to render the army of Spain as far as possible independent of the mother
country. They well knew how often the treasury of Carthage was empty
owing to the extravagance and dishonesty of her rulers, and how
impossible it would be to obtain thence the supplies required for
the army. Therefore they established immense workshops, where arms,
munitions of war, machines for sieges, and everything required for the
use of the army were fabricated.

Vast as were the expenses of these establishments, the revenues
of Iberia were amply sufficient not only to defray all the cost of
occupation, but to transmit large sums to Carthage. These revenues were
derived partly from the tribute paid by conquered tribes, partly from
the spoils taken in captured cities, but most of all from the mines of
gold and silver, which were at that time immensely rich, and were worked
by the labour of slaves taken in war or of whole tribes subdued.

Some idea of the richness of these mines may be formed by the fact that
one mine, which Hannibal had inherited from his father, brought in to
him a revenue of nearly a thousand pounds a day; and this was but one
of his various sources of wealth. This was the reason that Hamilcar,
Hasdrubal, and Hannibal were able to maintain themselves in spite of the
intrigues of their enemies in the capital. Their armies were their own
rather than those of the country.

It was to them that the soldiers looked for their pay, as well as for
promotion and rewards for valour, and they were able, therefore, to
carry out the plans which their genius suggested untrammelled by orders
from Carthage. They occupied, indeed, a position very similar to that of
Wallenstein, when, with an army raised and paid from his private means,
he defended the cause of the empire against Gustavus Adolphus and the
princes of the Protestant league. It is true that the Carthaginian
generals had always by their side two commissioners of the senate.
The republic of Carthage, like the first republic of France, was ever
jealous of her generals, and appointed commissioners to accompany them
on their campaigns, to advise and control their movements and to report
on their conduct; and many of the defeats of the Carthaginians were due
in no small degree to their generals being hampered by the interference
of the commissioners. They were present, as a matter of course, with the
army of Hannibal, but his power was so great that their influence over
his proceedings was but nominal.

The war which was about to break out with Rome is called the second
Punic war, but it should rather be named the war of Hannibal with
Rome. He conceived and carried it out from his own resources, without
interference and almost without any assistance from Carthage. Throughout
the war her ships lay idle in her harbour. Even in his greatest need
Carthage never armed a galley for his assistance. The pay of the army
came solely from his coffers, the material for the war from the arsenals
constructed by his father, his brother-in-law, and himself. It was a war
waged by a single man against a mighty power, and as such there is, with
the exception of the case of Wallenstein, nothing to resemble it in the
history of the world.

Passing through the narrow passage into the harbour the fleet sailed up
to the end of the bay, and were soon alongside the spacious quays which
had been erected. A large quantity of shipping already lay there, for
the trade of Carthagena with the mother city and with the ports of
Spain, Africa, and the East already rivaled that of Carthage. A group of
officers were gathered on the quay as Hamilcar's ship, which was
leading the fleet, neared it, and Hamilcar exclaimed, "There is Hannibal
himself!"

As the ship moored alongside the quay Hannibal came on board and warmly
embraced his cousin, and then bestowed a cordial greeting upon Malchus.

"Why, cousin Malchus," he said, "though it is but a year since I was in
Carthage, I should scarce have known you, so much have you grown. I see
you have entered the cavalry. That is well. You cannot begin too early
to accustom yourself to war."

Then turning, he went among the young men of the guard, to all of whom
he was personally known, greeting them with a cordiality and kindness
which greatly gratified them. Malchus gazed at him with admiration.
Fortunately an accurate description of Hannibal has come down to us. He
was one who, even at first sight, won all hearts by his lofty and noble
expression, by the kindness and sincerity which his face expressed. The
Carthaginians, as a race, were short, but Hannibal was very tall, and
his great width of shoulders testified to his immense strength.

The beauty of the Carthaginian race was proverbial, but even among
them he was remarkable. His head was well placed on his shoulders; his
carriage was upright and commanding; his forehead lofty; his eye, though
soft and gentle at ordinary times, was said to be terrible in time of
battle. His head was bare. His hair, of a golden brown, was worn long,
and encircled by a golden band. His nose was long and straight, forming,
with the forehead, a perfect profile. The expression of the mouth was
kind but firm. His beard was short. The whole contour of the face was
noble in the extreme.

In battle he wore a helmet of bronze closely fitting the head, behind
which projected a curved metal plate covering his neck. A band of gold
surrounded the helmet; in front were five laurel leaves in steel; at the
temples two leaves of the lotus of the same metal. On the crest, rising
from an ornament enriched with pearls, was a large plume of feathers,
sometimes red and sometimes white. A tuft of white horsehair fell from
the plate behind. A coat of mail, made of a triple tissue of chains of
gold, covered his body. Above this he wore a shirt of the finest white
linen, covered to the waist by a jerkin of leather overlaid with gold
plates. A large mantle of purple embroidered with gold hung from his
shoulders. He wore sandals and leggings of red morocco leather.

But it was only on special occasions that Hannibal was thus
magnificently clad. On the march he dressed generally in a simple blouse
like that worn by his soldiers. His arms were borne behind him by an
esquire. These consisted of his shield, of Galatian manufacture. Its
material was bronze, its shape circular. In the centre was a conical,
sharply pointed boss. The face of the shield was ornamented with
subjects taken from the history of Carthage in relief. The offensive
arms were a sword, a lance, and a bow with arrows. But it was not to the
splendour of his appearance that Hannibal owed the enthusiasm by which
he was regarded by his troops. His strength and skill were far superior
to those of any man in his army. His food was as simple as that of his
soldiers, he was capable of going for days without eating, and it was
seldom that he broke his fast until the day's work was over. When he ate
it would be sitting on horseback, or as he walked about seeing to the
needs of the soldiers.

At night he slept among them, lying on a lion skin without covering. He
was indifferent to heat and cold, and in the heaviest tempest of wind
and rain would ride bareheaded among his troops, apparently unconscious
of the tempest against which he was struggling. So far as was known
he was without a vice. He seldom touched wine. His morals were
irreproachable. He never gave way to anger. His patience under trials
and difficulties of all sorts was illimitable.

In the midst of the greatest trials and dangers he preserved his
cheerfulness, and had ever an encouraging word for his soldiers. Various
as were the nationalities of the troops who followed him, constrained
as most of them had been to enter the service of Carthage, so great was
their love and admiration for their commander that they were ready
to suffer all hardships, to dare all dangers for his sake. It was his
personal influence, and that alone, which welded this army, composed of
men of various nationalities and tribes, into one whole, and enabled it
to perform the greatest military exploits in the world's history, and
for years to sustain a terrible struggle against the whole power of
Rome.



CHAPTER VI: A CAMPAIGN IN SPAIN


Among the young officers who had followed Hannibal on board were
some who had left Carthage only a few months before and were known to
Malchus. From them he learned with delight that the troops would take
the field at once.

"We are going on a campaign against the Vacaei," one of them said. "The
army marched out two days since. Hannibal has been waiting here for your
arrival, for a fast sailing ship which started a few hours after you
brought the news that you were on your way, and you will set off to join
the rest without delay. It is going to be a hard campaign."

"Where is the country of the Vacaei?" Malchus asked.

"A long way off," the other replied. "The marches will be long and
tiresome. Their country lies somewhat to the northwest of the great
plateau in the centre of Iberia. We shall have to ascend the mountains
on this side, to cross the plateau, to follow the rivers which flow to
the great ocean."

The Vacaei, in fact, dwelt in the lands bordered by the upper Duero,
their country comprising a portion of old Castille, Leon, and the Basque
provinces. The journey would indeed be a long and difficult one; and
Hannibal was undertaking the expedition not only to punish the turbulent
Vacaei, who had attacked some of the tribes which had submitted to
Carthage, but to accustom the troops to fatigues and hardships, and to
prepare them for the great expedition which he had in view. No time was
indeed lost, for as soon as the troops were landed they were formed up
and at once started on their march.

"This is more than we bargained for," Trebon, a young guardsman whose
place in the ranks was next to Malchus, said to him. "I thought we
should have had at least a month here before we set out. They say the
city is as gay as Carthage; and as I have many friends here I have
looked forward to a month of jollity before starting. Every night when I
lay down on the hard planks of the deck I have consoled myself with the
thought that a soft bed awaited me here; and now we have to take at once
to the bare ground, with nothing but this skin strapped on the pommel of
my saddle to sleep on, and my bernous to cover me. It is colder already
a great deal than it was at Carthage; and if that is so here, what will
it be on the tops of those jagged mountains we see before us? Why, as I
live, that highest one over there is of dazzling white! That must be the
snow we have heard of--the rain turned solid by cold, and which they say
causes a pain to the naked limbs something like hot iron. Fancy having
to sleep in such stuff!"

Malchus laughed at the complaints of his comrade.

"I confess I am glad we are off at once," he said, "for I was sick of
doing nothing but idling away my time at Carthage; and I suppose it
would be just the same here. How busy are the streets of the town!
Except for the sight of the mountains which we see through the breaks of
the houses, one might believe one's self still at home."

The aspect of Carthagena, indeed, closely resembled that of the mother
city, and the inhabitants were of the same race and blood.

Carthagena had in the first place been formed by a great colony of
Libyans. The inhabitants of that province inhabiting the seaports and
coasts near Carthage were a mixture of Phoenician and native blood. They
were ever impatient of the supremacy of Carthage, and their rebellions
were frequent and often dangerous. After the suppression of these
insurrections, Carthage, sensible of the danger arising from the
turbulence of her neighbours, deported great numbers of them to form
colonies. Vast numbers were sent up into the Soudan, which was then one
of the most important possessions of the republic. The most extensive,
however, of these forced emigrations was the great colony sent to found
Carthagena, which had thus in a very few years, under the fostering
genius of the great Hamilcar, become a great and prosperous city.

Carthage itself had thus suddenly sprung into existence. After many
internal troubles the democracy of Tyre had gained the upper hand in
that city; and finding their position intolerable, the whole of the
aristocracy decided to emigrate, and, sailing with a great fleet under
their queen Dido or Elisa--for she was called by both names--founded
Carthage. This triumph of the democracy in Tyre, as might be expected,
proved the ruin of that city. Very rapidly she fell from the lofty
position she had held, and her place in the world and her proud position
as Queen of the Seas was very speedily taken by Carthage.

The original Libyan colony of Carthagena had been very largely increased
by subsequent emigration, and the populace presented an appearance very
similar to that of the mother city, save that instead of the swarthy
desert tribesmen, with their passive face and air of proud indifference,
mingling with the population of the town, there was in Carthagena a
large admixture of native Iberians, who, belonging to the tribes first
subdued by Carthage, had either been forced to settle here to supply
manual labour needed for the rising city, or who had voluntarily
abandoned their wandering life and adopted the more settled habitudes
and more assured comforts of existence in a great town.

Skirting the lower part of the city, Hamilcar's force marched along the
isthmus and crossed the bridge over the canal cut through it, and
was soon in the country beyond. The ground rose gradually, and after
marching for six miles the brigade was halted at a spot to which
Hannibal had, when the fleet was first discerned approaching along the
coast, despatched some bullocks and other provisions for their use. The
march was a short one, but after a week's confinement on board ship
the men were little fitted for a long journey. The bullocks and other
rations were served out to the various companies, and the work of
preparing the repast began. Malchus was amused, although rather
disgusted at his first experience in a real campaign. When with Hamilcar
on the expedition against the Atarantes he had formed part of his
father's suite and had lived in luxury. He was now a simple soldier, and
was called upon to assist to cut up the bullock which had fallen to the
share of the Carthaginian cavalry.

Some of the party went out to cut and bring in wood for the fires and
cooking; others moistened the flour and made dough for the flat cakes
which would be baked in the hot embers and eaten with the meat.
Loud shouts of laughter rose as the young soldiers worked at their
unaccustomed tasks, superintended by the officers, who, having all made
several campaigns, were able to instruct them as to their duties. From
a culinary point of view the meal could not be pronounced a success,
and was, indeed, a contrast to the food to which the young nobles were
accustomed. The march, however, and the keen bracing air had given them
good appetites, and the novelty and strangeness of the experience gave
a zest to the food; and in spite of the roughness of the meal, all
declared that they had never dined better. Many fires were now lit; and
round these, as the evening closed in, the men gathered in groups, all
closely wrapped in their bernouses, which were worn alike by officers
and men of the whole of the nationalities serving in the Carthaginian
army, serving as a cloak by day and a blanket at night. Presently a
trampling of horses was heard, and Hannibal and his personal staff rode
into the encampment.

He had not started until several hours after them, when, having given
his last orders and made all final arrangements for the management
of affairs during his absence, he had ridden on to join the army.
Dismounting, he went at once on foot among the troops, chatting gaily
with them and inquiring how they fared. After visiting all the other
detachments he came to the bivouac of the Carthaginian horse, and for an
hour sat talking by their fires.

"Ah!" he said as he rose to go, "the others will sleep well enough
tonight; but you sybarites, accustomed to your soft couches and your
luxuries, will fare badly. I remember my first night on the hard ground,
although 'tis now sixteen years back, how my limbs ached and how I
longed for morning. Now, let me give you a hint how to make your beds
comfortable. Mind, this is not for the future, but till your limbs get
accustomed to the ground you may indulge in luxuries. Before you try
to go off to sleep note exactly where your hip bones and shoulders will
rest; take your daggers and scoop out the earth at these points so as
to make depressions in which they may lie. Then spread your lion skins
above them and lie down. You will sleep as comfortably as if on a soft
couch."

Many of the young soldiers followed Hannibal's advice; others, among
whom was Malchus, determined to accustom themselves at once to the hard
ground. Malchus was not long in getting to sleep, his last thought being
that the precaution advised by Hannibal to ensure repose was altogether
unnecessary. But he changed his opinion when, two or three hours later,
he woke up with acute pains in his hip and shoulder. After trying
vainly, by changing his position, again to go off to sleep, he rose,
rolled up the skin, and set to work to make the excavations recommended
by the general. Then spreading out the skin again he lay down, and was
astonished to find how immense was the relief afforded by this simple
expedient.

At daybreak the party were in motion. Their march was a long one; for
Hannibal wished to come up with the main army as soon as possible, and
no less than thirty miles were encompassed before they halted for the
night. They were now far up on the slopes of the Sierras. The latter
part of the journey had been exceedingly toilsome. The route was mostly
bare rock, which sorely tried the feet of the soldiers, these being
in most cases unprotected even by sandals. Malchus and his mounted
companions did not of course suffer in their feet. But they were almost
as glad as the infantry when the camping place was reached, for nothing
is more fatiguing to a horseman than to be obliged to travel in the
saddle for ten hours at the pace of footmen. The halting place this
time was near the upper edge of the forest which then clothed the lower
slopes of the mountains.

Enough meat had been killed on the previous evening for three days'
rations for the troops, and there was therefore no loss of time in
preparing the meal. Wood, of course, was in abundance, and the pots
were soon hanging from thick poles placed above the fires. The night was
exceedingly cold, and the soldiers were grateful for the shelter which
the trees afforded from the piercing wind which blew across the snow
covered peaks of the higher range of mountains.

"What is that noise?" Malchus asked one of the officers as, after the
meal was finished and silence began to reign in the camp, a deep sound
was heard in the forest.

"That is the howling of a pack of wolves," the officer said. "They are
savage brutes, and when in company will not hesitate to attack small
parties of men. They abound in the mountains, and are a scourge to
the shepherds of the plains, especially in the cold weather, when they
descend and commit terrible damage among the flocks."

"I thought I did not know the sound," Malchus said. "The nights were
noisy enough sometimes at the southern edge of the desert. The packs
of jackals, with their sharp yelping cry, abounded; then there was the
deeper note of the hyenas, and the barking cry of troops of monkeys, and
the thundering roar of the lions. They were unpleasant enough, and at
first used to keep one awake; but none of them were so lugubrious
as that mournful howl I hear now. I suppose sometimes, when there is
nothing else to do, we get up hunting parties?"

"Yes," the officer replied; "it is the chief amusement of our garrisons
in winter among the wild parts of the country. Of course, near
Carthagena these creatures have been eradicated; but among the mountains
they abound, and the carcass of a dead horse is sure to attract plenty
of them. It is a sport not without danger; and there are many instances
where parties of five or six have gone out, taking with them a carcass
to attract the wolves, and have never returned; and a search has
resulted in the discovery of their weapons, injured and perhaps broken,
of stains of blood and signs of a desperate struggle, but of them not so
much as a bone has remained behind."

"I thought lion hunting was an exciting sport but the lions, although
they may move and hunt in companies, do not fight in packs, as these
fierce brutes seem to do. I hope some day to try it. I should like to
send back two of their heads to hang on the wall by the side of that of
the lion I killed up in the desert."

"Next winter you may do so," the officer said. "The season is nearly
over now, and you may be sure that Hannibal will give us enough to do
without our thinking of hunting wolves. The Vacaei are fierce enough.
Perhaps two of their heads would do instead of those of wolves."

"I do not think my mother and sisters would approve of that," Malchus
laughed; "so I must wait for the winter."

The night did not pass so quietly as that which had preceded it. The
distant howling of the wolves, as they hunted in the forest, kept the
horses in a tremor of terror and excitement, and their riders were
obliged over and over again to rise and go among them, and by speaking
to and patting them, to allay their fear. So long as their masters were
near them the well trained horses were quiet and tractable, and would
at a whispered order lie down and remain in perfect quiet; but no sooner
had they left them and again settled to sleep than, at the first howl
which told that the pack were at all approaching, the horses would lift
their heads, prick their ears in the direction of the sound, and rise
to their feet and stand trembling, with extended nostrils snuffing the
unknown danger, pawing the ground, and occasionally making desperate
efforts to break loose from their picket ropes.

The work of soothing had then to be repeated, until at last most of the
riders brought their lions' skins and lay down by the prostrate horses,
with their heads upon their necks. The animals, trained thus to sleep
with their riders by their side, and reassured by the presence of their
masters, were for the most part content to lie quiet, although the packs
of wolves, attracted by the scent of the meat that had been cooked,
approached close to the camp and kept up a dismal chorus round it until
morning.

Day by day the march was continued. The country was wild and rugged,
foaming torrents had to be crossed, precipices surmounted, barren tracts
traversed. But after a week's hard marching the column had overcome the
greater part of the difficulty, had crossed the Sierras and gained the
plateau, which with a gradual fall slopes west down to the Atlantic, and
was for the most part covered with a dense growth of forests. They now
to their satisfaction overtook the main body of the army, and their
marches would be somewhat less severe, for hitherto they had each day
traversed extra distances to make up for the two days' loss in starting.
Here Malchus for the first time saw the bands of Gaulish mercenaries.

