in the room with them, doing some sewing of her own, so quiet that half
the time they forgot she was there. It was great fun, sewing all
together and chattering as they sewed.

A good deal of the time they talked about how splendid it was of them to
be so kind to little 'Lias. "My! I don't believe most girls would put
themselves out this way for a dirty little boy!" said Stashie,
complacently.

"No INDEED!" chimed in Betsy. "It's just like a story, isn't it--working
and sacrificing for the poor!"

"I guess he'll thank us all right for sure!" said Ellen. "He'll never
forget us as long as he lives, I don't suppose."

Betsy, her imagination fired by this suggestion, said, "I guess when
he's grown up he'll be telling everybody about how, when he was so poor
and ragged, Stashie Monahan and Ellen Peters and Elizabeth Ann ..."

"And Eliza!" put in that little girl hastily, very much afraid she would
not be given her due share of the glory.

Cousin Ann sewed, and listened, and said nothing.

Toward the end of May two little blouses, two pairs of trousers, two
pairs of stockings, two sets of underwear (contributed by the teacher),
and the pair of shoes Uncle Henry gave were ready. The little girls
handled the pile of new garments with inexpressible pride, and debated
just which way of bestowing them was sufficiently grand to be worthy the
occasion. Betsy was for taking them to school and giving them to 'Lias
one by one, so that each child could have her thanks separately. But
Stashie wanted to take them to the house when 'Lias's stepfather would
be there, and shame him by showing that little girls had had to do what
he ought to have done.

Cousin Ann broke into the discussion by asking, in her quiet, firm
voice, "Why do you want 'Lias to know where the clothes come from?"

They had forgotten again that she was there, and turned around quickly
to stare at her. Nobody could think of any answer to her very queer
question. It had not occurred to any one that there could BE such a
question.

Cousin Ann shifted her ground and asked another: "Why did you make these
clothes, anyhow?"

They stared again, speechless. Why did she ask that? She knew why.

Finally little Molly said, in her honest, baby way, "Why, YOU know why,
Miss Ann! So 'Lias Brewster will look nice, and Mr. Pond will maybe
adopt him."

"Well," said Cousin Ann, "what has that got to do with 'Lias knowing who
did it?"

"Why, he wouldn't know who to be grateful to," cried Betsy.

"Oh," said Cousin Ann. "Oh, I see. You didn't do it to help 'Lias. You
did it to have him grateful to you. I see. Molly is such a little girl,
it's no wonder she didn't really take in what you girls were up to." She
nodded her head wisely, as though now she understood.

But if she did, little Molly certainly did not. She had not the least
idea what everybody was talking about. She looked from one sober,
downcast face to another rather anxiously. What was the matter?

Apparently nothing was really the matter, she decided, for after a
minute's silence Miss Ann got up with entirely her usual face of
cheerful gravity, and said: "Don't you think you little girls ought to
top off this last afternoon with a tea-party? There's a new batch of
cookies, and you can make yourselves some lemonade if you want to."

They had these refreshments out on the porch, in the sunshine, with
their dolls for guests and a great deal of chatter for sauce. Nobody
said another word about how to give the clothes to 'Lias, till, just as
the girls were going away, Betsy said, walking along with the two older
ones, "Say, don't you think it'd be fun to go some evening after dark
and leave the clothes on 'Lias's doorstep, and knock and run away quick
before anybody comes to the door?" She spoke in an uncertain voice and
smoothed Deborah's carved wooden curls.

"Yes, I do!" said Ellen, not looking at Betsy but down at the weeds by
the road.  "I think it would be lots of fun!"

Little Molly, playing with Annie and Eliza, did not hear this; but she
was allowed to go with the older girls on the great expedition.

It was a warm, dark evening in late May, with the frogs piping their
sweet, high note, and the first of the fireflies wheeling over the wet
meadows near the tumble-down house where 'Lias lived. The girls took
turns in carrying the big paper-wrapped bundle, and stole along in the
shadow of the trees, full of excitement, looking over their shoulders at
nothing and pressing their hands over their mouths to keep back the
giggles. There was, of course, no reason on earth why they should
giggle, which is, of course, the very reason why they did. If you've
ever been a little girl you know about that.

One window of the small house was dimly lighted, they found, when they
came in sight of it, and they thrilled with excitement and joyful alarm.
Suppose 'Lias's dreadful stepfather should come out and yell at them!
They came forward on tiptoe, making a great deal of noise by stepping on
twigs, rustling bushes, crackling gravel under their feet and doing all
the other things that make such a noise at night and never do in the
daytime. But nobody stirred inside the room with the lighted window.
They crept forward and peeped cautiously inside ... and stopped giggling.
The dim light coming from a little kerosene lamp with a smoky chimney
fell on a dismal, cluttered room, a bare, greasy wooden table, and two
broken-backed chairs, with little 'Lias in one of them. He had fallen
asleep with his head on his arms, his pinched, dirty, sad little figure
showing in the light from the lamp. His feet dangled high above the
floor in their broken, muddy shoes. One sleeve was torn to the shoulder.
A piece of dry bread had slipped from his bony little hand and a tin
dipper stood beside him on the bare table. Nobody else was in the room,
nor evidently in the darkened, empty, fireless house.

[Illustration: He had fallen asleep with his head on his arms.]

As long as she lives Betsy will never forget what she saw that night
through that window. Her eyes grew very hot and her hands very cold. Her
heart thumped hard. She reached for little Molly and gave her a great
hug in the darkness. Suppose it were little Molly asleep there, all
alone in the dirty, dismal house, with no supper and nobody to put her
to bed. She found that Ellen, next her, was crying quietly into the
corner of her apron.

Nobody said a word. Stashie, who had the bundle, walked around soberly
to the front door, put it down, and knocked loudly. They all darted away
noiselessly to the road, to the shadow of the trees, and waited until
the door opened. A square of yellow light appeared, with 'Lias's figure,
very small, at the bottom of it. They saw him stoop and pick up the
bundle and go back into the house. Then they went quickly and silently
back, separating at the cross-roads with no good-night greetings.

Molly and Betsy began to climb the hill to Putney Farm. It was a very
warm night for May, and little Molly began to puff for breath. "Let's
sit down on this rock awhile and rest," she said.

They were half-way up the hill now. From the rock they could see the
lights in the farmhouses scattered along the valley road and on the side
of the mountain opposite them, like big stars fallen from the multitude
above. Betsy lay down on the rock and looked up at the stars. After a
silence little Molly's chirping voice said, "Oh, I thought you said we
were going to march up to 'Lias in school and give him his clothes. Did
you forget about that?"

Betsy gave a wriggle of shame as she remembered that plan. "No, we
didn't forget it," she said. "We thought this would be a better way."

"But how'll 'Lias know who to thank?" asked Molly.

"That's no matter," said Betsy. Yes, it was Elizabeth-Ann-that-was who
said that. And meant it, too. She was not even thinking of what she was
saying. Between her and the stars, thick over her in the black, soft
sky, she saw again that dirty, disordered room and the little boy, all
alone, asleep with a piece of dry bread in his bony little fingers.

She looked hard and long at that picture, all the time seeing the quiet
stars through it. And then she turned over and hid her face on the rock.
She had said her "Now I lay me" every night since she could remember,
but she had never prayed till she lay there with her face on the rock,
saying over and over, "Oh, God, please, please, PLEASE make Mr. Pond
adopt 'Lias."





CHAPTER IX

THE NEW CLOTHES FAIL

All the little girls went early to school the next day, eager for the
first glimpse of 'Lias in his new clothes. They now quite enjoyed the
mystery about who had made them, and were full of agreeable excitement
as the little figure was seen approaching down the road. He wore the
gray trousers and the little blue shirt; the trousers were a little too
long, the shirt a perfect fit. The girls gazed at him with pride as he
came on the playground, walking briskly along in the new shoes, which
were just the right size. He had been wearing all winter a pair of
cast-off women's shoes. From a distance he looked like another child.
But as he came closer ... oh! his face! his hair! his hands! his
finger-nails! The little fellow had evidently tried to live up to his
beautiful new raiment, for his hair had been roughly put back from his
face, and around his mouth and nose was a small area of almost clean
skin, where he had made an attempt at washing his face. But he had made
practically no impression on the layers of encrusted dirt, and the
little girls looked at him ruefully. Mr. Pond would certainly never take
a fancy to such a dreadfully grimy child! His new, clean clothes made
him look all the worse, as though dirty on purpose!

The little girls retired to their rock-pile and talked over their bitter
disappointment, Ralph and the other boys absorbed in a game of marbles
near them. 'Lias had gone proudly into the schoolroom to show himself to
Miss Benton.

It was the day before Decoration Day and a good deal of time was taken
up with practising on the recitations they were going to give at the
Decoration Day exercises in the village. Several of the children from
each school in the township were to speak pieces in the Town Hall. Betsy
was to recite BARBARA FRIETCHIE, her first love in that school, but she
droned it over with none of her usual pleasure, her eyes on little
'Lias's smiling face, so unconscious of its dinginess.

At noon time the boys disappeared down toward the swimming-hole. They
often took a swim at noon and nobody thought anything about it on that
day. The little girls ate their lunch on their rock, mourning over the
failure of their plans, and scheming ways to meet the new obstacle.
Stashie suggested, "Couldn't your Aunt Abigail invite him up to your
house for supper and then give him a bath afterward?" But Betsy,
although she had never heard of treating a supper-guest in this way, was
sure that it was not possible. She shook her head sadly, her eyes on the
far-off gleam of white where the boys jumped up and down in their
swimming-hole. That was not a good name for it, because there was only
one part of it deep enough to swim in. Mostly it was a shallow bay in an
arm of the river, where the water was only up to a little boy's knees
and where there was almost no current. The sun beating down on it made
it quite warm, and even the first-graders' mothers allowed them to go
in. They only jumped up and down and squealed and splashed each other,
but they enjoyed that quite as much as Frank and Harry, the two
seventh-graders, enjoyed their swooping dives from the spring-board over
the pool. They were late in getting back from the river that day and
Miss Benton had to ring her bell hard in that direction before they came
trooping up and clattered into the schoolroom, where the girls already
sat, their eyes lowered virtuously to their books, with a prim air of
self-righteousness. THEY were never late!

Betsy was reciting her arithmetic. She was getting on famously with
that. Weeks ago, as soon as Miss Benton had seen the confusion of the
little girl's mind, the two had settled down to a serious struggle with
that subject. Miss Benton had had Betsy recite all by herself, so she
wouldn't be flurried by the others; and to begin with had gone back,
back, back to bedrock, to things Betsy absolutely knew, to the 2x2's and
the 3x3's. And then, very cautiously, a step at a time, they had
advanced, stopping short whenever Betsy felt a beginning of that
bewildered "guessing" impulse which made her answer wildly at random.

After a while, in the dark night which arithmetic had always been to
her, Betsy began to make out a few definite outlines, which were always
there, facts which she knew to be so without guessing from the
expression of her teacher's face. From that moment her progress had been
rapid, one sure fact hooking itself on to another, and another one on to
that. She attacked a page of problems now with a zest and
self-confidence which made her arithmetic lessons among the most
interesting hours at school. On that day she was standing up at the
board, a piece of chalk in her hand, chewing her tongue and thinking
hard how to find out the amount of wall-paper needed for a room 12 feet
square with two doors and two windows in it, when her eye fell on little
'Lias, bent over his reading book. She forgot her arithmetic, she forgot
where she was. She stared and stared, till Ellen, catching the direction
of her eyes, looked and stared too. Little 'Lias was CLEAN,
preternaturally, almost wetly clean. His face was clean and shining, his
ears shone pink and fair, his hands were absolutely spotless, even his
hay-colored hair was clean and, still damp, brushed flatly back till it
shone in the sun. Betsy blinked her eyes a great many times, thinking
she must be dreaming, but every time she opened them there was 'Lias,
looking white and polished like a new willow whistle.

Somebody poked her hard in the ribs. She started and, turning, saw
Ralph, who was doing a sum beside her on the board, scowling at her
under his black brows. "Quit gawking at 'Lias," he said under his
breath. "You make me tired!" Something conscious and shame-faced in his
manner made Betsy understand at once what had happened. Ralph had taken
'Lias down to the little boys' wading-place and had washed him all over.
She remembered now that they had a piece of yellow soap there.

Her face broke into a radiant smile and she began to say something to
Ralph about how nice that was of him, but he frowned again and said,
crossly, "Aw, cut it out! Look at what you've done there! If I couldn't
9 x 8 and get it right!"

"How queer boys are!" thought Betsy, erasing her mistake and putting
down the right answer. But she did not try to speak to Ralph again about
'Lias, not even after school, when she saw 'Lias going home with a new
cap on his head which she recognized as Ralph's. She just looked at
Ralph's bare head, and smiled her eyes at him, keeping the rest of her
face sober, the way Cousin Ann did. For just a minute Ralph almost
smiled back. At least he looked quite friendly. They stepped along
toward home together, the first time Ralph had ever condescended to walk
beside a girl.

"We got a new colt," he said.

"Have you?" she said. "What color?"

"Black, with a white star, and they're going to let me ride him when
he's old enough."

"My! Won't that be nice!" said Betsy.

And all the time they were both thinking of little 'Lias with his new
clothes and his sweet, thin face shining with cleanliness.

"Do you like spruce gum?" asked Ralph.

"Oh, I LOVE gum!" said Betsy.

"Well, I'll bring you down a chunk tomorrow, if I don't forget it," said
Ralph, turning off at the cross-roads.

They had not mentioned 'Lias at all.

The next day they were to have school only in the morning. In the
afternoon they were to go in a big hay-wagon down to the village to the
"exercises." 'Lias came to school in his new blue-serge trousers and his
white blouse. The little girls gloated over his appearance, and hung
around him, for who was to "visit school" that morning but Mr. Pond
himself! Cousin Ann had arranged it somehow. It took Cousin Ann to fix
things! During recess, as they were playing still-pond-no-more-moving on
the playground, Mr. Pond and Uncle Henry drew up to the edge of the
playground, stopped their horse, and, talking and laughing together,
watched the children at play. Betsy looked hard at the big, burly,
kind-faced man with the smiling eyes and the hearty laugh, and decided
that he would "do" perfectly for 'Lias. But what she decided was to have
little importance, apparently, for after all he would not get out of the
wagon, but said he'd have to drive right on to the village. Just like
that, with no excuse other than a careless glance at his watch. No, he
guessed he wouldn't have time, this morning, he said. Betsy cast an
imploring look up into Uncle Henry's face, but evidently he felt himself
quite helpless, too. Oh, if only Cousin Ann had come! SHE would have
marched him into the schoolhouse double-quick. But Uncle Henry was not
Cousin Ann, and though Betsy saw him, as they drove away,
conscientiously point out little 'Lias, resplendent and shining, Mr.
Pond only nodded absently, as though, he were thinking of something
else.

Betsy could have cried with disappointment; but she and the other girls,
putting their heads together for comfort, told each other that there was
time enough yet. Mr. Pond would not leave town till tomorrow.
Perhaps ... there was still some hope.

But that afternoon even this last hope was dashed. As they gathered at
the schoolhouse, the girls fresh and crisp in their newly starched
dresses, with red or blue hair-ribbons, the boys very self-conscious in
their dark suits, clean collars, new caps (all but Ralph), and blacked
shoes, there was no little 'Lias. They waited and waited, but there was
no sign of him. Finally Uncle Henry, who was to drive the straw-ride
down to town, looked at his watch, gathered up the reins, and said they
would be late if they didn't start right away. Maybe 'Lias had had a
chance to ride in with somebody else.

They all piled in, the horses stepped off, the wheels grated on the
stones. And just at that moment a dismal sound of sobbing wails reached
them from the woodshed back of the schoolhouse. The children tumbled out
as fast as they had tumbled in, and ran back, Betsy and Ralph at their
head. There in the woodshed was little 'Lias, huddled in the corner
behind some wood, crying and crying and crying, digging his fists into
his eyes, his face all smeared with tears and dirt. And he was dressed
again in his filthy, torn old overalls and ragged shirt. His poor little
bare feet shone with a piteous cleanliness in that dark place.

"What's the matter? What's the matter?" the children asked him all at
once. He flung himself on Ralph, burying his face in the other boy's
coat, and sobbed out some disjointed story which only Ralph could
hear ... and then as last and final climax of the disaster, who should
come looking over the shoulders of the children but Uncle Henry AND Mr.
Pond! And 'Lias all ragged and dirty again! Betsy sat down weakly on a
pile of wood, utterly disheartened. What was the use of anything!

"What's the matter?" asked the two men together.

Ralph turned, with an angry toss of his dark head, and told them
bitterly, over the heads of the children: "He just had some decent
clothes. ... First ones he's EVER had! And he was plotting on going to
the exercises in the Town Hall. And that darned old skunk of a
stepfather has gone and taken 'em and sold 'em to get whiskey. I'd like
to KILL him!"

Betsy could have flung her arms around Ralph, he looked so exactly the
way she felt. "Yes, he is a darned old skunk!" she said to herself,
rejoicing in the bad words she did not know before. It TOOK bad words to
qualify what had happened.

She saw an electric spark pass from Ralph's blazing eyes to Mr. Pond's
broad face, now grim and fierce. She saw Mr. Pond step forward, brushing
the children out of his way, like a giant among dwarfs. She saw him
stoop and pick little 'Lias up in his great, strong arms, and, holding
him close, stride furiously out of the woodshed, across the playground
to the buggy which was waiting for him.

"He'll go to the exercises all right!" he called back over his shoulder
in a great roar. "He'll go, if I have to buy out the whole town to get
him an outfit! And that whelp won't get these clothes, either; you hear
me say so!"

He sprang into the buggy and, holding 'Lias on his lap, took up the
reins and drove rapidly forward.

They saw little 'Lias again, entering the Town Hall, holding fast to Mr.
Pond's hand. He was magnificent in a whole suit of store clothes, coat
and all, and he wore white stockings and neat, low shoes, like a city
child!

They saw him later, up on the platform, squeaking out his little
patriotic poem, his eyes, shining like stars, fixed on one broad,
smiling face in the audience. When he finished he was overcome with
shyness by the applause, and for a moment forgot to turn and leave the
platform. He hung his head, and, looking out from under his eyebrows,
gave a quaint, shy little smile at the audience. Betsy saw Mr. Pond's
great smile waver and grow dim. His eyes filled so full that he had to
take out his handkerchief and blow his nose loudly.

And they saw little 'Lias once more, for the last time. Mr. Pond's buggy
drove rapidly past their slow-moving hay-wagon, Mr. Pond holding the
reins masterfully in one hand. Beside him, very close, sat 'Lias with
his lap full of toys, oh, FULL--like Christmas! In that fleeting glimpse
they saw a toy train, a stuffed dog, a candy-box, a pile of
picture-books, tops, paper-bags, and even the swinging crane of the big
mechanical toy dredge that everybody said the storekeeper could never
sell to anybody because it cost so much!

As they passed swiftly, 'Lias looked out at them and waved his little
hand flutteringly. His other hand was tightly clasped in Mr. Pond's big
one. He was smiling at them all. His eyes looked dazed and radiant. He
turned his head as the buggy flashed by to call out, in a shrill,
exulting little shout, "Good-bye! Good-bye! I'm going to live with ..."
They could hear no more. He was gone, only his little hand still waving
at them over the back of the buggy seat.

Betsy drew a long, long breath. She found that Ralph was looking at her.
For a moment she couldn't think what made him look so different. Then
she saw that he was smiling. She had never seen him smile before. He
smiled at her as though he were sure she would understand, and never
said a word. Betsy looked forward again and saw the gleaming buggy
vanishing over the hill in front of them. She smiled back at Ralph
silently.

Not a thing had happened the way she had planned; no, not a single
thing! But it seemed to her she had never been so happy in her life.





CHAPTER X

BETSY HAS A BIRTHDAY

Betsy's birthday was the ninth day of September, and the Necronsett
Valley Fair is always held from the eighth to the twelfth. So it was
decided that Betsy should celebrate her birthday by going up to
Woodford, where the Fair was held. The Putneys weren't going that year,
but the people on the next farm, the Wendells, said they could make room
in their surrey for the two little girls; for, of course, Molly was
going, too. In fact, she said the Fair was held partly to celebrate her
being six years old. This would happen on the seventeenth of October.
Molly insisted that that was PLENTY close enough to the ninth of
September to be celebrated then. This made Betsy feel like laughing out,
but observing that the Putneys only looked at each other with the
faintest possible quirk in the corners of their serious mouths, she
understood that they were afraid that Molly's feelings might be hurt if
they laughed out loud. So Betsy tried to curve her young lips to the
same kind and secret mirth.

And, I can't tell you why, this effort not to hurt Molly's feelings made
her have a perfect spasm of love for Molly. She threw herself on her and
gave her a great hug that tipped them both over on the couch on top of
Shep, who stopped snoring with his great gurgling snort, wriggled out
from under them, and stood with laughing eyes and wagging tail, looking
at them as they rolled and giggled among the pillows.

"What dress are you going to wear to the Fair, Betsy?" asked Cousin Ann.
"And we must decide about Molly's, too."

This stopped their rough-and-tumble fun in short order, and they applied
themselves to the serious question of a toilet.

When the great day arrived and the surrey drove away from the Wendells'
gate, Betsy was in a fresh pink-and-white gingham which she had helped
Cousin Ann make, and plump Molly looked like something good to eat in a
crisp white little dimity, one of Betsy's old dresses, with a deep hem
taken in to make it short enough for the little butter-ball. Because it
was Betsy's birthday, she sat on the front seat with Mr. Wendell, and
part of the time, when there were not too many teams on the road, she
drove, herself. Mrs. Wendell and her sister filled the back seat solidly
full from side to side and made one continuous soft lap on which Molly
happily perched, her eyes shining, her round cheeks red with joyful
excitement. Betsy looked back at her several times and thought how very
nice Molly looked. She had, of course, little idea how she herself
looked, because the mirrors at Putney Farm were all small and high up,
and anyhow they were so old and greenish that they made everybody look
very queer-colored. You looked in them to see if your hair was smooth,
and that was about all you could stand.

So it was a great surprise to Betsy later in the morning, as she and
Molly wandered hand in hand through the wonders of Industrial Hall, to
catch sight of Molly in a full-length mirror as clear as water. She was
almost startled to see how faithfully reflected were the yellow of the
little girl's curls, the clear pink and white of her face, and the blue
of her soft eyes. An older girl was reflected there also, near Molly, a
dark-eyed, red-cheeked, sturdy little girl, standing very straight on
two strong legs, holding her head high and free, her dark eyes looking
out brightly from her tanned face. For an instant Betsy gazed into those
clear eyes and then ... why, gracious goodness! That was herself she was
looking at! How changed she was! How very, very different she looked
from the last time she had seen herself in a big mirror! She remembered
it well--out shopping with Aunt Frances in a department store, she had
caught sight of a pale little girl, with a thin neck, and spindling legs
half-hidden in the folds of Aunt Frances's skirts. But she didn't look
even like the sister of this browned, muscular, upstanding child who
held Molly's hand so firmly.

All this came into her mind and went out again in a moment, for Molly
caught sight of a big doll in the next aisle and they hurried over to
inspect her clothing. The mirror was forgotten in the many exciting
sights and sounds and smells of their first county fair.

The two little girls were to wander about as they pleased until noon,
when they were to meet the Wendells in the shadow of Industrial Hall and
eat their picnic lunch together. The two parties arrived together from
different directions, having seen very different sides of the Fair. The
children were full of the merry-go-rounds, the balloon-seller, the
toy-venders, and the pop-corn stands, while the Wendells exchanged views
on the shortness of a hog's legs, the dip in a cow's back, and the
thickness of a sheep's wool. The Wendells, it seemed, had met some
cousins they didn't expect to see, who, not knowing about Betsy and
Molly, had hoped that they might ride home with the Wendells.

"Don't you suppose," Mrs. Wendell asked Betsy, "that you and Molly could
go home with the Vaughans? They're here in their big wagon. You could
sit on the floor with the Vaughan children."

Betsy and Molly thought this would be great fun, and agreed
enthusiastically.

"All right then," said Mrs. Wendell. She called to a young man who stood
inside the building, near an open window: "Oh, Frank, Will Vaughan is
going to be in your booth this afternoon, isn't he?"

"Yes, ma'am," said the young man. "His turn is from two to four."
