sloping down to one corner, where a brook trickled along quietly. Here
three large trees were located, under whose spreading branches the boys,
in the intervals of study, used often to stretch themselves for a chat
or engage in some schoolboy games, such as nimble peg or quoits. The
owner of the field was an easy-going man, who did not appear to be
troubled by the visits of the boys, as long as they did not maltreat the
peaceful cows who gathered their subsistence from the scanty grass that
grew there.

"He wants to keep out of your way, I guess," volunteered Bates.

As this suggestion was flattering to the pride of the "boss," it was
graciously received.

"Very likely," he said; "but he'll find that isn't so easy. Boys, follow
me, if you want to see some fun."

Jim started with his loose stride for the field, where he expected to
meet his adversary, or, rather, victim, for so he considered him, and
the smaller boys followed him with alacrity. There was going to be a
scrimmage, and they all wanted to see it.

Jim and his followers issued from the gate, and, crossing the street,
scaled the bars that separated Carver's field from the highway. Already
they could see the two boys--Roscoe and Wilkins-slowly walking, and
nearly arrived at the brook in the lower part of the field.

"He doesn't seem much afraid," remarked Talbot, one of the recent
comers, incautiously.

Upon him immediately Jim frowned ominously.

"So you are taking sides with him, Talbot, are you?" he said,
imperiously.

"No, Jim," answered Talbot, hurriedly, for he now saw that he had been
guilty of an imprudence.

"What made you say he wasn't scared, then?"

"I only said he didn't seem afraid," answered Talbot, apologetically.

"Be careful what you say in future, young fellow!" said Jim, sternly;
"that is, if you are a friend of mine. If you are going over to Roscoe,
you can go, and I shall know how to treat you."

"But I am not going over to him. I don't like him," said the cowardly
boy.

"Very well; I accept your apology this time. In future be careful what
you say."

By this time Wilkins and Roscoe had reached the clump of big trees, and
had seated themselves under their ample branches. Then, for the first
time, glancing backward toward the school, they became aware of the
advancing troop of boys. Wilkins saw them first.

"There's Jim coming!" he exclaimed. "Now you are in a pickle. He means
business."

"I suppose," said Hector, coolly, "he has decided to accept my
invitation, and come to see me."

"You'll find he has," said Wilkins, significantly.

"He seems to have considerable company," remarked Hector, scanning the
approaching party with tranquillity.

"They're coming to see the fun!" said Wilkins.

"I suppose you mean the fight between Jim Smith and myself."

"Well, not exactly. They've come to see you thrashed."

Hector smiled.

"Suppose they should see Jim thrashed instead--what then?"

"They might be surprised: but I don't think they will be," answered
Wilkins, dryly. He was, on the whole, well disposed toward Hector, and
he certainly disliked Jim heartily, but he did not allow his judgment to
be swayed by his preferences, and he could foresee but one issue to the
impending conflict. There was one thing that puzzled him exceedingly,
and that was Hector's coolness on the brink of a severe thrashing, such
as Jim was sure to give him for his daring defiance and disregard of his
authority.

"You're a queer boy, Hector," he said. "You don't seem in the least
alarmed."

"I am not in the least alarmed," answered Hector. "Why should I be?"

"You don't mind being thrashed, then?"

"I might mind; but I don't mean to be thrashed if I can help it."

"But you can't help it, you know."

"Well, that will soon be decided."

There was no time for any further conversation, for Jim and his
followers were close at hand.

Jim opened the campaign by calling Hector to account.

"Look here, you new boy," he said, "didn't Bates tell you that I wanted
to see you?"

"Yes," answered Hector, looking up, indifferently.

"Well, why didn't you come to me at once, hey?"

"Because I didn't choose to. I sent word if you wished to see me, to
come where I was."

"What do you mean by such impudence, hey?"

"I mean this, Jim Smith, that you have no authority over me and never
will have. I have not been here long, but I have been here long enough
to find out that you are a cowardly bully and ruffian. How all these
boys can give in to you, I can't understand."

Jim Smith almost foamed at the mouth with rage.

"You'll pay for this," he howled, pulling off his coat, in furious
haste.




CHAPTER XIII. WHO SHALL BE VICTOR?



Hector was not slow to accept the challenge conveyed by his antagonist's
action. He, too, sprang to his feet, flung off his coat, and stood
facing the bully.

Hector was three inches shorter, and more than as many years younger,
than Jim. But his figure was well proportioned and strongly put
together, as the boys could see. On the other hand; Jim Smith was
loosely put together, and, though tall, he was not well proportioned.
His arms were long and his movements were clumsy. His frame, however,
was large, and he had considerable strength, but it had never been
disciplined. He had never learned to box, and was ignorant of the first
rudiments of the art of self-defense. But he was larger and stronger
than any of his school-fellows, and he had thus far had no difficulty in
overcoming opposition to his despotic rule.

The boys regarded the two combatants with intense interest. They could
see that Hector was not alarmed, and meant to defend himself. So there
was likely to be a contest, although they could not but anticipate an
easy victory for the hitherto champion of the school.

Hector did not propose to make the attack. He walked forward to a
favorable place and took his stand. The position he assumed would have
assured the casual observer that he knew something of the art in which
his larger antagonist was deficient.

"So you are ready to fight, are you?" said Jim.

"You can see for yourself."

Jim rushed forward, intending to bear down all opposition. He was
whirling his long arms awkwardly, and it was clear to see that he
intended to seize Hector about the body and fling him to the earth. Had
he managed to secure the grip he desired, opposition would have been
vain, and he would have compassed his design. But Hector was far too
wary to allow anything of this kind. He evaded Jim's grasp by jumping
backward, then dashing forward while his opponent was somewhat unsteady
from the failure of his attempt, he dealt him a powerful blow in the
face.

Jim Smith was unprepared for such prompt action. He reeled, and came
near falling. It may safely be said, also, that his astonishment was as
great as his indignation, and that was unbounded.

"So that's your game, is it?" he exclaimed, furiously. "I'll pay you for
this, see if I don't."

Hector did not reply. He did not propose to carry on the battle by
words. Already the matter had come to a sterner arbitrament, and he
stood on the alert, all his senses under absolute control, watching his
big antagonist, and, from the expression of his face, seeking to divine
his next mode of attack. He had this advantage over Jim, that he was
cool and collected, while Jim was angry and rendered imprudent by his
anger. Notwithstanding his first repulse, he did not fully understand
that the new boy was a much more formidable opponent than he
anticipated. Nor did he appreciate the advantage which science gives
over brute force. He, therefore, rushed forward again, with the same
impetuosity as before, and was received in precisely the same way.
This time the blood started from his nose and coursed over his inflamed
countenance, while Hector was still absolutely unhurt.

Meanwhile the boys looked on in decided amazement. It had been as far
as possible from their thoughts that Hector could stand up successfully
against the bully even for an instant. Yet here two attacks had been
made, and the champion was decidedly worsted. They could not believe the
testimony of their eyes.

Carried away by the excitement of the moment, Wilkins, who, as we have
said, was disposed to espouse the side of Hector, broke into a shout of
encouragement.

"Good boy, Roscoe!" he exclaimed. "You're doing well!"

Two or three of the other boys, those who were least under the
domination of Jim, and were only waiting for an opportunity of breaking
away from their allegiance, echoed the words of Wilkins. If there was
anything that could increase the anger and mortification of the tyrant
it was these signs of failing allegiance. What! was he to lose his hold
over these boys, and that because he was unable to cope with a boy much
smaller and younger than himself? Perish the thought! It nerved him to
desperation, and he prepared for a still more impetuous assault.

Somewhere in his Greek reader, Hector had met with a saying attributed
to Pindar, that "boldness is the beginning of victory." He felt that
the time had now come for a decisive stroke. He did not content
himself, therefore, with parrying, or simply repelling the blow of his
antagonist, but he on his part assumed the offensive. He dealt his blows
with bewildering rapidity, pressed upon Jim, skillfully evading the
grasp of his long arms, and in a trice the champion measured his length
upon the greensward.

Of course, he did not remain there. He sprang to his feet, and renewed
the attack. But he had lost his confidence. He was bewildered, and, to
confess the truth, panic-stricken, and the second skirmish was briefer
than the first.

When, for the third time, he fell back, with his young opponent standing
erect and vigorous, the enthusiasm of the boys overcame the limits of
prudence. There was a shout of approval, and the fallen champion, to
add to his discomfiture, was forced to listen to his own hitherto
subservient followers shouting, "Hurrah for the new boy! Hurrah for
Hector Roscoe!"

This was too much for Jim.

He rose from the ground sullenly, looked about him with indignation
which he could not control, and, shaking his fist, not at one boy in
particular, but at the whole company, exclaimed: "You'll be sorry for
this, you fellows! You can leave me, and stand by the new boy if you
want to, but you'll be sorry for it. I'll thrash you one by one, as I
have often done before."

"Try Roscoe first!" said one boy, jeeringly.

"I'll try you first!" said Jim; and too angry to postpone his intention,
he made a rush for the offender.

The latter, who knew he was no match for the angry bully, turned and
fled. Jim prepared to follow him, when he was brought to by Hector
placing himself in his path.

"Let that boy alone!" he said, sternly.

"What business is it of yours?" demanded Jim, doggedly; but he did not
offer to renew the attack, however.

"It will be my business to put an end to your tyranny and bullying,"
said Hector, undauntedly. "If you dare to touch one of these boys, you
will have to meet me as well."

Jim had had enough of encountering Hector. He did not care to make a
humiliating spectacle of himself any more before his old flatterers. But
his resources were not at an end.

"You think yourself mighty smart!" he said, with what was intended to be
withering sarcasm. "You haven't got through with me yet."

He did not, however, offer to pursue the boy who had been the first to
break away from his allegiance. He put on his coat, and turned to walk
toward the school, saying, "You'll hear from me again, and that pretty
soon!"

None of his late followers offered to accompany him. He had come to the
contest with a band of friends and supporters. He left it alone. Even
Bates, his most devoted adherent, remained behind, and did not offer to
accompany the discrowned and dethroned monarch.

"What's Jim going to do?" asked Talbot.

"He's going to tell old Sock, and get us all into trouble."

"It'll be a cowardly thing to do!" said Wilkins. "He's been fairly
beaten in battle, and he ought to submit to it."

"He won't if he can help it."

"I say, boys, three cheers for the new boy!" exclaimed Wilkins.

They were given with a will, and the boys pressed forward to shake the
hand of the boy whose prowess they admired.

"Thank you, boys!" said Hector, "but I'd rather be congratulated on
something else. I would rather be a good scholar than a good fighter."

But the boys were evidently of a different opinion, and elevated Hector
straightway to the rank of a hero.




CHAPTER XIV. SOCRATES CALLS HECTOR TO ACCOUNT.



Jim Smith, as he walked back to the institute, nursing his wrath, felt
very much like a dethroned king. He was very anxious to be revenged upon
Hector, but the lesson he had received made him cautious. He must get
him into trouble by some means. Should he complain to his uncle? It
would involve the necessity of admitting his defeat, unless he could
gloss over the story in some way.

This he decided to do.

On reaching the school he sought his dormitory, and carefully wiped away
the blood from his face. Then he combed his hair and arranged his dress,
and sought his uncle.

Mr. Smith was at his desk, looking over his accounts, and estimating the
profits of the half year, when his nephew made his appearance.

"Uncle Socrates, I'd like to speak to you."

"Very well, James. Proceed."

"I want to complain of the new boy who came this morning."

Socrates Smith looked up in genuine surprise. As a general thing,
his nephew brought few complaints, for he took the responsibility of
punishing boys he did not like himself.

"What! Roscoe?" inquired the principal.

"Yes."

"Is he in any mischief?"

"Mischief? I should say so! Why, he's a regular young Turk."

"A young Turk? I don't think I understand you, James."

"I mean, he's a young ruffian."

"What has he been doing?" asked Socrates, in surprise.

"He pitched into me a short time ago," said Jim, in some embarrassment.

"Pitched into you! You don't mean to say that he attacked you?"

"Yes, I do."

"But he's a considerably smaller boy than you, James. I am surprised
that he should have dared to attack you."

"Yes, he is small, but he's a regular fighter."

"I suppose you gave him a lesson?"

"Ye-es, of course."

"So that he won't be very likely to renew the attack."

"Well, I don't know about that. He's tough and wiry, and understands
boxing. I found it hard work to thrash him."

"But you did thrash him?" said Socrates, puzzled.

"Yes."

"Then what do you want me to do?"

"I thought you might punish him for being quarrelsome."

"It may be a good idea. I remember now that his uncle warned me that he
would need restraining."

"Just so, uncle," said Jim, eagerly. "His uncle was right."

"Well, I will give him a lecture. He will find that he cannot behave as
he pleases at Smith Institute," said Socrates, pompously. "He will find
that I do not tolerate any defiance of authority. I will speak of it
after vespers."

"Thank you, uncle."

"He'll get a raking down!" thought Jim, with gratification. "I'll make
it hot for him here, he may be sure of that."

Half an hour after supper was read a brief evening service called
vespers, and then the boys' study hours commenced. During this time they
were expected to be preparing their lessons for the next day.

The service was generally read by Socrates Smith, A. M., in person. It
was one of the few official duties he performed, and he was generally
very imposing in his manner on this occasion.

When the service had been read on that particular evening, the principal
