
"I'll see. Suppose you had a rope--could you swing out of the window?"

"Yes; I could fasten it to the bedstead, and fix that just against the
window."

"Then I think I can help you. Can you catch a ball?"

"Yes; but what good will that do?"

"You'll see. Make ready now, and don't miss it."

He produced a ball of common size, and after taking aim, threw it
lightly up toward Philip's window. The first time it didn't come within
reach. The second Philip caught it skilfully, and by the moonlight saw
that a stout piece of twine was attached to it. At the end of the twine
Frank had connected it with a clothesline which he had borrowed from
home.

"Now pull away, Phil," urged Frank.

Philip did, and soon had the stout line in his possession.

"It will hold; it's new and strong," said Frank. "Father only bought it
last week. I didn't think, then, what use we should have for it."

Philip, however, was not afraid. He was so anxious to escape that, even
if there had been any risk to run, he would readily have incurred it for
the sake of getting away from the poor-house, in which he was unwilling
to spend a single night. He fastened one end of the rope firmly to his
bedstead, as he had proposed, then cautiously got upon the window-sill
and lowered himself, descending hand over hand till he reached the
ground.

He breathed a sigh of relief as he detached himself from the rope and
stood beside Frank Dunbar.

Just then the boys heard a second-story window open, and saw Mr.
Tucker's head projecting from it.



CHAPTER XV. ESCAPE AND FLIGHT.



Though the boys had made as little noise as possible, conversing in an
undertone, they had been heard by Mrs. Tucker. Her husband, as was his
custom, had gone to sleep; but Mrs. Tucker, who, during the day, had
discovered the loss of ten cents from her bureau drawer in which she
kept her savings, had been kept awake by mental trouble. Some of my
readers may think so small a loss scarcely worth keeping awake for, but
Mrs. Joe Tucker was a strictly economical and saving woman--some even
called her penurious--and the loss of ten cents troubled her.

She would have laid it to one of "them paupers," as she was wont
contemptuously to refer to them, except that she never allowed one of
them to enter the sacred precincts of her chamber.

A horrible thought entered her mind. Could it be Zeke, the boy whom she
thought such a paragon, though no one else had been able to discover
his virtues or attractions! She did not like to think of it, but it did
occur to her that Zeke, the previous day, had asked her for ten cents,
though he would not own the purpose for which he wanted it. The boy
might have been tempted to take the money. At any rate, she would go and
see.

Zeke slept in a small room adjoining. When his mother entered, with a
candle in her hand, he was lying asleep, with his mouth wide open, and
one arm dropped over the side of the bed.

Mrs. Tucker took a look at him, and saw that he was wrapped in slumber
and unable to notice what she proposed to do. His clothes were thrown
down carelessly on a chair near-by.

Mrs. Tucker searched first in the pockets of his pants, and, though she
discovered a large variety of miscellaneous articles, "of no use to any
one except the owner," she didn't discover any traces of the missing
dime. She began to hope that he had not taken it, after all, although,
in that case, the loss would continue to be shrouded in obscurity. But,
on continuing her search, she discovered in one of the pockets of his
vest a silver ten-cent piece.

Mrs. Tucker's eyes flashed, partly with indignation at Zeke's
dishonesty, partly with joy at the recovery of the missing coin.

"I've found you out, you bad boy!" she said, in a low voice, shaking her
fist at the sleeping boy. "I wouldn't have believed that my Zeke would
have robbed his own mother. We must have a reckoning to-morrow."

She was half-inclined to wake Zeke up and charge him with his crime,
confronting him with the evidence of it which she had just discovered;
but on second thoughts she decided that she might as well let him sleep,
as the next day would do just as well.

Poor Zeke! he was not guilty, after all, though whether his honesty was
strict enough to resist a powerful temptation, I am not sure.

The dime which Mrs. Tucker had discovered was the same one that Philip
had given to Zeke in return for his service in notifying Frank Dunbar
of his captivity. In another pocket was the five-cent piece given him by
Frank, but that had escaped his mother's attention.

The reader will understand now how it happened that Mrs. Tucker was
kept awake beyond her usual time. She was broad awake when Frank Dunbar
arrived, and she heard something through the partially open window of
the conference between the two boys. She heard the voices that is to
say, but could not tell what was said.

With her mind dwelling upon Zeke's supposed theft, however, she was more
easily frightened than usual, and immediately jumped to the conclusion
that there were burglars outside, trying to get in.

The absurdity of burglars attempting to rob the town poorhouse did not
occur to her in panic. She sat up in bed, and proceeded to nudge her
husband in no gentle fashion.

"Mr. Tucker!" she exclaimed.

Her husband responded by an inarticulate murmur, but did not wake.

"Mr. Tucker!" she exclaimed, in a louder voice, giving him a still more
vigorous shake.

"Eh! What! What's the matter?" said Tucker, opening his eyes at last,
and staring vacantly at his wife.

"What's the matter!" retorted his wife impatiently. "The matter is that
there's burglars outside!"

"Let 'em stay outside!" said Joe Tucker, in a sleepy tone.

"Did any one ever hear such a fool?" exclaimed Mrs. Tucker, exasperated.
"They're trying to get in. Do you hear that, Mr. Tucker?"

"Trying to get in! Is the door locked?" asked Joe, a little alarmed.

"You must get up and defend the house," continued Mrs. Tucker.

Now, Mr. Tucker was not a brave man. He had no fancy for having a
hand-to-hand conflict with burglars, who might be presumed to be
desperate men. It occurred to him that it would be decidedly better to
stay where he was and ran no risk.

"Never mind, Abigail," he said, soothingly. "The burglars can't do us
any harm. They can't do any more than carry off a pauper or two, and I
don't, believe they'll do that."

"I wouldn't mind that, Mr. Tucker; but I've left the spoons
down-stairs!" answered his wife.

"How many are there!"

"Six. I want you to go down and get them and bring them up here, where
they will be safe."

"But suppose I should meet some of the burglars!" suggested Tucker,
trembling.

"Then you must defend yourself like a man!"

"You might find me in the morning weltering in my gore!" said Joe, with
an uneasy shudder.

"Are we to have the spoons stolen, then!" demanded Mrs. Tucker sharply.

"If you care so much for the spoons, Abigail, you'd better go
down-stairs yourself and get 'em. I don't value them as much as my
life."

"I don't know but I will, if you'll look out of the window and see
whether you can see any of the burglars outside," responded Mrs. Tucker.
"If they haven't got in yet, I'll take the risk."

"Where did you hear 'em, Abigail?"

"Eight outside. Open the window and look out, and you may see 'em."

Mr. Tucker was not entirely willing to do this, but still he preferred
it to going down-stairs after the spoons, and accordingly he advanced,
and, lifting the window, put his head out, as described at the close of
the last chapter.

Philip and Frank were just ready to go when they heard the window
rising, and naturally looked up in some trepidation.

"It's old Tucker!" said Frank, in a low voice.

Philip looked up, and saw that his friend was right.

Mr. Tucker had not yet discovered them, but the whisper caught his ear,
and looking down he caught sight of the two boys.

In his alarm, and the obscurity of the night, he did not make out that
they were boys and not men, and was about to withdraw his head in alarm,
when a mischievous impulse seized Frank Dunbar.

"Give me the ball, Philip!" he said quickly.

Philip complied with his request, not understanding his intention.

Now, Frank belonged to a baseball club, and had a capital aim. He threw
up the ball and struck Mr. Tucker fairly in the nose. The effect upon
the terrified Joe was startling.

Full as his mind was of burglars, he fancied that it was something a
great deal more deadly that had struck him.

"Oh, Abigail! I'm shot through the brain!" he moaned in anguish, as he
poked in his head and fell back upon the floor.

"What do you mean, Joe?" asked his wife, in alarm, as she hastened to
her prostrate husband, whose hand was pressed convulsively upon the
injured organ, which, naturally ached badly with the force of the blow.

"I'm a dead man!" moaned Mr. Tucker; "and it's all your fault. You made
me go to the window."

"I don't believe you're shot at all! I didn't hear any report," said
Mrs. Tucker. "Let me see your face."

Mr. Tucker withdrew his hand mournfully.

"You've only been struck with a rock or something," said she, after a
careful examination.

"It's bleeding!" groaned Joe, seeing a dark stain on his night-dress.

"Suppose it is--it won't kill you. I'll look out myself."

But she saw nothing. Philip and Frank had immediately taken to flight,
and vanished in the darkness.

"They've run away!" announced Mrs. Tucker. "My spoons are safe."

"But my nose isn't," groaned Mr. Tucker.

"You won't die this time," said Mrs. Tucker, not very sympathetically.
"Soak your nose in the wash-basin, and you'll be all right in the
morning."

The two boys were destined to have another adventure that night.



CHAPTER XVI. A NIGHT ADVENTURE.



"I didn't mean to hit him," said Frank, as he and Philip hurried away
from the poorhouse, "I only intended to give him a fright."

"I think you have. I wonder whether he recognized us!"

"I don't believe it. He had hardly got his head out of the window before
I let drive."

"Then he won't imagine I have escaped."

"What are your plans, Phil? Suppose they try to take you back to the
poorhouse?"

"They won't get the chance. Before five o'clock to-morrow morning I
shall leave Norton."

"Leave town?" exclaimed Frank, in surprise. "And so soon?"

"Yes. There is nothing for me to do here."

"Father would like to have you stay and assist him on the farm. He said
so to me. He wouldn't be able to pay much, but I think we would have a
good time together."

Philip pressed his friend's hand warmly.

"I know we should, Frank," he said, "but if I remained here, it would
only remind me of my poor father. I would rather go out into the world
and try my fortune."

"Isn't it risky, Phil?" objected Frank doubtfully.

"I suppose it is; but I am willing to work, and I don't expect much."

"Suppose you fall sick?"

"Then, if I can, I will come back to you and your good father and
mother, and stay till I am well."

"Promise me that, Phil?"

"I promise."

"I wish I could go with you, Phil," said Frank, with a boyish impulse.

"No, it wouldn't be wise for you. You have a good home, and you will be
better off there than among strangers."

"It might be your home, too, Phil."

"Thank you; but I shall be better away from Norton for a time."

A minute later, Frank said suddenly:

"There's Squire Pope coming. He will see you."

"I don't care. He won't take me back."

"Get behind the stone wall, and I will wait and interview him."

Philip immediately followed the advice of his friend. He was curious to
hear what the squire would say.

Squire Pope's eyesight was not good, and it was only when he came near
that he recognized Frank Dunbar. He stopped short, for there was a
subject on which he wished to speak.

"Frank Dunbar!" he said.

"Do you wish to speak to me, sir?" inquired Frank coldly.

"Yes. Where have you been?"

"Out walking," answered Frank shortly.

"Have you been to the poorhouse?"

"I have."

"Did you see Philip?"

"I saw him looking out of a third-story window."

Squire Pope chuckled, if, indeed, such a dignified man can be said to
chuckle.

"What did he say?" he condescended to inquire.

"That he wouldn't stay."

"He will have to," responded Squire Pope complacently. "Mr. Tucker will
see to that."

"Probably Mr. Tucker will wake up some fine morning and find Phil's room
empty," said Frank quietly.

"I'll take the risk of it," returned the squire serenely. "But there's a
matter I want to speak to you about. You've got Philip's fiddle in your
possession."

"Suppose I have."

"I wish you to bring it round to my house in the morning, and I'll give
you something for your trouble."

"You must excuse me, Squire Pope. If it were your property, I would
bring it to you and charge nothing for my trouble."

"Young man," said the squire sternly. "I am Philip's legal guardian, and
I have a right to receive his violin. You will get into trouble if you
resist my authority."

"If you will give me Philip's order for it, you shall have it, sir."

"Frank Dunbar, you are trifling with me. Philip is now a pauper, and has
no right to hold property of any kind. He cannot give a legal order."

"Then you are guardian to a pauper?"

"In my capacity of overseer of the poor."

"In my capacity as Philip's friend, I refuse to consider you his
guardian. You may call him a pauper, but that doesn't make him one."

"He is an inmate of the Norton Poorhouse."

Frank laughed.

"I don't want to be disrespectful, Squire Pope," he said; "but I can't
help telling you that you undertook a bigger job than you thought for,
when you made up your mind to make a pauper of Philip Gray."

Squire Pope was indignant at the coolness of Frank.

"I shall come to your house to-morrow morning," he said, "and convince
you to the contrary."

"Very well, sir."

Frank Dunbar bowed, and the squire went his way.

"That's a very impudent boy!" he soliloquized. "Just like the Gray boy.
It wouldn't do him any harm to put him under Joe Tucker's care, too."

After the squire had passed on, Philip came out from behind the stone
wall.

"Did you hear what passed between your guardian and myself?" asked
Frank.

"Yes, I heard every word."

"He little thought that the bird had flown, Phil."

"He will make all the trouble he can. That is one more reason why I
think it best to leave town."

"I wouldn't let Squire Pope drive you out of town."

"I would stay and face the music if it suited me, but I want to go
away."

"Suppose we cut across this field. It will be a little nearer."

"All right."

There was a pathway through a pasture-lot, comprising some ten acres,
poor land, covered with puny bushes, and a few gnarled trees, producing
cider-apples. It belonged to an old bachelor farmer, who lived in
solitary fashion, doing his own cooking, and in general taking care
of himself. He was reputed to have money concealed about his premises,
