


gath ered      ar row head
   sum mer          wap pa to
     pond              toes


THE WAPPATO.

The party found a root new to them on the lower Columbia.
The Indians called it wappato.
Captain Clark called it arrowhead.
The wappato grew all the year.
The Indian women gathered it.
A woman carried a light canoe to a pond.
She waded into the pond.
She put the canoe on the water.
With her toes she pulled up the wappato from the bottom of the pond.
The woman caught it and put it in the canoe.
She was in the water many hours, summer and winter.
When her canoe was full, she put it on her head and carried it home.
She roasted the wappato on hot stones.
It tasted very good.
The soldiers said it was the best root they had tasted.
The Indian women used to put some wappato in grass baskets and sell it
to the tribes up the river.




anx ious      cheer ful      view
break ing     dis tinct ly   shores


TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN.

The party went down the Columbia River in canoes.
It was a hard trip.
It rained all the time.
Each day the men were wet to the skin.
They had to carry their goods around some rapids.
They could not be very cheerful.
One day it stopped raining for a little time.
The low clouds went away.
The party saw that the river was very wide.
They rowed on.
Then they saw the great ocean lying in the sun.
They became very happy.
They cheered and laughed and sang.
They rowed on very fast.
Captain Lewis wrote in his book:
"Ocean in view! O! the joy! We are in VIEW of the Ocean, this great
Pacific Ocean, which we have been so long anxious to see. The noise made
by the waves breaking on the rocky shores may be heard distinctly."




half    for got    jour ney    troub les


THE PACIFIC OCEAN.

The party saw that they had come to the end of their journey.
They had come 4,134 miles from the mouth of the Missouri River.
It had taken them a year and a half to come.
But now they forgot their troubles.
They forgot the times they had been hungry.
They forgot their cut feet and their black and blue backs.
They forgot the bears and the snakes and the mosquitoes.
They saw the Pacific Ocean before them.
They sang because they were the first white men to make this journey.
They did not care for the troubles going back.
They knew that they could go home faster than they had come.
And they sang together, "The Ocean! The Ocean! O joy! O joy!"




beach     blub ber    line    thun der
Clat sop  salt        whale   sand


SACAJAWEA ON THE OCEAN BEACH.

The party made a winter camp at the mouth of the Columbia River.
They called it Fort Clatsop.
The Indians near-by were the Clatsop tribe.
These Indians gave the whites some whale blubber.
They said that a whale was on the ocean beach.
Captain Clark and some men got ready to go to see it.
Sacajawea came to Captain Clark and said, "May I go, too?
I have come over the mountains with you to find the Great Water and I
have not been to it yet.
Now I would see the Big Animal and the Great Water, too."
Captain Clark was glad to have her go.
He wrote in his book that this was the only time she asked for anything.
She took her baby on her back and walked with Captain Clark.
When she got near the ocean, she was afraid.
The noise seemed to her like thunder.
She always had been afraid of thunder.
When she saw the waves, she was afraid they would come over the earth.
She had never before seen any big body of water.
She had seen only rivers and ponds.
The ocean looked very big.
She would not go near the waves.
Then Captain Clark showed her the high water line.
He told her that the waves would not go over that line.
She sat down on the sand with her baby in her lap.
She watched the waves a long time.
Then she was not afraid.
She walked out to the waves.
When they came to shore, she ran before them.
She let them come over her feet.
She took some ocean water in her hand and tasted it.
She did not like its salt taste.
But she did like to run after the waves.




bags      oil      wood en
eight y   pork     trough


THE WHALE.

Captain Clark and his party walked all day before they came to where the
whale lay.
The waves had carried it up on the shore.
It was a very big animal.
It was longer than most houses.
It was eighty feet long.
The Indians were cutting it up.
They put the meat into a large wooden trough.
Then they put hot stones into the trough.
The hot stones melted out the oil.
The Indians put the oil into skin bags.
They used it to eat with roots and mush.
They did not wish to sell the oil.
But after a time, they did sell some oil to Captain Clark.
They sold him some blubber, too.
The blubber was white and looked like pork fat.
The soldiers cooked some and ate it.
They liked it very much.
Sacajawea was happy to see the whale.
She walked all around it.
She made her baby to look well at it.
She told him he might never see one again.
The baby did not care for the whale, but he laughed because Sacajawea
laughed.




beau ti ful    robe         sor ry
belt           sea-ot ter   wear


SACAJAWEA'S BELT.

The Clatsop chief came to Fort Clatsop to see the captains.
He had on a robe made of two sea-otter skins.
The skins were the most beautiful the captains had yet seen.
They wanted the chief to sell the robe.
He did not want to sell it, as sea-otters are hard to get.
They said they would give him anything they had for it.
Still he would not sell it.
Sacajawea saw him looking at her blue bead belt.
She had made this belt from beads Captain Clark had given her.
She used to wear it all the time.
She said to the Clatsop chief, "Will you sell the robe for my belt?"
He said, "Yes, I will sell it for the chief beads."
The Indians called blue beads "chief beads."
Sacajawea thought a little time.
Then she gave her belt to him.
He put it around his neck.
He gave her his sea-otter robe.
She gave it to Captain Clark for a present.
She was sorry to give up her belt.
The captains had no more blue beads to give her to make another.
But she was glad to give Captain Clark the beautiful sea-otter skins.




boiled     crust      five      pairs
burned     filled     kegs      treat


AT FORT CLATSOP.

At Fort Clatsop, the captains wrote in their books.
They wrote about all they had seen coming to the Pacific.
They wrote about things near Fort Clatsop.
They made maps of the land near the Missouri River, in the Rocky
Mountains, and on the banks of the Columbia.
Some of the men hunted.
They made the skins of animals into clothes and moccasins.
They made between three and four hundred pairs of moccasins.
They saved these to wear on the way home.
