
"No."

"Then, hadn't you better look at mine again?" he said, persuasively.

"It would be of no use."

"If the price is any objection," said Abner, insinuatingly, "I don't
know but I might say a LEETLE less, though the animal's wuth more'n I
ask for it."

"It isn't the price that stands in the way, Mr. Holden."

"What is it, then? Sam Nichols hain't been slandering me, I hope. If he
has, I'll be even with him."

"Spare your anger against Sam Nichols. He said nothing against you;
though I believe you warned me against him."

"Yes, I did. I felt it my duty to caution you, so you might not be
overreached by him."

"You prefer to overreach me yourself," said the other, quietly.

Abner started, and changed color.

"What do you mean?" he said. "Who told you I wanted to overreach you?"

"Why, this is the way the matter stands. I asked you for a good family
horse, such as my wife might drive with safety. Didn't you understand me
so?"

"Of course."

"And you tried to sell me an ill-tempered brute, blind of one eye, for
an extortionate price. Can you deny it?"

"Somebody's been telling you a pack of lies," said Abner, hoarsely.

"I don't think they are lies. I have every reason to think they are
true. By the way, what is the animal's name?"

"Spitfire," said Abner, rather reluctantly.

"A good name for a family horse," said the stranger, sarcastically.

"Where did you learn all this?" demanded Abner. "Who's been slandering
the horse?"

"I got my information at your place, from one who ought to know."

A light dawned upon Abner Holden's mind.

"Herbert told him," muttered Abner to himself. "That cursed boy has
spoiled my bargain, and he shall smart for it."

In a furious rage, he retraced his steps homeward, breathing threats of
vengeance dire against our hero.




CHAPTER XI

A CRISIS


Abner Holden's disappointment was excessive at the sudden falling
through of his horse trade, and his feeling of anger against Herbert for
his agency in the matter was in proportion to his disappointment. His
chief thought, as he hurried home from the tavern, was that he would
make the boy smart for his interference.

"I'll give him a good flogging," muttered Abner to himself, and he felt
that this would be some slight compensation for the injury and slight
loss which Herbert had caused him to sustain.

"I'll teach him to spoil my bargains," he said, while his face wore an
expression decidedly ugly. "I reckon he won't do it a second time."

It was in this frame of mind that he reached home.

Herbert had just entered the kitchen with an armful of wood for the
housekeeper, and having thrown down his burden, was about to go back,
when, on turning, he confronted the stormy and wrathful face of his
employer.

"He's found out," Herbert concluded at once, and he braced his nerves
for the storm which he knew must come.

"Well, young man, I've an account to settle with you," said Abner,
abruptly.

Herbert did not reply, but waited for Mr. Holden to state the matter.
But in Abner's present angry condition, he chose to construe his silence
into cause of offense.

"Why don't you speak?" he said. "What do you mean by looking me
impudently in the face?"

"I have no intention of being impudent," said Herbert. "I think you are
mistaken, Mr. Holden."

"Do you dare to tell me I am mistaken?" roared Holden, lashing himself
into a rage.

"I don't mean to do or say anything that is not perfectly respectful,"
said Herbert, manfully, looking steadily in his employer's face.

"Why did you tell a pack of lies about my horse this morning, and so
make me lose my trade?"

"I didn't tell a pack of lies," said Herbert.

"Didn't you tell the man who came here that he was an ill-tempered
brute, and blind of one eye?"

Abner Holden glared upon the boy as if he wanted to spring upon him, and
give him a thrashing on the spot.

"I told him that Spitfire was not suitable for a family horse."

"What did you tell him that for?"

"Because it was true."

"Supposing it was true, didn't you know that you were spoiling my
trade?"

"I am sorry for that, Mr. Holden, but if he had bought the horse,
supposing it to be gentle, it might have broken his wife's neck."

"What business was that of yours? That was his lookout."

"I didn't look upon it in that way. I thought he ought to buy the horse
with his eyes open."

"You did, did you?" roared Abner. "Then I advise you to open your own
eyes, for you're going to get one of the worst lickings you ever had."

Abner Holden's anger now reached an ungovernable pitch. Looking about
him for a weapon, he espied the broom resting against the wall. He
seized it, and with a scream of rage, made for Herbert, shaking off the
grasp of the housekeeper, who tried to stay him.

Herbert, perceiving the peril in which he stood, ran round the table,
which stood, with leaves open, in the middle of the floor. Abner pursued
him with headlong haste.

"Lord preserve us! The man is mad!" ejaculated the housekeeper, trying
to get out of the way. But in this she was not successful. The kitchen
was small, and before she could guard against a collision, Abner had
stumbled over Mrs. Bickford, and both came down together. She uttered a
succession of piercing shrieks, and, with a view of relieving Herbert,
pretended that her life was in danger, grasping Abner by the hair and
holding him fast.

Herbert saw that this was the favorable moment for escape, and, seizing
his hat, dashed out of the house. He ran across the fields as fast as
his limbs could carry him, expecting that he would be pursued. Before we
follow him, we will describe the scene that took place after his flight.

"Let go my hair, Mrs. Bickford!" exclaimed Abner, tugging vainly to
break from the housekeeper's grasp.

"I dare not," she said. "I'm afraid you'll murder me."

"You are making a fool of yourself," retorted Abner. "What should I
murder you for? But I will, if you don't let go!"

"Hello, who's talking of murder?" demanded a rough voice.

The speaker was a neighbor, who chanced to be passing, and was led to
enter by the uproar, which was plainly audible outside.

"Save me!" exclaimed Mrs. Bickford. "He's threatened to murder me."

"Stop your nonsense, you old fool!" retorted Abner, vexed at the
equivocal position in which he was placed.

"What's all this row about? Mr. Holden, you ought to be ashamed of
yourself for attacking a defenseless woman."

"I didn't intend to," said Abner, sullenly. "She got in my way, and I
stumbled over her; and then she seized me by the hair."

"What were you going to do with that broom?" demanded the other,
suspiciously.

"What was I going to do? I was going to thrash that rascally boy of
mine, and Mrs. Bickford knew it perfectly well."

"What has he done?"

"He? He's spoiled a trade of mine by his lying, and I was going to flog
him for it, when Mrs. Bickford got in my way."

"Well," said the visitor, shrugging his shoulders, "I don't want to
interfere in your affairs. I suppose that you've a right to flog the
boy, but it strikes me that a broom handle is rather an ugly weapon."

"It isn't half heavy enough," said Abner, savagely; "but where is the
boy? Did you see him?"

"Given leg-bail, I reckon, and I don't wonder at it."

"Run away?" ejaculated Abner, disappointed. "Did you see where he went?"

"No, I didn't, and if I had, I'm not sure that I would tell you."

Abner would like to have thrashed the man who showed so little sympathy
with his anger, but he felt that it would hardly be prudent. He went
to the door and looked out. But there was no trace of Herbert to be
discovered.

"He'll get it when he does come back," he said to himself.

The idea that Herbert might not come back at all never once occurred
to him. He resolved that the flogging should lose nothing by being
deferred.

We must now return to Herbert, whom we left running across the fields.

His departure had been so sudden, that his prominent idea was to get
out of the way of his employer's violence. He was at first under the
impression that he was pursued, but when, after running perhaps a
quarter of a mile, he ventured to look around, he saw, to his great
relief, that there was no one on his track. Being out of breath, he
stopped, and, throwing himself down on the grass in the shadow of a
stone wall, began to consider his plans for the future.

Everything was in doubt except one point. He felt that he had broken,
finally, the tie that bound him to Mr. Holden. He would not return to
him. He had experienced enough of Abner's ugly and unreasonable
temper to feel that there could be no harmony between them, and as
to submitting to personal violence from such a man as that, his blood
boiled at the thought. He knew that he should resist with all the
strength he possessed, and what the result might be he did not dare to
think. What lay before him in the future he could not conjecture, but
whatever it might be, he felt that it was better than to remain an
inmate of Abner Holden's household, and in his power.

But where should he go? That was a question not easily answered. After
his experience of his uncle's indifference to him, he did not wish to
appeal to him for aid, yet he felt that he should like to go to New York
and try his fortune there. Thousands of people lived there, and earned
enough to support them comfortably. Why not he? It was a thousand miles
off, and he might be some time in getting there. He might have to stop
and work on the way. But, sooner or later, he resolved that he would
find his way to the great metropolis.

But there was one difficulty which presented itself at the outset. This
difficulty related to his clothing. He had on a pair of overalls and a
ragged vest which Abner had provided for him, intending that he should
save the good suit he brought with him for Sundays. His present suit,
which had been worn by half a dozen of his predecessors, Herbert
decidedly objected to wearing, as, in addition to being faded and worn,
it was by no means a good fit. He must get his other suit.

But this was in Mr. Holden's attic, and it would hardly be prudent to
venture back for it, as Abner was on the lookout for him, and there
would be a collision, and perhaps he might be forcibly detained.
Fortunately, his money he had about him. This amounted, as the reader
already knows, to nearly fifteen dollars, and would, no doubt, be of
essential service to him in the project which he had undertaken. As to
the clothes, he must think of a way of securing them, before setting out
on his journey to New York.




CHAPTER XII

RALPH THE RANGER


One thing was certain. There was no chance of obtaining the clothes at
present. Probably his best course would be to wait till night, and
then come back to the house on the chance of gaining Mrs. Bickford's
attention. In the meantime, probably, the best thing to be done was to
conceal himself temporarily in a belt of woods lying about a mile back
of Abner Holden's house.

As soon as his breath was recovered, Herbert got up, and headed for
these woods. A few minutes found him in the midst of them. He made his
way with some difficulty through the underbrush, parting the thick stems
with his hands, until he reached a comparatively open space of perhaps
an acre in extent. In the midst of this space a rude hut was visible,
constructed of logs, and covered with the branches of trees. In front
of it, sitting on the stump of a tree, which perhaps had been spared
for that purpose, sat a tall man, with very brown complexion, clad in
a rough hunting suit. His form, though spare, was tough and sinewy, and
the muscles of his bare arms seemed like whipcords. A short, black pipe
was in his mouth. The only covering of his head was the rough, grizzled
hair, which looked as if for months it had never felt the touch of a
comb or brush.

Herbert, though he had never before seen this singular being, recognized
him at once as Ralph the Ranger, as he was properly called in the
village. For years he had lived a hermit-like existence in the forest,
supporting himself mainly by his rifle. This was not difficult, for his
wants were few and simple. What cause led him to shun the habitations of
his kind, and make his dwelling in the woods, no one knew, and perhaps
no one ever would know, for of himself he was silent, and it was not
easy to draw him out.

He looked up as he heard Herbert's step, and said, abruptly: "Well, boy,
what do you want?"

His manner was rough, but our hero was not afraid. He answered frankly,
"I am hiding."

"Hiding? Who from?"

"From Abner Holden."

"Humph! Why should you hide from him? What has he to do with you?"

"I am bound to him, and he is angry with me because he thinks I
interfered in a trade of his. He wanted to beat me, so I ran away."

"Good!" said Ralph, approvingly. "Tell me about it."

Herbert drew near, and told his story.

Ralph listened attentively.

"Boy," said he, "I think you are honest. There are not many that can be
said of. As for Abner Holden, I know him. He's a mean skinflint. Pah!"
and he spit, contemptuously. "You'd better not go back to him."

"I don't mean to," said Herbert, promptly.

"What are your plans? Have you formed any?"

"I want to go to New York."

"To New York," repeated Ralph, thoughtfully. "You wish to get into the
crowd, while I seek to avoid it. But it is natural to youth. At your
age, it was so with me. I hope, my boy, the time will not come when you,
like me, will wish to shun the sight of men."

Herbert listened in sympathy, not unmingled with surprise, to the speech
of this man, which was quite superior to what might have been expected
from one of his appearance.

"When do you wish to start?" asked Ralph, after a pause.

"First, I want to get my clothes."

"Where are they?"

"In my room, at Mr. Holden's house."

"How do you expect to get them?"

"Mrs. Bickford, the housekeeper, is a friend of mine. I thought I might
go there to-night, and attract her attention without rousing Mr. Holden.
She would get them for me."

"Good! I will go with you."

"Will you?" asked Herbert, gladly.

He had felt a little doubt as to the result of his expedition, as, if
Mr. Holden should be awake and start in pursuit, he would stand a good
chance of being captured, which, above all things, he most dreaded. But
with so able an auxiliary as Ralph, he knew he could bid easy defiance
to Abner, however much the latter might desire to molest him.

"Yes, I will stand by you, and you shall share my cabin with me as long
as you like. You are not afraid of me?"

"No," said Herbert, quickly.

Ralph looked kindly at him.

"Some of the children run from me," he said. "It is not strange,
perhaps, for I look savage, I suppose, but you do well to trust me. I
will be your friend, and that is something I have not said to any living
being for years. I like your face. It is brave and true."

"Thank you for your favorable opinion, Mr.--" Here Herbert paused in
uncertainty, for he had never heard Ralph's surname.

"Call me Ralph. I have done with the title of \ civilization. Call me
Ralph. That will suit me best."

"Thank you for your kindness, then, Ralph."

"What is your name?"

"Herbert--Herbert Mason."

"Then, Herbert, I think you must be hungry. Have you eaten your dinner?"

"No," said Herbert.

"Then you shall share mine. My food is of the plainest, but such as it
is, you are welcome. Come in."

Herbert entered the cabin. The only table was a plank supported at each
end by a barrel. From a box in the corner Ralph drew out some corn-bread
and some cold meat. He took a tin measure, and, going out of the cabin,
filled it with water from a brook near by. This he placed on the rude
table.

"All is ready," he said. "Take and eat, if my food is not too rude."

Herbert did eat, and with appetite. He was a growing boy, whose appetite
seldom failed him, and he had been working hard since breakfast, which
he had taken at six, while it was now one o'clock. No wonder he was
hungry.

Ralph looked on with approval.

"You are the first that has shared my meal for many a long day," he
said. "Day after day, and year after year, I have broken my fast
alone, but it seems pleasant, after all," he said, musingly. "Men are
treacherous and deceitful, but you," he said, resting his glance on the
frank, ingenuous face of his youthful guest, "you must be honest and
true, or I am greatly deceived."

"I hope you will find me so," said Herbert, interested more and more in
the rough-looking recluse, about whose life he suspected there must be
some sad secret, of which the world knew nothing.

After dispatching the meal provided by his hospitable entertainer,
Herbert sat down on the grass just outside the cabin, and watched lazily
the smoke which issued from Ralph's pipe, as it rose in many a fantastic
curl.

"How long have you lived here, Ralph?" asked our hero at length.

"Ten years," said the recluse, removing his pipe from his lips.

"It is a long time."

