"So will I."

"Silence at the table!" came in the sharp tones of Josiah
Crabtree, who presided over the particular board at which the
Rovers had been placed.

"I was only wondering if my brother was going to get any supper,"
returned Sam boldly.

"Silence!  I will take care of that."

In the midst of the meal a newcomer appeared at the doorway to the
messroom.  It was Dan Baxter.

"Well, Baxter, how is this?" asked Mr. Strong, the teacher nearest
to him.

"I--I was carried to Bar Landing," answered the bully sheepishly.

"Bar Landing?  Then you were on the afternoon boat from Ithaca?"

"Yes, sir."

"How did you come to be carried past Cedarville?"

"I--er--fell asleep on the trip."

"Indeed!  Well, when next you travel you had better try to keep
awake," was George Strong's comment, and a titter passed along the
table, which made Dan Baxter very angry.

"Sit down here. Alexander, help Baxter to some supper."

"Yes, sah," came from the waiter; and no more was said.  Presently
Baxter caught sight of Dick at the table opposite, and he looked
daggers at the youth.  "He's got it in for me," thought Dick; and
he was right.

The supper at an end, the pupils were allowed two hours to
themselves--one hour outdoors if they wished it, or both hours
in the reading room, which was well supplied with books and all of
the best magazines.  The newcomers went out in a bunch, and
Captain Harry Blossom accompanied them.

"I'll show you the gymnasium, if you wish to see it," he said.

"I would like to know something about Tom," replied Dick.  "Where
have they placed him?"

"Undoubtedly in the guardroom."

"Where is that?"

"Do you see that window over there?" and Captain Harry pointed
with his hand.

"Yes," came from Dick and Sam together.

"Well, that's the window to the place."

"I wonder if I can't talk to my brother?" went on Dick.

"It's against the rules to talk to a prisoner."

"Well, I'm going to talk anyway," said Dick with a recklessness
which was unusual to him.  "I want to find out just what they are
doing with him."

"I guess I had best leave this crowd," remarked the young captain
of Company A.

Dick was about to ask why, when Sam nudged him on the arm.  "Let
him go," whispered the younger brother.

In a moment more Captain Harry had walked away.

"Don't you see what he meant?" asked Sam aloud.

"Well hardly."

"Then you are losing some of your wit, Dick.  He didn't want to
see us break the rules.  I suppose if he had seen us he would have
felt it was his duty to report us."

"That's so, Sam.  How thick I was!  Well, I'm going over to the
window now."

"So am I."

"And I'll go too," added Fred.

Off the three hurried across the parade ground, the other new
cadets watching them curiously, for all had heard of what Tom had
done and how Josiah Crabtree had treated him.

The window of the guardroom was but five feet from the ground.  In
front of it, however, was an iron fence, placed in the form of a
semicircle, at a distance of about ten feet from the opening.  The
fence was higher than Dick's head, and the iron pickets were
sharp-pointed.

"The window to the room is shut," announced the elder Rover, after
an inspection in the semi-darkness.  "It's a shame, in this warm
weather.  Poor Tom will be half smothered to death!"

"Wait till I attract his attention," said Sam.  Catching up a clod
of grass and dirt he threw it against one of the window panes.

A minute of suspense followed, but no face appeared at the window.

"That's queer," said Fred.  "It seems to me he would show himself
if he was there."

"Perhaps he, can't," said Sam.  "He may be chained up in the other
end of the room."

"I'm going to make sure," said Dick determinedly.  "Sam and Fred,
both of you give me a boost up."

"But how will you get back?"

"You can give me another boost through the pickets."

"Hurrah! so we can!" cried Sam.  "All right; up you go!"

And up Dick did go, so rapidly that he almost fell over the top of
the iron barrier.

"Now, who has a match?" he asked.

"Here you are," said Fred, and passed over several.

Stepping to the window, Dick tapped upon it, and at the same time
struck a light, for the room within was pitch-dark.  The next
instant he muttered a cry of disgust.  "Sold!"

"What's that?" came from Sam and Fred.

"The room is empty."

"Then there must be some mistake," said Fred.  "Can you see all
over inside?"

"Yes."

"Sure Tom isn't asleep in a corner or on a couch--if there is
one?" put in Sam.  "He would go to sleep if he could."

"He isn't here--no doubt of it," answered Dick, after striking a
second match and making another inspection. "Oh!"

Dick blew out the match in a hurry and started back for the fence.
He had seen the door of the guardroom open and Josiah Crabtree
come in.

The head assistant of Putnam Hall saw the light of the match and
by it obtained a good view of Dick's face.

"Ha! that youth has come here to assist his brother to escape!"
was the conclusion he reached.  He darted for the window and threw
it up.

"Come back here, Master Rover!" he cried, as he saw Dick trying to
mount the fence.

"Don't you go!" whispered Sam, and tried to assist Dick from the
other side, while Fred did the same.

Josiah Crabtree would have leaped from the window, but the bars
held him back.

"I'll get you yet!" he ejaculated wrathfully, and, turning, ran
from the guardroom, with the intention of capturing Dick on the
parade ground.




CHAPTER IX

A STRANGE MEETING IN THE WOODS.


To go back to Tom, at the time he was left alone by the head
assistant of Putnam Hall, after refusing to give up the keys to
his satchel and trunk.

"I've put my foot into it now," thought the boy dismally.  "I
wonder what Captain Putnam will say to all this when he hears of
it?  Of course old Crabtree will make out the worst possible case
against me."

It was too dark to see much, and he dropped on the couch.  He was
worried a good deal, yet he was not one to take anything too
deeply to heart.

Before long a waiter appeared with a tray containing a big bowl of
bread and milk.  Had Josiah Crabtree had his own way, he would
have sent only bread and water for the lad's supper, but such a
proceeding would have been contrary to Captain Putnam's rule.  The
kind captain realized that his pupils were but boys and should not
be treated as real prisoners, even when they did break the academy
rules.

"Heah is yo' suppah, sah!" announced Alexander, the waiter, as he
set the tray on the table.  "Sorry I can't leave the light, sah."
He referred to a lamp, also, on the tray, which he now removed.

"What have you got?" asked Tom, sitting up.

"Bowl of bread and milk, sah."

"Is that what they give visitors for supper?"

"Gracious, sah, is yo' a visitah, sah?"

"I consider myself as such until I am placed on the muster roll."

At this Alexander scratched his woolly head.  "Well, sah, I don't
know nuffin about dat, sah.  I has to obey Mr. Crabtree's oahdahs,
sah."

"Has Captain Putnam come back yet?"

"No, sah, an' he sent word dat he didn't think he could git back,
sah, before morning, sah."

"Humph!  Then I'll have to stay here until that time."

"I reckon so, sah."

"It's a jolly shame."

"Dat's right, sah," and Alexander grinned.

"Well, leave the bread and milk.  It's better than nothing.  But
hold on.  Who are you?"

"Alexander Pop, sah, at yo' service, sah," and again the colored
man grinned.  He was a short, fat fellow, the very embodiment of
good nature.

"Well, Alexander, if you are at my service, supposing you get me
something else to eat beside this bread and milk."

"Oh, sah, I couldn't do dat."

"Yes, you could.  Here is a quarter.  Don't you want to earn
that?"  And Tom held out the silver piece.

"Mr. Crabtree would hab me discharged if he cotched me, Master
Rober."

"Then don't let him catch you, Aleck, my boy."

At this the negro laughed and showed his immense ivories.

"Yo' is jest de boy I dun like to see, sah," he said.  "Jess wait
an' I'll do wot I can fo! You but mum's de word, sah-eh?"

"I never peach, Aleck; it's only a coward that does that,"
concluded Tom.

The negro disappeared from the room, but reappeared in less than
ten minutes with something done up in a napkin.

"Dare you am, sah," he said, "two tongue sandwiches and a big
piece of layer cake, sah, all I could git, fo' Mrs. Green am werry
sharp.  And here is a bit of candle, sah, for a light.  But please
don't let 'em know I brought yo' de things, sah."

"Never a word, Aleck, thank you," answered Tom, and handed over
the quarter.

Left again to himself, Tom lost no time in making way, not only
with the sandwiches and cake, but also some of the bread and milk,
for his day's traveling had left him tremendously hungry.  The bit
of candle was less than two inches long, and began to splutter
just as the meal was finished.

A rattle at the door caused the lad to sweep the cake crumbs out
of sight, blow out the candle, and pocket the tiny bit left.  Then
the light of a lamp lit up the guardroom, and Josiah Crabtree came
in.

"Well, Rover, have you enjoyed your supper?" he asked coldly, as
he glanced at the half empty bowl.

"Very much," was the youth's equally cold reply.

"You like bread and milk, then," was Crabtree's sarcastic
rejoinder.

"Nothing better, sir, for supper."

The head assistant bit his lip, and then set down the lamp.

"Rover, don't you think, you are making a bad beginning?" he said
after a pause.

"I don't understand you, Mr. Crabtree."

"Any other boy on joining a school would wish to make his entrance
as creditable as possible."

"But I haven't joined this school yet."

"I won't argue that point."

"I wasn't even on your grounds, but in the public highway--and
there shot off--what?  A simple firecracker.  And for that you
hauled me to this place, and treat me like one who has broken half
the laws of the land.  If Captain Putnam upholds you in this
matter, do you know what I shall do?"

"Make an additional fool of yourself, I presume."

"I shall write home to my guardian that I do not consider Putnam
Hall a proper boarding academy for any boy, and that I want to be
put somewhere else."

At these outspoken words Josiah Crabtree grew pale.  His great
unpopularity was already having its effect upon Captain Putnam,
and he was afraid that if he should be the means of losing a pupil
it might cost him his place, as much as he knew that the captain
did not favor changes in his staff of instructors.

"Don't be unreasonable, my lad," he said, but his tone was much
milder than before.

"I don't think I am unreasonable."

"The road is one belonging to this institution--in brief, a
private road.  You became a pupil here when you entered our
carriage, that, which brought you here."

"Does everybody who rides in that carriage become a Putnam Hall
pupil?" demanded Tom.

He saw that he was worrying Crabtree, and resolved to keep it up.

"Well--er--we won't argue that point."

"Then supposing we don't argue anything until Captain Putnam comes
back?  In the meantime if you will release me I'll go to
Cedarville and put up at the hotel for the night."

"I shall not release you."

"All right, then.  But if my guardian takes me away, mark my
words, you shall stand a personal lawsuit for having locked me up
here without having any right to do so."

"Why--er--this to me--me, the head assistant here?" screamed
Josiah Crabtree.

In his rage he ran over to Tom and caught him by the ear.

He had scarcely done so than Tom put out one foot, gave the
teacher a shove, and down went Crabtree flat on his back.

"You villain!" gasped the head assistant, as he scrambled to his
feet.

"Don't you pinch my ear again," retorted Tom.

The door was open, and before Crabtree could stop him he ran out
into the hallway.

"Hold on!"

"Not much!"

"It will be the worse for you!"

"I'll risk that."

"Stop him, somebody!" screamed Josiah Crabtree at the top of his
voice.

Without waiting, Tom ran down the hallway.  He knew not where he
was going, and, coming, to a door, slipped through.  He now found
himself in the rear of the Hall and a few seconds later ran across
the back garden and dove into the farm lands.

"Free once more," he thought.  "And I shan't go back until I am
certain Captain Putnam is on hand to receive me.  I wonder how
Dick and Sam are faring?"

Thinking that his brothers would soon learn of his escape, and not
wishing to be caught, he hurried on until the farm lands were
passed and he found himself in a woods.

