
THE HUNT FOR MR. QUACK


In spite of her hopelessness in regard to Mr. Quack, there is no
doubt that Mrs.  Quack felt better that night after she had eaten
the corn left among the rushes of the Smiling Pool by Farmer Brown's
boy. Now she had that very comfortable feeling that goes with a
full stomach, she could think better. As the Black Shadows crept
across the Smiling Pool, she turned over in her mind Sammy Jay's
plan for helping her the next day. The more she thought about it,
the better it seemed, and she began to feel a little ashamed that
she had not appeared more grateful to Sammy when he told her. At
the time she had been tired and hungry and discouraged. Now she
was beginning to feel rested, and she was no longer hungry. These
things made all the difference in the world. As she thought over
Sammy's plan, she began to feel a little hope, and when at last
she put her head under her wing to go to sleep, she had made up
her mind that the plan was worth trying, and that she would do her
part.

Bright and early the next morning, Sammy Jay and Blacky the Crow
were in the Big Hickory-tree near the Smiling Pool ready to start
for the Big River to hunt for Mr. Quack. Peter Rabbit had been so
afraid that he would miss something that he had stayed near the
Smiling Pool all night, so he was on hand to see the start.

It had been agreed that Mrs. Quack was to go to a certain place on
the Big River and then swim up as far as she thought it would be
of any use. She was to stay in the middle of the river, where she
would be quite safe from hunters with terrible guns, and where also
these same hunters would be sure to see her and so not be tempted
to shoot at Blacky the Crow if he happened to fly over them. You
see, they would hope that Mrs. Quack would swim in near enough to
be shot and so would not risk frightening her by shooting at Blacky.

When Mrs. Quack had finished her breakfast, she started for the
Big River, and her stout wings moved so swiftly that they made a
whistling sound. Sammy Jay and Blacky the Crow followed her, but
though they flew as fast as they could, Mrs.  Quack had reached
the Big River before they had gone half the way. When they did get
there, they saw Mrs. Quack out in the middle, swimming about and
watching for them. Blacky flew across the river and pretended to
be hunting for food along the farther bank, just as every hunter
knows he often does. Sammy Jay did the same thing on the other
bank.

Mrs. Quack swam slowly up the Big River, keeping in the middle,
and Blacky and Sammy followed along up the two banks, all the time
using their sharp eyes for all they were worth to find Mr. Quack
hiding among the broken-down rushes or under the bushes in the
water, for the Big River had overflowed its banks, and in some
places bushes and trees were in the water.

Now Sammy Jay dearly loves to hunt for things. Whenever he knows
that one of his neighbors in the Green Forest has hidden something,
he likes to hunt for it. It isn't so much that he wants what has
been hidden, as it is that he wants to feel he is smart enough to
find it. When he does find it, he usually steals it, I'm sorry to
say. But it is the fun of hunting that Sammy enjoys most. So now
Sammy thoroughly enjoyed hunting for Mr. Quack. He peered into every
likely hiding-place and became so interested that he quite forgot
about the hunters who might be waiting along the bank.

So it happened that he didn't see a boat drawn in among the bushes
until he was right over it. Sitting in it was a man with a terrible
gun, very intently watching Mrs. Quack out in the middle of the
Big River. Sammy was so startled that before he thought he opened
his mouth and screamed "Thief! thief! thief!" at the top of his
lungs, and flew away with all his might. Mrs. Quack heard his scream
and understood just what it meant.

A little later Blacky the Crow discovered another hunter hiding
behind the bushes on his side. "Caw! caw! caw!" shouted Blacky,
flying out over the water far enough to be safe from that terrible
gun he could see.

"Quack! quack!" replied Mrs. Quack, which meant that she understood.
And so the hunt went on without a sign of poor Mr. Quack.




XVI

SAMMY JAY SEES SOMETHING GREEN


For all their peeking and peering among the broken-down rushes and
under the bushes along the banks of the Big River, and no sharper
eyes ever peeked and peered, Sammy Jay and Blacky the Crow had
found no sign of the missing Mr.  Quack.

"I guess Mrs. Quack was right and that Mr. Quack was killed when
he was shot," muttered Sammy to himself. "Probably one of those
hunters had him for dinner long ago. Hello! There's another hunter
up where the Laughing Brook joins the Big River! I guess I won't
take any chances. I'd like to find Mr. Quack, but Sammy Jay is a
lot more important to me than Mr. Quack, and that fellow just might
happen to take it into his head to shoot at me."

So Sammy silently flew around back of the hunter and stopped in a
tree where he could watch all that the man did. For some time Sammy
sat there watching. The hunter was sitting behind a sort of fence
of bushes which quite hid him from any one who might happen to be
out on the Big River. But of course Sammy could see him perfectly,
because he was behind him. Out in front of that little fence, which
was on the very edge of the water, were a number of what Sammy
at first took to be some of Mrs. Quack's relatives. "Why doesn't
he shoot them?" thought Sammy. He puzzled over this as he watched
them until suddenly it came into his head that he hadn't seen one
of them move since he began watching them. The man changed his
position, and still those Ducks didn't move, although some of them
were so near that they simply couldn't have helped knowing when the
hunter moved unless they were more stupid than any one of Sammy's
acquaintance.

This was very curious, very curious indeed. Sammy flew a little
nearer and then a little nearer, taking the greatest care not to
make a sound. Pretty soon he was so near that he could see those
Ducks very plainly, and he stared with all his might. He couldn't
see any feathers! No, Sir, he couldn't see any feathers!  Then he
understood.

"Huh!" said he to himself. "Those are not Ducks at all. They are
just pieces of wood made to look like Ducks. Now I wonder what they
are for."

In a few minutes he found out. He saw the hunter crouch down a
little lower and look down the Big River. Sammy looked too. He saw
a flock of real Ducks flying swiftly just above the middle of the
Big River. Suddenly the leader turned straight towards the place
where the hunter was hiding, and the others followed him. He could
hear Mrs. Quack calling excitedly out in the middle of the Big
River, but the strangers did not heed her. They had their eyes on
those wooden Ducks and were coming straight in to join them.

"They think they are real Ducks and so this place is perfectly
safe!" thought Sammy. He saw the hunter make ready to shoot with his
terrible gun and then, without stopping to think what might happen
to him, he opened his mouth and screamed at the top of his voice.
He saw the Ducks suddenly swing out towards the middle of the Big
River and knew that they had heard his warning. He saw the hunter
suddenly rise and point his gun at the flying Ducks. He heard the
bang, bang of the terrible gun, but not one of the flock was hit. The
distance was too great. Sammy chuckled happily. Then he remembered
that he himself was within easy reach of that terrible gun, and
probably the hunter was very angry. In great fright Sammy turned
and flew, dodging behind trees and every second expecting to hear
again the roar of that terrible gun.

But he didn't, and so when he thought he was safe, he stopped. Now
in flying away from the hunter he had followed the Laughing Brook
where it winds through a sort of swamp before it joins the Big
River. Because there was more water than could be kept between the
banks of the Big River, it had crept over the banks, and all the
trees of the swamp were standing in water. Just beyond where Sammy
was sitting was a pile of brush in the water. A Jolly Little Sunbeam,
dancing down through the tree tops, touched something under the
edge of the brush, and Sammy's sharp eyes caught a flash of green.
Idly he watched it, and presently it moved. Instantly Sammy was
all curiosity. He flew over where he could see better.

"Now what can that be?" thought Sammy, as he peered down at the
pile of brush and tried to see under it.




XVII

MR. QUACK IS FOUND AT LAST


Sammy Jay's eyes sparkled as he watched that spot of green under the
pile of brush in the swamp through which the Laughing Brook finds
its way to join the Big River. All around was water, for you know
it was spring, and the melting snows on the hills way up where the
Big River has its beginning were pouring more water into the Big
River than its banks would hold as it hurried down to the Great
Ocean. It just couldn't hurry fast enough to take all that water
down as fast as it ran into the Big River, and so the water had
crept over the banks in places. It had done this right here in the
little swamp where Sammy was.

Sammy sat perfectly still, for he learned long ago that only by
keeping perfectly still may one see all that is to be seen. That
green spot had moved.  He was sure of that. And if it moved, it
must be something alive. If it were alive, it must be somebody,
and Sammy wanted to know who it was. Try as he would he couldn't
remember any one who wore such glossy green as that. So he sat
perfectly still, for he knew that if whoever was hiding under that
brush should even guess that he was being watched, he would not
come out.

So, his eyes sparkling with excitement, Sammy watched. He was
impatiently patient. Did you know that it is possible to be impatiently
patient? Well, it is. Sammy was just boiling with impatience inside,
but he didn't let that impatience spoil the patience of his waiting.
He sat there just as still as still, with his eyes fixed on that
green spot, and you would never have guessed that he was fairly
bursting with impatience to know who it was he was watching.  That
is what is called self-control. It means the power to make yourself
do a certain thing, no matter how much you may want to do something
else. It is a splendid thing to have, is self-control.

After what seemed to Sammy a very long time, the green spot moved
again. Little by little something reached out from under the pile
of brush. It was a head, a very beautiful green head, and it was
exactly like Mrs. Quack's head, only hers was a sober brown instead
of green. Sammy choked back a little gasp of surprise as a sudden
thought popped into his head. Could this be the lost Mr. Quack?
He had forgotten that probably Mr. Quack dressed differently from
Mrs. Quack, and so of course he had been looking for some one all
in brown. There was the bang of a gun somewhere over on the Big
River, and the green head was hastily withdrawn under the bush, but
not before Sammy had seen a look of terrible fear in his eyes. "I
believe it IS Mr. Quack!" thought Sammy. "If it is, I'll have the
best news ever to tell Mrs. Quack. Just trust Sammy Jay to find
anything he goes looking for."

This was just plain boasting, and Sammy knew it. But Sammy always
