   And other such 'pleasures of hope' for the winter?

   You men, selfish creatures, think all of the care
   Of living and keeping yourselves in existence,
   Is due to your own daily labor, and share,
   From breakfast to dinner of business persistance;
   While woman is either a plaything or drudge,
   According to station of wealth or position,
   Which men help along with a word or a nudge
   To heaven high up or low down to perdition.

   But what was I saying of a world free from care,
   Of eating and drinking and dresses to wear?

   Where women by husbands are never tormented,
   And never asked money where husbands dissented?
   And never see others, their rivals, in fashion ahead,
   And never have doctors--a woman's great dread--
   And nothing, I hope, like my own indigestion,
   To torment and starve them, as this one does me,
   And keep them from sipping--forgive the suggestion--
   The nectar etherial they drink for their tea.




Mrs. Merdle Suggesteth that Dinner being finished, the Gentlement will Smoke. In the meantime, she Discourseth.


   "Now Merdle--now Colonel--I know you are waiting.
   And thinking my talking to eating's a bar,
   Still hoping, by tasting, my appetite sating,
   Will give you the license to smoke a cigar.

   [Illustration: "WILL GIVE YOU THE LICENSE TO SMOKE A CIGAR"]

   Well then, I've done now, and hope too you've dined,
   As well as down town where you dine for a shilling,
   At Taylor's, or Thompson's, or one of the kind,
   Where mortals are flocking each day for their filling;
   Or else at the Astor where bachelors quarter,
   Where port holes for windows give light to the room,
   Far out of the region of Eve's every daughter,
   So high they are stuck up away toward the moon.

   Though as for the 'stuck up' no walls built of brick,
   Or granite, or marble, or dirty red sand,
   Could stick up a man who himself's but a stick,
   An inch above where he would naturally stand.

   To witness the truth of this final assertion,
   I call you to witness the sticks at the door,
   Where they make it a daily, a 'manly' diversion,
   To ogle each woman, and sometimes do more,
   Who passes the hotel that's named by a saint,
   Where boorish bad manners give room for complaint.

   Where idlers and loafers, with gamblers a few,
   Make up for the nonce the St. Nicholas crew.

   The 'outside barbarians,' I freely confess,
   Who ogle our faces and ogle our dress,
   Who spit where we walk as dirty a puddle
   As bipeds can make when their brains are 'a muddle,'
   Do not prove the inside is as dirty as they are,
   Or else the gods help all the ladies who stay there.

   Why any prefer in a hotel to stay,
   Instead of a house of their choosing to own,
   Is just to avoid all the trouble, they say,
   That servants to give us are certainly prone,
   I'm sure if a tyranny more terrible prevails,
   In Austria or other despotic domain,
   My memory where most certainly fails,
   That servants and milliners over us gain,
   Just here in New York, and the more is the pity,
   Where Wood is the Mogul that governs the city.




Mrs. Merdle, having "Nibbled a Little" for two Hours at Dinner, retireth from the Table unsatisfied.


   "Impatient--oh yes--just the way with you men!

   I never have time to half finish my eating
   Ere Merdle is done; such a fidget is then,
   He'd starve me I think rather 'n miss of a meeting
   Where brokers preside o'er the fate of the stocks,
   As Pales presided o'er shepherds and flocks.

   Now while you are smoking--what nonsense and folly--
   I'll go to my room.--don't say No, for I must--
   Put on a new dress, with assistance of Molly,
   And then with a little strong tea and a crust,
   My strength I may hope for a walk will be able
   As far as the gate, and a very short ride,
   To give me a relish again for the table--
   What else do we live for in this world beside?"




The Poet Moralizeth--He Discourseth to those who Gorge and Complain.


   Oh! Kitty Malone--Mrs. Merdle 'tis now--
   Was there ever on earth than this, greater folly?

   Still gorging, while groaning, and swearing a vow,
   That yours is a case of most sad melancholy.

   With table that Croesus never had but might covet,
   You live but to eat and to eat 'cause you love it;
   And yet while you swallow great sirloins of meat
   Complain like a beggar of nothing to eat.




He Discourseth of the Wherefore of Bachelorism.


   "What else do we live for in this world beside?"

   Alas! 't is the question of ten times a day,
   That comes on the wind, or that floats on the tide,
   And creeps in the houses where men go to pray.

   What else do we live for than get such a wife
   As this of the banker of our faint description?

   What else is the end of our fashionable life
   From which men escape as they would from conscription?

   What else is the reason so few natives marry,
   Than this, that extravagance leads on to ruin?

   It is because few men are able to carry
   The load of this baking and roasting and stewing,
   Of buying and wasting extravagant meat,
   Where women are dying of "nothing to eat;"
   Where men in corruption so rapidly tending,
   In morals and wealth in bankruptcy ending.

   That forging and stealing and breaches of trust,
   And ten thousand arts of the confidence game,
   And follies uncounted of men "on a bust,"
   Are follies and crimes of this age to our shame,
   Till angels who witness the folly so wide
   Extended from palace to farm-house and cot,
   Might wonder if mortals life's objects forgot,
   Or Merdle's position is man's common lot?




He Discourseth of What some Mortals Live for.


   "What else do they live for in this world beside?"

   What else but for Kittys or one of the same,
   Do mothers their daughters at schools give the touch
   That leaves them to live as a wife but in name
