"No," said Mactavish, sharply; "you'll take your turn like the rest."

The new-comer was a native of Orkney, a country from which, and the
neighbouring islands, the Fur Company almost exclusively recruits its
staff of labourers. These men are steady, useful servants, although
inclined to be slow and lazy _at first_; but they soon get used to the
country, and rapidly improve under the example of the active Canadians
and half-breeds with whom they associate; some of them are the best
servants the Company possess. Hugh Mathison, however, was a very bad
specimen of the race, being rough and coarse in his manners, and very
lazy withal. Upon receiving the trader's answer, Hugh turned sulkily on
his heel and strode towards the door. Now, it happened that Baptiste's
bundle lay just behind him, and on turning to leave the place, he
tripped over it and stumbled, whereat the voyageurs burst into an
ironical laugh (for Hugh was not a favourite).

"Confound your trash!" he cried, giving the little bundle a kick that
scattered everything over the floor.

"Crapaud!" said Baptiste, between his set teeth, while his eyes flashed
angrily, and he stood up before Hugh with clinched fists, "what mean
you by that, eh?"

The big Scotchman held his little opponent in contempt; so that,
instead of putting himself on the defensive, he leaned his back against
the door, thrust his hands into his pockets, and requested to know
"what that was to him."

Baptiste was not a man of many words, and this reply, coupled with the
insolent sneer with which it was uttered, caused him to plant a sudden
and well-directed blow on the point of Hugh's nose, which flattened it
on his face, and brought the back of his head into violent contact with
the door.

"Well done!" shouted the men; "bravo, Baptiste! _Regardez le nez, mes
enfants!_"

"Hold!" cried Mactavish, vaulting the counter, and intercepting Hugh,
as he rushed upon his antagonist; "no fighting here, you blackguards!
If you want to do _that,_ go outside the fort;" and Peter, opening the
door, thrust the Orkneyman out.

In the meantime, Baptiste gathered up his goods and left the store, in
company with several of his friends, vowing that he would wreak his
vengeance on the "gros chien" before the sun should set.

He had not long to wait, however, for just outside the gate he found
Hugh, still smarting under the pain and indignity of the blow, and
ready to pounce upon him like a cat on a mouse.

Baptiste instantly threw down his bundle, and prepared for battle by
discarding his coat.

Every nation has its own peculiar method of fighting, and its own ideas
of what is honourable and dishonourable in combat. The English, as
everyone knows, have particularly stringent rules regarding the part of
the body which may or may not be hit with propriety, and count it foul
disgrace to strike a man when he is down, although, by some strange
perversity of reasoning, they deem it right and fair to _fall_ upon him
while in this helpless condition, and burst him if possible. The
Scotchman has less of the science, and we are half inclined to believe
that he would go the length of kicking a fallen opponent; but on this
point we are not quite positive. In regard to the style adopted by the
half-breeds, however, we have no doubt. They fight _any_ way and
_every_ way, without reference to rules at all; and really, although we
may bring ourselves into contempt by admitting the fact, we think they
are quite right. No doubt the best course of action is _not_ to fight;
but if a man does find it _necessary_ to do so, surely the wisest plan
is to get it over at once (as the dentist suggested to his timorous
patient), and to do it in the most effectual manner.

Be this as it may, Baptiste flew at Hugh, and alighted upon him, not
head first, or fist first, or feet first, or _anything_ first, but
altogether--in a heap as it were; fist, feet, knees, nails, and teeth,
all taking effect at one and the same time, with a force so
irresistible that the next moment they both rolled in the dust together.

For a minute or so they struggled and kicked like a couple of serpents,
and then, bounding to their feet again, they began to perform a
war-dance round each other, revolving their fists at the same time in,
we presume, the most approved fashion. Owing to his bulk and natural
laziness, which rendered jumping about like a jack-in-the-box
impossible, Hugh Mathison preferred to stand on the defensive; while
his lighter opponent, giving way to the natural bent of his mercurial
temperament and corporeal predilections, comported himself in a manner
that cannot be likened to anything mortal or immortal, human or
inhuman, unless it be to an insane cat, whose veins ran wild-fire
instead of blood. Or perhaps we might liken him to that ingenious piece
of firework called a zigzag cracker, which explodes with unexpected and
repeated suddenness, changing its position in a most perplexing manner
at every crack. Baptiste, after the first onset, danced backwards with
surprising lightness, glaring at his adversary the while, and rapidly
revolving his fists as before mentioned; then a terrific yell was
heard; his head, arms, and legs became a sort of whirling conglomerate;
the spot on which he danced was suddenly vacant, and at the same moment
Mathison received a bite, a scratch, a dab on the nose, and a kick on
the stomach all at once. Feeling that it was impossible to plant a
well-directed blow on such an assailant, he waited for the next
onslaught; and the moment he saw the explosive object flying through
the air towards him, he met it with a crack of his heavy fist, which,
happening to take effect in the middle of the chest, drove it backwards
with about as much velocity as it had approached, and poor Baptiste
measured his length on the ground.

"Oh, pauvre chien!" cried the spectators, "c'est fini!"

"Not yet," cried Baptiste, as he sprang with a scream to his feet
again, and began his dance with redoubled energy, just as if all that
had gone before was a mere sketch--a sort of playful rehearsal, as it
were, of what was now to follow. At this moment Hugh stumbled over a
canoe-paddle, and fell headlong into Baptiste's arms, as he was in the
very act of making one of his violent descents. This unlooked-for
occurrence brought them both to a sudden pause, partly from necessity
and partly from surprise. Out of this state Baptiste recovered first,
and taking advantage of the accident, threw Mathison heavily to the
ground. He rose quickly, however, and renewed the light with freshened
vigour.

Just at this moment a passionate growl was heard, and old Mr. Kennedy
rushed out of the fort in a towering rage.

Now Mr. Kennedy had no reason whatever for being angry. He was only a
visitor at the fort, and so had no concern in the behaviour of those
connected with it. He was not even in the Company's service now, and
could not, therefore, lay claim, as one of its officers, to any right
to interfere with its men. But Mr. Kennedy never acted much from
reason; impulse was generally his guiding-star. He had, moreover, been
an absolute monarch, and a commander of men, for many years past in his
capacity of fur-trader. Being, as we have said, a powerful, fiery man,
he had ruled very much by means of brute force--a species of suasion,
by the way, which is too common among many of the gentlemen (?) in the
employment of the Hudson's Bay Company. On hearing, therefore, that the
men were fighting in front of the fort, Mr. Kennedy rushed out in a
towering rage.

"Oh, you precious blackguards!" he cried, running up to the combatants,
while with flashing eyes he gazed first at one and then at the other,
as if uncertain on which to launch his ire. "Have you no place in the
world to fight but _here_? eh, blackguards?"

"O monsieur," said Baptiste, lowering his hands, and assuming that
politeness of demeanour which seems inseparable from French blood,
however much mixed with baser fluid, "I was just giving _that dog_ a
thrashing, monsieur."

"Go!" cried Mr. Kennedy in a voice of thunder, turning to Hugh, who
still stood in a pugilistic attitude, with very little respect in his
looks.

Hugh hesitated to obey the order; but Mr. Kennedy continued to advance,
grinding his teeth and working his fingers convulsively, as if he
longed to lay violent hold of the Orkneyman's swelled nose; so he
retreated in his uncertainty, but still with his face to the foe. As
has been already said, the Assiniboine River flows within a hundred
yards of the gate of Fort Garry. The two men, in their combat, had
approached pretty near to the bank, at a place where it descends
somewhat precipitately into the stream. It was towards this bank that
Hugh Mathison was now retreating, crab fashion, followed by Mr.
Kennedy, and both of them so taken up with each other that neither
perceived the fact until Hugh's heel struck against a stone just at the
moment that Mr. Kennedy raised his clenched fist in a threatening
attitude. The effect of this combination was to pitch the poor man head
over heels down the bank, into a row of willow bushes, through which,
as he rolled with great speed, he went with a loud crash, and shot head
first, like a startled alligator, into the water, amid a roar of
laughter from his comrades and the people belonging to the fort; most
of whom, attracted by the fight, were now assembled on the banks of the
river.

Mr. Kennedy's wrath vanished immediately, and he joined in the
laughter; but his face instantly changed when he beheld Hugh sputtering
in deep water, and heard some one say that he could not swim.

"What! can't swim?" he exclaimed, running down the bank to the edge of
the water. Baptiste was before him, however. In a moment he plunged in
up to the neck, stretched forth his arm, grasped Hugh by the hair, and
dragged him to the land.




CHAPTER VIII.

Farewell to Kate--Departure of the brigade--Charley becomes a voyageur.


On the following day at noon, the spot on which the late combat had
taken place became the theatre of a stirring and animated scene. Fort
Garry, and the space between it and the river, swarmed with voyageurs,
dressed in their cleanest, newest, and most brilliant costume. The
large boats for the north, six in number, lay moored to the river's
bank, laden with bales of furs, and ready to start on their long
voyage. Young men, who had never been on the road before, stood with
animated looks watching the operations of the guides as they passed
critical examination upon their boats, overhauled the oars to see that
they were in good condition, or with crooked knives (a species of
instrument in the use of which voyageurs and natives are very expert)
polished off the top of a mast, the blade of an oar, or the handle of a
tiller. Old men, who had passed their lives in similar occupations,
looked on in silence--some standing with their heads bent on their
bosoms, and an expression of sadness about their faces, as if the scene
recalled some mournful event of their early life, or possibly reminded
them of wild, joyous scenes of other days, when the blood coursed
warmly in their young veins, and the strong muscles sprang lightly to
obey their will; when the work they had to do was hard, and the sleep
that followed it was sound--scenes and days that were now gone by for
ever. Others reclined against the wooden fence, their arms crossed,
their thin white hair waving gently in the breeze, and a kind smile
playing on their sunburned faces, as they observed the swagger and
coxcombry of the younger men, or watched the gambols of several
dark-eyed little children--embryo buffalo-hunters and voyageurs--whose
mothers had brought them to the fort to get a last kiss from papa, and
witness the departure of the boats.

Several tender scenes were going on in out-of-the-way places--in angles
of the walls and bastions, or behind the gates-between youthful couples
about to be separated for a season. Interesting scenes these of pathos
and pleasantry--a combination of soft glances and affectionate fervent
assurances; alternate embraces (that were _apparently_ received with
reluctance, but _actually_ with delight, and proffers of pieces of
calico and beads and other trinkets (received both _apparently_ and
_actually_ with extreme satisfaction) as souvenirs of happy days that
were past), and pledges of unalterable constancy and bright hope in
days that were yet to come.

A little apart from the others, a youth and a girl might be seen
sauntering slowly towards the copse beyond the stable. These were
Charley Kennedy and his sister Kate, who had retired from the bustling
scene to take a last short walk together, ere they separated, it might
be for years, perhaps for ever! Charley held Kate's hand, while her
sweet little head rested on his shoulder.

"O Charley, Charley, my own dear, darling Charley, I'm quite miserable,
and you ought not to go away; it's very wrong, and I don't mind a bit
what you say, I shall die if you leave me!" And Kate pressed him
tightly to her heart, and sobbed in the depth of her woe. "Now, Kate,
my darling, don't go on so! You know I can't help it--"

"I _don't_ know," cried Kate, interrupting him, and speaking
vehemently--"I don't know, and I don't believe, and I don't care for
anything at all; it's very hard-hearted of you, and wrong, and not
right, and I'm just quite wretched!"

Poor Kate was undoubtedly speaking the absolute truth; for a more
disconsolate and wretched look of woebegone misery was never seen on so
sweet and tender and lovable a little face before. Her blue eyes swam
in two lakes of pure crystal, that overflowed continually; her mouth,
which was usually round, had become an elongated oval; and her
nut-brown hair fell in dishevelled masses over her soft cheeks.

"O Charley," she continued, "why _won't_ you stay?"

"Listen to me, dearest Kate," said Charley, in a very husky voice.
"It's too late to draw back now, even if I wished to do so; and you
don't consider, darling, that I'll be back again soon. Besides, I'm a
man now, Kate, and I must make my own bread. Who ever heard of a man
being supported by his old father."

"Well, but can't you do that here?"

"No, don't interrupt me, Kate," said Charley, kissing her forehead;
"I'm quite satisfied with _two short_ legs, and have no desire whatever
to make my bread on the top of _three long_ ones. Besides, you know I
can write to you."

"But you won't; you'll forget."

"No, indeed, I will not. I'll write you long letters about all that I
see and do; and you shall write long letters to me about--"

"Stop, Charley," cried Kate; "I won't listen to you. I hate to think of
it."

And her tears burst forth again with fresh violence. This time
Charley's heart sank too. The lump in his throat all but choked him; so
he was fain to lay his head upon Kate's heaving bosom, and weep along
with her.

For a few minutes they remained silent, when a slight rustling in the
bushes was heard. In another moment a tall, broad-shouldered,
gentlemanly man, dressed in black, stood before them. Charley and Kate,
on seeing this personage, arose, and wiping the tears from their eyes,
gave a sad smile as they shook hands with their clergyman.

"My poor children," said Mr. Addison, affectionately, "I know well why
your hearts are sad. May God bless and comfort you! I saw you enter the
wood, and came to bid you farewell, Charley, my dear boy, as I shall
not have another opportunity of doing so."

"O dear Mr. Addison," cried Kate, grasping his hand in both of hers,
and gazing imploringly up at him through a perfect wilderness of
ringlets and tears, "do prevail upon Charley to stay at home; please
do!"

Mr. Addison could scarcely help smiling at the poor girl's extreme
earnestness.

"I fear, my sweet child, that it is too late now to attempt to dissuade
Charley. Besides, he goes with the consent of his father; and I am
inclined to think that a change of life for a _short_ time may do him
good. Come, Kate, cheer up! Charley will return to us again ere long,
improved, I trust, both physically and mentally."

Kate did _not_ cheer up, but she dried her eyes, and endeavoured to
look more composed; while Mr. Addison took Charley by the hand, and, as
they walked slowly through the wood, gave him much earnest advice and
counsel.

The clergyman's manner was peculiar. With a large, warm, generous
heart, he possessed an enthusiastic nature, a quick, brusque manner,
and a loud voice, which, when his spirit was influenced by the strong
emotions of pity or anxiety for the souls of his flock, sunk into a
deep soft bass of the most thrilling earnestness. He belonged to the
Church of England, but conducted service very much in the Presbyterian
form, as being more suited to his mixed congregation. After a long
conversation with Charley, he concluded by saying--

"I do not care to say much to you about being kind and obliging to all
whom you may meet with during your travels, nor about the dangers to
which you will be exposed by being thrown into the company of wild and
reckless, perhaps very wicked, men. There is but _one_ incentive to
every good, and _one_ safeguard against all evil, my boy, and that is
the love of God. You may perhaps forget much that I have said to you;
but remember this, Charley, if you would be happy in this world, and
have a good hope for the next, centre your heart's affection on our
blessed Lord Jesus Christ; for believe me, boy, _His_ heart's affection
is centred upon you."

As Mr. Addison spoke, a loud hello from Mr. Kennedy apprised them that
their time was exhausted, and that the boats were ready to start.
Charley sprang towards Kate, locked her in a long, passionate embrace,
and then, forgetting Mr. Addison altogether in his haste, ran out of
the wood, and hastened towards the scene of departure.

"Good-bye, Charley!" cried Harry Somerville, running up to his friend
and giving him a warm grasp of the hand. "Don't forget me, Charley. I
wish I were going with you, with all my heart; but I'm an unlucky dog.
Good-bye." The senior clerk and Peter Mactavish had also a kindly word
and a cheerful farewell for him as he hurried past.

"Good-bye, Charley, my lad!" said old Mr. Kennedy, in an _excessively_
loud voice, as if by such means he intended to crush back some unusual
but very powerful feelings that had a peculiar influence on a certain
lump in his throat. "Good-bye, my lad; don't forget to write to your
old--Hang it!" said the old man, brushing his coat-sleeve somewhat
violently across his eyes, and turning abruptly round as Charley left
him and sprang into the boat--"I say, Grant, I--I--What are you staring
at, eh?" The latter part of his speech was addressed, in an angry tone,
to an innocent voyageur, who happened accidentally to confront him at
the moment.

"Come along, Kennedy," said Mr. Grant, interposing, and grasping his
excited friend by the arm--"come with me."

"Ah, to be sure!--yes," said he, looking over his shoulder and waving a
last adieu to Charley, "Good-bye, God bless you, my dear boy!--I say,
Grant, come along; quick, man, and let's have a pipe--yes, let's have a
pipe." Mr. Kennedy, essaying once more to crush back his rebellious
feelings, strode rapidly up the bank, and entering the house, sought to
overwhelm his sorrow in smoke: in which attempt he failed.




CHAPTER IX.

The voyage--The encampment--A surprise.


It was a fine sight to see the boats depart for the north. It was a
thrilling, heart-stirring sight to behold these picturesque, athletic
men, on receiving the word of command from their guides, spring lightly
into the long, heavy boats; to see them let the oars fall into the
water with a loud splash, and then, taking their seats, give way with a
will, knowing that the eyes of friends and sweethearts and rivals were
bent earnestly upon them. It was a splendid sight to see boat after
boat shoot out from the landing-place, and cut through the calm bosom
of the river, as the men bent their sturdy backs until the thick oars
creaked and groaned on the gunwales and flashed in the stream, more and
more vigorously at each successive stroke, until their friends on the
bank, who were anxious to see the last of them, had to run faster and
faster in order to keep up with them, as the rowers warmed at their
work, and made the water gurgle at the bows--their bright blue and
scarlet and white trappings reflected in the dark waters in broken
masses of colour, streaked with long lines of shining ripples, as if
they floated on a lake of liquid rainbows. And it was a glorious thing
to hear the wild, plaintive song, led by one clear, sonorous voice,
that rang out full and strong in the still air, while at the close of
every two lines the whole brigade burst into a loud, enthusiastic
chorus, that rolled far and wide over the smooth waters--telling of
their approach to settlers beyond the reach of vision in advance, and
floating faintly back, a last farewell, to the listening ears of
fathers, mothers, wives, and sisters left behind. And it was
interesting to observe how, as the rushing boats sped onwards past the
cottages on shore, groups of men and women and children stood before
the open doors and waved adieu, while ever and anon a solitary voice
rang louder than the others in the chorus, and a pair of dark eyes grew
brighter as a voyageur swept past his home, and recognised his little
ones screaming farewell, and seeking to attract their _sire's_
attention by tossing their chubby arms or flourishing round their heads
the bright vermilion blades of canoe-paddles. It was interesting, too,
to hear the men shout as they ran a small rapid which occurs about the
lower part of the settlement, and dashed in full career up to the Lower
Fort--which stands about twenty miles down the river from Fort
Garry--and then sped onward again with unabated energy, until they
passed the Indian settlement, with its scattered wooden buildings and
its small church; passed the last cottage on the bank; passed the low
swampy land at the river's mouth; and emerged at last as evening
closed, upon the wide, calm, sea-like bosom of Lake Winnipeg.

Charley saw and heard all this during the whole of that long, exciting
afternoon, and as he heard and saw it his heart swelled as if it would
burst its prison-bars, his voice rang out wildly in the choruses,
regardless alike of tune and time, and his spirit boiled within him as
he quaffed the first sweet draught of a rover's life--a life in the
woods, the wild, free, enchanting woods, where all appeared in _his_
eyes bright, and sunny, and green, and beautiful!

As the sun's last rays sunk in the west, and the clouds, losing their
crimson hue, began gradually to fade into gray, the boats' heads were
turned landward. In a few seconds they grounded on a low point, covered
with small trees and bushes which stretched out into the lake. Here
Louis Peltier had resolved to bivouac for the night.

"Now then, mes garcons," he exclaimed, leaping ashore, and helping to
drag the boat a little way on to the beach, "vite, vite! a terre, a
terre!--Take the kettle, Pierre, and let's have supper."

Pierre needed no second bidding. He grasped a large tin kettle and an
axe, with which he hurried into a clump of trees. Laying down the
kettle, which he had previously filled with water from the lake, he
singled out a dead tree, and with three powerful blows of his axe,
brought it to the ground. A few additional strokes cut it up into logs,
varying from three to five feet in length, which he piled together,
first placing a small bundle of dry grass and twigs beneath them, and a
few splinters of wood which he cut from off one of the logs. Having
accomplished this, Pierre took a flint and steel out of a gaily
ornamented pouch which depended from his waist, and which went by the
