
"To the kitchen," replied Cornelli.

"You have nothing whatever to do in the kitchen and you shall not go
there. I thought you knew that you have to go upstairs before lunch
to fix your hair. But before you go up come in here. I have to tell
you something very important."

Cornelli followed her cousin into the room. Miss Grideelen was standing
near the window as if she had expected the return of her friend. Leading
Cornelli to the sofa, Miss Dorner pointed to it, saying: "You are sure
to know who has done this and you had better tell me right away."

On the dark plush coverings were visible distinct marks of dusty shoe
soles. There was no trace of a whole foot, but one could see that
somebody had trampled on the sofa.

"I did not do it," said Cornelli with sparkling eyes.

"Who in all the house would have done it except you? Please ask yourself
that, Cornelli! There is no question about it at all," said Miss Dorner.
"It is probably one of your little jokes similar to throwing your
dresses out of the window. I know all about it. Just let me tell you
this! It is the last time that you, a girl of ten years old, will show
such a terrible lack of manners. As long as I am here, you shall not
do it any more. You really should spare your good, sensitive father
such behavior."

"I have not done it. No, I did not do it, no, no!" Cornelli cried
aloud.

"But Cornelli, only reflect! You are blushing and your conscience is
giving you away," Miss Grideelen here remarked. "It would be so much
better for you to say humbly: 'I have done it and I am sorry; I shall
never do it again!'"

"No, no! I have not done it. No, no!" Cornelli cried out louder still.
Her cheeks were glowing red from anger and excitement.

"Do not make such a noise," ordered the cousin. "One might think there
was an accident. It is not worth while to lose so many words. You
should not have made things worse by denying it; if you had not,
everything would be all settled. You have misbehaved and you shall not
do so any more. Remember!"

"No, I did not misbehave. No, no! And I shall not say yes when it is
not true," Cornelli now cried, quite beside herself.

"Go to your room, Cornelli, and smooth out your forehead before you
come to dinner. Your little horns are protruding quite plainly when
you act that way. Just look at yourself in the mirror and see yourself
how repulsive you look. If you think that there is anybody in the world
who can still like you when you have black horns on your forehead, you
are mistaken. Go, now, and return with another face."

Cornelli went.

Reaching her room, Cornelli put her hand up to her brow. Right on her
forehead were two protruding points. Should horns be really growing
there? The child had a sudden horrible fright at this thought. She was
sure that everybody could see them already, for she could feel them
quite distinctly. She could not stand it any longer, so she ran away
to old Martha.

"No, I did not do it, Martha. I never did it," she called out, running
into the little room. "When I tell them no, no, they ought to believe
that I did not do it. I never, never did it. They shall know it! But
they won't believe me even if I say it a hundred times and--"

"Stop a little, Cornelli!" said old Martha kindly. "You see, you are
all out of breath. Sit down here on your stool and tell me quietly
what has excited you so. You know that I believe your words. I have
known you since you were small, and I know that what you say is true."

It was impossible for Cornelli to speak calmly about what had happened,
but it soothed her, nevertheless, to be able to pour out her heart and
to know that Martha believed her. She told of the accusation which had
been brought against her, and how she had not been believed despite
all her assurances. She was certain that both ladies would always
believe for ever and ever that she had done it and had denied it. At
this thought Cornelli again became quite red from excitement and was
on the point of breaking out again. But Martha put her hand on the
child's shoulder, quietly restraining her.

"No, no, Cornelli, that's enough," she said soothingly. "It is only
to your advantage that it is so and not as they have said. You have
been accused wrongly and cannot prove it, but God knows the truth. He
has heard everything. You can be calm and happy and look up to Him
with a clear conscience. You can say to yourself: 'God knows it, and
I do not need to be afraid or frightened.' If you had really done wrong
and had denied it, you would have to be afraid that the truth would
be revealed. Then you could not look up calmly to the sky, for you
would be frightened at the thought that up there was One who knew
everything and from whom nothing could be hidden. A wrong accusation
does not stay with us forever. Even if it takes ever so long, it
generally is revealed in the end, and you certainly will not need to
bear it in all eternity, because God already knows how it is."

Cornelli had really grown calm at the thought that there was One who
knew how it all was. When her trouble began to weigh upon her, she
could always say: "You know it all, dear Father in Heaven, You have
seen and heard everything."

"If He could only tell them! They would then know it, too. God could
easily do that," Cornelli said.

"Yes, but that is not the way things happen. We do not know better
than He what is good for us," Martha said, shaking her head quite
seriously. "If we could rule, everything would come wrong. We never
can see ahead of the hour and we never know what is good for us because
the next moment always brings something we did not know about. Otherwise
we would always be trying to undo what we have strained to do the day
before; we should only make ourselves miserable over and over again.
But if God ordains anything that we do not understand, we must believe
firmly that something good will come out of it. We must be patient,
and if our troubles are too heavy, we must console ourselves and think:
God knows what good will come from it. But we are forgetting the time,
Cornelli. You must hurry home to your dinner, now. I am afraid it is
already late."

Cornelli's black frown had disappeared during Martha's soothing speech,
but now a deep shadow flew across her face.

"Oh, Martha, if I only did not need to go home any more! I hate to go
back and sit at table. I would not mind dying of hunger, if I could
only stay here with you."

Cornelli, glancing at her home, drew together her brows as if she saw
something frightful there.

"But, child, you must not say such things about your lovely home; it
is wrong to do that," said Martha, kindly admonishing her. "Just think
how many children have no home at all. How grateful they would be to
God for a home like yours. Go, now, Cornelli, be grateful for all God
has given you and chase away the thoughts that make you sad. Come soon
again and we shall be glad together, for there is always something to
be glad about."

Cornelli went. While she had been with Martha and had heard her words,
it had really seemed to her that there was no cause for grief. As soon,
however, as she entered the garden and saw the windows of the room
where they were surely already at table, everything that had pressed
heavily on her heart rose again. After all, Martha did not know
everything.

Cornelli was sure that she could never be happy any more. She could
not go in there and she could not eat. She felt as if she could not
swallow anything, for big stones seemed to stick in her throat. If she
would only die from it all! Cornelli thought that that would be best,
for then everything would be over. So she sat down on the lawn behind
the thick currant bushes, where she could not be seen from the house.
Meanwhile, Miss Mina had carried away the sweets and was putting the
fruit course on the table.

"It seems to me that Cornelli does not care if she comes to table a
whole hour late," said Miss Dorner. "Nothing is to be kept warm for
her, for she does not seem to have learned yet how to respect time and
order. She had better learn it soon."

Mina went out to sit down for her dinner. Esther had everything ready
and was just putting the dessert in the cupboard.

"That is for Cornelli as soon as she comes home," she said, sitting
down, too; "the poor child gets enough bitter things to swallow
nowadays."

"But why shouldn't she come in time?" asked Mina crossly. "Besides,
she couldn't possibly eat the whole dessert. We can take our share and
there will be enough left, surely as much as is good for her."

"I won't let you have it," said Esther, firmly pressing her arm to the
table as a sign that she would stay there. "The child must have
something that will help her to swallow all the cross words she hears
all day," she continued. "What was wrong again this morning, when there
was such a scene in the living room?"

"It was nothing," replied Mina. "There were a few marks of dust on the
sofa, and the ladies thought that Cornelli had been standing on it.
The child would not admit it and so the ladies kept on accusing her
till Cornelli set up a senseless row."

"I really think, Miss Mina, that you could have given an explanation,"
said Esther with a sly smile. "If one has to wind up the clock, it is
quicker to jump up on the sofa than to push the heavy thing away. When
one wears tight lace boots in the early morning, one can't take them
off easily, eh, Miss Mina?" With these words Esther glanced at the
neat little boots that Mina was stretching out comfortably under the
table.

"Well, what was there so terrible about that?" retorted Mina pertly.
"The sofa won't be spoiled on account of that, and besides, I have to
clean it myself."

"I only think you could have said a word, before the ladies accused
the child of having lied to them and before she nearly had a fit over
the injustice. She made such a noise that one could hear it all over
the house! It went right through me."

"Oh, pooh! it was not as bad as that," asserted Mina; "the child has
long since forgotten the whole thing. That is the way with children.
One moment they make a horrible noise and the next they go out of the
door and forget about it. Why should one bother?"

"It used to be different," said Esther smilingly, "Miss Mina could not
be obliging enough to the child then. Things are all done for other
people now and not for those of the house."

"Those of the house!" repeated Mina mockingly. "It won't be long before
you, too, will be singing another tune. When the new lady of the house
gives orders in the kitchen you will have to obey, too."

Esther dropped her spoon. "For goodness sake, what are you saying?"
she exclaimed. "Who should have thought of such a thing? Whom do you
mean, the cousin or the other one?"

"Well, I can't tell that exactly," replied the maid. "Our master has
not discussed that with me, but one must be dumb not to see what is
going on and why the ladies came here. After all, one wants to know
what one is going to do. That two have come, is the surest sign of
all, for we shall be supposed not to suspect."

"For goodness sake," said Esther again, "what a discovery! I am sure
it must be the relation, for she already rules the house. I tell you
one thing, though, Miss Mina, that I shall keep on singing the same
tune I have been singing for the last twelve years in this house, and
I don't care who is going to rule. You can believe me."

"Oh, we shall see about that, Esther," said Mina with a superior air.
She got up, now, to see if the ladies needed anything.

Waking up from a sound sleep, Cornelli did not remember where she was.
She was lying on the lawn behind the currant bushes. She remembered
at last how she had come back at lunch time from Martha's cottage and
how she had suddenly felt weary and sleepy. She must have dropped down
and gone to sleep.

It was evening and there was no more sunshine on the grass, but the
sky was still light, although it was beginning to grow dark. Cornelli
suddenly had a longing she had never known before. She felt as if she
had to eat and taste everything about her, the bushes and the leaves,
the flowers, and especially the unripe plums on the tree above her.
Oh, if she only had a piece of bread! Cornelli got up quickly and ran
towards the house.

"Come quickly, Cornelli," Esther called to her through the open kitchen
window; "they are just sitting down to supper; you have come just in
time."

Cornelli flew to her room and, pulling out a thick shawl from among
her things, tied it around her head. Then, running to the dining room,
she sat down at her accustomed seat.

"So you have come again," said Miss Dorner, who had just settled down,
too. "A well brought up child should at least say good evening when
she enters the room after a long absence."

"Good evening," said Cornelli, after which she finished her soup with
unusual haste.

"Where do you come from after all this time?" asked the cousin.

"From the garden," was the reply.

"That is quite possible, but where were you before that?"

"With Martha," Cornelli answered.

"If you could only learn to answer more pleasantly!" remarked Miss
Dorner, "it would be to your own advantage, for you do not have many
pleasing things about you; it would only make you more attractive, and
you really should strive to become so.

"Next time you want to stay so long at this woman's house you have to
ask my permission. I absolutely forbid you to stay away so long without
asking me, do you hear? You deserve to be scolded for your long absence
to-day, but I shall not say anything further. But why do you look so
pitiful! What is the matter? Have you a toothache?"

"No," Cornelli quickly gave forth.

"Have you a headache?"

"No."

"What is the matter with you?"

"Nothing."

"You shall never again set up such a masquerade when there is nothing
the matter with you, Cornelli," said the cousin scoldingly. "Why do
you put this shawl around your head? Are you trying to look like an
untidy gypsy? Don't ever come to table that way again! Betty, have you
ever seen the like? Can you understand this behavior from a sensible
child?"

The friend just shook her head.

"Perhaps Cornelli does it because she does not know what else to do.
She does not seem to desire a proper occupation," she replied.

When Cornelli came down to breakfast next day, she had taken off the
