remained where he fell.

"Boys," said Stubbs, coolly, to the two sailors, who had been ordered
to put Harry in irons, "hadn't you better help the captain into his
cabin? He seems to be unwell."

Just then the mate came on deck. He didn't make inquiries, but took in
the situation at a glance, and assisted the captain to his feet.

"Shall I help you downstairs, sir?" he asked.

The captain silently acquiesced, and the prime actor in this rather
startling scene left the deck.

Jack Pendleton scrambled down from his elevated perch with the agility
of a cat. He ran up to Harry, and grasped his hand with evident
emotion.

"You have saved my life!" he said. "I will always be your friend. I
would lay down my life for you."

"It's all right, Jack," said Harry, rather shyly. "You would have done
the same for me."

"Yes, I would," answered Jack, heartily, "But there's no one else who
would have done it for me."

"Are you going to leave me out, my boy?" asked the Yankee, with a
smile on his plain but good-natured face.

"No, sir," responded Jack. "You stood up to the captain like a man. He
didn't frighten you."

"No, I wasn't much scared," drawled Stubbs, contorting his features
drolly. "But, I say, young man, I've got a piece of advice to give
you. You don't seem to be much of a favorite with the captain."

"It doesn't look so," said Jack, laughing in spite of the danger
through which he had passed.

"Just you keep out of his way as much as you can. When a man gets as
full as he does, he's apt to be dangerous."

"Thank you, sir; I will."

Among the spectators of the scene just described, the most
panic-stricken, probably was Montgomery Clinton, the Brooklyn dude.

After the captain had gone below, he walked up to Harry, whom he
regarded with evident admiration.

"I say, you're quite a hero. I was awfully frightened, don't you know,
when that big bully aimed at the sailor boy."

"You looked a little nervous, Mr. Clinton," said Harry, smiling.

"You were awfully brave, to knock the pistol out of his hand. I don't
see how you dared to do it."

"I didn't stop to think of danger. I saw that Jack's life was in
danger, and I did the only thing I could to save him."

"I'm glad you're not put in irons. It must be awful to be in irons."

"I don't think I should like it, though I never had any experience.
You'd have stood by me, wouldn't you, Mr. Clinton?"

Clinton was evidently alarmed at the suggestion.

"Yes, of course," he said, nervously; "that is, I would have gone down
to see you on the sly. You wouldn't expect me to fight the captain,
don't you know."

Harry could hardly refrain from smiling at the idea of the
spindle-shaped dude resisting the captain; but he kept a straight face
as he answered:

"I look upon you as a brave man, Mr. Clinton. When I get into trouble,
I shall be sure to call upon you."

"Oh, certainly," stammered Clinton. "But I say, Mr. Vane, I hope
you'll be prudent; I do, really. Captain Hill might shoot you, you
know, as he tried to shoot the sailor boy just now."

"If he does, Mr. Clinton, I shall expect you to interfere, You are not
as strong as the captain, but a bold front will go a great way. If you
threaten to--to horsewhip him, I think it might produce an effect upon
him."

"Really, my dear Mr. Vane," said Clinton, turning pale, "I don't think
I could go as far as that."

"I thought you were my friend, Mr. Clinton," said Harry,
reproachfully.

"So I am, but I think you are, too--too bloodthirsty, Mr. Vane. It is
best to be prudent, don't you know. There's that Yankee, Mr. Stubbs;
he would do a great deal better than I. He's stronger, and older,
and--you'd better speak to him, don't you know."

"A very good suggestion, Mr. Clinton," said Harry.

"I am afraid I should fare badly," thought our hero, "if I depended
upon Clinton to stand by me. He isn't of the stuff they make heroes
of."

Twenty-four hours passed before Captain Hill reappeared on deck.
Meanwhile Harry had received congratulations from all the passengers
on his display of pluck, and from some of the sailors besides. In
fact, if he had not been a sensible boy, he might have been in danger
of being spoiled by praise. But he answered, very modestly, that he
had only acted from impulse, actuated by a desire to save Jack, and
had not had time to count the consequences.

"I'll stand by you, my lad," said Hirman Stubbs. "The captain may try
to do you wrong, but he will have somebody else to reckon with--I
won't see you hurt."

"Thank you, Mr. Stubbs," said Harry, heartily. "I know the value of
your help already. Mr. Clinton also is willing to stand by me, though
he says he don't want to get into a fight with the captain."

"Clinton! That spindle-legged dude!" said Stubbs, exploding with
laughter. "My! he couldn't scare a fly."

Harry laughed, too. He could not help doing so.

"He seems a good fellow, though not exactly a hero," he said. "I am
glad to have his good will."

"He is more of a tailor's dummy than a man," said Stubbs. "I always
want to laugh when I look at him. Hist! there's the captain."

Harry turned quickly toward the companionway, and saw Captain Hill set
foot on the deck. A glance satisfied him that the captain was sober.




CHAPTER XII

A STORM


Captain Hill must have observed Harry and Mr. Stubbs, but walked by
them without notice, and attended to his duties, giving his orders in
a sharp quick tone. He was an experienced seaman, and thoroughly
fitted for the post of chief, when not under the influence of liquor.

"I am glad to see that the captain is sober," said Stubbs, in a low
voice.

"So am I," answered Harry.

One change, all noticed in Captain Hill. He became silent, reserved,
morose. His orders were given in a quick, peremptory tone, and he
seemed to cherish a grudge against all on board. Some captains add
much to the pleasure of the passengers by their social and cheery
manners, but whenever Captain Hill appeared, a wet blanket seemed to
fall on the spirits of passengers and crew, and they conversed in an
undertone, as if under restraint.

Between the captain and the mate there was a great difference.
Mr. Holdfast had a bluff, hearty way with him, which made him popular
with all on board. As an officer, he was strict, and expected his
orders to be executed promptly, but in private he was affable and
agreeable. The sailors felt instinctively that he was their friend,
and regarded him with attachment, while they respected his seamanship.
If a vote had been taken, there was not one but would have preferred
him as captain to Captain Hill.

Thus far--I am speaking of a time when the Nantucket was three months
out--there had been no serious storm. Rough weather there had been,
and wet, disagreeable weather, but the staunch ship had easily
overcome all the perils of the sea, and, with the exception of
Montgomery Clinton, no one had been seriously alarmed. But one
afternoon a cloud appeared in the hitherto clear sky, which would have
attracted no attention from a landsman. Mr. Holdfast observed it,
however, and, quietly calling the captain, directed his attention to
it.

"I think we are going to have a bad storm, Captain Hill," he said.
"That's a weather breeder."

The captain watched the cloud for a moment, and then answered,
quietly: "I think you are right, Mr. Holdfast. You may give your
orders accordingly."

The sails were reefed, and the vessel was prepared for the warfare
with the elements which awaited it.

The little cloud increased portentiously in size. All at once a strong
wind sprang up, the sea roughened, and the billows grew white with
fury, while the good ship, stanch as she was, creaked and groaned and
was tossed as if it were a toy boat on the wrathful ocean.

The passengers were all seriously alarmed. They had never before
realized what a storm at sea was. Even a man of courage may well be
daunted by the terrific power of the sea when it is roused to such an
exhibition.

"Harry," said the professor, "this is terrible."

"Yes, indeed," answered the boy, gravely.

It became so rough and difficult to stand on deck, on account of the
vessel being tossed about like a cockleshell, that Harry felt
constrained to go below.

As he passed the cabin of Montgomery Clinton, he heard a faint voice
call his name.

Entering, he saw the dude stretched out in his berth, with an
expression of helpless terror in his weak face.

"Oh! Mr. Vane," he said; "do you think we are going to the bottom?"

"I hope not, Mr. Clinton. Our officers are skillful men. They will do
all they can for us."

It was a terrible night. None of the passengers ventured upon deck.
Indeed, such was the motion that it would have been dangerous, as even
the sailors found it difficult to keep their footing. Harry was pale
and quiet, unlike his friend from Brooklyn, whose moans were heard
mingled with the noise of the tempest.

It was about three o'clock in the morning when those below heard, with
terror, a fearful crash, and a trampling of feet above. One of the
masts had fallen before the fury of the storm, and the shock made the
good ship careen to a dangerous extent. What happened, however, was
not understood below.

"I wonder what has happened," said the professor, nervously. "I think
I will go up and see."

He got out of his berth, but only to be pitched helpless to the other
end of the cabin.

"This is terrible!" he said, as he picked himself up.

"I will try my luck, professor," said Harry.

He scrambled out of his berth, and, with great difficulty, made his
way upstairs.

One glance told him what had occurred. The crippled ship was laboring
through the sea. It seemed like a very unequal combat, and Harry might
be excused for deciding that the ship was doomed. All about the sea
wore its fiercest aspect. Harry returned cautiously to his cabin.

"Well?" said the professor.

"One of the masts is gone," answered the boy. "The ship is having a
hard time."

"Is there danger?" asked the professor, anxiously.

"I am afraid so," said Harry, gravely.

At length the night wore away. The violence of the storm seemed to
have abated, for, after a time, the motion diminished. More
enterprising than the rest of the passengers, Harry resolved to go on
deck.

"Won't you come with me, Mr. Clinton?" he asked.

"I--I couldn't, 'pon my honor. I'm as weak as a rag. I don't think I
could get out of my berth, really, now."

"I'll go with you, my young friend," said Mr. Stubbs.

Harry and his Yankee friend set foot cautiously on deck. The prospect
was not reassuring. The ship rolled heavily, and from the creaking it
seemed that the timbers of the hull were strained. The sailors looked
fagged out, and there was a set, stern look on the face of the
captain, whom, nevertheless, Mr. Stubbs ventured to accost.

"What's the prospect, captain?" he asked.

"You'd better make your will," said the captain, grimly.

"That's cheerful," commented Stubbs, turning to Harry.

"Yes, sir," answered Harry, soberly.

"Don't tell our foppish friend below, or he'll rend our ears with his
howls. But you, my young friend, it's rather rough on you. How old are
you?"

"Sixteen."

"And I'm rising fifty. Even if I am taken away, I've a good thirty
years the advantage of you. I've had a good time, on the whole, and
enjoyed myself as well as the average. Still, I don't quite like going
to the bottom in the Nantucket. I was looking forward to at least
twenty years or so more of life."

"We must submit to the will of God," said Harry.

"You are quite right, my boy! It is easy to see that you have been
well trained. Mr. Holdfast"--for they had reached the place where the
mate was standing--"shall we outlive the storm?"

"It is hard to say, Mr. Stubbs. It depends on the stanchness of the
ship. We'll do all we can."

Ten minutes later there was a sinister answer to the inquiry of
Mr. Stubbs. A sailor, who had been sent down into the hold, came with
the information that the ship had sprung a leak.

Then commenced the weary work at the pumps. The sailors were already
worn out with fighting the storm under the direction of the captain
and mate, and it seemed almost more than flesh and blood could stand
to undertake the additional labor.

Harry and Mr. Stubbs had a hurried conference.

"Can't we help at this work, Mr. Stubbs?" asked Harry. "The poor men
look utterly exhausted."

"Well thought of, my boy! I am with you. I will speak to the captain."

But Mr. Holdfast, the mate, chanced to be nearer, and to him
Mr. Stubbs put the question:

"Can't I help at the pumps?"

"And I, too, Mr. Holdfast," put in Harry.

"I accept your offer with thanks. The men are very tired."

So Harry and Mr. Stubbs helped at this necessary work, and when the
professor and the Melbourne merchant heard of it they, too,
volunteered. But Marmaduke Timmins, the valetudinarian, and Montgomery
Clinton felt quite inadequate to the task.

Harry found his work tiresome and fatiguing, but he had the comfort of
feeling that he was relieving the exhausted sailors, and doing
something to save his own life and the lives of his companions.

He caught sight of poor Jack, looking ready to drop.

"Jack, you must be very tired," he said, in a tone of deep sympathy.

"If I stood still I should drop on the deck fast asleep," said Jack.

"Can't you lie down for an hour? I am taking your place."

Mr. Holdfast coming up at this moment, Harry suggested this to him,
and the mate said kindly:

"Jack, my lad, go below and catch a little nap. I will call you when I
want you."

So Jack, much relieved, went below, and, without a thought of the
danger, so fatigued was he, fell asleep the moment he got into his
bunk, and was not called up for four hours.

After a while they reduced the flow of water, but ascertained that the
ship was badly strained, and by no means safe. It was not till the
next day, however, that an important decision was reached.

All were called on deck.

"It is my duty to tell you," said Captain Hill, "that the ship is so
damaged by the recent storm that it is liable to sink at any time.
Those who choose to run the risk may remain, however. I propose, with
such as choose to join me, to take to the boats. I will give you
fifteen minutes to decide."

Excitement and dismay were painted on the faces of all. The ship might
be insecure, but to launch out upon the great ocean in a frail boat
seemed to involve still greater danger.




CHAPTER XIII

"WHO WILL STAY?"


The decision was a momentous one. It might be death to remain on the
ship, but to a landsman it seemed still more perilous to embark on an
angry sea in a frail boat.

The passengers looked at each other in doubt and perplexity.

They had but fifteen minutes in which to make up their minds.

The mate stood by, his face and manner serious and thoughtful.

"Mr. Holdfast," said Mr. Stubbs, "do you agree with the captain that
it is our best course to take to the boats?"

"I should prefer to try the ship a little longer. I say so with
diffidence, since the captain has a longer experience than I."

"I don't think much of your judgment, Mr. Holdfast," said Captain
Hill, in a tone of contempt.

The mate's face flushed--not so much at the words as the tone.

"Nevertheless Captain Hill," he said, "I stand by what I have said."

"Mr. Holdfast," said Mr. Stubbs, who seemed to speak for the
passengers, "if some of us decide to remain on the ship, will you
remain with us?"

"I will!" answered the mate, promptly.

"Then set me down as the first to remain," said Stubbs.

Somehow this man, rough and abrupt as he was, had impressed Harry as a
man in whom confidence might be reposed. He felt safe in following
where he led.

"I am but a boy," he said, "but I have to decide for my life. I shall
remain with the mate and Mr. Stubbs."

Quietly Stubbs shook hands with Harry.

"I am glad to have you with us," he said earnestly. "We will die or
live together."

Next came Professor Hemenway.

"Put me down as the third," he said. "Harry, we sailed together, and
we will remain together to the end."

"I go in the boat," said John Appleton. "I have a great respect for
Mr. Holdfast, but I defer to the captain's judgment as superior."

He went over and ranged himself beside the captain.

"You are a sensible man, sir," said Captain Hill, with a scornful
glance at the mate and the passengers who sided with him.
"Mr. Holdfast can go down with the ship, if he desires. I prefer to
cut loose from a doomed vessel."

Marmaduke Timmins, the invalid, looked more sallow and nervous than
ever. He had swallowed a pill while the others were speaking, to give
himself confidence.

"I will go with the captain," he said. "My life is likely to be short,
for my diseases are many, but I owe it to myself to do my best to save
it."

"In deciding to go with me, you are doing your best, sir," said
Captain Hill.

He had not hitherto paid much attention to Mr. Timmins, whom he looked
upon as a crank on the subject of health, but he was disposed to look
upon him now with more favor.

At this moment Montgomery Clinton appeared at the head of the stairs.
The poor fellow was pale, and disheveled, and tottered from weakness.

"What's going on?" he asked, feebly. Harry took it upon himself to
explain, using as few words as possible.

"Will you go with the captain, or stay on the Nantucket?" asked Harry.
