subject was resumed.




CHAPTER VIII

RAISING THE "WOODVILLE"


Ethan French, during the two years he had been a resident of the
State of New York, had been an earnest and diligent student. His mind
was even more improved than his manners. His taste for mechanics had
prompted him to study the various subjects included in this science,
and as he stood by his companion, the pilot, he talked quite
learnedly about the specific gravity of wood and iron, about
displacement, buoyancy, and similar topics.

"The hull of the steamer--that is, the woodwork--will not float
itself, but it will sustain considerable additional weight," said he.

"Yes, I understand all that," replied Lawry. "If there had been no
iron in the _Woodville_ she would not have gone down."

"The iron in her engines is seven or eight times as heavy as the
same bulk of water. Its weight carried the hull down with it."

"Then we must put down empty casks enough to float the engine,"
added Lawry.

"No; the woodwork of the hull will hold up a portion of the weight
of the engine, and we must furnish buoyancy enough to sustain the
rest of it."

"It will not take a great many casks, then--will it?"

"Not a great many; but the difficulty is to get them down to the
bottom, and fasten them to the hull."

"I can do that," replied Lawry confidently.

Ethan approved the method, and promised to ascertain what weight
each of the casks would sustain in the water, when he had obtained
their dimensions. The ferry-boat reached the other side of the lake,
and the young men went to see Mr. Nelson, the owner of the casks. He
did not wish to use the hogsheads till October, and was willing they
should be employed for the purpose indicated, if Lawry would give him
security for their safe return.

"Mr. Sherwood will do that for you, Lawry," said Ethan.

"That's a good name," added the oil speculator. "If he will
guarantee the safe return of the casks, that is all I ask. I wonder
if Mr. Sherwood don't want some shares in the Meteor Oil Company."

"I don't know; I'll ask him," replied Ethan.

"If you will, I won't charge you anything for the use of the casks,"
added Mr. Nelson.

Mr. Sherwood was consulted in the evening. He was very willing to
furnish the required security for the use of the oil-casks, but he
did not seem to have the same confidence in the "Meteor" which Mr.
Nelson exhibited, though he promised to consider the matter.

It required three days to complete the preparations for raising the
_Woodville_. All the ropes and rigging in the neighborhood,
including many hay-ropes and clothes-lines, had been collected; the
oil-casks had been conveyed over the lake in the ferry-boat, and
secured within a "boom" composed of four long timbers, lashed
together at the ends, forming a square, which was moored close to the
Goblins; and a raft had been built, upon which the operations were to
be conducted.

Mr. Sherwood had offered to furnish as many men as could be employed
to assist in the work; but the young engineers had so arranged their
plans that no help was needed. At sunrise in the morning the boys ran
down to the Goblins in the ferry-boat, which was necessary for the
transportation of sundry heavy articles. The raft was already there,
moored in the proper place for commencing the labors of the day. The
engineers were deeply interested in the operations before them, for
there was a difficult problem to be solved, which required all their
skill and ingenuity; and Lawry felt that his future prosperity and
happiness depended upon the success of the undertaking.

Their plans and their machinery were yet to be tried, and there was
a degree of excitement attending the execution of the project which
was as agreeable as it was stimulating to their enthusiastic natures.
People had laughed at the idea of two boys raising a steamer burdened
with heavy machinery, and both of them felt that their reputations
were at stake.

"Now, Lawry, we shall soon find out what we can do," said Ethan, as
they made fast the ferry-boat to the raft.

"I know what we can do," replied the young pilot confidently. "If
the casks will float her, she shall come to the top of the water
before to-morrow night. Now, Ethan, the first thing is to get a rope
under her."

"That's easy enough."

"It's all easy enough, if you only believe in yourself."

A rope of six fathoms in length was selected from the mass of
rigging on the raft, and a stone just heavy enough to sink the line
attached to the middle of it. Lawry took it in the wherry, sculled to
the stern of the sunken steamer, and dropped it into the water. He
then carried one end to Ethan, on the raft, while he returned with
the other in his boat, which he moored to the opposite side of the
_Woodville_. The middle of the rope was kept on the bottom of
the lake by the stone, while the two ends were carried forward by the
boys until the bight was drawn under the keel of the steamer, as far
as her position on the rocks would permit it to go. Lawry's end was
made fast around the smokestack, and Ethan's to the raft.

One of the hogsheads was next floated out of the boom enclosure, and
hauled upon the raft, Lawry adjusted the hogshead slings to the cask.
In the middle of the raft an aperture had been left, large enough for
a hogshead to pass through, over which a small derrick had been
built. A stone post, about the length of the casks, and just heavy
enough to sink one of them, had been brought down on the bateau. This
"sinker," as the young engineers called it, had been weighed, and it
exactly conformed to the requirement of Ethan's figures; it was just
sufficient to overcome the flotage power of the cask.

"Now, keep cool, Ethan, and we shall find out whether your figures
are correct, or not," said Lawry.

"Figures won't lie," replied Ethan; "I know they are correct, and
that hogshead will go to the bottom as quick as though it were made
of lead."

"We shall soon see," added Lawry, as he placed a couple of skids
across the "well." "Now we must place the sinker on those skids."

By the aid of the derrick, which was provided with a rude windlass,
constructed by Ethan, the stone post was hoisted up, and then dropped
down on the skids. The sinker had been rigged with slings, and the
hogshead was attached to it by a contrivance of Lawry, upon which the
success of the operation wholly depended, and which it will be very
difficult to describe with words. The sinker would carry the cask to
the bottom of the lake, where its buoyancy was to assist in bringing
the steamer to the surface of the water; but it was necessary, after
the cask had been sunk and fastened to the hull, to detach it from
the sinker; and this had been a problem of no little difficulty to
Lawry, who managed the nautical part of the enterprise.

Fastened to the slings on the sinker was a rope ten fathoms in
length. A loop was formed in this line, close to the sinker, and the
bight passed through the slings on the hogshead. The loop was then
laid over the two ropes, one of which was fast to the sinker, and the
other was the unattached end of the line, and "toggled" on with a
marline-spike. If the young reader does not quite understand the
process, let him take a string, with one end fastened to a flatiron;
double it, and pass the loop--which sailors call a _bight_--upward
between the thumb and forefinger; bring the loop down to meet
the two parts of the string on the palm of the hand; then take the
two lines into the loop, and put a pencil under the two parts drawn
through the loop. The flatiron will correspond to the stone sinker,
and the thumb to the slings on the hogshead. Lift up the flatiron, so
that the weight will bear on the thumb; then pull out the pencil, and
the iron will drop.

The marlinespike was thoroughly greased, and a small line attached
to the head of it, so that it could be easily drawn out of the loop,
when the cask had been secured to the hull of the steamer.

"There, we are all right now," said Lawry, after he had tried the
marlinespike several times to satisfy himself that it could be easily
drawn from its place. "Now we will make fast the rope which runs
under the keel to the hogshead."

"Here it is," added Ethan.

"We want to have the cask under the guard of the steamer when we get
it down."

"That will be easy enough."

"Perhaps it will; but I'm afraid the rope will bind on the keel."

"If it does, we must take the raft round to the other side of the
_Woodville_, and pass it round the windlass; we can haul it up
in that way."

"That will take too much time. I think you and I both will be strong
enough to haul the cask into place."

"Now, give us a turn at the windlass, Ethan," said Lawry, when he
was ready.

"Aye, aye," replied Ethan, as he turned the crank, and raised the
sinker and the cask, so that the skids which supported them could be
removed.

"Lower away!" added Lawry, highly excited; and the sinker began to
descend into the water, carrying with it the hogshead. "That works
first-rate. Now hold on till I get hold of the other end of the
guide-rope."

Lawry jumped into the wherry, and sculled round to the other side of
the sunken steamer, where he detached the end of the line passing
under the keel from the smoke-stack, where it had been secured. He
hauled on the rope till he got it clear of the stone with which it
had been sunk.

"Lower away!" shouted Lawry.

"Lower, it is," answered Ethan.

"Slowly," added the pilot, as he hauled in the rope.

"It is going to the right place. I can see it in the water."

"Hold on!" cried Lawry; and the wherry was so unsteady beneath him
that it was with great difficulty he "kept what he had got" on the
rope.

In order to overcome this disadvantage he passed the rope around the
smokestack.

"I have it now!" shouted he. "This gives me a splendid purchase;"
and he hauled in the rope, bringing the hogshead chock up to the hull
of the sunken craft.

"We are growing wiser every moment," laughed Ethan.

"So we are. Lower away, slowly. That's it," said Lawry. "Lower away."

"The sinker is on the bottom," replied Ethan.

"All right; can you see the hogshead?"

"Yes; you have hauled it completely under the guard. The water is as
clear as crystal," answered Ethan.

"Hold on a moment till I make fast this line!"

Thus far the experiment had been entirely successful, and Lawry's
bosom bounded with emotion. The plan for raising the _Woodville_
was his own, though he had been greatly assisted by Ethan, who had
designed and constructed the derrick and windlass, thus diminishing
the labor of the enterprise. The young pilot felt like a conqueror
when he had placed the first cask in position.

Sculling the wherry back to the raft, he pulled the string attached
to the toggle, and drew it out of the noose.

"Hoist away," said he.

"Hoist, it is," replied Ethan, as he took hold with him.

"All right!" shouted the young nautical engineer. "I feel like
giving three cheers," he added.

"So do I; and we'll do it, when we get the sinker on the raft."

The stone post came up "in good order and condition," and the skids
were placed under it, to keep it in position for the sinking of the
second hogshead. The three cheers were given with a will, and they
came from the hearts of the boys. They had labored patiently for
three days in gathering the material and constructing the machinery
for the raising of the steamer, and their first success was a real joy.

"Breakfast-time," said Lawry, as the horn sounded from the ferry-house.

"I don't want any breakfast," answered Ethan. "I don't feel as
though we could spare the time for eating."

"Haste and waste," added Lawry, laughing. "We have got a great deal
of hard work to do, and we must keep our strength. For my part, I'm
hungry."

"I'm not; and I'm so interested in this job that I don't like to
leave. We ought to have brought our breakfast down with us."

"I don't think we shall make anything by driving the work too hard.
We must keep cool, and do it well. Besides, I'm liable to be called
off a dozen times a day."

"What for?"

"To take people over the ferry."

"Oh, bother!" exclaimed Ethan impatiently. "Have we got to leave the
work to paddle everybody that comes along over the lake?"

"We have," said Lawry. "I must look out for the family now."

There was a good wind, and the boys returned to the ferry-house in
the bateau. Before they had finished their breakfast, the ferry-horn
sounded, and Lawry was obliged to take a team over to Pointville
before the work could be resumed. Ethan was rather impatient under
this delay; but he was too kind-hearted to make any unpleasant remark
which would remind his friend of his father's crime.




CHAPTER IX

BEN WILFORD'S PLAN


While Lawry was ferrying the team over the lake, Ethan occupied
himself in making a long-handled boat-hook, which might be useful in
the operation of raising the steamer. While he was thus engaged, a
young man, about eighteen years of age, coarsely dressed, and with a
very red face, came down the road and stopped at the place where he
was at work.

"What you making?" asked the young man.

"A boat-hook," replied Ethan.

"Do you belong here?" continued the stranger nodding his head toward
the ferry-house.

"No; I'm only helping Lawry Wilford for a few days."

"The old man's got into hot water, they say."

"Yes."

"Well, he was always preaching to me about doing the right thing;
and now he's fallen off the horse-block himself," added the young
man, with a slight chuckle.

"It's bad for Mr. Wilford and his family."

"That's so. Where's Lawry now?"

"He has gone over with the ferry-boat."

"I reckon Lawry has to run the machine now."

"He has to run the ferry-boat."

"Well, he knows how. Lawry's smart--he is. I suppose you don't know
me."

"I do not."

"I'm Lawry's brother; and that makes it that Lawry is my brother."

"Then you are Benjamin Wilford?"

"That's my name; but Ben Wilford sounds a good deal more natural to
me. I heard the old man had got into trouble, and I came up to see
about it, though I'm out of a job just now, and couldn't do anything
better. I hear that Lawry owns a steamboat, and I didn't know but
he'd want some help. Where is she?"
