
A BOY'S SONG


Where the pools are bright and deep,
Where the gray trout lies asleep,
Up the river and o'er the lea,
That's the way for Billy and me.

Where the blackbird sings the latest,
Where the hawthorn blooms the sweetest,
Where the nestlings chirp and flee,
That's the way for Billy and me.

Where the mowers mow the cleanest,
Where the hay lies thick and greenest,
There to trace the homeward bee,
That's the way for Billy and me.

Where the hazel bank is steepest,
Where the shadow falls the deepest,
Where the clustering nuts fall free,
That's the way for Billy and me.

Why the boys should drive away
Little sweet maidens from the play,
Or love to banter and fight so well,
That's the thing I never could tell.

But this I know, I love to play
Through the meadow, amid the hay;
Up the water and o'er the lea,
That's the way for Billy and me.

JAMES HOGG.



THE FROGS' TRAVELS


Long, long ago, in the country of Japan, there were two frogs.

One of the frogs lived in a pond near Tokio, and the other lived in a
little stream near Kioto.

One fine morning in early spring, these two frogs decided that they
would travel forth to see the world.

Strangely enough, though they had never heard of each other, the same
thought came to each frog at the same time.

The first frog started along the road which led from Tokio to Kioto.

He found the journey difficult and the road hard to travel. So, when he
had hopped to the top of a high hill halfway, he decided to stop a while
and rest.

The other frog started out on the same road, but from Kioto.

It took him a long time to reach the hill where the first frog was
resting.

The two frogs met at the top of the hill. They were delighted to make
each other's acquaintance.

"Greetings, friend!" said the first of the two frogs. "Where are you
going?"

"I have a great desire to see the world, and especially to visit Tokio.
I am on my way for a visit to Tokio now," replied the second frog.

"There is no need of hurrying. Let us rest here and stretch our limbs,"
said the first frog.

"What a pity that we are not taller!" said the Kioto frog.

"Why?" asked the Tokio frog.

"If we were taller, we could see both towns from this hill. Then we
should be able to tell whether or not it were worth while to continue
our journey," said the Kioto frog.

"Oh, we can easily find that out!" replied the other.

"We can stand on our hind legs and take hold of one another. Then each
can look at the town toward which he is traveling," he added.

"A fine idea! Let us try it at once."

The two frogs stood upon their hind legs, holding each other tightly to
keep from falling.

The Tokio frog turned toward Kioto, and the Kioto frog turned toward
Tokio.

The foolish frogs forgot that their eyes were on the backs of their
heads.

Although their noses pointed toward the places to which they wished to
go, their eyes beheld the towns from which they had just come.

"Indeed, I shall travel no further!" the first frog exclaimed.

"Kioto is exactly like Tokio. I shall go home at once," he added.

"Tokio is only a copy of Kioto," said the other frog.

"It is not worth while to take the trouble to journey there!" he added
disdainfully.

The two frogs bade each other a polite farewell, and each returned to
his own home town.

To the end of their lives, the two frogs believed that Tokio and Kioto
were really exactly alike.

Neither of the frogs ever again tried to see the world.




THE MERCHANT'S CARAVAN


Once there was a merchant who had fine silks and rugs to sell. He wished
to send his goods to a country on the other side of the sandy desert.

The merchant owned a large caravan of camels, and he employed many men.
Camels were the only animals strong enough to travel over the desert
with the heavy loads.

For many days, Abdul the merchant and his men had been preparing for the
journey. The canvas tents and the poles were placed upon one camel.
Great leather bottles of water were loaded upon another camel.

Firewood and bags of rice and barley meal were placed upon still
another. It required many camels to carry the merchant's goods.

At last the caravan was ready for the journey. The sun shone steadily,
making the sand so hot that no one could walk upon it in the daytime.
But at night both men and camels could travel easily.

So Abdul the merchant said to the men, "Be ready to start after sunset
to-night. Give the camels plenty of water to drink, and feed them well,
for we shall have a long, hard journey."

Abdul and his men traveled all that night. One man was the pilot. He
rode ahead, for he knew the stars, and by them he could guide the
caravan.

At daybreak they stopped. They spread the canvas tents and fed the
camels. They built fires, cooked the rice, and made cakes of the barley
meal. During the day, the men rested in the shade of the tents.

After the evening meal, the caravan started again on its way.

They had traveled thus for three long, silent nights. Early on the third
morning, the camels raised their heads, stretched their nostrils, and
hastened eagerly forward.

The pilot cried, "The camels smell water and grass. An oasis is near!"

Before long they could see palm trees, with their spreading leaves
waving in the soft breeze.

Joyfully they rested during the day. The camels drank freely from the
cool spring. The men filled the great leather bottles with fresh water.
In the evening, refreshed and happy, the men continued the journey.

So they traveled night after night, resting during the heat of the day.
At last, one morning the pilot said, "We shall soon reach the end of our
journey."

The men were very glad to hear this, for they were weary, and the camels
needed rest.

After supper that night Abdul said, "Throw away the firewood and most of
the water. It will lighten the burden of the camels. By to-morrow we
shall reach the city."

When the caravan started that evening, the pilot led the way as usual,
but after a while, weary with many nights of watching, he fell asleep.

All night long the caravan traveled. At daybreak the pilot awoke and
looked at the last star, fading in the morning light.

"Halt!" he called. "The camels must have turned while I slept. We are at
the place from which we started yesterday."

There was no water to drink. There was no firewood to cook the food. The
men spread the tents and lay down under them, saying, "The wood and the
water are gone. We are lost!"

But Abdul said to himself, "This is no time to rest. I must find water.
If I give way to despair, all will be lost."

Then Abdul started away from the tent, watching the ground closely. He
walked and walked. At last he saw a tuft of grass.

"There must be water somewhere under the sand, or this grass would not
be here," thought the merchant.

He ran back to the tent, shouting and calling, "Bring an ax and a spade.
Come quickly!"

The men jumped up and ran with the merchant to the place where the grass
was growing. They began to dig in the sand, and presently they struck a
rock.

Abdul jumped down into the hole and put his ear close to the rock.

"Water! Water!" he cried. "I hear water running under this great rock.
We must not despair!"

Then, raising his ax above his head, he struck a heavy blow. Again and
again he struck the rock.

At last the rock broke, and a stream of water, clear as crystal, filled
the hole almost before the merchant could jump out of it.

A shout of joy burst from the lips of the men. They drank the water
eagerly, and afterwards led the camels to the spring. Then they set up a
pole, to which they fastened a flag, so that other traders might find
the well.

In the evening, the men again started on their journey, and they reached
the city the very next day.




QUEEN HULDA AND THE FLAX


There was once a poor peasant, Hans by name. He lived with his wife and
children in a valley at the foot of a snow-capped mountain.

Hans often drove his sheep to pasture up the mountain side.

He always carried his crossbow with him, to protect the sheep. He was a
skillful marksman.

Once in a while, Hans would shoot a deer. The deer meat would serve as
food for his family during many days.

One day Hans was watching his sheep while they grazed on the mountain
side. Suddenly a deer appeared. Its spreading antlers glittered in the
morning sunlight with wonderful brightness.

The deer bounded across the pasture to the rocks higher up the mountain.
Hans followed quickly, hoping to approach near enough to shoot an arrow.

From rock to rock, higher and higher, Hans followed the deer, until at
last they were at the summit of the mountain.

They sped over the snow until the deer disappeared in the Blue Grotto.

Hans followed more slowly, along a dark and narrow tunnel that led to
the Blue Grotto. Suddenly he caught a glimpse of a bright light in the
distance.

He walked on and soon reached a brightly lighted cave. From the walls
and ceiling of the cave hung many wonderful crystals and precious
stones.

A tall woman dressed in pure white stood in the midst of the cave. A
golden girdle was fastened about her waist. A crown set with jewels
rested on her head. In her hand she held a bunch of blue flowers.

Lovely maidens in dainty robes, with graceful wreaths of Alpine roses on
their heads, attended their queen.

Overcome with wonder, Hans knelt before the beautiful woman. As in a
dream, he heard her say very softly, "Choose for yourself what you will
of my treasures--gold, or silver, or precious stones."

"Most gracious queen," replied Hans, "I ask only for the flowers in your
hand."

The queen was pleased, and she gave the flowers to Hans at once.

"You have chosen well," said she. "Take also these seeds and sow them in
your fields."

Suddenly a peal of thunder shook the grotto. When it had ceased, Hans
found himself standing alone on the mountain.

When Hans reached home, he showed his wife the blue flowers and the
seeds that had been given him by the queen.

"Wonderful crystals and precious stones hang from the walls and ceiling
of the cave, but the queen is more beautiful than all!" exclaimed Hans.

"Why did you not choose some of the diamonds and gold?" cried his wife,
and she scolded Hans roundly, because he had taken only flowers and
seeds.

Hans made no reply, but he went to the fields and plowed the ground.
Then he sowed carefully the seeds that the queen had given him.

The weeks passed by. Tiny green leaves began to show above the ground.
The plants grew taller and taller, and then the blue flowers began to
appear.

The flowers were so beautiful that even the angry wife was pleased. She
had never seen anything like them.

Hans watched his fields day and night. One moonlight night, he saw the
lovely queen of the Blue Grotto walking about among the flowers, with
her maidens. They seemed to be guarding the blossoms.

At last the flowers had withered, and the seeds were ripe. Then the
queen of the Blue Grotto appeared at the cottage door.

The queen of the Blue Grotto said, "I am Queen Hulda. I have come to
teach you how to spin and weave."

"The blue flowers that your husband chose were the wonderful flax,"
added the queen. "I love it very much."

Queen Hulda taught Hans and his wife how to spin and weave linen cloth.

Many people bought the linen and the flax seeds, so that Hans and his
wife became very rich.

Every year Queen Hulda and her maidens watched over the fields. Hans was
very happy, because he had chosen the blue flowers of the wonderful
flax.




ALADDIN'S LAMP


Oh, whither away, ye children dear!
  To Fairy Grove in Wonderland!

The trees bend low with a wondrous glows
Diamonds and rubies the fruit, and lo,
Gather the gems, for you they grow.

So hither hie, ye children dear!
  To Fairy Grove in Wonderland!

Welcome prince and princess gay,
Elf and fay and sprite at play,
Dancing till the dawn of day.

Then hasten all, ye children dear!
  To enter the Realm of Wonderland!

No giant or genie need cause you alarm,
Treasures they'll give, and keep away harm,
For ALADDIN'S LAMP is the hidden charm.




ALADDIN AND THE MAGIC LAMP


Aladdin was a poor boy who lived in a city of Persia. His mother was a
widow. She supported herself by weaving mats.

One day Aladdin was playing in the street. A tall, dark man stood
watching him. When the game was finished, the man beckoned to Aladdin to
come to him.

"What is your name, my boy?" asked the man, who was a Magician.

"My name is Aladdin," answered the boy. He wondered who the stranger
might be.

"And what is your father's name?" the Magician asked.

"My father was Mustapha the tailor, but he died when I was only two
years of age," replied Aladdin.

"Alas!" cried the Magician, pretending to weep. "He was my brother, and
you must be my nephew. I am your long lost uncle."

Then he embraced Aladdin and gave him five gold coins, saying, "Come
with me, and I will show you the sights."

They went from the city, through pretty gardens, into the open country.
They walked a long distance.

The Magician gave Aladdin some delicious fruit to eat and told him
wonderful stories. The lad scarcely noticed how very far they had gone.

At last they reached a valley between two mountains.

The Magician stood still for a moment and looked about him.

"Ah!" he exclaimed. "This is the very place for which I have been
searching. Gather some sticks. I will kindle a fire."

Soon the fire was burning merrily. The Magician took a curious powder
from his girdle. He mumbled strange words as he sprinkled it upon the
flames.

In an instant, the earth beneath their feet trembled, and they heard a
rumbling sound like distant thunder.

Then the ground opened in front of them. There lay a large flat stone
with a brass ring fastened to the top.

"A wonderful treasure lies hidden below," said the Magician. "Obey me,
and it will soon be ours."

Then Aladdin grasped the ring in the way the Magician told him to do,
and easily lifted the stone.

"Now," said the Magician, "go down the steps which you see before you.
You will come to three great halls.

"Pass through the halls, but be careful to touch nothing, not even the
walls, for if you do, you will certainly die. When you have passed
through the halls, you will reach a garden of fruit trees. In a niche in
the garden wall, you will see a lighted lamp. Put out the light, pour
the oil from the bowl, and bring the lamp to me."

Then the Magician placed a magic ring upon Aladdin's finger, to guard
him, and commanded him to go at once in search of the lamp.

Aladdin found everything exactly as the Magician had said. He went
through the halls and the garden until he found the lighted lamp. When
he had poured out the oil and had placed the lamp inside his coat, he
began to look about him.

Upon the trees were fruits of every color of the rainbow. Some were
clear as crystal, some were ruby red, and others sparkled with a green,
blue, or purple light.

The leaves of the trees were silver and gold. Aladdin did not know that
these fruits were precious stones--diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and
amethysts, but they looked so beautiful that he filled his pockets with
them as he passed back through the garden.
