much money they had.

"Two dollars," answered Phil.

"That is only one dollar for each."

"Yes, Giacomo."

"Then we shall be beaten," said the little boy, with a sigh.

"I am afraid so."

"And get no supper."

"Yes," said Phil; "unless," he added, "we get some supper now."

"With this money?" asked Giacomo, startled at the boldness of the
suggestion.

"Yes; we shall be beaten at any rate. It will be no worse for us if we
get some supper."

"Will you buy some bread?"

"No," said Phil, daringly. "I am going to buy some meat."

"What will the padrone say?"

"I shall not tell the padrone."

"Do you think he will find out?"

"No. Besides, we ought to have some supper after walking about all day."

Evidently Phil had begun to think, and the essential injustice of
laboring without proper compensation had impressed his youthful mind.
Giacomo was more timid. He had not advanced as far as Phil, nor was he
as daring. But I have already said that he was guided in a great measure
by Phil, and so it proved in this case.

Phil, having made up his mind, set about carrying his plan into
execution. Only a block distant was a cheap restaurant, where plates of
meat were supplied to a poor class of customers at ten cents per plate.

"Let us go in here," he said.

Giacomo followed, but not without trepidation. He knew that what they
were about to do would be a heinous crime in the eyes of the padrone.
Even Phil had never ventured upon such direct rebellion before. But Mr.
Pomeroy's suggestion that he should run away was beginning to bear fruit
in his mind. He had not come to that yet, but he might. Why should he
not earn money for his own benefit, as well as for the padrone? True, he
was bound to the latter by a legal contract entered into by his father,
but Phil, without knowing much about law, had an indistinct idea that
the contract was a one-sided one, and was wholly for the advantage of
the other party. The tyrant is always in danger of losing his hold upon
the victim when the latter begins to think.

They entered the restaurant, and sat down at a table.

The tables were greasy. The floor was strewed with sawdust. The waiters
were dirty, and the entire establishment was neither neat nor inviting.
But it was democratic. No customers were sent away because they were
unfashionably attired. The only requisite was money enough to defray
their bills. Nevertheless Giacomo felt a little in awe even of the dirty
waiters. His frugal meals were usually bought at the baker's shop, and
eaten standing in the street. Sitting down at a table, even though it
was greasy, seemed a degree of luxury to which he was not entitled. But
Phil more easily adapted himself to circumstances. He knew that he had
as much right there as any other customer.

Presently a waiter presented himself.

"Have you ordered?" he asked.

"Give me some roast beef," said Phil. "What will you have, Giacomo?"

"The same as you, Filippo," said Giacomo, in Italian.

"What's that?" asked the waiter, thinking he had named some dish.

"He will have some roast beef, too. Will you have some coffee, Giacomo?"

"If you have it," answered the smaller boy.

So Phil gave the double order, and very soon the coffee and meat were
placed before them. I suspect that few of my readers would have regarded
these articles with any relish. One need not be fastidious to find fault
with the dark-hued beverage, which was only a poor imitation of coffee,
and the dark fragments of meat, which might have been horseflesh so far
as appearance went. But to the two Italian boys it was indeed a feast.
The coffee, which was hot, warmed their stomachs, and seemed to them
like nectar, while the meat was as palatable as the epicure finds his
choicest dishes. While eating, even Giacomo forgot that he was
engaged in something unlawful, and his face was lighted up with rare
satisfaction.

"It is good," said Phil, briefly, as he laid down his knife and fork,
after disposing of the last morsel upon his plate.

"I wish I could have such a supper every day," said Giacomo.

"I will when I am a man," said Phil.

"I don't think I shall ever be a man," said Giacomo, shaking his head.

"Why not?" asked Phil, regarding him with surprise.

"I do not think I shall live."

"What makes you think so, Giacomo?" said Phil, startled.

"I am not strong, Filippo," said the little boy, "I think I get weaker
every day. I long so much to go back to Italy. If I could see my mother
once more, I would be willing to die then."

"You must not think of such things, Giacomo," said Phil, who, like most
healthy boys, did not like to think of death. "You will get strong when
summer comes. The weather is bad now, of course."

"I don't think I shall, Filippo. Do you remember Matteo?"

"Yes, I remember him."

Matteo was a comrade who had died six months before. He was a young boy,
about the size and age of Giacomo.

"I dreamed of him last night, Filippo. He held out his hand to me."

"Well?"

"I think I am going to die, like him."

"Don't be foolish, Giacomo," said Phil. But, though he said this, even
he was startled by what Giacomo had told him. He was ignorant, and the
ignorant are prone to superstition; so he felt uncomfortable, but did
not like to acknowledge it.

"You must not think of this, Giacomo," he said. "You will be an old man
some day."

"That's for you, Filippo. It isn't for me," said the little boy.

"Come, let us go," said Phil, desirous of dropping the subject.

He went up to the desk, and paid for both, the sum of thirty cents.

"Now, come," he said.

Giacomo followed him out, and they turned down the street, feeling
refreshed by the supper they had eaten. But unfortunately they had been
observed. As they left the restaurant, they attracted the attention
of Pietro, whom chance had brought thither at an unfortunate time. His
sinister face lighted up with joy as he realized the discovery he had
made. But he wished to make sure that it was as he supposed. They might
have gone in only to play and sing.

He crossed the street, unobserved by Phil and Giacomo, and entered the
restaurant.

"Were my two brothers here?" he asked, assuming relationship.

"Two boys with fiddles?"

"Yes; they just went out."

"Did they get supper?"

"Yes; they had some roast beef and coffee."

"Thank you," said Pietro, and he left the restaurant with his suspicions
confirmed.

"I shall tell the padrone," he said to himself.

"They will feel the stick to-night."



CHAPTER X

FRENCH'S HOTEL

Pietro had one of those mean and malignant natures that are best pleased
when they are instrumental in bringing others into trouble. He looked
forward to becoming a padrone himself some time, and seemed admirably
fitted by nature to exercise the inhuman office. He lost no time, on his
return, in making known to his uncle what he had learned.

For the boys to appropriate to their own use money which had been
received for their services was, in the eyes of the padrone, a crime of
the darkest shade. In fact, if the example were generally followed, it
would have made a large diminution of his income, though the boys might
have been benefited. He listened to Pietro with an ominous scowl, and
decided to inflict condign punishment upon the young offenders.

Meanwhile Phil and Giacomo resumed their wanderings. They no longer
hoped to make up the large difference between what they had and the sum
they were expected by the padrone to bring. As the evening advanced the
cold increased, and penetrated through their thin clothing, chilling
them through and through. Giacomo felt it the most. By and by he began
to sob with the cold and fatigue.

"What is the matter, Giacomo?" asked Phil, anxiously.

"I feel so cold, Filippo--so cold and tired. I wish I could rest."

The boys were in Printing House Square, near the spot where now stands
the Franklin statue.

"If you want to rest, Giacomo," said Phil, pityingly, "we will go into
French's Hotel a little while."

"I should like to."

They entered the hotel and sat down near the heater. The grateful warmth
diffused itself through their frames, and Giacomo sank back in his seat
with a sigh of relief.

"Do you feel better, Giacomo?" asked his comrade.

"Yes, Filippo; I wish I could stay here till it is time to go home."

"We will, then. We shall get no more money outside."

"The padrone----"

"Will beat us at any rate. It will be no worse for us. Besides they may
possibly ask us to play here."

"I can play no more to-night, Filippo, I am so tired."

Phil knew very little of sickness, or he might have seen that Giacomo
was going to be ill. Exposure, fatigue, and privation had been too much
for his strength. He had never been robust, and he had been subjected to
trials that would have proved hard for one much stronger to bear.

When he had once determined to remain in the comfortable hotel, Phil
leaned back in his chair also, and decided to enjoy all the comfort
attainable. What though there was a beating in prospect?

He had before him two or three hours of rest and relief from the outside
cold. He was something of a philosopher, and chose not to let future
evil interfere with present good.

Near the two boys sat two young men--merchants from the interior of New
York State, who were making a business visit to the metropolis.

"Well, Gardner," said the first, "where shall we go to-night?"

"Why need we go anywhere?"

"I thought you might like to go to some place of amusement."

"So I would if the weather were less inclement. The most comfortable
place is by the fire."

"You are right as to that, but the evening will be long and stupid."

"Oh, we can worry it through. Here, for instance, are two young
musicians," indicating the little fiddlers. "Suppose we get a tune out
of them?"

"Agreed. Here, boy, can you play on that fiddle?"

"Yes," said Phil.

"Well, give us a tune, then. Is that your brother?"

"No, he is my comrade."

"He can play, too."

"Will you play, Giacomo?"

The younger boy roused himself. The two stood up, and played two or
three tunes successfully. A group of loungers gathered around them and
listened approvingly. When they had finished Phil took off his hat and
went the rounds. Some gave, the two first mentioned contributing most
liberally. The whole sum collected was about fifty cents.

Phil and Giacomo now resumed their seats. They felt now that they were
entitled to rest for the remainder of the evening, since they had gained
quite as much as they would have been likely to earn in wandering about
the streets. The group that had gathered about them dispersed, and they
ceased to be objects of attention. Fatigue and the warmth of the room
gradually affected Giacomo until he leaned back and fell asleep.

"I won't take him till it's time to go back," thought Phil.

So Giacomo slept on, despite the noises in the street outside and the
confusion incident to every large hotel. As he sat asleep, he attracted
the attention of a stout gentleman who was passing, leading by the hand
a boy of ten.

"Is that your brother?" he asked in a low tone of Phil.

"No, signore; it is my comrade."

"So you go about together?"

"Yes, sir," answered Phil, bethinking himself to use English instead of
Italian.

"He seems tired."

"Yes; he is not so strong as I am."

"Do you play about the streets all day?"

"Yes, sir."

"How would you like that, Henry?" asked his father to the boy at his
side.

"I should like to play about the streets all day," said Henry,
roguishly, misinterpreting the word "play."

"I think you would get tired of it. What is your name, my boy?"

"Filippo."

"And what is the name of your friend?"

"Giacomo."

"Did you never go to school?"

Phil shook his head.
