"I don't know even the name of anyone in this first race," Isobel said,
looking at the card.

"That doesn't matter in the least, Miss Hannay," Wilson, who had just
come up to the side of the carriage, said. "There are six horses in; you
pick out any one you like, and I will lay you five pairs of gloves to
one against him."

"But how am I to pick out when I don't know anything about them, Mr.
Wilson? I might pick out one that had no chance at all."

"Yes; but you might pick out the favorite, Miss Hannay, so that it is
quite fair."

"Don't you bet, Isobel," her uncle said. "Let us have a sweepstake
instead."

"What is a sweepstake, uncle?"

There was a general laugh.

"Well, my dear, we each put in a rupee. There are six of us, and there
are Wilson and the Doctor. You will go in, Doctor, won't you?"

"Yes; I don't mind throwing away a rupee, Major."

"Very well, that makes eight. We put eight pieces of paper in the hat.
Six of them have got the names of the horses on, the other two are
blank. Then we each pull out one. Whoever draws the name of the horse
that wins takes five rupees, the holder of the second two, and the third
saves his stake. You shall hold the stakes, Mrs. Hunter. We have all
confidence in you."

The slips were drawn.

"My horse is Bruce," Isobel said.

"There he is, Miss Hannay," Wilson, who had drawn a blank, said, as
a horse whose rider had a straw colored jacket and cap came cantering
along the course. "This is a race for country horses--owners up.
That means ridden by their owners. That is Pearson of the 13th Native
Cavalry. He brought the horse over from Lucknow."

"What chance has he?"

"I have not the least idea, Miss Hannay. I did not hear any betting on
this race at all."

"That is a nice horse, uncle," Isobel said, as one with a rider in black
jacket, with red cap, came past.

"That is Delhi. Yes, it has good action."

"That is mine," the eldest Miss Hunter said.

"The rider is a good looking young fellow," the Doctor said, "and is
perfectly conscious of it himself. Who is he, Wilson? I don't know him."

"He is a civilian. Belongs to the public works, I think."

The other horses now came along, and after short preliminary canters the
start was made. To Isobel's disappointment her horse was never in the
race, which Delhi looked like winning until near the post, when a rather
common looking horse, which had been lying a short distance behind him,
came up with a rush and won by a length.

"I don't call that fair," Miss Hunter said, "when the other was first
all along. I call that a mean way of winning, don't you, father?"

"Well, no, my dear. It was easy to see for the last quarter of a mile
that the other was making what is called 'a waiting race' of it, and
was only biding his time. There is nothing unfair in that, I fancy Delhi
might have won if he had had a better jockey. His rider never really
called upon him till it was too late. He was so thoroughly satisfied
with himself and his position in the race that he was taken completely
by surprise when Moonshee came suddenly up to him."

"Well, I think it is very hard upon Delhi, father, after keeping ahead
all the way and going so nicely. I think everyone ought to do their best
from the first."

"I fancy you are thinking, Miss Hunter," the Doctor said, "quite as much
that it is hard on you being beaten after your hopes had been raised, as
it is upon the horse."

"Perhaps I am, Doctor," she admitted.

"I think it is much harder on me," Isobel said. "You have had the
satisfaction of thinking all along that your horse was going to win,
while mine never gave me the least bit of hope."

"The proper expression, Miss Hannay, is, your horse never flattered
you."

"Then I think it is a very silly expression, Mr. Wilson, because I don't
see that flattery has anything to do with it."

"Ah, here is Bathurst," the Doctor said. "Where have you been, Bathurst?
You slipped away from me just now."

"I've just been talking to the Commissioner, Doctor. I have been trying
to get him to see--"

"Why, you don't mean to say," the Doctor broke in, "that you have been
trying to cram your theories down his throat on a racecourse?"


"It was before the race began," Bathurst said, "and I don't think the
Commissioner has any more interest in racing than I have."

"Not in racing," the Doctor agreed, "but I expect he has an interest in
enjoying himself generally, which is a thing you don't seem to have the
most remote idea of. Here we are just getting up a sweepstake for the
next race; hand over a rupee and try to get up an interest in it. Do try
and forget your work till the race is over. I have brought you here
to do you good. I regard you as my patient, and I give you my medical
orders that you are to enjoy yourself."

Bathurst laughed.

"I am enjoying myself in my way, Doctor."

"Who is that very pretty woman standing up in the next carriage but
one?" Isobel asked.

"She comes from an out station," the Doctor repeated; "she is the wife
of the Collector there, but I think she likes Cawnpore better than
Boorgum; her name is Rose."

"Is that her husband talking to her?"

"No; that is a man in the Artillery here, I think."

"Yes," the Major said, "that is Harrowby, a good looking fellow, and
quite a ladies' man."

"Do you mean a man ladies like, uncle, or who likes the society of
ladies?"

"Both in his case, I should fancy," the Major said; "I believe he is
considered one of the best looking men in the service."

"I don't see why he should be liked for that," Isobel said. "As far as I
have seen, good looking men are not so pleasant as others. I suppose it
is because they are conscious of their own good looks, and therefore do
not take the trouble of being amusing. We had one very good looking
man on board ship, and he was the dullest man to talk to on board. No,
Doctor, I won't have any names mentioned, but I am right, am I not?"

"He was a dull specimen, certainly," the Doctor said, "but I think you
are a little too sweeping."

"I don't mean all good looking men, of course, but men who what I call
go in for being good looking. I don't know whether you know what I mean.
What are you smiling at, Mr. Wilson?"

"I was thinking of two or three men I know to whom your description
applies, Miss Hannay; but I must be going--they are just going to start
the next race, and mine is the one after, so I must go and get ready.
You wish me success, don't you?"

"I wish you all the success you deserve. I can't say more than that, can
I?"

"I am afraid that is saying very little," he laughed. "I don't expect to
win, but I do hope I shall beat Richards, because he is so cock sure he
will beat me."

This wish was not gratified. The first and second horses made a close
race of it; behind them by ten or twelve lengths came the other horses
in a clump, Wilson and Richards singling themselves out in the last
hundred yards and making a desperate race for the third place, for which
they made a dead heat, amid great laughter from their comrades.

"That is excellent," Major Hannay said; "you won't see anything more
amusing than that today, girls. The third horse simply saved his stake,
so that as they will of course divide, they will have paid twenty-five
rupees each for the pleasure of riding, and the point which of their
tats is the fastest remains unsettled."

"Well, they beat a good many of them, Major Hannay," Miss Hunter said;
"so they did not do so badly after all."

"Oh, no, they did not do so badly; but it will be a long time before
they get over the chaff about their desperate struggle for the third
place."

The next two races attracted but slight attention from the occupants
of the carriage. Most of their acquaintances in the station came up one
after the other for a chat. There were many fresh introductions, and
there was so much conversation and laughter that the girls had little
time to attend to what was going on around them. Wilson and Richards
both sauntered up after changing, and were the subject of much chaff as
to their brilliant riding at the finish. Both were firm in the belief
that the judge's finding was wrong, and each maintained stoutly he had
beaten the other by a good head.

The race for Arabs turned out a very exciting one; the Rajah of
Bithoor's horse was the favorite, on the strength of its performances
elsewhere; but Prothero's horse was also well supported, especially in
the regiment, for the Adjutant was a first class rider, and was in
great request at all the principal meetings in Oude and the Northwest
Provinces, while it was known that the Rajah's horse would be ridden by
a native. The latter was dressed in strict racing costume, and had at
the last races at Cawnpore won two or three cups for the Rajah.

But the general opinion among the officers of the station was that
Prothero's coolness and nerve would tell. His Arab was certainly a fast
one, and had won the previous year, both at Cawnpore and Lucknow; but
the Rajah's new purchase had gained so high a reputation in the Western
Presidency as fully to justify the odds of two to one laid on it, while
four to one were offered against Prothero, and from eight to twenty to
one against any other competitor.

Prothero had stopped to have a chat at the Hunters' carriage as he
walked towards the dressing tent.

"Our hopes are all centered in you, Mr. Prothero," Mr. Hunter said.
"Miss Hannay has been wagering gloves in a frightfully reckless way."

"I should advise you to hedge if you can, Miss Hannay," he said. "I
think there is no doubt that Mameluke is a good deal faster than Seila.
I fancy he is pounds better. I only beat Vincent's horse by a head last
year, and Mameluke gave him seven pounds, and beat him by three lengths
at Poona. So I should strongly advise you to hedge your bets if you
can."

"What does he mean by hedge, uncle?"

"To hedge is to bet the other way, so that one bet cancels the other."

"Oh, I shan't do that," she said; "I have enough money to pay my bets if
I lose."

"Do you mean to say you mean to pay your bets if you lose, Miss Hannay?"
the Doctor asked incredulously.

"Of course I do," she said indignantly. "You don't suppose I intend to
take the gloves if I win, and not to pay if I lose?"

"It is not altogether an uncommon practice among ladies," the Doctor
said, "when they bet against gentlemen. I believe that when they wager
against each other, which they do not often do, they are strictly
honest, but that otherwise their memories are apt to fail them
altogether."

"That is a libel, Mrs. Hunter, is it not?"

"Not altogether, I think. Of course many ladies do pay their bets when
they lose, but others certainly do not."

"Then I call it very mean," Isobel said earnestly. "Why, it is as bad as
asking anyone to make you a present of so many pairs of gloves in case a
certain horse wins."

"It comes a good deal to the same thing," Mrs. Hunter admitted, "but to
a certain extent it is a recognized custom; it is a sort of tribute that
is exacted at race time, just as in France every lady expects a present
from every gentleman of her acquaintance on New Year's Day."

"I wouldn't bet if I didn't mean to pay honestly," Isobel said. "And if
Mr. Prothero doesn't win, my debts will all be honorably discharged."

There was a hush of expectation in the crowd when the ten horses whose
numbers were up went down to the starting point, a quarter of a mile
from the stand. They were to pass it, make the circuit, and finish
there, the race being two miles. The interest of the natives was
enlisted by the fact that Nana Sahib was running a horse, while the
hopes of the occupants of the inclosure rested principally on Seila.

The flag fell to a good start; but when the horses came along Isobel saw
with surprise that the dark blue of the Rajah and the Adjutant's scarlet
and white were both in the rear of the group. Soon afterwards the
scarlet seemed to be making its way through the horses, and was speedily
leading them.

"Prothero is making the running with a vengeance," the Major said. "That
is not like his usual tactics, Doctor."

"I fancy he knows what he is doing," the Doctor replied. "He saw that
Mameluke's rider was going to make a waiting race of it, and as the
horse has certainly the turn of speed on him, he is trying other
tactics. They are passing the mile post now, and Prothero is twelve or
fourteen lengths ahead. There, Mameluke is going through his horses; his
rider is beginning to get nervous at the lead Prothero has got, and
he can't stand it any longer. He ought to have waited for another half
mile. You will see, Prothero will win after all. Seila can stay, there
is no doubt about that."

A roar of satisfaction rose from the mass of natives on the other side
of the inclosure as Mameluke was seen to leave the group of horses and
gradually to gain upon Seila.

"Oh, he will catch him, uncle!" Isobel said, tearing her handkerchief in
her excitement.

The Major was watching the horses through his field glass.

"Never mind his catching him," he said; "Prothero is riding quietly and
steadily. Seila is doing nearly her best, but he is not hurrying her,
while the fool on Mameluke is bustling the horse as if he had only a
hundred yards further to go."

The horses were nearing the point at which they had started, when a
shout from the crowd proclaimed that the blue jacket had come up to and
passed the scarlet. Slowly it forged ahead until it was two lengths in
advance, for a few strides their relative positions remained unaltered,
then there was a shout from the carriages; scarlet was coming up again.
Mameluke's rider glanced over his shoulder, and began to use the whip.
For a few strides the horse widened the gap again, but Prothero still
sat quiet and unmoved. Just as they reached the end of the line of
carriages, Seila again began to close up.

"Seila wins! Seila wins!" the officers shouted.

But it seemed to Isobel that this was well nigh impossible, but foot by
foot the mare came up, and as they passed the Hunters' carriage her head
was in advance.

In spite of the desperate efforts of the rider of Mameluke, another
hundred yards and they passed the winning post, Seila a length ahead.



CHAPTER VII.


The exultation of the officers of the 103d over Seila's victory was
great. They had all backed her, relying upon Prothero's riding, but
although his success was generally popular among the Europeans at
the station, many had lost considerable sums by their confidence in
Mameluke's speed.

Isobel sat down feeling quite faint from the excitement.

"I did not think I could have been so excited over a race between two
horses," she said to Mrs. Hunter; "it was not the bets, I never even
thought about them--it was just because I wanted to see Mr. Prothero's
horse win. I never understood before why people should take such an
interest in horse racing, but I quite understand now."

"What is your size, Miss Hannay?" Wilson asked.

"Oh, I don't care anything about the gloves, Mr. Wilson; I am sorry I
bet now."

"You needn't feel any compunction in taking them from me or from any of
us, Miss Hannay; we have all won over Seila; the regiment will have to
give a ball on the strength of it. I only put on a hundred rupees, and
so have won four hundred, but most of them have won ever so much more
than that; and all I have lost is four pair of gloves to you, and four
to Mrs. Doolan, and four to Mrs. Prothero--a dozen in all. Which do you
take, white or cream, and what is your size?"

"Six and a half, cream."

"All right, Miss Hannay. The Nana must have lost a good lot of money;
he has been backing his horse with everyone who would lay against
it. However, it won't make any difference to him, and it is always a
satisfaction when the loss comes on someone to whom it doesn't matter a
bit. I think the regiment ought to give a dinner to Prothero, Major; it
was entirely his riding that did it; he hustled that nigger on Mameluke
splendidly. If the fellow had waited till within half a mile of home he
would have won to a certainty; I never saw anything better."

"Well, Miss Hannay, what do you think of a horse race?" Bathurst, who
had only remained a few minutes at the carriage, asked, as he strolled
up again. "You said yesterday that you had never seen one."

"I am a little ashamed to say I was very much excited over it, Mr.
Bathurst. You have not lost, I hope? You are looking" and she stopped.

"Shaky?" he said. "Yes; I feel shaky. I had not a penny on the race,
for though the Doctor made me put into a sweep last night at the club,
I drew a blank; but the shouting and excitement at the finish seemed to
take my breath away, and I felt quite faint."

"That is just how I felt; I did not know men felt like that. They don't
generally seem to know what nerves are."

"I wish I didn't; it is a great nuisance. The Doctor tries to persuade
me that it is the effect of overwork, but I have always been so from a
child, and I can't get over it."

"You don't look nervous, Mr. Bathurst."

"No; when a man is a fair size, and looks bronzed and healthy, no one
will give him credit for being nervous. I would give a very great deal
if I could get over it."

"I don't see that it matters much one way or the other, Mr. Bathurst."

"I can assure you that it does. I regard it as being a most serious
misfortune."

Isobel was a little surprised at the earnestness with which he spoke.

"I should not have thought that," she said quietly; "but I can
understand that it is disagreeable for a man to feel nervous, simply,
I suppose, because it is regarded as a feminine quality; but I think a
good many men are nervous. We had several entertainments on board the
ship coming out, and it was funny to see how many great strong men broke
down, especially those who had to make speeches."

"I am not nervous in that way," Bathurst said, with a laugh. "My pet
horror is noise; thunder prostrates me completely, and in fact all
noises, especially any sharp, sudden sound, affect me. I really find
it a great nuisance. I fancy a woman with nerves considers herself as
a martyr, and deserving of all pity and sympathy. It is almost a
fashionable complaint, and she is a little proud of it; but a man ought
to have his nerves in good order, and as much as that is expected of him
unless he is a feeble little body. There is the bell for the next race."

"Are you going to bet on this race again, Miss Hannay?" Wilson said,
coming up.

"No, Mr. Wilson. I have done my first and last bit of gambling. I
don't think it is nice, ladies betting, after all, and if there were a
hospital here I should order you to send the money the gloves will cost
you to it as conscience money, and then perhaps you might follow my
example with your winnings."

"My conscience is not moved in any way," he laughed; "when it is I will
look out for a deserving charity. Well, if you won't bet I must see if I
can make a small investment somewhere else."

"I shall see you at the ball, of course?" Isobel said, turning to Mr.
Bathurst, as Wilson left the carriage.

"No, I think not. Balls are altogether out of my line, and as there is
always a superabundance of men at such affairs here, there is no sense
of duty about it."

"What is your line, Mr. Bathurst?"

"I am afraid I have none, Miss Hannay. The fact is, there is really
more work to be done than one can get through. When you get to know the
natives well you cannot help liking them and longing to do them some
good if they would but let you, but it is so difficult to get them to
take up new ideas. Their religion, with all its customs and ceremonies,
seems designed expressly to bar out all improvements. Except in the case
of abolishing Suttee, we have scarcely weaned them from one of their
observances; and even now, in spite of our efforts, widows occasionally
immolate themselves, and that with the general approval.

"I wish I had an army of ten thousand English ladies all speaking the
language well to go about among the women and make friends with them;
there would be more good done in that way than by all the officials in
India. They might not be able to emancipate themselves from all their
restrictions, but they might influence their children, and in time pave
the way for a moral revolution. But it is ridiculous," he said, breaking
off suddenly, "my talking like this here, but you see it is what
you call my line, my hobby, if you like; but when one sees this hard
working, patient, gentle people making their lot so much harder than it
need be by their customs and observances one longs to force them even
against their own will to burst their bonds."

Dr. Wade came up at this moment and caught the last word or two.

"You are incorrigible, Bathurst. Miss Hannay, I warn you that this
man is a monomaniac. I drag him away from his work, and here he is
discoursing with you on reform just as a race is going to start. You
may imagine, my dear, what a thorn he is in the side of the bigwigs.
You have heard of Talleyrand's advice to a young official, 'Above all
things, no zeal.' Go away, Bathurst; Miss Hannay wants to see the race,
and even if she doesn't she is powerless to assist you in your crusade."

Bathurst laughed and drew off.

"That is too bad, Doctor. I was very interested. I like to talk to
people who can think of something besides races and balls and the gossip
of the station."

"Yes, in reason, in reason, my dear; but there is a medium in all
things. I have no doubt Bathurst will be quite happy some time or other
to give you his full views on child marriages, and the remarriages of
widows, and female education, and the land settlement, and a score of
other questions, but for this a few weeks of perfect leisure will be
required. Seriously, you know that I think Bathurst one of the finest
young fellows in the service, but his very earnestness injures both his
prospects and his utility. The officials have a horror of
enthusiasm; they like the cut and dried subordinate who does his duty
conscientiously, and does not trouble his head about anything but
carrying out the regulations laid down for him.

"Theoretically I agree with most of Bathurst's views, practically I see
that a score of officials like him would excite a revolution throughout
a whole province. In India, of all places in the world, the maxim
festina lente--go slow--is applicable. You have the prejudices of a
couple of thousand years against change. The people of all things are
jealous of the slightest appearance of interference with their customs.
The change will no doubt come in time, but it must come gradually, and
must be the work of the natives themselves and not of us. To try to
hasten that time would be but to defer it. Now, child, there is the
bell; now just attend to the business in hand."

"Very well, Doctor, I will obey your orders, but it is only fair to say
that Mr. Bathurst's remarks are only in answer to something I said," and
Isobel turned to watch the race, but with an interest less ardent than
she had before felt.

Isobel's character was an essentially earnest one, and her life up to
the day of her departure to India had been one of few pleasures. She had
enjoyed the change and had entered heartily into it, and she was as yet
by no means tired of it, but she had upon her arrival at Cawnpore been a
little disappointed that there was no definite work for her to perform,
and had already begun to feel that a time would come when she would
want something more than gossip and amusements and the light talk of the
officers of her acquaintance to fill her life.

She had as yet no distinct interest of her own, and Bathurst's
earnestness had struck a cord in her own nature and seemed to open a
wide area for thought. She put it aside now and chatted gayly with the
Hunters and those who came up to the carriage, but it came back to her
as she sat in her room before going to bed.

Up till now she had not heard a remark since she had been in Cawnpore
that might not have been spoken had the cantonments there been the whole
of India, except that persons at other stations were mentioned. The
vast, seething native population were no more alluded to than if they
were a world apart. Bathurst's words had for the first time brought home
to her the reality of their existence, and that around this little group
of English men and women lay a vast population, with their joys and
sorrows and sufferings.

At breakfast she surprised Mrs. Hunter by asking a variety of questions
as to native customs. "I suppose you have often been in the Zenanas,
Mrs. Hunter?"

