
'Ingratitude,' said the Psammead, 'is a dreadful vice.'

'We're not ungrateful,'Jane made haste to say, 'but we didn't
REALLY want that wish.  Robert only just said it.  Can't you take
it back and give us a new one?'

'No - I can't,' the Sand-fairy said shortly; 'chopping and changing
- it's not business.  You ought to be careful what you do wish.
There was a little boy once, he'd wished for a Plesiosaurus instead
of an Ichthyosaurus, because he was too lazy to remember the easy
names of everyday things, and his father had been very vexed with
him, and had made him go to bed before tea-time, and wouldn't let
him go out in the nice flint boat along with the other children -
it was the annual school-treat next day - and he came and flung
himself down near me on the morning of the treat, and he kicked his
little prehistoric legs about and said he wished he was dead.  And
of course then he was.'

'How awful!' said the children all together.

'Only till sunset, of course,' the Psammead said; 'still it was
quite enough for his father and mother.  And he caught it when he
woke up - I can tell you.  He didn't turn to stone - I forget why
- but there must have been some reason.  They didn't know being
dead is only being asleep, and you're bound to wake up somewhere or
other, either where you go to sleep or in some better place.  You
may be sure he caught it, giving them such a turn.  Why, he wasn't
allowed to taste Megatherium for a month after that.  Nothing but
oysters and periwinkles, and common things like that.'

All the children were quite crushed by this terrible tale.  They
looked at the Psammead in horror.  Suddenly the Lamb perceived that
something brown and furry was near him.

'Poof, poof, poofy,' he said, and made a grab.

'It's not a pussy,' Anthea was beginning, when the Sand-fairy
leaped back.

'Oh, my left whisker!' it said; 'don't let him touch me.  He's
wet.'

Its fur stood on end with horror - and indeed a good deal of the
ginger-beer had been spilt on the blue smock of the Lamb.

The Psammead dug with its hands and feet, and vanished in an
instant and a whirl of sand.

The children marked the spot with a ring of stones.

'We may as well get along home,' said Robert.  'I'll say I'm sorry;
but anyway if it's no good it's no harm, and we know where the
sandy thing is for to-morrow.'

The others were noble.  No one reproached Robert at all.  Cyril
picked up the Lamb, who was now quite himself again, and off they
went by the safe cart-road.

The cart-road from the gravel-pits joins the road almost directly.

At the gate into the road the party stopped to shift the Lamb from
Cyril's back to Robert's.  And as they paused a very smart open
carriage came in sight, with a coachman and a groom on the box, and
inside the carriage a lady - very grand indeed, with a dress all
white lace and red ribbons and a parasol all red and white - and a
white fluffy dog on her lap with a red ribbon round its neck.  She
looked at the children, and particularly at the Baby, and she
smiled at him.  The children were used to this, for the Lamb was,
as all the servants said, a 'very taking child'.  So they waved
their hands politely to the lady and expected her to drive on.  But
she did not.  Instead she made the coachman stop.  And she beckoned
to Cyril, and when he went up to the carriage she said:

'What a dear darling duck of a baby!  Oh, I SHOULD so like to adopt
it!  Do you think its mother would mind?'

'She'd mind very much indeed,' said Anthea shortly.

'Oh, but I should bring it up in luxury, you know.  I am Lady
Chittenden.  You must have seen my photograph in the illustrated
papers.  They call me a beauty, you know, but of course that's all
nonsense.  Anyway -'

She opened the carriage door and jumped out.  She had the
wonderfullest red high-heeled shoes with silver buckles.  'Let me
hold him a minute,' she said.  And she took the Lamb and held him
very awkwardly, as if she was not used to babies.

Then suddenly she jumped into the carriage with the Lamb in her
arms and slammed the door and said, 'Drive on!'

The Lamb roared, the little white dog barked, and the coachman
hesitated.

'Drive on, I tell you!' cried the lady; and the coachman did, for,
as he said afterwards, it was as much as his place was worth not
to.

The four children looked at each other, and then with one accord
they rushed after the carriage and held on behind.  Down the dusty
road went the smart carriage, and after it, at double-quick time,
ran the twinkling legs of the Lamb's brothers and sisters.

The Lamb howled louder and louder, but presently his howls changed
by slow degree to hiccupy gurgles, and then all was still and they
knew he had gone to sleep.

The carriage went on, and the eight feet that twinkled through the
dust were growing quite stiff and tired before the carriage stopped
at the lodge of a grand park.  The children crouched down behind
the carriage, and the lady got out.  She looked at the Baby as it
lay on the carriage seat, and hesitated.

'The darling - I won't disturb it,' she said, and went into the
lodge to talk to the woman there about a setting of Buff Orpington
eggs that had not turned out well.

The coachman and footman sprang from the box and bent over the
sleeping Lamb.

'Fine boy - wish he was mine,' said the coachman.

'He wouldn't favour YOU much,' said the groom sourly; 'too
'andsome.'

The coachman pretended not to hear.  He said:

'Wonder at her now - I do really!  Hates kids.  Got none of her
own, and can't abide other folkses'.'

The children, crouching in the white dust under the carriage,
exchanged uncomfortable glances.

'Tell you what,' the coachman went on firmly, 'blowed if I don't
hide the little nipper in the hedge and tell her his brothers took
'im!  Then I'll come back for him afterwards.'

'No, you don't,' said the footman.  'I've took to that kid so as
never was.  If anyone's to have him, it's me - so there!'

'Stow your gab!' the coachman rejoined.  'You don't want no kids,
and, if you did, one kid's the same as another to you.  But I'm a
married man and a judge of breed.  I knows a first-rate yearling
when I sees him.  I'm a-goin' to 'ave him, an' least said soonest
mended.'

'I should 'a' thought,' said the footman sneeringly, you'd a'most
enough.  What with Alfred, an' Albert, an' Louise, an' Victor
Stanley, and Helena Beatrice, and another -'

The coachman hit the footman in the chin - the foot- man hit the
coachman in the waistcoat - the next minute the two were fighting
here and there, in and out, up and down, and all over everywhere,
and the little dog jumped on the box of the carriage and began
barking like mad.

Cyril, still crouching in the dust, waddled on bent legs to the
side of the carriage farthest from the battlefield.  He unfastened
the door of the carriage - the two men were far too much occupied
with their quarrel to notice anything - took the Lamb in his arms,
and, still stooping, carried the sleeping baby a dozen yards along
the road to where a stile led into a wood.  The others followed,
and there among the hazels and young oaks and sweet chestnuts,
covered by high strong-scented bracken, they all lay hidden till
the angry voices of the men were hushed at the angry voice of the
red-and-white lady, and, after a long and anxious search, the
carriage at last drove away.

'My only hat!' said Cyril, drawing a deep breath as the sound of
wheels at last died away.  'Everyone DOES want him now - and no
mistake!  That Sammyadd has done us again!  Tricky brute!  For any
sake, let's get the kid safe home.'

So they peeped out, and finding on the right hand only lonely white
road, and nothing but lonely white road on the left, they took
courage, and the road, Anthea carrying the sleeping Lamb.

Adventures dogged their footsteps.  A boy with a bundle of faggots
on his back dropped his bundle by the roadside and asked to look at
the Baby, and then offered to carry him; but Anthea was not to be
caught that way twice.  They all walked on, but the boy followed,
and Cyril and Robert couldn't make him go away till they had more
than once invited him to smell their fists.  Afterwards a little
girl in a blue-and-white checked pinafore actually followed them
for a quarter of a mile crying for 'the precious Baby', and then
she was only got rid of by threats of tying her to a tree in the
wood with all their pocket-handkerchiefs.  'So that the bears can
come and eat you as soon as it gets dark,' said Cyril severely.
Then she went off crying.  It presently seemed wise, to the
brothers and sisters of the Baby, who was wanted by everyone, to
hide in the hedge whenever they saw anyone coming, and thus they
managed to prevent the Lamb from arousing the inconvenient
affection of a milkman, a stone-breaker, and a man who drove a cart
with a paraffin barrel at the back of it.  They were nearly home
when the worst thing of all happened.  Turning a corner suddenly
they came upon two vans, a tent, and a company of gipsies encamped
by the side of the road.  The vans were hung all round with wicker
chairs and cradles, and flower-stands and feather brushes.  A lot
of ragged children were industriously making dust-pies in the road,
two men lay on the grass smoking, and three women were doing the
family washing in an old red watering-can with the top broken off.

In a moment all the gipsies, men, women, and children, surrounded
Anthea and the Baby.

'Let me hold him, little lady,' said one of the gipsy women, who
had a mahogany-coloured face and dust-coloured hair; 'I won't hurt
a hair of his head, the little picture!'

'I'd rather not,' said Anthea.

'Let me have him,' said the other woman, whose face was also of the
hue of mahogany, and her hair jet-black, in greasy curls.  'I've
nineteen of my own, so I have.'

'No,' said Anthea bravely, but her heart beat so that it nearly
choked her.

Then one of the men pushed forward.

'Swelp me if it ain't!' he cried, 'my own long-lost cheild!  Have
he a strawberry mark on his left ear?  No?  Then he's my own babby,
stolen from me in hinnocent hinfancy.  'And 'im over - and we'll
not 'ave the law on yer this time.'

He snatched the Baby from Anthea, who turned scarlet and burst into
tears of pure rage.

The others were standing quite still; this was much the most
terrible thing that had ever happened to them.  Even being taken up
by the police in Rochester was nothing to this.  Cyril was quite
white, and his hands trembled a little, but he made a sign to the
others to shut up.  He was silent a minute, thinking hard.  Then he
said:

'We don't want to keep him if he's yours.  But you see he's used to
us.  You shall have him if you want him.'

'No, no!' cried Anthea - and Cyril glared at her.

'Of course we want him,' said the women, trying to get the Baby out
of the man's arms.  The Lamb howled loudly.

'Oh, he's hurt!' shrieked Anthea; and Cyril, in a savage undertone,
bade her 'Stow it!'

'You trust to me,' he whispered.  'Look here,' he went on, 'he's
awfully tiresome with people he doesn't know very well.  Suppose we
stay here a bit till he gets used to you, and then when it's
bedtime I give you my word of honour we'll go away and let you keep
him if you want to.  And then when we're gone you can decide which
of you is to have him, as you all want him so much.'

'That's fair enough,' said the man who was holding the Baby, trying
to loosen the red neckerchief which the Lamb had caught hold of and
drawn round his mahogany throat so tight that he could hardly
breathe.  The gipsies whispered together, and Cyril took the chance
to whisper too.  He said, 'Sunset! we'll get away then.'

And then his brothers and sisters were filled with wonder and
admiration at his having been so clever as to remember this.

'Oh, do let him come to us!' said Jane.  'See we'll sit down here
and take care of him for you till he gets used to you.'

'What about dinner?' said Robert suddenly.  The others looked at
him with scorn.  'Fancy bothering about your beastly dinner when
your br - I mean when the Baby' - Jane whispered hotly.  Robert
carefully winked at her and went on:

'You won't mind my just running home to get our dinner?' he said to
the gipsy; 'I can bring it out here in a basket.'

His brother and sisters felt themselves very noble, and despised
him.  They did not know his thoughtful secret intention.  But the
gipsies did in a minute.
'Oh yes!' they said; 'and then fetch the police with a pack of lies
about it being your baby instead of ours!  D'jever catch a weasel
asleep?' they asked.

'If you're hungry you can pick a bit along of us,' said the
light-haired gipsy woman, not unkindly.  'Here, Levi, that blessed
kid'll howl all his buttons off.  Give him to the little lady, and
let's see if they can't get him used to us a bit.'

So the Lamb was handed back; but the gipsies crowded so closely
that he could not possibly stop howling.  Then the man with the red
handkerchief said:

'Here, Pharaoh, make up the fire; and you girls see to the pot.
Give the kid a chanst.'  So the gipsies, very much against their
will, went off to their work, and the children and the Lamb were
left sitting on the grass.

'He'll be all right at sunset,'Jane whispered.  'But, oh, it is
awful!  Suppose they are frightfully angry when they come to their
senses!  They might beat us, or leave us tied to trees, or
something.'

'No, they won't,' Anthea said.  ('Oh, my Lamb, don't cry any more,
it's all right, Panty's got oo, duckie!) They aren't unkind people,
or they wouldn't be going to give us any dinner.'

'Dinner?' said Robert.  'I won't touch their nasty dinner.  It
would choke me!'

The others thought so too then.  But when the dinner was ready - it
turned out to be supper, and happened between four and five - they
were all glad enough to take what they could get.  It was boiled
rabbit, with onions, and some bird rather like a chicken, but
stringier about its legs and with a stronger taste.  The Lamb had
bread soaked in hot water and brown sugar sprinkled on the top.  He
liked this very much, and consented to let the two gipsy women feed
him with it, as he sat on Anthea's lap.  All that long hot
afternoon Robert and Cyril and Anthea and Jane had to keep the Lamb
amused and happy, while the gipsies looked eagerly on.  By the time
the shadows grew long and black across the meadows he had really
'taken to' the woman with the light hair, and even consented to
kiss his hand to the children, and to stand up and bow, with his
hand on his chest - 'like a gentleman' - to the two men.  The whole
gipsy camp was in raptures with him, and his brothers and sisters
could not help taking some pleasure in showing off his
accomplishments to an audience so interested and enthusiastic.  But
they longed for sunset.

'We're getting into the habit of longing for sunset,' Cyril
whispered.  'How I do wish we could wish something really sensible,
that would be of some use, so that we should be quite sorry when
sunset came.'

The shadows got longer and longer, and at last there were no
separate shadows any more, but one soft glowing shadow over
everything; for the sun was out of sight - behind the hill - but he
had not really set yet.  The people who make the laws about
lighting bicycle lamps are the people who decide when the sun sets;
he has to do it, too, to the minute, or they would know the reason
why!

But the gipsies were getting impatient.
