
After the prisoners had left the dock, Captain Dave went up to the
officer.

"I believe," he said, "that the boy has not voluntarily taken part in
these robberies, but has been led away, or perhaps obliged by threats
to take part in them; he may be able to give you some assistance, for
maybe these men are not the only persons to whom the stolen goods
have been sold, and he may be able to put you on the track of other
receivers."

"The matter is out of my hands now," the officer said, "but I will
represent what you say in the proper quarter; and now you had better
come round with me; you may be able to pick out some of your
property. We only made a seizure of the place an hour ago. I had all
the men who came in on duty this morning to take a look at the
prisoners. Fortunately two or three of them recognised Marner, and
you may guess we lost no time in getting a search warrant and going
down to his place. It is the most important capture we have made for
some time, and may lead to the discovery of other robberies that have
been puzzling us for months past. There is a gang known as the Black
Gang, but we have never been able to lay hands on any of their
leaders, and such fellows as have been captured have refused to say a
word, and have denied all knowledge of it. There have been a number
of robberies of a mysterious kind, none of which have we been able to
trace, and they have been put down to the same gang. The Chief
Constable is waiting for me there, and we shall make a thorough
search of the premises, and it is like enough we shall come across
some clue of importance. At any rate, if we can find some of the
articles stolen in the robberies I am speaking of, it will be a
strong proof that Marner is one of the chiefs of the gang, and that
may lead to further discoveries."

"You had better come with us, John," Captain Dave said. "You know our
goods better than I do myself. Will you come, Cyril?"

"I should be of no use in identifying the goods, sir, and I am due in
half an hour at one of my shops."

The search was an exhaustive one. There was no appearance of an
underground cellar, but on some of the boards of the shop being taken
up, it was found that there was a large one extending over the whole
house. This contained an immense variety of goods. In one corner was
a pile of copper bolts that Captain Dave and John were able to claim
at once, as they bore the brand of the maker from whom they obtained
their stock. There were boxes of copper and brass ship and house
fittings, and a very large quantity of rope, principally of the sizes
in which the stock had been found deficient; but to these Captain
Dave was unable to swear. In addition to these articles the cellar
contained a number of chests, all of which were found to be filled
with miscellaneous articles of wearing apparel--rolls of silk,
velvet, cloth, and other materials--curtains, watches, clocks,
ornaments of all kinds, and a considerable amount of plate. As among
these were many articles which answered to the descriptions given of
goods that had been stolen from country houses, the whole were
impounded by the Chief Constable, and carried away in carts. The
upper part of the house was carefully searched, the walls tapped,
wainscotting pulled down, and the floors carefully examined. Several
hiding-places were found, but nothing of any importance discovered in
them.

"I should advise you," the Chief Constable said to Captain Dave, "to
put in a claim for every article corresponding with those you have
lost. Of course, if anyone else comes forward and also puts in a
claim, the matter will have to be gone into, and if neither of you
can absolutely swear to the things, I suppose you will have to settle
it somehow between you. If no one else claims them, you will get them
all without question, for you can swear that, to the best of your
knowledge and belief, they are yours, and bring samples of your own
goods to show that they exactly correspond with them. I have no doubt
that a good deal of the readily saleable stuff, such as ropes, brass
sheaves for blocks, and things of that sort, will have been sold, but
as it is clear that there is a good deal of your stuff in the stock
found below, I hope your loss will not be very great. There is no
doubt it has been a splendid find for us. It is likely enough that we
shall discover among those boxes goods that have been obtained from a
score of robberies in London, and likely enough in the country. We
have arrested three men we found in the place, and two women, and may
get from some of them information that will enable us to lay hands on
some of the others concerned in these robberies."




CHAPTER V

KIDNAPPED


That afternoon Captain Dave went down to the Bridewell, and had an
interview with Tom Frost, in the presence of the Master of the
prison.

"Well, Tom, I never expected to have to come to see you in a place
like this."

"I am glad I am here, master," the boy said earnestly, with tears in
his eyes. "I don't mind if they hang me; I would rather anything than
go on as I have been doing. I knew it must come, and whenever I heard
anyone walk into the shop I made sure it was a constable. I am ready
to tell everything, master; I know I deserve whatever I shall get,
but that won't hurt me half as much as it has done, having to go on
living in the house with you, and knowing I was helping to rob you
all along."

"Anything that you say must be taken down," the officer said; "and I
can't promise that it will make any difference in your sentence."

"I do not care anything about that; I am going to tell the truth."

"Very well, then, I will take down anything you say. But wait a
minute."

He went to the door of the room and called.

"Is the Chief Constable in?" he asked a man who came up. "If he is,
ask him to step here."

A minute later the Chief Constable came in.

"This prisoner wishes to make a confession, Master Holmes. I thought
it best that you should be here. You can hear what he says then, and
it may help you in your inquiry. Besides, you may think of questions
on points he may not mention; he understands that he is speaking
entirely of his own free will, and that I have given him no promise
whatever that his so doing will alter his sentence, although no doubt
it will be taken into consideration."

"Quite so," the constable said. "This is not a case where one
prisoner would be ordinarily permitted to turn King's evidence
against the others, because, as they were caught in the act, no such
evidence is necessary. We know all about how the thing was done, and
who did it."

"I want to tell how I first came to rob my master," the boy said. "I
never thought of robbing him. When I came up to London, my father
said to me, 'Whatever you do, Tom, be honest. They say there are
rogues up in London; don't you have anything to do with them.' One
evening, about a year ago I went out with Robert, and we went to a
shop near the wall at Aldgate. I had never been there before, but
Robert knew the master, who was the old man that was taken in the
lane. Robert said the man was a relation of his father's, and had
been kind to him. We sat down and talked for a time, and then Robert,
who was sitting close to me, moved for something, and put his hand
against my pocket.

"'Hullo!' he said; 'what have you got there?'

"'Nothing,' I said.

"'Oh, haven't you?' and he put his hand in my pocket, and brought out
ten guineas. 'Hullo!' he said; 'where did you get these? You told me
yesterday you had not got a groat. Why, you young villain, you must
have been robbing the till!'

"I was so frightened that I could not say anything, except that I did
not know how they came there and I could swear that I had not touched
the till. I was too frightened to think then, but I have since
thought that the guineas were never in my pocket at all, but were in
Robert's hand.

"'That won't do, boy,' the man said. 'It is clear that you are a
thief. I saw Robert take them from your pocket, and, as an honest
man, it is my duty to take you to your master and tell him what sort
of an apprentice he has. You are young, and you will get off with a
whipping at the pillory, and that will teach you that honesty is the
best policy.'

"So he got his hat and put it on, and took me by the collar as if to
haul me out into the street. I went down on my knees to beg for
mercy, and at last he said that he would keep the matter quiet if I
would swear to do everything that Robert told me; and I was so
frightened that I swore to do so.

"For a bit there wasn't any stealing, but Robert used to take me out
over the roof, and we used to go out together and go to places where
there were two or three men, and they gave us wine. Then Robert
proposed that we should have a look through the warehouse. I did not
know what he meant, but as we went through he filled his pockets with
things and told me to take some too. I said I would not. Then he
threatened to raise the alarm, and said that when Captain Dave came
down he should say he heard me get up to come down by the rope on to
the warehouse, and that he had followed me to see what I was doing,
and had found me in the act of taking goods, and that, as he had
before caught me with money stolen from the till, as a friend of his
could testify, he felt that it was his duty to summon you at once. I
know I ought to have refused, and to have let him call you down, but
I was too frightened. At last I agreed to do what he told me, and
ever since then we have been robbing you."

"What have you done with the money you got for the things?" the
constable asked.

"I had a groat sometimes," the boy said, "but that is all. Robert
said first that I should have a share, but I said I would have
nothing to do with it. I did as he ordered me because I could not
help it. Though I have taken a groat or two sometimes, that is all I
have had."

"Do you know anything about how much Robert had?"

"No, sir; I never saw him paid any money. I supposed that he had some
because he has said sometimes he should set up a shop for himself,
down at some seaport town, when he was out of his apprenticeship; but
I have never seen him with any money beyond a little silver. I don't
know what he used to do when we had given the things to the men that
met us in the lane. I used always to come straight back to bed, but
generally he went out with them. I used to fasten the gate after him,
and he got back over the wall by a rope. Most times he didn't come in
till a little before daybreak."

"Were they always the same men that met you in the lane?"

"No, sir. The master of the shop was very seldom there. The big man
has come for the last three or four months, and there were two other
men. They used to be waiting for us together until the big man came,
but since then one or other of them came with him, except when the
master of the shop was there himself."

"Describe them to me."

The boy described them as well as he could.

"Could you swear to them if you saw them?"

"I think so. Of course, sometimes it was moonlight, and I could see
their faces well; and besides, the light of the lantern often fell
upon their faces."

The constable nodded.

"The descriptions answer exactly," he said to Captain Dave, "to the
two men we found in the shop. The place was evidently the
headquarters of a gang of thieves."

"Please, sir," the boy said, "would you have me shut up in another
place? I am afraid of being with the others. They have sworn they
will kill me if I say a word, and when I get back they will ask me
who I have seen and what I have said."

Captain Dave took the other two men aside.

"Could you not let the boy come home with me?" he said. "I believe
his story is a true one. He has been terrified into helping that
rascal, Robert Ashford. Of course he himself was of no good to them,
but they were obliged to force him into it, as otherwise he would
have found out Robert's absences and might have reported them to me.
I will give what bail you like, and will undertake to produce him
whenever he is required."

"I could not do that myself," the constable said, "but I will go
round to the Court now with the boy's confession, and I have no doubt
the Alderman will let him go. But let me give you a word of advice:
don't let him stir out of the house after dark. We have no doubt that
there is a big gang concerned in this robbery, and the others of
which we found the booty at the receiver's. They would not know how
much this boy could tell about them, but if he went back to you they
would guess that he had peached. If he went out after dark, the
chances would be against his ever coming back again. No, now I think
of it, I am sure you had better let him stay where he is. The Master
will put him apart from the others, and make him comfortable. You
see, at present we have no clue as to the men concerned in the
robberies. You may be sure that they are watching every move on our
part, and if they knew that this boy was out, they might take the
alarm and make off."

"Well, if you think so, I will leave him here."

"I am sure that it would be the best plan."

"You will make him comfortable, Master Holroyd?"

"Yes; you need not worry about him, Captain Dowsett."

They then turned to the boy.

"You will be moved away from the others, Tom," Captain Dave said,
"and Mr. Holroyd has promised to make you comfortable."

"Oh, Captain Dave," the boy burst out, "will you forgive me? I don't
mind being punished, but if you knew how awfully miserable I have
been all this time, knowing that I was robbing you while you were so
kind to me, I think you would forgive me."

"I forgive you, Tom," Captain Dave said, putting his hand on the
boy's shoulder. "I hope that this will be a lesson to you, all your
life. You see all this has come upon you because you were a coward.
If you had been a brave lad you would have said, 'Take me to my
master.' You might have been sure that I would have heard your story
as well as theirs, and I don't think I should have decided against
you under the circumstances. It was only your word against Robert's;
and his taking you to this man's, and finding the money in your
pocket in so unlikely a way, would certainly have caused me to have
suspicions. There is nothing so bad as cowardice; it is the father of
all faults. A coward is certain to be a liar, for he will not
hesitate to tell any falsehood to shelter him from the consequences
of a fault. In your case, you see, cowardice has made you a thief;
and in some cases it might drive a man to commit a murder. However,
lad, I forgive you freely. You have been weak, and your weakness has
made you a criminal; but it has been against your own will. When all
this is over, I will see what can be done for you. You may live to be
an honest man and a good citizen yet."

Two days later Cyril was returning home late in the evening after
being engaged longer than usual in making up a number of accounts for
one of his customers. He had come through Leadenhall Street, and had
entered the lane where the capture of the thieves had been made, when
he heard a footstep behind him. He turned half round to see who was
following him, when he received a tremendous blow on the head which
struck him senseless to the ground.

After a time he was dimly conscious that he was being carried along.
He was unable to move; there was something in his mouth that
prevented him from calling out, and his head was muffled in a cloak.
He felt too weak and confused to struggle. A minute later he heard a
voice, that sounded below him, say,--

"Have you got him?"

"I have got him all right," was the answer of the man who was
carrying him.

Then he felt that he was being carried down some stairs.

Someone took him, and he was thrown roughly down; then there was a
slight rattling noise, followed by a regular sound. He wondered
vaguely what it was, but as his senses came back it flashed upon him;
it was the sound of oars; he was in a boat. It was some time before
he could think why he should be in a boat. He had doubtless been
carried off by some of the friends of the prisoners', partly,
perhaps, to prevent his giving evidence against them, partly from
revenge for the part he had played in the discovery of the crime.

In a few minutes the sound of oars ceased, and there was a bump as
the boat struck against something hard. Then he was lifted up, and
someone took hold of him from above. He was carried a few steps and
roughly thrust in somewhere. There was a sound of something heavy
being thrown down above him, and then for a long time he knew nothing
more.

When he became conscious again, he was able, as he lay there, to come
to a distinct conclusion as to where he was. He had been kidnapped,
carried off, taken out in a boat to some craft anchored in the river,
and was now in the hold. He felt almost suffocated. The wrap round
his head prevented his breathing freely, the gag in his mouth pressed
on his tongue, and gave him severe pain, while his head ached acutely
from the effects of the blow.

The first thing to do was, if possible, to free his hands, so as to
relieve himself from the gag and muffling. An effort or two soon
showed him that he was but loosely bound. Doubtless the man who had
attacked him had not wasted much time in securing his arms, believing
that the blow would be sufficient to keep him quiet until he was safe
on board ship. It was, therefore, without much difficulty that he
managed to free one of his hands, and it was then an easy task to get
rid of the rope altogether. The cloak was pulled from his face, and,
feeling for his knife, he cut the lashings of the gag and removed it
from his mouth. He lay quiet for a few minutes, panting from his
exhaustion. Putting up his hand he felt a beam about a foot above his
body. He was, then, in a hold already stored with cargo. The next
thing was to shift his position among the barrels and bales upon
which he was lying, until he found a comparatively level spot. He was
in too great pain to think of sleep; his head throbbed fiercely, and
he suffered from intense thirst.

From time to time heavy footsteps passed overhead. Presently he heard
a sudden rattling of blocks, and the flapping of a sail. Then he
noticed that there was a slight change in the level of his position,
and knew that the craft was under way on her voyage down the river.

It seemed an immense time to him before he saw a faint gleam of
light, and edging himself along, found himself again under the
hatchway, through a crack in which the light was shining. It was some
hours before the hatch was lifted off, and he saw two men looking
down.

"Water!" he said. "I am dying of thirst."

"Bring a pannikin of water," one of the men said, "but first give us
a hand, and we will have him on deck."

Stooping down, they took Cyril by the shoulders and hoisted him out.

"He is a decent-looking young chap," the speaker went on. "I would
have seen to him before, if I had known him to be so bad. Those
fellows didn't tell us they had hurt him. Here is the water, young
fellow. Can you sit up to drink it?"

Cyril sat up and drank off the contents of the pannikin.

"Why, the back of your head is all covered with blood!" the man who
had before spoken said. "You must have had an ugly knock?"

"I don't care so much for that," Cyril replied. "It's the gag that
hurt me. My tongue is so much swollen I can hardly speak."

"Well, you can stay here on deck if you will give me your promise not
to hail any craft we may pass. If you won't do that I must put you
down under hatches again."

"I will promise that willingly," Cyril said; "the more so that I can
scarce speak above a whisper."

"Mind, if you as much as wave a hand, or do anything to bring an eye
on us, down you go into the hold again, and when you come up next
time it will be to go overboard. Now just put your head over the
rail, and I will pour a few buckets of water over it. I agreed to get
you out of the way, but I have got no grudge against you, and don't
want to do you harm."

Getting a bucket with a rope tied to the handle, he dipped it into
the river, and poured half-a-dozen pailfuls over Cyril's head. The
lad felt greatly refreshed, and, sitting down on the deck, was able
to look round. The craft was a coaster of about twenty tons burden.
There were three men on deck besides the man who had spoken to him,
and who was evidently the skipper. Besides these a boy occasionally
put up his head from a hatchway forward. There was a pile of barrels
and empty baskets amidship, and the men presently began to wash down
the decks and to tidy up the ropes and gear lying about. The shore on
both sides was flat, and Cyril was surprised at the width of the
river. Behind them was a small town, standing on higher ground.

"What place is that?" he asked a sailor who passed near him.

"That is Gravesend."

A few minutes afterwards the boy again put his head out of the
hatchway and shouted,--

"Breakfast!"

"Can you eat anything, youngster?" the skipper asked Cyril.

"No, thank you, my head aches too much; and my mouth is so sore I am
sure I could not get anything down."

"Well, you had best lie down, then, with your head on that coil of
rope; I allow you did not sleep much last night."

In a few minutes Cyril was sound asleep, and when he awoke the sun
was setting.

"You have had a good bout of it, lad," the skipper said, as he raised
himself on his elbow and looked round. "How are you feeling now?"

"A great deal better," Cyril said, as he rose to his feet.

"Supper will be ready in a few minutes, and if you can manage to get
a bit down it will do you good."

"I will try, anyhow," Cyril said. "I think that I feel hungry."

The land was now but a faint line on either hand. A gentle breeze was
blowing from the south-west, and the craft was running along over the
smooth water at the rate of three or four miles an hour. Cyril
wondered where he was being taken to, and what was going to be done
with him, but determined to ask no questions. The skipper was
evidently a kind-hearted man, although he might be engaged in lawless
business, but it was as well to wait until he chose to open the
subject.

As soon as the boy hailed, the captain led the way to the hatchway.
They descended a short ladder into the fo'castle, which was low, but
roomy. Supper consisted of boiled skate--a fish Cyril had never
tasted before--oaten bread, and beer. His mouth was still sore, but
he managed to make a hearty meal of fish, though he could not manage
the hard bread. One of the men was engaged at the helm, but the other
two shared the meal, all being seated on lockers that ran round the
cabin. The fish were placed on an earthenware dish, each man cutting
off slices with his jack-knife, and using his bread as a platter.
Little was said while the meal went on; but when they went on deck
again, the skipper, having put another man at the tiller, while the
man released went forward to get his supper, said,--

"Well, I think you are in luck, lad."

Cyril opened his eyes in surprise.

"You don't think so?" the man went on. "I don't mean that you are in
luck in being knocked about and carried off, but that you are not
floating down the river at present instead of walking the deck here.
I can only suppose that they thought your body might be picked up,
and that it would go all the harder with the prisoners, if it were
proved that you had been put out of the way. You don't look like an
informer either!"

"I am not an informer," Cyril said indignantly. "I found that my
employer was being robbed, and I aided him to catch the thieves. I
don't call that informing. That is when a man betrays others engaged
in the same work as himself."

"Well, well, it makes no difference to me," the skipper said. "I was
engaged by a man, with whom I do business sometimes, to take a fellow
who had been troublesome out of the way, and to see that he did not
come back again for some time. I bargained that there was to be no
