The terrified animals literally pushed the leaders over the rocks and
then tumbled upon them. In a little while the gully or stream would be
choked with the furiously struggling creatures and hundreds would be
killed within a few minutes.

The bison is as fond as the hog of wallowing in mud. When he comes upon
a marshy spot he lies down and rolls about until he has worn out a large
and shallow excavation into which the water oozes through the damp soil.
Lying down again he rolls and turns until he is plastered from head
to tail with mud. Though it cannot be said that it adds to his
attractiveness, yet the coating no doubt serves well as a protection
against the swarms of insects, which are sometimes terrible enough to
sting animals to death.

Those who have viewed the scraggy specimens in the menageries and
zoological gardens would scarcely suspect the activity and power of
running possessed by them. The body is covered with such an abundance
of hair that it looks larger than it really is, while the legs appear
smaller. But the bison not only can run swiftly, but possesses great
endurance. They will often dash at full speed over ground so rough that
the more graceful horse will stumble.

When wounded by the hunters, a bull will sometimes turn in desperation
on his persecutor. Then, unless the horse is well trained, serious
consequences are likely to follow. The plunging thrust of his stumpy
horns perhaps rips open the steed, sending the rider flying over the
back of the furious bison, who may turn upon him and slay him before he
can escape.

This rarely happens, however, the bison being a huge, cowardly creature
which prefers to run rather than fight, and a hunt of the game in these
days often takes the character of wholesale butchery in which no true
sportsman would engage.



CHAPTER XIV.


 A Strange Occurrence--Arrival of Friends--Carson Joins a Large
 Company--Trapping on the Yellowstone--The Blackfeet--A Dreadful
 Scourge--In Winter Quarters--The Friendly Crow Indians--Loss of Two
 Trappers--On the Head Waters of the Missouri.

A singular occurrence took place a few nights after the return of Carson
and his friends from an extended bison hunt. Their horses and mules were
corralled near the post and a sentinel was on duty at all hours of the
night to prevent the animals being stolen by the Indians who were always
prowling through the neighborhood.

In the dim uncertain light, just beyond midnight, the sentinel saw two
men walk forward from the darkness, and without any appearance of haste,
let down the bars and drive out the stock. Very naturally he concluded
they were his friends who intended to take out the animals to graze. As
there was nothing more for him to do, he sought his quarters, lay down
and went to sleep.

In the morning not a horse or a mule was to be found. The two
individuals who had let down the bars and driven them out, were
Blackfeet Indians, whose complete success was due to their amazing
audacity. Had they shown any hesitation or haste, the suspicions of the
sentinel would have been aroused, but when the truth became known, he
was the most astonished man at the fort.

The hunters were in a most sorry plight, for the Blackfeet having made
a clean sweep, they were without the means of pursuing and recovering
their property. The parties who belonged at the fort had suffered a
somewhat similar trick a short time before from the same tribe, so that
only a few rickety horses remained in their possession.

Under the circumstances, the trappers were compelled to accept their
misfortune with grim philosophy, and await the arrival of the rest
of the party, who had promised to rejoin them after completing their
business at Fort Walla Walla.

Sure enough, a few weeks later, their friends appeared and
providentially indeed they brought with them an extra supply of
excellent horses. The trappers were in overflowing spirits once more and
soon started for the general rendezvous on Green River.

Other trappers continued to arrive for a number of days, until about all
that were expected had come in. Trade and barter then began and lasted
some three weeks. The scene was picturesque and stirring and there was
much hand shaking and pleasant wishes when the time came to separate.

Kit Carson left the employ of the Hudson Bay Company trader and attached
himself to a party numbering fully a hundred who had determined to
trap along the Yellowstone. It will be recalled that Carson once quit a
company of trappers because it was too large, and it may be wondered why
he should join one that was still more numerous. The reason he did
so was because they were going into the very heart of the Blackfoot
country. They had suffered so much from these daring marauders that
they knew there would be no safety unless they went in strong force.
Furthermore, the whites had so many old scores to settle with those
redskins that they meant to invite attack from them. If the Blackfeet
would only offer the opportunity for battle, the trappers meant to give
them their fill.

The formidable company arranged matters according to a system. Dividing
into two equal parties, the duty of one was made to trap beaver, while
the other furnished food and guarded the property. By this means,
they would always be in shape to meet their sworn foes, while the real
business which brought them into the country would not be neglected.

The hunters were confident they would not be left alone very long. The
Blackfeet would resent the invasion of their hunting grounds, and to say
the least, would take measures to prevent the time hanging heavily on
the hands of the pale faces.

But, to the astonishment of the trappers, the days passed without
bringing a glimpse of the savages. No hostile shot awoke the impressive
stillness of the wilderness. Could it be the Blackfeet were seeking to
throw the whites off their guard? Did they expect to induce a degree of
carelessness that would enable the Blackfeet to gather their warriors
and overwhelm them before they could reply?

It was not reasonable to suppose that the sagacious tribe held any such
belief, for they could not have failed to know that any such hope was
idle.

But the explanation came one day by a party of friendly Crow Indians,
who stated that the small pox was raging with such awful virulence among
the Blackfeet that they were dying by hundreds and thousands. Indeed,
the havoc was so dreadful that there was reason to believe the whole
tribe would be swept away.

It would not be the first time that such an annihilation has taken place
among the American Indians. The treatment required by that frightful
disease is precisely the opposite of that which the red man in his
ignorance pursues. When small pox breaks out among them, therefore, the
mortality becomes appalling.

The Crow Indians affiliated with the trappers and guided them to a
secluded valley, where they established themselves for the winter. The
lodges were made strong and substantial, and it was fortunate that such
precautions were taken, for the winter proved one of the severest known
for many years. With their abundance of fuel, they kept enormous fires
going and passed the days and nights in comparative comfort.

But it was far different with their stock. During the severe weather,
the only food that could be obtained was the bark of the cottonwood.
The inner lining of this is quite palatable to animals and in cases of
extremity it affords temporary sustenance to men. With its help actual
starvation was kept away, though it came very close.

Unusual weather always brings unusual experience, and the intense cold
developed an annoyance to the trappers upon which they had not counted.
The difficulty of finding food was felt by the wild animals as well
as domestic, and the bisons became desperate. When they saw the horses
eating their fodder, they rushed forward and with lowered heads drove
them away. If a horse or mule refused, he was likely to be gored to
death.

The beasts finally became so numerous and fierce they would have killed
all the stock of our friends if they had not kindled large fires and
mounted constant guard. When the weather moderated those annoyances
ended.

Had any explorer of the west found his way to the secluded valley
where the trappers were in winter quarters, he would have looked upon
a striking scene. The Crow Indians and white men engaged in numerous
athletic sports in friendly rivalry. They maintained the best of terms,
and when the bisons departed, the strange community enjoyed themselves
far better than would be supposed. In truth where they were favored with
such rugged health and where they had plenty of food and comfortable
quarters, it would have been remarkable had they not been comparatively
happy. They were not disturbed by political discussions or diversity of
views on any public questions and were satisfied that the glorious Union
was safe without any worriment on their part.

When spring came, two of their party were sent to Fort Laramie to
procure needed supplies. They went off well mounted and armed and
were never heard of again. Somewhere in the recesses of the forest or
mountain, the Blackfeet had probably killed them as they had done with
many a brave man before, and as they have done with multitudes since.

When it became certain the messengers had been slain, the company
began the spring hunt without them. After trapping a brief while on the
Yellowstone, they worked their way to the head waters of the Missouri.
They met with fair success and while engaged in that section, learned
that the reports of the ravages of the small pox among the Blackfeet had
been greatly exaggerated. Instead of being decimated, the tribe had
not suffered to any serious extent and were as strong and aggressive as
ever.

The trappers were not displeased to learn that such was the case,
for they desired a settlement of accounts with them. Under such
circumstances it was impossible that hostilities should be long delayed.



CHAPTER XV.


 A Fierce Battle with the Blackfeet--Daring Act of Kit Carson--Arrival of
 the Reserves and End of the Battle.

When near the head waters of the Missouri, the trappers discovered they
were approaching the principal village of the Blackfeet. They determined
to attack and punish the Indians who had caused them so much trouble
and suffering; but the whites were so numerous and powerful that extreme
care was necessary to prevent their presence becoming known.

When a number of miles from the village, the trappers came to a halt,
and Kit Carson with several men was sent forward to reconnoitre. With
extreme caution they made their way to a point from which they could
overlook the village.

A glance showed the Indians hurriedly making ready to move elsewhere.
The shrewd red men had discovered their danger before their enemies
caught sight of them. Carson galloped back as rapidly as he could, and
made known what had been seen. A council was hastily called and about
half the company advanced to give the Blackfeet battle. Kit Carson, as
might be supposed, was made the leader. The others were to guard the
property, advance slowly and act as reserve, which could be hurried
forward should it become necessary.

As agreed upon, Kit Carson galloped ahead, and the moment his men came
in sight of the village, they dashed through it, killing a number
of warriors. The others slowly fell back, fighting as they went, and
without showing the least panic. They received charge after charge of
the white men, with the steadiness of veterans. By and by the eagerness
of the trappers reduced their ammunition and their firing became less
destructive. The Blackfeet were quick to perceive the cause, and in turn
they charged upon their assailants who became immediately involved in
a desperate hand to hand fight. It was then the small arms in the
possession of the whites played their part. They were used with such
effect, that the fierce warriors were compelled once more to retreat.

But the courageous red men recoiled a short distance only, when they
halted and then, with exultant yells, dashed toward the trappers, who
despite all they could do, were forced back until it looked as if the
whole party would be overwhelmed and destroyed.

On this retreat, one of the horses belonging to the hunters was shot,
and plunged to the ground so suddenly that his rider was caught before
he could spring from the saddle. Several of the warriors were quick to
perceive his sore straits, and dashed toward him, eager to secure his
scalp. The poor fellow struggled desperately, but could not extricate
himself, and his expression of horrified despair when he perceived the
fierce red men running a race with each other to reach him, would have
melted the heart of almost any one.

Carson was several rods distant, but seeing the danger of his friend,
he bounded out of his saddle, and shouted to the others to rally to the
defence of their imperilled comrade. Kit raised his rifle while on the
run and shot the leading warrior dead. The other whites were so close
behind that the remaining Blackfeet whirled and ran for their lives.
Several of them were shot down before they could reach the shelter of
the rocks from behind which they sprang after the fallen white man.

Carson's devotion to his friend now placed him in an unpleasant if not
dangerous situation. His steed being without restraint, galloped off
beyond his reach, and the commander was thus left on foot, when there
was urgent need that he should be mounted.

Meanwhile the mountaineer who was caught under the body of his horse,
was struggling desperately to withdraw his imprisoned leg, for there was
no saying when the Blackfeet would be upon him again. He succeeded at
last, and, standing upon his feet, shook himself together, as may be
said, and he found that though pretty badly bruised, no bones were
broken, and he was able to do his full part in the serious duty before
him.

The exciting episode benefited the trappers in one respect: it served to
check the seemingly resistless rush of the Blackfeet and gave the others
a chance to rally and fix upon some course of action.

Carson ran rapidly toward the nearest horseman and sprang upon the back
of his animal behind him. The steed was forced to his best and speedily
joined the main body a short distance off. It was fortunate that just at
that moment there came a lull in the furious fighting, else Carson could
scarcely have escaped so well. The runaway horse was pursued by one
of the mountaineers who finally cornered and brought him back to their
leader.

The Blackfeet did not follow the whites, nor did the latter return to
their charge against them. Both parties had gained a thorough taste of
each other's mettle, and the conclusion reached was like that of two
trained pugilists--their strength was so nearly equal that neither could
afford to throw away his advantage by leading in the assault.

Undoubtedly Carson and his men would have withdrawn but for the hope
that the reserves were close at hand. The trappers had fought valiantly
but not more so than the Indians, who still possessed plenty ammunition
while that of the whites was nearly exhausted. Had they advanced and
encountered the warriors again, the latter would have swept everything
before them. As it was, the mountaineers were by no means safe even when
acting on the defensive. If the red men should charge upon them with
their old time fierceness, it was by no means certain they would
not destroy the whites. The fight would necessarily be of the most
sanguinary nature, but when guns and small arms were useless for lack
of ammunition, nothing short of a miracle could save them from
annihilation.

Several hours had gone and Carson and his men wondered what could delay
the reserves. Time always passes slowly to those in waiting, and to some
of the hunters the tardiness of their friends was unaccountable. Carson
was on the point of sending messengers back to hurry them forward, when
the whole party appeared and the situation changed.

But those who expected the Blackfeet to flee in panic when they observed
the doubling of the assailing forces, were much mistaken. The feeling
among the Indians could not be described as in the least "panicky."
They quietly surveyed the new arrivals and prepared with the coolness
of veterans for the conflict that was sure to come, within the next few
minutes.

The powder was distributed among the trappers, who were more eager than
ever to attack their old enemies, who were as ready as they for the
conflict. Nearly two hundred yards separated the combatants, when
the mountaineers, leaving their horses behind, advanced on foot. The
Blackfeet stationed themselves behind rocks and trees and defiantly
awaited the attack.

In a few minutes the most savage fight of the day was raging. A hundred
rifles were flashing in every direction and the yells of the red men
mingled with the shouts of the excited mountaineers.

As the warriors had used every means to shelter themselves, it was
necessary to dislodge them before they could be driven back. Without
remaining together in a compact mass, the trappers made for them with
the fierceness of tigers.

The result of this charge were a number of remarkable combats. A hunter
would dash at a warrior crouching behind some rock, and the two would
begin dodging, advancing, retreating, firing, striking and manoeuvering
against each other. Sometimes one would succeed and sometimes the other.
The Blackfoot, finding the situation becoming too hot, would break
for other cover and probably would be shot on the run or would escape
altogether. Again, it would be the white man who would be just a second
too late in discharging his gun and would pay the penalty with his life.

At last the Indians began falling back and the mountaineers pushing them
hard, they finally broke and fled in a wild panic, leaving many dead
