It'll throw them into a nice light perspiration and they'll drop
off and sleep like tops." And they did it, and before they had
finished, the whole lot of them were perspiring gently and snoring
as softly as lambs.

When they went back to Racketty-Packetty House they talked a good
deal about Cynthia and wondered and wondered why she had left her
scarlet fever so suddenly. And at last Ridiklis made up her mind to
tell them something she had heard.

"The Duchess told me," she said, rather slowly because it was bad
news--"The Duchess said that Cynthia went away because her Mama
had sent for her--and her Mama had sent for her to tell her that a
little girl princess is coming to see her to-morrow. Cynthia's
Mama used to be a maid of honor to the Queen and that's why the
little girl Princess is coming. The Duchess said--" and here
Ridiklis spoke very slowly indeed, "that the nurse was so excited
she said she did not know whether she stood on her head or her
heels, and she must tidy up the nursery and have that Racketty-Packetty
old dolls' house carried down stairs and burned, early to-morrow
morning. That's what the Duchess _said_--"

Meg and Peg and Kilmanskeg clutched at their hearts and gasped and
Gustibus groaned and Lady Patsy caught Peter Piper by the arm to
keep from falling. Peter Piper gulped--and then he had a sudden
cheerful thought.

"Perhaps she was raving in delirium," he said.

"No, she wasn't," said Ridiklis shaking her head, "I had just given
her hot water and cold, and gruel, and broth, and castor oil, and
ipecacuanha and put ice almost all over her. She was as sensible as
any of us. To-morrow morning we shall not have a house over our
heads," and she put her ragged old apron over her face and cried.

[Transcriber's Note: See picture apron.jpg]

"If she wasn't raving in delirium," said Peter Piper, "we shall not
have any heads. You had better go back to the Castle tonight,
Patsy. Racketty-Packetty House is no place for you."

Then Lady Patsy drew herself up so straight that she nearly fell
over backwards.

"I--will--_never_--leave you!" she said, and Peter Piper couldn't
make her.

You can just imagine what a doleful night it was. They went all
over the house together and looked at every hole in the carpet and
every piece of stuffing sticking out of the dear old shabby sofas,
and every broken window and chair leg and table and ragged blanket--
and the tears ran down their faces for the first time in their
lives. About six o'clock in the morning Peter Piper made a last
effort.

[Transcriber's Note: See picture together.jpg]

"Let's all join hands in a circle," he said quite faintly, "and
dance round and round once more."

But it was no use. When they joined hands they could not dance, and
when they found they could not dance they all tumbled down in a
heap and cried instead of laughing and Lady Patsy lay with her arms
round Peter Piper's neck.

Now here is where I come in again--Queen Crosspatch--who is telling
you this story. I always come in just at the nick of time when
people like the Racketty-Packettys are in trouble. I walked in at
seven o'clock.

"Get up off the floor," I said to them all and they got up and
stared at me. They actually thought I did not know what had
happened.

"A little girl Princess is coming this morning," said Peter Piper,
and our house is going to be burned over our heads. This is the end
of Racketty-Packetty House."

"No, it isn't!" I said. "You leave this to me. I told the Princess
to come here, though she doesn't know it in the least."

A whole army of my Working Fairies began to swarm in at the nursery
window. The nurse was working very hard to put things in order and
she had not sense enough to see Fairies at all. So she did not see
mine, though there were hundreds of them. As soon as she made one
corner tidy, they ran after her and made it untidy. They held her
back by her dress and hung and swung on her apron until she could
scarcely move and kept wondering why she was so slow. She could not
make the nursery tidy and she was so flurried she forgot all about
Racketty-Packetty House again--especially as my Working Fairies
pushed the arm-chair close up to it so that it was quite hidden.
And there it was when the little girl Princess came with her Ladies
in Waiting. My fairies had only just allowed the nurse to finish
the nursery.

Meg and Peg and Kilmanskeg and Ridiklis and Gustibus and Peter
Piper and Lady Patsy were huddled up together looking out of one
window. They could not bear to be parted. I sat on the arm of the
big chair and ordered my Working Fairies to stand ready to obey me
the instant I spoke.

The Princess was a nice child and was very polite to Cynthia when
she showed her all her dolls, and last but not least, Tidy Castle
itself. She looked at all the rooms and the furniture and said
polite and admiring things about each of them. But Cynthia realized
that she was not so much interested in it as she had thought she
would be. The fact was that the Princess had so many grand dolls'
houses in her palace that Tidy Castle did not surprise her at all.
It was just when Cynthia was finding this out that I gave the order
to my Working Fairies.

"Push the arm-chair away," I commanded; "very slowly, so that no
one will know it is being moved."

So they moved it away--very, very slowly and no one saw that it had
stirred. But the next minute the little girl Princess gave a
delightful start.

"Oh! what is that!" she cried out, hurrying towards the
unfashionable neighborhood behind the door.

Cynthia blushed all over and the nurse actually turned pale. The
Racketty-Packettys tumbled down in a heap beneath their window and
began to say their prayers very fast.

"It is only a shabby old doll's house, your Highness," Cynthia
stammered out. "It belonged to my Grandmamma, and it ought not to
be in the nursery. I thought you had had it burned, Nurse!"

"Burned!" the little girl Princess cried out in the most shocked
way. "Why if it was mine, I wouldn't have it burned for worlds! Oh!
please push the chair away and let me look at it. There are no
doll's houses like it anywhere in these days." And when the
arm-chair was pushed aside she scrambled down on to her knees just
as if she was not a little girl Princess at all.

"Oh! Oh! Oh!" she said. "How funny and dear! What a darling old
doll's house. It is shabby and wants mending, of course, but it is
almost exactly like one my Grandmamma had--she kept it among her
treasures and only let me look at it as a great, great treat."

Cynthia gave a gasp, for the little girl Princess's Grandmamma had
been the Queen and people had knelt down and kissed her hand and
had been obliged to go out of the room backwards before her.

