is the help you were talking about. He's only a baby. I could twist him
around my finger. Just lay down that gun, boy! It isn't meant for
children like you."




CHAPTER XII.


ESCAPE.

Though he had a weapon in his hand, many boys in Robert's situation
would have been unnerved. He was a mere boy, though strong of his age.
Opposed to him was a tall, strong man, of desperate character, fully
resolved to carry out his dishonest purpose, and not likely to shrink
from violence, to which he was probably only too well accustomed. From
the old man he was not likely to obtain assistance, for already Paul's
courage had begun to dwindle, and he regarded his nephew with a scared
look.

"Lay down that gun, boy!" repeated Ben Haley. "I know you. You're the
boy that rowed me across the river. You can row pretty well, but you're
not quite a match for me even at that."

"This gun makes me even with you," said Robert, returning his look
unflinchingly.

"Does it? Then all I can say is, that when you lose it you'll be in a
bad pickle. Lay it down instantly."

"Then lay down the gold you have in your pockets," said our hero, still
pointing his gun at Haley.

"Good boy! Brave boy!" said the old man, approvingly.

"Look here, boy," said Haley, in quick, stern tones, "I've had enough of
this nonsense. If you don't put down that gun in double quick time,
you'll repent it. One word--yes or no!"

"No," said Robert, resolutely.

No sooner had he uttered the monosyllable than Haley sprang toward him
with the design of wresting the gun from him. But Robert had his finger
upon the trigger, and fired. The bullet entered the shoulder of the
ruffian, but in the excitement of the moment he only knew that he was
hit, but this incensed him. In spite of the wound he seized the musket
and forcibly wrested it from our hero. He raised it in both hands and
would probably in his blind fury have killed him on the spot, but for
the sudden opening of the outer door, and entrance of a neighboring
farmer, who felt sufficiently intimate to enter without knocking. This
changed Haley's intention. Feeling that the odds were against him, he
sprang through the window, gun in hand, and ran with rapid strides
towards the river.

"What's the matter?" demanded the new arrival, surveying the scene
before him in astonishment.

"He's gone off with my gold," exclaimed Paul Nichols, recovering from
his stupefaction. "Run after him, catch him!"

"Who is it?"

"Ben Haley."

"What, your nephew! I thought he was dead long ago."

"I wish he had been," said Paul, wringing his hands. "He's taken all my
money--I shall die in the poorhouse."

"I can't understand how it all happened," said the neighbor, looking to
Robert for an explanation. "Who fired the gun?"

"I did," said our hero.

"Did you hit him?"

"I think so. I saw blood on his shirt. I must have hit him in the
shoulder."

"Don't stop to talk," said Paul, impatiently. "Go after him and get back
the gold."

"We can't do much," said the neighbor, evidently not very anxious to
come into conflict with such a bold ruffian. "He has the gun with him."

"What made you let him have it?" asked Paul.

"I couldn't help it," said Robert. "But he can't fire it. It is
unloaded, and I don't think he has any ammunition with him."

"To be sure," said Paul, eagerly. "You see there's no danger. Go after
him, both of you, He can't hurt ye."

Somewhat reassured the neighbor followed Robert, who at once started in
pursuit of the escaped burglar. He was still in sight, though he had
improved the time consumed in the foregoing colloquy, and was already
near the river bank. On he sped, bent on making good his escape with the
money he had dishonestly acquired. One doubt was in his mind. Should he
find a boat? If not, the river would prove an insuperable obstacle, and
he would be compelled to turn and change the direction of his flight.
Looking over his shoulder he saw Robert and the farmer on his track, and
he clutched his gun the more firmly.

"They'd better not touch me," he said to himself. "If I can't fire the
gun I can brain either or both with it."

Thoughts of crossing the stream by swimming occurred to him. A sailor by
profession, he was an expert swimmer, and the river was not wide enough
to daunt him. But his pockets were filled with the gold he had stolen,
and gold is well known to be the heaviest of all the metals. But
nevertheless he could not leave it behind since it was for this he had
incurred his present peril. In this uncertainty he reached the bank of
the river, when to his surprise and joy his eye rested upon Robert's
boat.

"The boy's boat!" he exclaimed, in exultation, "by all that's lucky! I
will take the liberty of borrowing it without leave."

He sprang in, and seizing one of the oars, pushed out into the stream,
first drawing up the anchor. When Robert and his companion reached the
shore he was already floating at a safe distance.

"He's got my boat!" exclaimed our hero, in disappointment.

"So he has!" ejaculated the other.

"You're a little too late!" shouted Ben Haley, with a sneer. "Just carry
back my compliments to the old fool yonder and tell him I left in too
great a hurry to give him my note for the gold he kindly lent me. I'll
attend to it when I get ready."

He had hitherto sculled the boat. Now he took the other oar and
commenced rowing. But here the wound, of which he had at first been
scarcely conscious, began to be felt, and the first vigorous stroke
brought a sharp twinge, besides increasing the flow of blood. His
natural ferocity was stimulated by his unpleasant discovery, and he
shook his fist menacingly at Robert, from whom he had received the
wound.

"There's a reckoning coming betwixt you and me, young one!" he cried,
"and it'll be a heavy one. Ben Haley don't forget that sort of debt. The
time'll come when he'll pay it back with interest. It mayn't come for
years, but it'll come at last, you may be sure of that."

Finding that he could not row on account of his wound, he rose to his
feet, and sculled the boat across as well as he could with one hand.

"I wish I had another boat," said Robert. "We could soon overtake him."

"Better let him go," said the neighbor. "He was always a bad one, that
Ben Haley. I couldn't begin to tell you all the bad things he did when
he was a boy. He was a regular dare-devil. You must look out for him, or
he'll do you a mischief some time, to pay for that wound."

"He brought it on himself," said Robert "I gave him warning."

He went back to the farmhouse to tell Paul of his nephew's escape. He
was brave and bold, but the malignant glance with which Ben Haley
uttered his menace, gave him a vague sense of discomfort.




CHAPTER XIII.


REVENGE.

In spite of his wounded arm Ben Haley succeeded in propelling the boat
to the opposite shore. The blood was steadily, though slowly, flowing
from his wound, and had already stained his shirt red for a considerable
space. In the excitement of first receiving it he had not felt the pain;
now, however, the wound began to pain him, and, as might be expected,
his feeling of animosity toward our hero was not diminished.

"That cursed boy!" he muttered, between his teeth. "I wish I had had
time to give him one blow--he wouldn't have wanted another. I hope the
wound isn't serious--if it is, I may have paid dear for the gold."

Still, the thought of the gold in his pockets afforded some
satisfaction. He had been penniless; now he was the possessor of--as
near as he could estimate, for he had not had time to count--five
hundred dollars in gold. That was more than he had ever possessed before
at one time, and would enable him to live at ease for a while.

On reaching the shore he was about to leave the boat to its fate, when
he espied a boy standing at a little distance, with a hatchet in his
hand. This gave him an idea.

"Come here, boy," he said.

The boy came forward, and examined the stranger with curiosity.

"Is that your hatchet?" he asked.

"No, sir. It belongs to my father."

"Would you mind selling it to me if I will give you money enough to buy
a new one?"

"This is an old hatchet."

"It will suit me just as well, and I haven't time to buy another. Would
your father sell it?"

"Yes, sir; I guess so."

"Very well. What will a new one cost you?"

The boy named the price.

"Here is the money, and twenty-five cents more to pay you for your
trouble in going to the store."

The boy pocketed the money with satisfaction. He was a farmer's son, and
seldom had any money in his possession. He already had twenty-five cents
saved up toward the purchase of a junior ball, and the stranger's
gratuity would just make up the sum necessary to secure it. He was in a
hurry to make the purchase, and, accordingly, no sooner had he received
the money than he started at once for the village store. His departure
was satisfactory to Ben Haley, who now had nothing to prevent his
carrying out his plans.

"I wanted to be revenged on the boy, and now I know how," he said. "I'll
make some trouble for him with this hatchet."

He drew the boat up and fastened it. Then he deliberately proceeded to
cut away at the bottom with his newly-acquired hatchet. He had a strong
arm, and his blows were made more effective by triumphant malice. The
boat he supposed to belong to Robert, and he was determined to spoil it.

He hacked away with such energy that soon there was a large hole in the
bottom of the boat. Not content with inflicting this damage, he cut it
in various other places, until it presented an appearance very different
from the neat, stanch boat of which Will Paine had been so proud. At
length Ben stopped, and contemplated the ruin he had wrought with
malicious satisfaction.

"That's the first instalment in my revenge," he said. "I should like to
see my young ferryman's face when he sees his boat again. It'll cost
him more than he'll ever get from my miserly uncle to repair it. It
serves him right for meddling with matters that don't concern him. And
now I must be getting away, for my affectionate uncle will soon be
raising a hue and cry after me if I'm not very much mistaken."

He would like to have gone at once to obtain medical assistance for his
wound, but to go to the village doctor would be dangerous. He must wait
till he had got out of the town limits, and the farther away the better.
He knew when the train would start, and made his way across the fields
to the station, arriving just in time to catch it. First, however, he
bound a handkerchief round his shoulder to arrest the flow of blood.

When he reached the station, and was purchasing his ticket, the
station-master noticed the blood upon his shirt.

"Are you hurt, sir?" he asked.

"Yes, a little," said Ben Haley.

"How did it happen?" inquired the other, with Yankee inquisitiveness.

"I was out hunting," said Ben, carelessly, "with a friend who wasn't
much used to firearms. In swinging his gun round, it accidentally went
off, and I got shot through the shoulder."

"That's bad," said the station-master, in a tone of sympathy. "You'd
better go round to the doctor's, and have it attended to."

"I would," said Ben, "but I am called away by business of the greatest
importance. I can get along for a few hours, and then I'll have a doctor
look at it. How soon will the train be here?"

"It's coming now. Don't you hear it?"

"That's the train I must take. You see I couldn't wait long enough for
the doctor," added Ben, anxious to account satisfactorily for his
inattention to the medical assistance of which he stood in need.

When he was fairly on board the cars, and the train was under way, he
felt considerably relieved. He was speeding fast away from the man he
had robbed, and who was interested in his capture, and in a few days he
might be at sea, able to snap his fingers at his miserly uncle and the
boy whom he determined some day to meet and settle scores with.

From one enemy of Robert the transition is brief and natural to another.
At this very moment Halbert Davis was sauntering idly and discontentedly
through the streets of the village. He was the son of a rich man, or of
one whom most persons, his own family included, supposed to be rich; but
this consciousness, though it made him proud, by no means made him
happy. He had that morning at the breakfast table asked his father to
give him a boat like Will Paine's, but Mr. Davis had answered by a
decided refusal.

"You don't need any boat," he said, sharply.

"It wouldn't cost very much," pleaded Halbert.

"How much do you suppose?"

"Will Paine told me his father paid fifty dollars for his."

"Why don't you borrow it sometimes?"

"I can't borrow it. Will started a day or two since for boarding
school."

"Better still. I will hire it for you while he is away."

"I thought of it myself," said Halbert, "but just before he went away
Will lent it to the factory boy," sneering as he uttered the last two
words.

"Do you mean Robert Rushton?"

"Yes."

"That's only a boy's arrangement. I will see Mr. Paine, and propose to
pay him for the use of the boat, and I presume he will be willing to
accede to my terms."

"When will you see him?" asked Halbert, hopefully.

"I will try to see him in the course of the day."

It turned out, however, that there was no need of calling on Mr. Paine,
for five minutes later, having some business with Mr. Davis, he rang
the bell, and was ushered into the breakfast-room.

"Excuse my calling early," he said, "but I wished to see you about----"
and here he stated his business, in which my readers will feel no
interest. When that was over, Mr. Davis introduced the subject of the
boat, and made the offer referred to.

"I am sorry to refuse," said Mr. Paine, "but my son, before going away,
passed his promise to Robert Rushton that he should have it during his
absence."

"Do you hold yourself bound by such a promise?" inquired Mrs. Davis,
with a disagreeable smile.

"Certainly," said the lawyer, gravely. "Robert is a valued friend of my
son's, and I respect boyish friendship. I remember very well my own
boyhood, and I had some strong friendships at that time."

"I don't see what your son can find to like in Robert Rushton," said
Mrs. Davis, with something of Halbert's manner. "I think him a very
disagreeable and impertinent boy."

Mr. Paine did not admire Mrs. Davis, and was not likely to be influenced
by her prejudices. Without inquiry, therefore, into the cause of her
unfavorable opinion, he said, "I have formed quite a different opinion
of Robert. I am persuaded that you do him injustice."

"He attacked Halbert ferociously the other day," said Mrs. Davis,
determined to impart the information whether asked or not. "He has an
ungovernable temper."

Mr. Paine glanced shrewdly at Halbert, of whose arrogant and quarrelsome
disposition he had heard from his own son, and replied, "I make it a
point not to interfere in boys' quarrels. William speaks very highly of
Robert, and it affords him great satisfaction, I know, to leave the boat
in his charge."

Mrs. Davis saw that there was no use in pursuing the subject, and it
dropped.

After the lawyer had gone Halbert made his petition anew, but without
satisfactory results. The fact was, Mr. Davis had heard unfavorable
reports from New York the day previous respecting a stock in which he
had an interest, and it was not a favorable moment to prefer a request
involving the outlay of money.

It was this refusal which made Halbert discontented and unhappy. The
factory boy, as he sneeringly called him, could have a boat, while he, a
gentleman's son, was forced to go without one. Of course, he would not
stoop to ask the loan of the boat, however much he wanted it, from a boy
he disliked so much as Robert. He wondered whether Robert were out this
morning. So, unconsciously, his steps led him to the shore of the river,
where he knew the boat was generally kept. He cast his eye toward it,
when what was his surprise to find the object of his desire half full of
water, with a large hole in the bottom and defaced in other respects.




CHAPTER XIV.


TWO UNSATISFACTORY INTERVIEWS.

Halbert's first emotion was surprise, his second was gratification. His
rival could no longer enjoy the boat which he had envied him. Not only
that, but he would get into trouble with Mr. Paine on account of the
damage which it had received. Being under his care, it was his duty to
keep it in good condition.

"I wonder how it happened?" thought Halbert. "Won't the young beggar be
in a precious scrape when it's found out? Most likely he won't let Mr.
Paine know."

In this thought he judged Robert by himself. Straightway the plan
suggested itself of going to the lawyer himself and informing him of
Robert's delinquency. It would be a very agreeable way of taking revenge
him. The plan so pleased him that he at once directed his steps toward
Mr. Paine's office. On the way he overtook Hester Paine, the young lady
on whose account he was chiefly incensed against Robert. Being as
desirous as ever of standing in the young lady's good graces, he
hurriedly advanced to her side, and lifting his hat with an air of
ceremonious politeness, he said:

"Good-morning, Hester."

