medicine and material with which to build his home.

The tropics could not do without the palm. It is more to that region
than the pine is to the north.

THE CALABASH TREE.

Another very useful tree to the natives is the calabash, or gourd tree.
It provides him with many household utensils. In height and size it
resembles an apple tree. Its leaves are wedge-shaped and its flowers are
large, whitish and fleshy.

The fruit is something like a gourd and often a foot in diameter. The
shell of the fruit is so hard that it is not easily broken by rough
usage or burnt by exposure to fire. It is used instead of bottles, cups,
basins, dishes, pots and kettles, and to make musical instruments.

Sometimes the calabashes are polished, carved, dyed or otherwise
ornamented. The pulp of the fruit is used as a medicine.

THE TRAVELER'S TREE.

One of the most curious and beautiful trees on the island is the
traveler's tree. It is so named because it contains in its leaves and at
their bases a large quantity of pure water.

By piercing the leaves with a spear or pike the water is drawn out, and
found cool and refreshing. It often relieves the thirst of the traveler
in this warm country.

BREAD FRUIT.

Among the fruit products used in large quantities are the bread-fruit
and bread-nuts. These trees grow very large and have wide-spreading
branches about fifty feet from the ground.

The leaves are, very broad, and the fruit looks something like an ovoid
osage orange as large as one's head.

[Illustration: BREADFRUIT.]

The fruit is best when picked green, and baked in an oven or in the
ashes, after paring away the outer skin or rind. When done it resembles
a browned loaf of bread. It is very good and, wholesome, too; but it
tastes more like baked plantain than bread.

The bread-nuts look on the outside like the bread-fruit, but the inside
contains a great mass of closely packed nuts like large chestnuts. These
are not good raw, but are fine when baked or boiled.

ANNOTTO.

We have often heard people speak of butter and cheese being colored, but
did not know that the dairyman was obliged to send to the West Indies
for his dye. The bush which provides it is called the annotto or
annatto. It grows to the size of the quince tree. The leaves are
heart-shaped; and the rosy flowers are followed by fuzzy red-and-yellow
pods, something like chestnut burs.

These small burs are filled with a crimson pulp containing many seeds.
This pulp is immersed in water a few weeks, strained and boiled to a
paste. The paste is made into cakes and dried in the sun. Then it comes
to our country and appears upon our tables in butter or cheese.

Can you tell me where bay rum comes from? We have often wondered, and
find here an answer to the question. It is furnished by the bay tree,
which grows here. The leaves are distilled and the oil extracted from
them to furnish this perfume for the bath.

SPICES.

Spices, in some form, are served every day upon our table; yet few of us
know where they come from, or where, how, or upon what they grow.

We have heard of the Spice Islands, perhaps, and we just take it for
granted that they all grow there. We are very much surprised, then, to
find many of the spices in Puerto Rico.

ALLSPICE, OR PIMENTO.

The pimento spice is native to this soil. The groves of these trees are
beautiful. The trees grow to a height of thirty feet, their stems are
smooth and clean, and their leaves glossy.

[Illustration: BRANCH AND BUD OF PIMENTO (ALL-SPICE).]

The trees bear fruit when about seven years old. The berries are
gathered green and dried in the sun. The branches to which the berries
are attached are broken off by boys and thrown to girls and women, who
pick off the berries, and take them to the drying places. One tree
sometimes bears a hundred pounds.

The tree likes the hills and mountains along the sea, a hot climate and
a dry atmosphere.

THE NUTMEG TREE.

The nutmeg tree grows to a height of thirty to fifty feet. The ripe
fruit looks somewhat like the apricot on the outside. It bursts in two
and shows the dark nut covered with mace, a bright scarlet. This is
stripped off and pressed flat. The shells are broken open when perfectly
dry, and the nuts powdered with lime to prevent the attacks of worms.

The tree bears the sixth or seventh year,--the nuts becoming ripe six
months after the flower appears. Twenty thousand nuts are sometimes
gathered from one tree.

Other important growths we find to be pepper, which begins to bear when
five years old and may bear for thirty years; the vanilla bean, which
proves to be very profitable when properly cared for; and cacao, which
requires eight years to come to full fruitage, but is an invaluable
plant.

MINERALS.

Puerto Rico has no mines or minerals of any consequence, except a little
iron. Foundries for magnetic iron have been established at Ponce, San
Juan and Mayaguez.

Gold, silver, copper and coal are known to exist in small quantities
beneath the surface, but not in sufficient amount to be mined.

The island is well supplied with limestone, which makes an excellent
building material. Marble, also, is easily obtained. Along the coast are
occasional marshes where salt is prepared for market.

OUR JOURNEY'S END.

Our month in Puerto Rico is drawing to a close, and the good ship which
is to bear us homeward is waiting in the harbor.

We make a last farewell tour of the shops in San Juan, and buy a few
gifts for the friends at home: a green parrot to please sister; a
tortoise-shell comb for mother; a cane for father, a native hat for
brother, and a calabash drinking bowl for the school museum.

It is with reluctant steps that we make our way to the ship. The clear
sky, the perfect climate, the constant verdure, the wonderful plants and
trees, and the beautiful mountain scenery make Puerto Rico one of the
most attractive lands to be found anywhere.

Although the roads are in a deplorable condition, a new system has been
planned, and will probably be soon completed.

Though the country may lack school buildings, the cities and towns are
better provided with other public buildings than most places of the same
size in the United States. And the eagerness with which the people seize
upon the statements that their children are to be given the same
opportunity for an education as children in the United States have,
indicates that the schoolhouses will soon dot the island.

The streets of the smallest villages are paved, and all contain some
place of recreation and attempts at ornamentation. Each village has one
or more public squares laid out with trees, walks, flowers, seats, and
usually with a band stand in the center.

We do not find these improvements in all our own small towns. But the
people need better schools, more nourishing food, and improved methods
of farming. Sanitary measures need to be introduced into the homes and
communities. Harbors need to be dredged, that ships may come closer to
land. The water power of many rushing streams needs to be chained and
made to generate electricity, to grind corn, to hull coffee, to cook
food, to pull cars, and to light cities.

There should also be fountains, baths, and sewers; the land in certain
sections should be irrigated, and the streams should be bridged, that
means for travel and transportation may be afforded.

Perhaps all this will be done, ere we visit this island again. At any
rate, we sincerely hope that this may be the beginning of a new and
better day for Puerto Rico.

[Illustration: PRONOUNCING VOCABULARY.]

       *       *       *       *       *


REFERENCE BOOKS.


  "Our New Possessions," by Trumbull White. Cloth, 676 pp........$2.00
  "Puerto Rico and Its Resources," by Frederick A. Ober.......... 1.50
  "The West Indies," by A. K. Fisk. 414 pp....................... 1.50
  "Porto Rico," Hall............................................. 1.00
  "Porto Rico," Rector........................................... 1.25
  "Porto Rico," Dinwiddie........................................ 2.50
  "Porto Rico," Robinson......................................... 1.50
  "The West Indies and the Main"................................. 1.75
  "At Last" and "A Christmas in the West Indies," Kingsley.......
  "Three Cruises of the Blake," Alexander Agassiz. 2 vol......... 8.00
  "Down the Islands," Palon...................................... 2.50
  "The West Indies," Fiske....................................... 1.50
  "In the Wake of Columbus," Ober................................ 2.00
  "Due South," Ballou............................................ 1.50
  "The Foreign Commerce of Our Possessions," etc., Treasury
      Department, Washington.....................................
  "Porto Rico," National Geographic Magazine, '99, 25 cts.
      a number; per year......................................... 2.00

These books may be obtained from A. FLANAGAN Co., Chicago, Ill., at
price given. Considerable reductions may be secured, if several volumes
are purchased at one time.




TEACHER'S SUPPLEMENT

       *       *       *       *       *

A LITTLE JOURNEY TO PUERTO RICO

       *       *       *       *       *

SPECIAL SUGGESTIONS.


Children love to read or hear of the people of other lands, and the
tactful teacher will wrap her information about the natural features of
a country in the "sugared pill of stories."

Books of travel are helpful and interesting in linking together fact and
story. From them the child comes to feel a sympathetic interest in the
ways of people unlike those he knows.

By emphasizing the idea of continuity of beliefs and customs, we impress
the child with the most important lesson history and geography hold for
him,--that all countries and peoples are closely related and have mutual
interests.

"The acquisition of this feeling of the inter-relationship of the
nations of the world, while starting the child out with a broad view of
life, will in no wise lessen his love for his own country."

Too often the lonely little stranger in our midst--the foreigner--is
viewed with heartless curiosity, or contempt, and subjected to ridicule.
Patriotism to many a child means nothing more than a belief that our own
country is the best, our own people the smartest, and that we can whip
any and every other nation on the globe.

Do the children know that the "blood that boils so hotly against other
countries is drawn from the very same sources that feed the veins of our
seemingly alien neighbors"?

If any teacher imagines that her pupils have a definite idea of the
meaning of patriotism because they are able to sing "America" and the
"Star-Spangled Banner," let her read Marion Hill's story, entitled "The
Star-Spangled Banner," in McClure's Magazine for July (1900).

THE TRAVEL CLASS.

Nothing in the study of geography is more interesting or helpful to
pupils than the taking of imaginary journeys. It makes geography a
_live_ subject.

Suggest that your pupils organize a Travel Club, and that some of the
trips be personally conducted.

Maps and a globe should be in constant use. The home should be the
starting point. Railroad circulars, maps, and time-cards for free
distribution will be found valuable. Pupils should be taught _how to
use_ these maps and time cards.

Give pupils a choice as to routes or roads over which they are to
travel. Each pupil, however, should be able to give a reason for his
preference for any particular road, and must know the number of miles
and the time required for the journey. The road or route voted upon by
the majority may then be decided upon, and preparations made for the
trip.

Find out the best time to go to each particular country, and the reason.
What clothes it will be best to wear and to take with one. About how
much money it will be necessary to spend on such a trip, and when and
where this money should be changed into the coin or currency used in the
country we expect to visit.

A _Guide_ may be appointed to obtain time-tables, maps, railroad guides,
the little books of travel, or other descriptions of routes and of the
parts of the country that are to be visited. (Further suggestions in
regard to these "helps" will be found elsewhere in this book.)

The principal features of the country passed through may be described,
if time permits; also the more important cities. Note the population,
occupations, productions, together with anything of special interest or
historical importance associated with the city or locality.

The _Guide_ takes charge of the class in the same way that a tourist
guide would do. He escorts us from the home depot to the city, state, or
country, pointing out the route on a map suspended before the class.

Arriving at the city or country, he takes us to the various points of
interest, telling as much about each as he is able, and answering
questions pupils may wish to ask. If the guide can not answer all
questions, the teacher or some other member of the party may.

When the guide has finished with a topic or section, other members of
the party may give items of interest concerning it.

A different pupil may act as guide to each city or part of the country
visited, and each pupil should come to the class with a list of
questions about the places.

Every pupil in the class may take some part, either as guide, or as the
class artist, musician, librarian, historian, geographer, geologist,
botanist, zoologist, or man of letters.

A _Historian_ may tell us of the history of the country, and answer all
questions of historical interest.

A _Geographer_ may tell of the location on the globe, of the natural
land formations of mountains, canyons, prairies, rivers, etc., and of the
climate resulting from these. He should illustrate his remarks.

A _Geologist_ may assist, and show specimens of minerals and fossils, or
pictures of these.

A _Botanist_ may tell us of native plants, useful or ornamental, and
show pictures of these if possible. A _Zoologist_ tells of the native
