challenge, and the proud consciousness that no one could accept it, she
turned to her pans and kettles.

So Erick had won over everyone, but there was still one who looked at
him from the corner of his eyes and always with a look of wrath, for a
few days after Organ-Sunday, the Mayor had ordered that Churi should
appear before him, and the bold Churi could hardly keep on his feet when
he had to appear before the judicial tribunal, for he expected to
receive the well-earned punishment from the strong hand of the Mayor.
But the latter only pinched his ear a little and said: "Churi, Churi!
this time you get off better than you deserve, for I know now who got
the grapes last year, and I also know who wanted to get them again a few
days ago. If from now on, even one single little bunch is missing, I
shall hold you responsible, and you will be surprised at what will
happen to you, think of that! Now go."

Churi did not need to be told that twice; he was gone as if his life was
at stake; but from that time on he thought of revenge on Erick, and when
he met him, he shook his fist at him and said: "You wait! I will get you
sometime." But so far he had never met Erick alone, and had never been
able to do him the slightest harm. This secretly embittered Churi still
more.

Now winter had set in. Upper Wood lay deeply buried in snow, and
everyone was busy thinking of Christmas and New Year. In these days the
pastor gave a gentle hint to his wife, that the time for Erick's change
to the institute, for which the Mayor also had offered his help, was
fast approaching. But the lady hardly let him finish his sentence for
excitement, and answered at once: "How can you even think of such a
thing! In the first place; we must wait for the answer from Denmark,
before we do anything; and secondly, the whole Christmas joy would be
spoiled completely for the children, through such news; thirdly, we
ourselves, you and I, could not separate ourselves so suddenly and
unprepared from a child who is as dear to us as one of our own--"

"Fourthly, 'Lizebeth will give notice at once," continued the pastor,
"for she now is the worst of all, from all that I see. One thing is
sure, dear wife, if the little fellow was not so guileless and had not
such an exceptionally good disposition, you women would have ruined him
so that he never could get straightened again, for you, one and all,
spoil him quite terribly."

"It is just this harmless and exceptionally well-disposed character of
the child which wins all hearts, so that one cannot help treating him
with peculiar love. No talk of sending Erick away before Easter can be
considered, and much can happen before then, my dear husband."

"Oh, yes," the latter agreed, "only do not look for an answer from
Denmark, for it would be in vain. The guilelessness in that address went
a little too far."

But the pastor's wife was contented that another respite had been
granted, and she hoped on.

The winter passed, Easter was approaching, but no answer came. This time
the pastor's wife got ahead of her husband. When shortly before Easter a
belated April frost set in, she explained to him that new winter wraps
had to be made for all the children, and before one could think of
sending Erick away, summer clothing had to be prepared for him; his good
velvet suit looked, indeed, still very fine, and would last some time
yet, but her husband knew it was his only suit, and for mid-summer
another must absolutely be procured for him, and for that, time and
leisure were needed.

The pastor gave his consent to the postponement without opposition. In
his heart he was heartily glad for the good excuse; for he, like all the
rest, had learned to love Erick so much that the thought of his
departure was very painful to him.

His wife was contented again and thought in her heart: "Who knows what
may happen before summer."

But something did happen which seemed to destroy with one blow all her
hopes. The warm June had come and on the sunny hillsides around Upper
Wood the strawberries, which grew there in plenty, were beginning to
give out most delightful fragrance, and to turn red. That was a glorious
time for all children round about. The children of the parsonage, too,
undertook daily strawberry-expeditions and every evening belated they
returned home. The order-devoted aunt, who, after a winter's absence,
had returned with the summer to the parsonage, did not leave any remedy
untried to restore at least the usual condition of things.

Below near the Woodbach the berries grew largest and most plentifully.
But to go there they had to wait till Saturday afternoon, when they had
no school, for it was too far to take the walk after afternoon school.
When Saturday came and the sun was shining brightly in the sky, then the
whole company in joyous mood left the parsonage, Sally and Erick ahead,
Ritz and Edi following. All were armed with baskets, for to-day, so they
had decided, Mother was to receive a great quantity of strawberries
instead of their eating all on the spot as usually happened. Having
arrived on the hillside over the Woodbach, the best spots were sought;
if one was found which was plentifully sprinkled over with strawberries,
then the whole company was called together and the place cleared, and
afterwards each went out again for new discoveries.

Erick was a good climber; without any trouble he swung himself down over
the steepest hillsides, and jumped up the high rocks like a squirrel.
Sally saw him, how he swung himself down a rock where he had espied on
the lowest end a spot that shone bright red in the sun, as if covered
with rubies. Were they berries or flowers which were growing there so
beautifully? Erick must see them nearer. Sally shouted after him: "Call
us if you find something, but be careful, it is steep there."


[Illustration: _Churi....unexpectedly gave him such a severe push that
Erick rolled down the rest of the mountain side...._]


Erick answered with a yodel and disappeared. Having arrived below, he
met the Middle Lotters, who were bending in groups here and there, or
lying on the ground, eating the berries which they picked. Erick could
not find the red spot which he had seen from above; but not far away
from him stood Churi, who had seen him coming down. Churi called to him:

"Come here, velvet pants, here are berries such as you have never seen."

Erick went quite calmly to him and when he now had stepped quite close
to Churi, the latter unexpectedly gave him such a severe push that Erick
rolled down the rest of the mountain side and right into the gray waves
of the Woodbach.

When Churi saw that, he was frightened. For a moment he stared at the
gray waves; but Erick had disappeared, not a speck of him could be seen.
Then Churi softly turned round and ran away as quickly as he could,
without looking round, for his conscience bit him and drove him along,
and he dared not look anyone in the face for fear that someone could
read there what he had done. The other Middle Lotters had not paid
attention to what was going on. Perhaps once in a while one of the crowd
would ask, "What has become of Churi all of a sudden?" and another would
answer, "He can go, wherever he likes," and they would turn again to
their berries and think no more of him.

Meanwhile Sally had remained standing in the same spot and had waited
for Erick's call. When it did not come, she began to call, but received
no answer. She now called to Edi, and he came running with Ritz, and all
three called together for Erick, but in vain. The sun had long since
set, and it was beginning to grow dark. All children, even the Middle
Lotters, went past them on their homeward way, and they were always the
very last. "Show me once more, and be quite sure, the very spot where he
began to climb down," said Edi, "I will go down, in the same path."

Sally showed the exact spot, where Erick had descended over the rock,
and Edi began the descent a little timidly. But he arrived safely down
below and ran hither and thither, calling with a loud voice: "Erick!
Erick!" But only the echo from the rocks, round about, answered
mockingly: "'Rick! 'Rick!"

Now it really began to be dark, and round about not a human sound, only
the rushing of the Woodbach, sounded through the stillness. Edi began to
feel a little uncomfortable; he climbed as quickly as possible up the
rock and said hastily: "Come, we will go home. Perhaps Erick is already
at home, he may have gone by another road."

But Sally opposed this proposition with all her power, and assured him
firmly that Erick had not gone home; that he would have first come back
to her; and she was not going a step away from where he had left her,
until Erick came, for if he were to come and she was not there, then he
would wait for her again, if he had to wait the whole night, she was
sure of that.

"We must go home, you know it," declared Edi. "Come, Sally, you know we
must."

"I cannot, I cannot!" lamented Sally. "You go with Ritz and tell them at
home how it is; perhaps Erick cannot find the road again." At this
conjecture which, only now after she had uttered it, Sally saw plainly,
she began to weep and sob piteously, while Edi took Ritz by the hand and
ran toward home as quickly as possible.

Mother and Aunt were standing before the parsonage, looking in all
directions to see if the children would not make their appearance
somewhere. 'Lizebeth ran to and fro, hither and thither, and asked of
the returning children of the neighborhood, where the parsonage children
were. She received the same answer from all: the three were still below
by the Woodbach, and were waiting for Erick, who had gone alone. At last
Ritz and Edi came running through the darkness. Both panted in
confusion, one interrupting the other. They shouted: "Sally
sits--"--"Erick is over"--"Yes, Erick is over"--"But Sally still sits
and"--

"Sally sits and Erick is over!" cried the aunt. "Now let anyone make
sense of that!" But the mother drew Edi aside and said; "Come, tell me
quietly what has happened."

Then Edi told everything, how Erick had climbed over the rock and how
Sally now was sitting alone below near the Woodbach, and Erick gave no
answer to all his calling.

"For heaven's sake," the mother cried, now thoroughly frightened, "I
hope that nothing has happened to Erick! Or could he have lost his way?"
She ran into the house to ask her husband what was to be done. At once
'Lizebeth ran to seven or eight neighbors and brought them together with
a good deal of noise, all armed with staves and lanterns, as 'Lizebeth
had ordered. Also several women hastened up, they too wanted to help in
the seeking. Now the pastor had come out and joined them, for he himself
wanted to do everything to find Erick, and at any rate to bring Sally
home. 'Lizebeth came last in the procession, with a large basket hanging
from her arm, for without a basket, 'Lizebeth could not leave the house.

Two long hours went by, while the mother walked ceaselessly to and fro,
now to the window, then to the house door, now up and down the
sitting-room; for the longer no news came the greater grew her fear. At
last the house-door was opened and in came the father, holding the
weeping Sally by the hand, for he had not been able to comfort her. They
had at that time not been able to get a trace of Erick; but the
neighbors were still seeking for him and had promised not to stop
seeking until he was found. 'Lizebeth was still with them, and she was
the most energetic of all the seekers.

Only after many comforting words from the mother, and after she had
prayed with her whole heart with the child to the dear God, that He
would protect the lost Erick and bring him home again, could Sally at
last be quieted. She fell then into a deep sleep, and slept so soundly
that she did not wake until late the next morning, and the mother was
glad to know that her daughter was sleeping, as her grief would be
awakened again, when she woke up.

Sunday morning passed quietly and sadly in the parsonage. Father and
Mother came out of church, before which the people of Upper Wood and
Lower Wood, from Middle Lot, and the whole neighborhood round about, had
assembled to talk over the calamity.

So far Ritz and Edi had kept very quiet, each busy with his own
occupation. Edi, a large book on his knees, was reading. Ritz was very
busy with breaking off the guns from all his tin soldiers, as now,
having peace in the land, they did not need them.

"So," Edi, who had looked now and then over his book, said quite
seriously: "if war breaks out again, then the whole company can stay at
home, for they have no more guns; with what are they supposed to fight?"

Ritz had not thought of that. Quickly he threw all the gunless soldiers
into the box and said: "I do not care to play any more today," no doubt
with the unexpressed hope that the guns, by the time he should open the
box again, might be somehow mended. But now he became restless and asked
to go out, and Edi, who had seen the large gathering by the church, also
decided to go out doors, for he too wanted to hear what was going on.

The aunt opposed their going out for some time, but finally gave her
consent for half an hour, to which the mother, who had just come in,
agreed. Now Sally appeared and rushed at once to her mother, to hear
about Erick, whether he had come home and how, where and when, or
whether news had come. But before the mother had time to tell her child
gently that no news had come from Erick, but that more people had gone
out, early in the morning, to seek him, the two brothers came rushing in
with unusual bluster and shouted in confusion:

"There comes a large, large"--"A very tall gentleman"--"A gentleman who
walks very straight out of a coach with two horses."

"I believe it is a general," Edi brought out finally and very
importantly.

"No doubt," laughed the aunt. "Next you will see nothing but old
Carthaginians walking about Upper Wood and the whole neighborhood."

But the mother did not laugh. "Could it not be someone who might bring
news of Erick?" she asked. She ran to the window. At the entrance of the
house was an open traveling coach, to which were harnessed two bay
horses which pawed the ground impatiently, and shook their heads so that
the bright harness rattled loudly. Ritz and Edi disappeared again. These
sounds were irresistible to them.

Now 'Lizebeth rushed in. "There is a strange gentleman below with the
master," she reported. "I have directed him to the pastor's study, so
that the table can be set here, for I must go out again to the little
boy. The gentleman has snow-white hair but he has a fresh, ruddy face
and walks straight like an army man or a commander."

"And he came alone?" asked the mistress. "Then he does not bring Erick?
Who may he be?"

Meanwhile the tall, strange gentleman had entered the pastor's study
below, with the words: "Colonel von Vestentrop, of Denmark. The
gentleman will excuse me if I interrupt him."

The pastor was so surprised that for a moment he could not collect his
wits. Erick's grandfather! There stood the man bodily before him, whose
existence had been to him a mere fairy tale, and the man looked so
stately and so commanding, that everyone who beheld him must be inspired
with respect. But at the same time there was something winning in his
expression, which was familiar to the reverend gentleman from Erick's
dear face. And this gentleman had traveled so far to fetch his grandson,
and Erick had disappeared.

All this passed through the pastor's head with lightning speed; he stood
for a moment like one paralyzed. But the colonel did not give much time
to the surprised man to recover himself. He quickly took the offered
easy chair, drew the pastor down on another, looked straight into his
eyes and said: "Dear Sir, you sent through the French pastor in
Copenhagen a letter addressed to me, in which you inform me of things of
which I do not believe one single word."

The surprise of the pastor increased and was reflected in his face.

"Please understand me rightly, dear Sir," the speaker continued, "not
that I mean that you would make an incorrect statement; but you yourself
have been duped, your kindness has been shamefully misused. Because I
knew that, I did not wish to answer your letter in writing, for we would
have exchanged many letters uselessly and yet would never have come to
an understanding. Behind all this is a clever fellow, who wants to trick
you and me for the sake of gain. So I have let everything rest until I
could combine the present explanation with a journey to Switzerland. So
here I am, and I will tell you, in as few words as possible, the
unfortunate story which led to this deception. But let me look at once
at the object in question. I want to see what the boy is like, whom the
man dares to place before my eyes as my grandson."

The pastor had now to tell of the unfortunate accident of Erick's
disappearance, how they had searched so far in vain, but how everything
was being done to find the dear boy; therefore he might make his
appearance at any moment.

The colonel only smiled a little, but that smile was a little sarcastic
and he said: "My good Sir, let us stop the seeking. The boy will not
return. The fellow who has placed him in your hands has calculated
wrongly this time. He, no doubt, hoped that I, at such a distance, would
credulously accept everything that he wanted, and would do what he
wished. Now he has found out that I myself was on the way to see you;
and to bring before my eyes some foundling as my daughter's child, that
he did not dare to do. On that account the child has disappeared,
Reverend Sir; that man knows me."

However much the pastor might assure the colonel that no one had
interfered in the case, that the boy, after his mother's death, without
anyone's intercession had come into the parsonage, and that from the boy
himself, without himself knowing it, had come the suggestions about the
country and the name of the grandfather,--all explanation of the pastor
did no good, the sturdy gentleman adhered to his firm opinion that the
whole thing was the invented trick of a man who wished to make money,
and that the disappearance of the boy at the necessary moment confirmed
it.

"But how should, how could the man of whom you speak--"

The colonel did not listen to the end of the sentence. "You do not know
this man," he threw in, "you do not know his knavery, Sir! I had a
daughter, an only child; I had lost my wife soon after marriage; the
child was all in all to me. She was the sunshine of my house, beautiful
as few, always joyous, amiable to everyone and full of talents. She had
a voice which delighted everyone; it was my joy. I had her instructed in
the house, also in music. Then, a young teacher came and settled in the
town, near which my estate lies. People talked much about the young
musician, and of his artistic skill. He was engaged to teach on all our
neighboring estates. I did the same. I had him come to my house every
day and had no suspicion of misfortune. After a few months, my daughter,
who was hardly eighteen years old, told me that she wanted to marry that
man. I answered her that that never would happen; she should never again
speak of such a thing. She did not say another word, nor did she
complain--that was not her way. I thought all was past and settled, but
found it safer to stop the lessons, and I dismissed the instructor. The
same evening my daughter asked me, whether I could ever in my life
change my opinion. 'Never in my life,' I said, 'that is as sure as my
military honor'. The next morning, she had disappeared. A letter left
for me told me that she was going away with that man and would become
his wife. From that time on,--it is now twelve years ago,--I have never
heard anything from my child, till your letter came.

"That my daughter is dead, I can well believe, but that she has left a
helpless little boy, that I do not believe, for she would have sent such
a boy, of whom she had a right to dispose, to me; she knows me, she
would have known that I would give him my name, and the remembrance
would be wiped away. But this boy, who has disappeared again at the
right time, has been substituted by the music-teacher, who no doubt
lives somewhere in this neighborhood, and has done it for the purpose of
receiving a sum of money from me. And now, dear Sir, we are through. The
only thing left for me is to express my regret that, your kindness has
been misused through my name; good-bye."

With these words the colonel rose and offered his hand to the pastor.
The latter held it firmly, saying: "Only one more word, Colonel!
Consider one thing: you know your daughter's character. After she had
done you the great wrong, she might have decided not to send the boy to
you before he in some way could make good the mother's wrongdoing--perhaps
not until the time when he would do honor to your name, when he should
prove to you through his own character that he was worthy of your name."

"You are a splendid man, who means well with me; but you have not had
the experience I have had. You know no distrust, I can see that, and
that is why you have been imposed upon. Let us part."

Saying this the colonel again shook the pastor's hand and opened the
door. There the lady of the house met him, who for some time with
impatience had been walking up and down in the garden, for she was sure
that this caller, who stayed so long, was somehow connected with the
lost Erick, and she could not understand why her husband did not call
her. Sally, from the same expectation and greater impatience, followed
her every step. When now the mother had seen from the garden, that the
strange gentleman had risen, she could bear it no longer; she must know
what was going on. When she stepped on the threshold at the moment when
the stranger opened the door, then politeness demanded that the parson
introduce his wife, and the stranger from politeness was obliged to step
back into the room when the master of the house introduced his wife to
him with the words: "Colonel von Vestentrop from Denmark. You indeed
will be delighted to hear this name."

The lady stepped toward the colonel with visible delight and said
excitedly: "Is it possible? But at what a moment! But you will stay with
us, Colonel, for your dear grandchild must be found. The sweet boy
cannot be lost, he must have lost his way."

"Pardon me, my gracious lady," the colonel here interrupted her politely,
but somewhat stiffly, "I shall start at once. You are under a delusion;
I have no grandchild, and I must bid you good-bye."

At mention of the name "Vestentrop", Sally had grown very red; and she
trembled all over, during the conversation that followed. Now she
restrained herself no longer. Tears poured from her eyes, and with the
greatest agitation she sobbed: "Indeed, indeed, he is, I know it, he has
told me himself; but I dared not tell it to anyone."

"Well, the boy has found at least one good friend and defender," said
the colonel well-pleased, and wanted to pat Sally's cheeks, but she
withdrew quickly, for she first wanted to know whether the gentleman
would believe and recognize Erick, before she would let him touch her.

The mother too was struck to the core by this incredulity. Her husband
had whispered a few words to her, so she understood at once the whole
situation.

"Colonel," she now said, placing herself before him, "do not act in such
haste. Let me prevail on you to stay a few days, yes, even this one day!
The dear child must, and will be found, please God! See him first. Learn
to know the treasure which you are about to give up so lightly. If you
could know what sunshine you want to withhold from your house, you could
