
"And we, Captain, regret to find you allied with such a savage as
Tandakora."

A quick flush passed over the young Frenchman's face, but he made no
other sign.

"In war one cannot always choose," he replied. "I have come to receive
your surrender, and I warn you very earnestly that it will be wise for
you to tender it. The Indians have lost one man already and they are
inflamed. If they lose more I might not be able to control them."

"And if we yield ourselves you pledge us our lives, a transfer in
safety to Canada where we are to remain as prisoners of war, until
such time as we may be exchanged?"

"All that I promise, and gladly."

"You're sure, Captain de Galissonniere, that you can carry out the
conditions?"

"Absolutely sure. You are surrounded here on the peak, and you cannot
get away. All we have to do is to keep the siege."

"That is true, but while you can wait so can we."

"But we have plenty of water, and you have none."

"You would urge us again to surrender on the ground that it would be
the utmost wisdom for us to do so?"

"It goes without saying, Mr. Lennox."

"Then, that being the case, we decline."

De Galissonniere looked up in astonishment at the young face that
gazed down at him. The answer he had expected was quite the reverse.

"You mean that you refuse?" he exclaimed.

"It is just what I meant."

"May I ask why, when you are in such a hopeless position?"

"Tayoga, Mr. Willet and I wish to see how long we can endure the pangs
of thirst without total collapse. We've had quite a difference on the
subject. Tayoga says ten days, Mr. Willet twelve days, but I think we
can stand it a full two weeks."

De Galissonniere frowned.

"You are frivolous, Mr. Lennox," he said, "and this is not a time for
light talk. I don't know what you mean, but it seems to me you don't
appreciate the dire nature of your peril. I liked you and your
comrades when I met you in Quebec and I do not wish to see you perish
at the hands of the savages. That is why I have climbed up here to
make you this offer, which I have wrung from the reluctant Tandakora.
It was he who assured me that the besieged were you. It pains me that
you see fit to reject it."

"I know it was made out of a good heart," said Robert, seriously, "and
we thank you for the impulse that brought you here. Some day we may be
able to repay it, but we decline because there are always chances. You
know, Captain, that while we have life we always have hope. We may yet
escape."

"I do not see wherein it is possible," said the young Frenchman, with
actual reluctance in his tone. "But it is for you to decide what you
wish to do. Farewell."

"Farewell, Captain de Galissonniere," said Robert, with the utmost
sincerity. "I hope no bullet of ours will touch you."

The captain made a courteous gesture of good-by and slowly descended
the slope, disappearing among the bushes in the gorge, whence came a
fierce and joyous shout.

"That was the cry of the savages when he told them our answer," said
Willet. "They don't want us to surrender. They think that by-and-by
we'll fall into their hands through exhaustion, and then they can work
their will upon us."

"They don't know about that fountain, that pure, blessed fountain,"
said Robert, "the finest fountain that gushes out anywhere in this
northern wilderness, the fountain that Tayoga's Areskoui has put here
for our especial benefit."

His heart had become very light and, as usual when his optimism was
at its height, words gushed forth. Water, and their ability to get it
whenever they wanted it, was the key to everything, and he painted
their situation in such bright colors that his two comrades could not
keep from sharing his enthusiasm.

"Truly, Dagaeoga did not receive the gift of words in vain," said
Tayoga. "Golden speech flows from him, and it lifts up the minds
of those who hear. Manitou finds a use for everybody, even for the
orator."

"Though it was a hard task, even for Manitou," laughed Robert.

They watched the whole afternoon without any demonstration from the
enemy--they expected none--and toward evening the Onondaga, who was
gazing into the north, announced a dark shadow on the horizon.

"What is it?" asked Robert. "A cloud? I hope we won't have another
storm."

"It is no cloud," replied Tayoga. "It is something else that moves
very fast, and it comes in our direction. A little longer and I can
tell what it is. Now I see; it is a flight of wild pigeons, a great
flock, hundreds of thousands, and millions, going south to escape the
winter."

"We've seen such flights often."

"So we have, but this is coming straight toward us, and I have a great
thought, Dagaeoga. Areskoui has not only forgiven us for our unknown
sin--perhaps of omission--but he has also decided to put help in our
way, if we will use it. You see many dwarf trees at the southern edge
of the crest, and I believe that by dark they will be covered with
pigeons, stopping for the night."

"And some of them will stop for our benefit, though we have bear meat
too! I see, Tayoga."

Robert watched the flying cloud, which had grown larger and blacker,
and then he saw that Tayoga was right. It was an immense flock of wild
pigeons, and, as the twilight fell, they covered the trees upon their
crest so thickly that the boughs bent beneath them. Young Lennox and
the Onondaga killed as many as they wished with sticks, and soon, fat
and juicy, they were broiling over the coals.

"Tandakora will guess that the pigeons have fed us," said Robert, "and
he will not like it, but he will yet know nothing about the water."

They climbed down in turn in the darkness and took a drink, and
Robert, who explored a little, found many vines loaded with wild
grapes, ripe and rich, which made a splendid dessert. Then he took
a number of the smaller but very tough stems, and knotting them
together, with the assistance of Tayoga ran a strong rope from the
crest down to the fountain, thus greatly easing the descent for water
and the return.

"Now we can take two drinks where we took one before," he said
triumphantly when the task was finished. "If you have your water there
is nothing like making it easy to be reached. Moreover, while it was
safe for an agile fellow like me, you and Dave, Tayoga, being stiff
and clumsy, might have tumbled down the mountain and then I should
have been lonesome."

Willet, who had been keeping the watch alone, was inclined to the
belief that they might expect an attack in the night, if it should
prove to be very dark. He felt able, however, should such an attempt
come, to detect the advance of the savages, either by sight or
hearing, especially the latter, ear in such cases generally informing
him earlier than eye. But as neither Robert nor Tayoga was busy they
joined him, and all three sat near the brink with their rifles across
their knees, and their pistols loosened in their belts, ready for
their foes should they come in numbers.

They talked a while in low tones, and then fell silent. The night had
come, starless and moonless, favorable to the designs of Tandakora,
but they felt intense satisfaction, nevertheless. It was partly
physical. Robert's making of an easy road to the water, the coming of
the pigeons, to be eaten, apparently sent by Areskoui, and the ease
with which they believed they could hold their lofty fortress,
combined to produce a victorious state of mind. Robert looked over the
brink once or twice at the steep slope, and he felt that the warriors
would, in truth, be taking a mighty risk, if they came up that steep
path against the three.

He and Tayoga, in the heavy darkness, depended, like Willet, chiefly
on ear. It was impossible to see to the bottom of the valley, where
the dusk had rolled up like a sea, but, as the night was still, they
felt sure they could hear anyone climbing up the peak. In order to
make themselves more comfortable they spread their blankets at the
very brink, and lay down upon them, thus being able to repose, and at
the same time watch without the risk of inviting a shot.

Young Lennox knew that the attack, if it came at all, would not come
until late, and restraining his naturally eager and impatient temper,
he used all the patience that his strong will could summon, never
ceasing meanwhile to lend an attentive ear to every sound of the
night. He heard the wind rise, moan a little while in the gorge and
then die; he heard a fitful breeze rustle the boughs on the slopes and
then grow still, and he heard his comrades move once or twice to ease
their positions, but no other sound came to him until nearly midnight,
and then he heard the fall of a pebble on the slope, absolute proof
to one experienced as he that it had been displaced by the incautious
foot of a climbing enemy.

The rattling of the pebble was succeeded by a long interval of
silence, and the lad understood that too. The warriors, to whom time
was nothing, fearing that suspicion had been aroused by the fall of
the pebble, would wait until it had been lulled before resuming their
advance. They would flatten themselves like lizards against the slope,
not stirring an inch. But the three were as patient as they, and while
a full hour passed after the slip of the stone before the slightest
sound came from the slope, they did not relax their vigilance a
particle. Then all three heard a slight rustle among the bushes and
they peered cautiously over.

They were able to discern the dim outline of figures among the bushes
about twenty feet below, and Wilier, who directed the defense,
whispered that Tayoga and he would take aim, while Robert held his
fire in reserve. Then the Onondaga and he picked their targets in
the darkness and pulled trigger. Shouts, the fall of bodies and the
crackling of rifles came back. A half dozen bullets, fired almost at
random, whistled over their heads and then Robert sent his own lead at
a shadow which appeared very clearly among the bushes, a crashing fall
following at once.

Then the three, not waiting to reload, snatched out their pistols and
held themselves ready for a further attack, if it should come. But it
did not come. Even the rage of Tandakora had had enough. His second
repulse had been bloodier than the first, and it had been proved with
the lives of his warriors that they could not storm that terrible
steep, in the face of three such redoubtable marksmen.

Robert heard a number of pebbles rolling now, but they were made by
men descending, and the three, certain of abundant leisure, reloaded
their rifles. Their eyes told them nothing, but they were as sure as
if they had seen them that the warriors had disappeared in the sea of
darkness with which the gulf was filled. The lad breathed a long sigh
of relief.

"You're justified in your satisfaction," said Willet. "I think it's
the last direct attack they'll make upon us. Now they'll try the slow
methods of siege and our exhaustion by thirst, and how it would make
their venom rise if they knew anything about that glorious fountain
of ours! Since it's to be a test of patience, we'd better make things
easy for ourselves. I'll sit here and watch the slope, and, as the
night is turning cold, you and Tayoga, Robert, can build a fire."

There was a dip in the center of the crest, and in this they heaped
the fallen wood, which here as elsewhere in the wilderness was
abundant. Wood and water, two great requisites of primitive man, they
had in plenty, and had it not been for their eagerness to go forward
with their work they would have been content to stay indefinitely on
the peak.

The fire was soon blazing cheerfully. Warriors on the opposing peaks
or crest might see it, but they did not care. No bullets from rival
heights could reach them and the light would appear to their enemies
as a beacon of defiance, a sort of challenge that was very pleasing to
Robert's soul. He basked in the glow and heat of the coals, ate bear
meat and wild pigeon for a late supper, and discoursed on the strength
of their natural fortress.

"The peak was reared here by Areskoui for our especial benefit," he
said. "It is in every sense a tower of strength, water even being
placed in its side that we might not die of thirst."

"And yet we cannot stay here always," said the Onondaga. "Tomorrow we
must think of a way of escape."

"Let tomorrow take care of itself. Tayoga, you're too serious! You're
missing the pleasure of the night."

"Dagaeoga loves to talk and he talks well. His voice is pleasant in my
ear like to the murmur of a silver brook. Perhaps he is right. Lo! the
clouds have gone, and I can see Tododaho on his star. Areskoui watches
over us by day and Tododaho by night. We are once more the favorites
of the Sun God and of the great Onondaga who went away to his
everlasting star more than four centuries ago. Again I say Dagaeoga is
right; I will enjoy the night, and let the morrow care for itself."

He drew the folds of his blanket to his chin and stretched his length
before the fire. Having made up his mind to be satisfied, Tayoga would
let nothing interfere with such a laudable purpose. Soon he slept
peacefully.

"You might follow him," said Willet.

"I don't think I can do it now," said Robert. "I've a restless
spirit."

"Then wander about the peak, and I'll take up my old place at the edge
of the slope."

Robert went back to the far side, where he had stretched his rope of
grape vines down to the spring, and, craving their cool, fresh taste,
he ate more of the grapes. He noticed then that they were uncommonly
plentiful. All along the cliff they trailed in great, rich clusters,
black and glossy, fairly asking to be eaten. In places the vines
hung in perfect mazes, and he looked at them questioningly. Then
the thought came to him and he wondered why it had been so slow of
arrival. He returned to Willet and said:

"I don't think you need watch any longer here, Dave."

"Why?" was the hunter's astonished reply.

"Because we're going to leave the mountain."

"Leave the mountain! It's more likely, Robert, that your prudence has
left you. If we went down the slope we'd go squarely into the horde,
and then it would be a painful and lingering end for us."

"I don't mean the slope. We're to go down the other side of the
cliff."

"Except here and near the bottom the mountain is as steep everywhere
as the side of a house. The only way for us to get down is to fall
down and then we'd stop too quick."

"We don't have to fall down, we'll climb down."

"Can't be done, Robert, my boy. There's not enough bushes."

"We don't need bushes, there are miles of grape vines as strong as
leather. All we have to do is to knot them together securely and our
rope is ready. If we eased our way to the spring with vines then we
can finish the journey to the bottom of the cliff with them."

The hunter's gaze met that of the lad, and it was full of approval.
