on it and took some sleep. If I hadn't been able to take that rest I
wouldn't be here to tell the tale."

"Poor Miranda! What a time you must have had!" said the Doctor. "But
tell me, were you able to find out whereabouts Long Arrow was last
seen?"

"Yes. A young albatross told me he had seen him on Spidermonkey Island?"

"Spidermonkey Island? That's somewhere off the coast of Brazil, isn't
it?"

"Yes, that's it. Of course I flew there right away and asked every bird
on the island--and it is a big island, a hundred miles long. It seems
that Long Arrow was visiting some peculiar Indians that live there; and
that when last seen he was going up into the mountains looking for rare
medicine-plants. I got that from a tame hawk, a pet, which the Chief of
the Indians keeps for hunting partridges with. I nearly got caught and
put in a cage for my pains too. That's the worst of having beautiful
feathers: it's as much as your life is worth to go near most
humans--They say, 'oh how pretty!' and shoot an arrow or a bullet into
you. You and Long Arrow were the only two men that I would ever trust
myself near--out of all the people in the world."

"But was he never known to have returned from the mountains?"

"No. That was the last that was seen or heard of him. I questioned the
sea-birds around the shores to find out if he had left the island in a
canoe. But they could tell me nothing."

"Do you think that some accident has happened to him?" asked the Doctor
in a fearful voice.

"I'm afraid it must have," said Miranda shaking her head.

"Well," said John Dolittle slowly, "if I could never meet Long Arrow
face to face it would be the greatest disappointment in my whole life.
Not only that, but it would be a great loss to the knowledge of the
human race. For, from what you have told me of him, he knew more natural
science than all the rest of us put together; and if he has gone without
any one to write it down for him, so the world may be the better for
it, it would be a terrible thing. But you don't really think that he is
dead, do you?"

"What else can I think?" asked Miranda, bursting into tears, "when for
six whole months he has not been seen by flesh, fish or fowl."




THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. BLIND TRAVEL

THIS news about Long Arrow made us all very sad. And I could see from
the silent dreamy way the Doctor took his tea that he was dreadfully
upset. Every once in a while he would stop eating altogether and sit
staring at the spots on the kitchen table-cloth as though his thoughts
were far away; till Dab-Dab, who was watching to see that he got a good
meal, would cough or rattle the pots in the sink.

I did my best to cheer him up by reminding him of all he had done for
Luke and his wife that afternoon. And when that didn't seem to work, I
went on talking about our preparations for the voyage.

"But you see, Stubbins," said he as we rose from the table and Dab-Dab
and Chee-Chee began to clear away, "I don't know where to go now. I feel
sort of lost since Miranda brought me this news. On this voyage I had
planned going to see Long Arrow. I had been looking forward to it for
a whole year. I felt he might help me in learning the language of the
shellfish--and perhaps in finding some way of getting to the bottom of
the sea. But now?--He's gone! And all his great knowledge has gone with
him."

Then he seemed to fall a-dreaming again.

"Just to think of it!" he murmured. "Long Arrow and I, two
students--Although I'd never met him, I felt as though I knew him quite
well. For, in his way--without any schooling--he has, all his life, been
trying to do the very things which I have tried to do in mine--And now
he's gone!--A whole world lay between us--And only a bird knew us both!"

We went back into the study, where Jip brought the Doctor his slippers
and his pipe. And after the pipe was lit and the smoke began to fill the
room the old man seemed to cheer up a little.

"But you will go on some voyage, Doctor, won't you?" I asked--"even if
you can't go to find Long Arrow."

He looked up sharply into my face; and I suppose he saw how anxious I
was. Because he suddenly smiled his old, boyish smile and said,

"Yes, Stubbins. Don't worry. We'll go. We mustn't stop working and
learning, even if poor Long Arrow has disappeared--But where to go:
that's the question. Where shall we go?"

There were so many places that I wanted to go that I couldn't make up
my mind right away. And while I was still thinking, the Doctor sat up in
his chair and said,

"I tell you what we'll do, Stubbins: it's a game I used to play when I
was young--before Sarah came to live with me. I used to call it Blind
Travel. Whenever I wanted to go on a voyage, and I couldn't make up my
mind where to go, I would take the atlas and open it with my eyes shut.
Next, I'd wave a pencil, still without looking, and stick it down on
whatever page had fallen open. Then I'd open my eyes and look. It's a
very exciting game, is Blind Travel. Because you have to swear, before
you begin, that you will go to the place the pencil touches, come what
way. Shall we play it?"

"Oh, let's!" I almost yelled. "How thrilling! I hope it's China--or
Borneo--or Bagdad."

And in a moment I had scrambled up the bookcase, dragged the big atlas
from the top shelf and laid it on the table before the Doctor.

I knew every page in that atlas by heart. How many days and nights I
had lingered over its old faded maps, following the blue rivers from
the mountains to the sea; wondering what the little towns really looked
like, and how wide were the sprawling lakes! I had had a lot of fun with
that atlas, traveling, in my mind, all over the world. I can see it
now: the first page had no map; it just told you that it was printed in
Edinburgh in 1808, and a whole lot more about the book. The next page
was the Solar System, showing the sun and planets, the stars and the
moon. The third page was the chart of the North and South Poles. Then
came the hemispheres, the oceans, the continents and the countries.

As the Doctor began sharpening his pencil a thought came to me.

"What if the pencil falls upon the North Pole," I asked, "will we have
to go there?"

"No. The rules of the game say you don't have to go any place you've
been to before. You are allowed another try. I've been to the North
Pole," he ended quietly, "so we shan't have to go there." I could hardly
speak with astonishment.

"YOU'VE BEEN TO THE NORTH POLE!" I managed to gasp out at last. "But
I thought it was still undiscovered. The map shows all the places
explorers have reached to, TRYING to get there. Why isn't your name down
if you discovered it?"

"I promised to keep it a secret. And you must promise me never to tell
any one. Yes, I discovered the North Pole in April, 1809. But shortly
after I got there the polar bears came to me in a body and told me there
was a great deal of coal there, buried beneath the snow. They knew, they
said, that human beings would do anything, and go anywhere, to get coal.
So would I please keep it a secret. Because once people began coming
up there to start coal-mines, their beautiful white country would be
spoiled--and there was nowhere else in the world cold enough for polar
bears to be comfortable. So of course I had to promise them I would. Ah,
well, it will be discovered again some day, by somebody else. But I
want the polar bears to have their play-ground to themselves as long as
possible. And I daresay it will be a good while yet--for it certainly
is a fiendish place to get to--Well now, are we ready?--Good! Take the
pencil and stand here close to the table. When the book falls open, wave
the pencil round three times and jab it down. Ready?--All right. Shut
your eyes."

It was a tense and fearful moment--but very thrilling. We both had our
eyes shut tight. I heard the atlas fall open with a bang. I wondered
what page it was: England or Asia. If it should be the map of Asia, so
much would depend on where that pencil would land. I waved three times
in a circle. I began to lower my hand. The pencil-point touched the
page.

"All right," I called out, "it's done."




THE TWELFTH CHAPTER. DESTINY AND DESTINATION

WE both opened our eyes; then bumped our heads together with a crack in
our eagerness to lean over and see where we were to go.

The atlas lay open at a map called, Chart of the South Atlantic Ocean.
My pencil-point was resting right in the center of a tiny island. The
name of it was printed so small that the Doctor had to get out his
strong spectacles to read it. I was trembling with excitement.

"Spidermonkey Island," he read out slowly. Then he whistled softly
beneath his breath. "Of all the extraordinary things! You've hit upon
the very island where Long Arrow was last seen on earth--I wonder--Well,
well! How very singular!"

"We'll go there, Doctor, won't we?" I asked.

"Of course we will. The rules of the game say we've got to."

"I'm so glad it wasn't Oxenthorpe or Bristol," I said. "It'll be a grand
voyage, this. Look at all the sea we've got to cross. Will it take us
long?"

"Oh, no," said the Doctor--"not very. With a good boat and a good wind
we should make it easily in four weeks. But isn't it extraordinary? Of
all the places in the world you picked out that one with your eyes shut.
Spidermonkey Island after all!--Well, there's one good thing about it: I
shall be able to get some Jabizri beetles."

"What are Jabizri beetles?"

"They are a very rare kind of beetles with peculiar habits. I want to
study them. There are only three countries in the world where they are
to be found. Spidermonkey Island is one of them. But even there they are
very scarce."

"What is this little question-mark after the name of the island for?" I
asked, pointing to the map.

"That means that the island's position in the ocean is not known very
exactly--that it is somewhere ABOUT there. Ships have probably seen it
in that neighborhood, that is all, most likely. It is quite possible we
shall be the first white men to land there. But I daresay we shall have
some difficulty in finding it first."

How like a dream it all sounded! The two of us sitting there at the big
study-table; the candles lit; the smoke curling towards the dim ceiling
from the Doctor's pipe--the two of us sitting there, talking about
finding an island in the ocean and being the first white men to land
upon it!

"I'll bet it will be a great voyage," I said. "It looks a lovely island
on the map. Will there be black men there?"

"No. A peculiar tribe of Red Indians lives on it, Miranda tells me."

At this point the poor Bird-of-Paradise stirred and woke up. In our
excitement we had forgotten to speak low.

"We are going to Spidermonkey Island, Miranda," said the Doctor. "You
know where it is, do you not?"

"I know where it was the last time I saw it," said the bird. "But
whether it will be there still, I can't say."

"What do you mean?" asked the Doctor. "It is always in the same place
surely?"

"Not by any means," said Miranda. "Why, didn't you know?--Spidermonkey
Island is a FLOATING island. It moves around all over the place--usually
somewhere near southern South America. But of course I could surely find
it for you if you want to go there."

At this fresh piece of news I could contain myself no longer. I was
bursting to tell some one. I ran dancing and singing from the room to
find Chee-Chee.

At the door I tripped over Dab-Dab, who was just coming in with her
wings full of plates, and fell headlong on my nose,

"Has the boy gone crazy?" cried the duck. "Where do you think you're
going, ninny?"

"To Spidermonkey Island!" I shouted, picking myself up and doing
cart-wheels down the hall--"Spidermonkey Island! Hooray!--And it's a
FLOATING island!"

"You're going to Bedlam, I should say," snorted the housekeeper. "Look
what you've done to my best china!"

But I was far too happy to listen to her scolding; and I ran on,
singing, into the kitchen to find Chee-Chee.




PART THREE




THE FIRST CHAPTER. THE THIRD MAN

THAT same week we began our preparations for the voyage.

Joe, the mussel-man, had the Curlew moved down the river and tied it
up along the river-wall, so it would be more handy for loading. And for
three whole days we carried provisions down to our beautiful new boat
and stowed them away.

I was surprised to find how roomy and big she was inside. There were
three little cabins, a saloon (or dining-room) and underneath all this,
a big place called the hold where the food and extra sails and other
things were kept.

I think Joe must have told everybody in the town about our coming
voyage, because there was always a regular crowd watching us when we
brought the things down to put aboard. And of course sooner or later old
Matthew Mugg was bound to turn up.

"My Goodness, Tommy," said he, as he watched me carrying on some sacks
of flour, "but that's a pretty boat! Where might the Doctor be going to
this voyage?"

"We're going to Spidermonkey Island," I said proudly.

"And be you the only one the Doctor's taking along?"

"Well, he has spoken of wanting to take another man," I said; "but so
far he hasn't made up his mind."

Matthew grunted; then squinted up at the graceful masts of the Curlew.

"You know, Tommy," said he, "if it wasn't for my rheumatism I've half
a mind to come with the Doctor myself. There's something about a boat
standing ready to sail that always did make me feel venturesome and
travelish-like. What's that stuff in the cans you're taking on?"

"This is treacle," I said--"twenty pounds of treacle."

"My Goodness," he sighed, turning away sadly. "That makes me feel more
like going with you than ever--But my rheumatism is that bad I can't
hardly--"

I didn't hear any more for Matthew had moved off, still mumbling, into
the crowd that stood about the wharf. The clock in Puddleby Church
struck noon and I turned back, feeling very busy and important, to the
task of loading.

But it wasn't very long before some one else came along and interrupted
my work. This was a huge, big, burly man with a red beard and
tattoo-marks all over his arms. He wiped his mouth with the back of his
hand, spat twice on to the river-wall and said,

"Boy, where's the skipper?"

"The SKIPPER!--Who do you mean?" I asked.

"The captain--Where's the captain, of this craft?" he said, pointing to
the Curlew.

"Oh, you mean the Doctor," said I. "Well, he isn't here at present."

At that moment the Doctor arrived with his arms full of note-books and
butterfly-nets and glass cases and other natural history things. The big
man went up to him, respectfully touching his cap.

"Good morning, Captain," said he. "I heard you was in need of hands for
a voyage. My name's Ben Butcher, able seaman."

"I am very glad to know you," said the Doctor. "But I'm afraid I shan't
be able to take on any more crew."

"Why, but Captain," said the able seaman, "you surely ain't going to
face deep-sea weather with nothing more than this bit of a lad to help
you--and with a cutter that big!"

The Doctor assured him that he was; but the man didn't go away. He hung
around and argued. He told us he had known of many ships being sunk
through "undermanning." He got out what he called his stiffikit--a paper
which said what a good sailor he was--and implored us, if we valued our
lives, to take him.

But the Doctor was quite firm-polite but determined--and finally the man
walked sorrowfully away, telling us he never expected to see us alive
again.

Callers of one sort and another kept us quite busy that morning. The
Doctor had no sooner gone below to stow away his note-books than
another visitor appeared upon the gang-plank. This was a most
extraordinary-looking black man. The only other negroes I had seen had
been in circuses, where they wore feathers and bone necklaces and things
like that. But this one was dressed in a fashionable frock coat with an
enormous bright red cravat. On his head was a straw hat with a gay band;
and over this he held a large green umbrella. He was very smart in every
respect except his feet. He wore no shoes or socks.

"Pardon me," said he, bowing elegantly, "but is this the ship of the
physician Dolittle?"

"Yes," I said, "did you wish to see him?"

"I did--if it will not be discommodious," he answered.

"Who shall I say it is?"

"I am Bumpo Kahbooboo, Crown Prince of Jolliginki."

I ran downstairs at once and told the Doctor.

"How fortunate!" cried John Dolittle. "My old friend Bumpo! Well,
well!--He's studying at Oxford, you know. How good of him to come all
this way to call on me!" And he tumbled up the ladder to greet his
visitor.

The strange black man seemed to be overcome with joy when the Doctor
appeared and shook him warmly by the hand.

"News reached me," he said, "that you were about to sail upon a voyage.
I hastened to see you before your departure. I am sublimely ecstasied
that I did not miss you."

"You very nearly did miss us," said the Doctor. "As it happened, we
were delayed somewhat in getting the necessary number of men to sail
our boat. If it hadn't been for that, we would have been gone three days
ago."

"How many men does your ship's company yet require?" asked Bumpo.

"Only one," said the Doctor--"But it is so hard to find the right one."

"Methinks I detect something of the finger of Destination in this," said
Bumpo. "How would I do?"

"Splendidly," said the Doctor. "But what about your studies? You can't
very well just go off and leave your university career to take care of
itself, you know."

"I need a holiday," said Bumpo. "Even had I not gone with you, I
intended at the end of this term to take a three-months' absconsion--But
besides, I shall not be neglecting my edification if I accompany you.
Before I left Jolliginki my august father, the King, told me to be sure
and travel plenty. You are a man of great studiosity. To see the world
in your company is an opportunity not to be sneezed upon. No, no,
indeed."

"How did you like the life at Oxford?" asked the Doctor.

"Oh, passably, passably," said Bumpo. "I liked it all except the algebra
and the shoes. The algebra hurt my head and the shoes hurt my feet.
I threw the shoes over a wall as soon as I got out of the college
quadrilateral this morning; and the algebra I am happily forgetting very
fast--I liked Cicero--Yes, I think Cicero's fine--so simultaneous.
By the way, they tell me his son is rowing for our college next
year--charming fellow."

The Doctor looked down at the black man's huge bare feet thoughtfully a
moment.

"Well," he said slowly, "there is something in what you say, Bumpo,
about getting education from the world as well as from the college. And
if you are really sure that you want to come, we shall be delighted to
have you. Because, to tell you the truth, I think you are exactly the
man we need."




THE SECOND CHAPTER. GOOD-BYE!
