against the faces of the two boys.

They had to stand still and cover their eyes with their hands.

When the dust subsided they again hurried forward.

At the edge of the ravine a fiercer gust than the first hurled up
millions of icy particles.

They glittered like a cloud of diamond dust in the sun's rays.

Wishing to escape, both the lads dropped on to the lower ledge.

"It's worse here than ever," exclaimed Bob, holding his rifle in one
hand and placing the other so as partly to protect his face. "Let's get
into yonder cave."

They both ran toward it--that is, Jack ran, and Bob hobbled after.

The former had only just time to see that the floor of the cavern sank
at a sharp angle, when he felt his feet fly from under him.

Our hero, arriving at the cave's mouth at the instant of his friend's
fall, was horror-struck to see him slide on his side toward the edge of
a dark abyss, over which the water trickled.

"Help, Bob!" cried Jack, in vain trying to regain his feet.

Our hero clearly saw the fearful danger of his comrade's position.

Jack's feet were already over the edge.

"I am gone! Help!" he gasped.

Then, with a stifled cry, he disappeared over verge of the abyss.




Chapter VIII.--A Remarkable Story.


"Jack! Jack!" shouted Bob.

A sound as of falling rocks or ice blocks reached his ears, but no
answering voice.

The echoes of the falling masses died away.

Bob was filled with dismay at the dreadful ending of his chum.

He had reached his gun to him, but Larmore had been unable to grasp it.

He shuddered as he thought of Jack's feelings as he felt himself
shooting over the precipice.

There was nothing to do but to return.

He found, lame as he was, the path extremely difficult.

But at length he reached the yacht and told his story.

"It's dreadful," said Captain Sumner. "First my daughter and your
mother, and now your friend, a young gentleman we all liked and I, for
one, looked on as a comrade, for we fought side by side against that
rascally crew of ours."

The captain was quite affected.

When the _Dart_ was once more going through the water in the direction
in which Bob had seen what he took for a boat sail, he came to the side
of our hero, who stood leaning on the after-bulwarks, gazing at the
berg, whose southern point they were now passing.

"He was a fine young fellow!" he exclaimed, "and would have made a good
officer.

"But what are you looking at?"

"A seal, sir," said Bob. "Don't you see it, lying in the shade of that
block of ice, on the ledge, lapped by the swell?"

"Seals don't lie in the shade--they bask in the sun. Give me the glass,
Bob."

But our hero was already drawing it out to his focus.

No sooner did he get it pointed correctly than he uttered a cry of
surprise.

"That's his body!" he exclaimed. "At all events, a man's body. How on
earth did it come there?"

A small boat was still towing astern.

Bob, forgetful of his sprain, lowered himself into her, and grasped the
oars, while the captain followed.

"Hold hard!" shouted the mate.

Our hero impatiently, though he never for a moment expected to find his
friend alive, complied.

In two minutes Leeks reappeared and let down a flask into the boat.

Our hero dashed the oars into the water, and the small boat moved faster
over the heaving face of the ocean than she had ever done before.

"Don't deceive yourself. If it is your friend, he can't be alive," said
the captain, as they approached the body of the ledge.

"It is Jack!" he added, a couple of minutes later. "But how on earth did
he come there?"

Another score of vigorous strokes brought the little boat alongside the
berg.

Hardly waiting to fasten the painter, they rushed to the body.

It was lying on its back, and as Bob bent over it he noticed a faint
tinge of color on the cheek.

"He's only stunned, I believe, after all," cried our hero.

The captain unscrewed the top of the flask and poured a mouthful of wine
between the teeth of the senseless lad.

In a minute it took effect.

Jack sighed and opened his eyes.

"Let's get him on board the yacht at once," exclaimed the captain.

First, however, he passed his hand along each limb, and then felt Jack's
ribs.

The patient winced at the last experiment and uttered a low cry.

"Legs and arms all right," muttered the captain, as he with our hero's
help carried the boy to the small boat; "so, if a rib's broken, he must
consider himself well out of a bad scrape."

Bob again pulled his hardest, and when alongside the yacht his comrade
with some difficulty was got on board.

It was not until late that evening that Jack was able to tell of his
wonderful escape.

"I don't know much about it," he said, "but never shall I forget the
awful feeling as I shot over the edge of the precipice.

"Of course I thought that I should fall down a well that penetrated
right through the berg into the sea.

"However, instead of that, I did not fall a great distance before I came
down feet first among a lot of pieces of loose ice, or, if not loose,
they gave way with me, and together we went clattering down a second
slope.

"All of a sudden I was pulled up by my rifle, which was slung round my
shoulders, getting jammed across the passage.

"I tried to gain my feet, but failed; the slope was too smooth and
steep.

"There was but one thing for it, and that was to go on.

"I slipped the sling over my head, and away I went again.

"Then came another fall.

"This nearly knocked me senseless.

"I just remember another slide, then daylight, then a last fall, and I
lost all consciousness, only coming to myself to find you leaning over
me."

"How is your side?" asked the captain. "Your escape was most wonderful.
Another foot farther, and you would have been drowned."

"It was, as you say, a narrow escape. As for my side, I must say it's
rather painful."

However, on the captain pressing it, he came to the conclusion that no
ribs were broken.

It was bandaged up, and Jack was able to walk about, thankful that
things were not worse.




Chapter IX.--The Volcano Of Ice.


For three long days the _Dart_ bore away northwest, the direction in
which the last had been seen of the missing boat.

"Luckily it's the right course to steer for the Siberian coast,"
remarked the captain, as he sat over his wine after midday dinner. "We
shall sight the high land to-morrow morning, if not before"

"Surely we shall come across the boat in time, captain?" remarked Bob.

"Well, we have had wonderfully fine weather," replied the captain. "But,
after all she was but a cutter, handled by a lunatic."

And he and Bob interchanged looks of despair as they ascended the
companion ladder.

"Bok, go to the foremast-head," ordered the captain. "Take the glass,
and have a look around."

The sailor slung the telescope over his shoulder and nimbly mounted the
rigging.

When he arrived at the topgallant-yard he passed his arm round the
skypole, and, adjusting the glass, swept the line of the horizon.

There was a long pause.

"Deck ahoy!"

"What is it?" bellowed the captain.

"Sure, there is a mist, or smoke right ahead, and above it I see what
looks like the top of a mountain," replied the Irishman.

"Nothing else?"

"There is a low, flat berg."

"Nothing more? No sign of a boat-sail?"

"Nothing the size of a pocket handkerchief, yer honor."

"Well, we must give up the search for the present and start for the
Siberian shore. But I give you my word, Bob, I shall not give up this
hunt for many a week."

The wind fell light, and the _Dart_ did not make more than three knots
an hour during that afternoon.

The strange misty appearance still hung over the water.

They were gradually approaching it, and it was not more than a couple of
miles ahead, when, as the sun set, the captain and the two boys went to
supper, leaving Leeks in charge of the deck.

They had just finished their meal when the latter shouted down the
companion for them to come up.

An extraordinary scene met their gaze when they reached the deck.

The yacht was still in moderately smooth water, but a quarter of a mile
before her the sea was covered with a thick mist, while it was tossed
hither and thither in tumbling waves, which met and crossed one another
in wild confusion.

As they looked a thick body of smoke was belched from the midst of the
turmoil.

"Port! hard aport!" shouted the captain. "Round with the yards! Flatten
in the jib! Be smart, there!"

Rushing forward, followed by Bok and Jack, the captain himself seized
the rope and aided the sailors to execute his orders, while Leeks
attended to the jib.

Bok was at the wheel.

When on the new tack the _Dart_ was not a cable's length from the
boiling water.

"It's a subterranean eruption!" exclaimed the captain. "Look--look
yonder!"

Where he pointed, from the midst of the curling waves, a great black
patch of what seemed to be mud rose above the surface.

Round it were thick columns of smoke, which instantly shut it out from
view.

The wind chopped round, and a fierce gust came, laden with steam and
smoke, from the north.

The yacht heeled over till her copper sheeting gleamed above the
water-line.

Gasping for breath, for a fearful stench accompanied the smoke, which
enveloped them, all on board could do nothing but hold on to whatever
was handiest.

A rushing, roaring sound filled their ears as the _Dart_ dashed onward,
throwing the boiling water in showers of spray over her bows.

The men forward were forced to stagger aft.

It looked as if the _Dart_ was doomed!




Chapter X.--The Escape Of The "Dart."


For fully ten minutes no one could tell whether the yacht would right
herself or not.

Captain Sumner, aided by our hero and Jack, at length found the
topgallant halyards, and lowered the sail in the peak.

We say found, for the darkness was intense.

Then the gallant little vessel, as if freed from an overpowering load,
came up to her bracings.

Once more she flew with increased speed through the water.

A few seconds and the star-lit sky again appeared overhead, and the
rolling smoke wreaths were left behind.

"Heavens!" cried the captain; "never in all my life have I seen the
like. What a death to have escaped!"

As if exhausted with its own fury, the squall subsided as suddenly as it
had sprung up. The smoke gradually blew away.

And there, over the starboard quarter, some two miles distant, lay a
long, low, black island.

"Look! look!" yelled Bob suddenly.

All eyes followed his outstretched hand.

There on the shore rested a familiar-looking boat, containing three
figures--Mrs. Cromwell, Viola, and the madman.

Mrs. Cromwell and Viola were waving their hands. Then, assured they were
seen, both fell back unconscious.

As for the mad sailor, he never stirred. He was dead.

It did not take the captain and Bob long to reach the women folks. They
were taken on board the _Dart_, and, after Bob had kissed his mother and
the captain had hugged his daughter, and both were given food, they told
their story.

"When the madman struck Bob I nearly fainted," said Mrs. Cromwell. "When
I came to he had hoisted the sail, and we were leaving the shore. The
crazy fellow was eating some ship biscuit, which lay in a basket.

"When the madman had appeased his hunger he looked at us for some
minutes without speaking.

"We were dreadfully frightened, but he never once came aft to annoy us.

"He placed some tinned meat and water near us, and then sat by the mast,
singing loudly and rocking himself backward and forward.

"Viola and myself slept in turn; but the madman sat in the bow, looking
out ahead, hour after hour.

"When the wind rose and the waves broke into the cutter he reefed the
sail, and managed her wonderfully well.

"Still he never spoke.

"A shower fell, and Viola and myself collected the water and had a good
drink.

"Another time snow fell.

"This also we collected and put into the barrel.

"Time after time a fresh can of meat was placed out for us.

"But we ate very sparingly.

"I think at this period the man's senses were returning to him, for soon
after he spoke.

"He told us he did not know where we were, but trusted it was off the
coast of Siberia, and that we had every chance of being picked up.

"He said that his name was Charlow, and that he had been mate of a brig
that had been wrecked, but he had gone mad through misery, loneliness,
and want.

"We had just sighted the coast, when first the smoke from your vessel
came into view.

"Charlow was very weak, but he altered the direction the boat was going,
and told us how to steer toward you.

"Presently the yacht came in sight, and we tried to get him to put us on
board; but he was too weak, and just before Bob saw us he breathed his
last."

Such was Mrs. Cromwell's narrative, and Viola corroborated it.

A happy day was spent on board of the _Dart_. "I trust we are never
separated again," said Bob to his mother.

"So do I, Bob," she returned fondly. Then she gave a sigh. "I wonder
when we will reach Cedar Island. I see nothing like cedar trees around
here."

"The map has but one cedar on it," he returned. "It must have floated up
here in the water and taken root in the ice. Even Captain Sumner can't
understand that part of it."

On the following day the _Dart_ again set sail for the coast of Siberia.

They were well into the sea of Kamtchatka, and felt that they must soon
strike the spot mentioned in Ruel Gross' memorandums, if the old sailor
had taken his observations correctly.

"If only we were sure father was alive!" Bob murmured more than once.

Three days passed, and Bob was one morning in the foretop when suddenly
he gave a wild shout.

"Land ahoy!"

"Where away?" asked Captain Sumner quickly.

For from the deck nothing but icebergs were to be seen.

"To the northwest, sir. Will you let me have the glass?"

The glass was quickly brought and adjusted. The captain gave one glance.

"Ah! Bob, look!"

The boy did so, and then gave a shout that brought everyone on board on
deck.

"Cedar Island!"




Chapter XI.--Among A Strange Foe.


It was true.

Far off to the northwest they could see the shore of a land that was
covered with ice and snow.

The snow was of a reddish color, and the ice a deep blue.

But this was not all, nor by far the strangest part of the picture.

On the top of a hill, amid the snow, there stood a large cedar tree.

Its heavy branches swayed in the breeze mournfully; for though standing
as if planted, the tree was dead.

For several minutes those on the _Dart_ viewed the scene.

Then Bob broke the spell.

"Do you know what I think?" he said.

"I think that dead cedar was stuck up on the hill for a guide."

"Perhaps you are right," returned Captain Sumner. "One thing is
certain--we have reached Cedar Island, as Gross called it. Probably the
ground has a Russian name a yard long."

"Let us waste no time in getting ashore," cried Bob. "My father may be
waiting for us!"

At this the captain said nothing, not wishing to hurt the boy's
feelings. But the _Dart_ continued on her course, and soon they dropped
anchor in deep water but a few rods from the edge of the land.

Bob was the first to enter the small boat. He was followed by the
captain and Jack and two sailors.

The shore of the land reached, they gazed around curiously.

"Looks deserted," said Bob, in a disappointed tone of voice. "But come
on up to the cedar. We may be able to discover something from the top of
the hill." The ascent was quickly made by Bob, but scarcely was the top
gained than a shout was heard from below.

"Savages!"

Bob was right. The sight that met his eyes startled him as he had never
been startled before.

Rushing forward, they perceived the yacht surrounded by a half-score of
canoes.

Two others were drawn up on the beach, and half a dozen or more
copper-colored savages were standing round the dingy.

"We must save our boat at any cost!" cried Captain Sumner.

As they dashed down the hill the savages turned, armed with clubs, to
face them.

One was bending a bow, but a shot from Bob's gun broke his arm.

Jack also fired, and the aborigines, all save one, took to flight,
jumping into one of the canoes.

This brave chief, for such he looked, wielding a heavy club with both
hands, rushed at our hero.

Bob threw up his gun to parry the blow.

The weapon was struck from his hand, but the blow fell harmless.
