it, but I could not tell you what my life has been. When they found out
my weakness, they said I was not worth what they gave for me, and that I
must go into one of the low cabs, and just be used up; that is what they
are doing, whipping and working with never one thought of what I
suffer--they paid for me, and must get it out of me, they say. The man
who hires me now pays a deal of money to the owner every day, and so he
has to get it out of me, too; and so it's all the week round and round,
with never a Sunday rest."

I said, "You used to stand up for yourself if you were ill-used."

"Ah!" she said, "I did once, but it's no use; men are strongest, and if
they are cruel and have no feeling, there is nothing that we can do but
just bear it--bear it on and on to the end. I wish the end was come, I
wish I was dead. I have seen dead horses, and I am sure they do not
suffer pain."

I was very much troubled, and I put my nose up to hers, but I could say
nothing to comfort her. I think she was pleased to see me, for she said,
"You are the only friend I ever had."

Just then her driver came up, and with a tug at her mouth, backed her
out of the line and drove off, leaving me very sad, indeed.

A short time after this, a cart with a dead horse in it passed our cab
stand. The head hung out of the cart tail, the lifeless tongue was
slowly dropping with blood; and the sunken eyes! but I can't speak of
them, the sight was too dreadful! It was a chestnut horse with a long,
thin neck. I saw a white streak down the forehead. I believe it was
Ginger; I hoped it was, for then her troubles would be over. Oh! if men
were more merciful, they would shoot us before we came to such misery.




CHAPTER XV


At a sale I found myself in company with a lot of horses--some lame,
some broken-winded, some old, and some that I am sure it would have been
merciful to shoot.

[Illustration]

The buyers and sellers, too, many of them, looked not much better off
than the poor beasts they were bargaining about. There were poor old
men, trying to get a horse or pony for a few pounds, that might drag
about some little wood or coal cart. There were poor men trying to sell
a worn-out beast for two or three pounds, rather than have the greater
loss of killing him. Some of them looked as if poverty and hard times
had hardened them all over; but there were others that I would have
willingly used the last of my strength in serving; poor and shabby, but
kind and humane, with voices that I could trust. There was one tottering
old man that took a great fancy to me, and I to him, but I was not
strong enough--it was an anxious time! Coming from the better part of
the fair, I noticed a man who looked like a gentleman farmer, with a
young boy by his side; he had a broad back and round shoulders, a kind,
ruddy face, and he wore a broad-brimmed hat. When he came up to me and
my companions, he stood still, and gave a pitiful look round upon us. I
saw his eye rest on me; I had still a good mane and tail, which did
something for my appearance. I pricked my ears and looked at him.

"There's a horse, Willie, that has known better days."

"Poor old fellow!" said the boy; "do you think, grandpapa, he was ever a
carriage horse?"

"Oh, yes! my boy," said the farmer, coming closer, "he might have been
anything when he was young; look at his nostrils and his ears, the shape
of his neck and shoulder; there's a deal of breeding about that horse."
He put out his hand and gave me a kind pat on the neck. I put out my
nose in answer to his kindness; the boy stroked my face.

"Poor old fellow! see, grandpapa, how well he understands kindness.
Could not you buy him and make him young again as you did with
Ladybird?"

"My dear boy, I can't make all old horses young; besides, Ladybird was
not so very old, as she was run down and badly used."

"Well, grandpapa, I don't believe that this one is old; look at his mane
and tail. I wish you would look into his mouth, and then you could tell;
though he is so very thin, his eyes are not sunk like some old horses."
The old gentleman laughed. "Bless the boy! he is as horsey as his old
grandfather."

"But do look at his mouth, grandpapa, and ask the price; I am sure he
would grow young in our meadows."

The man who had brought me for sale now put in his word. "The young
gentleman's a real knowing one, sir. Now, the fact is, this 'ere hoss is
just pulled down with over-work in the cabs; he's not an old one, and I
heard as how the vetenary said that a six-months' run off would set him
right up, being as how his wind was not broken. I've had the tending of
him these ten days past, and a gratefuller, pleasanter animal I never
met with, and 'twould be worth a gentleman's while to give a five-pound
note for him, and let him have a chance. I'll be bound he'd be worth
twenty pounds next spring."

The old gentleman laughed, and the little boy looked up eagerly. "O,
grandpapa, did you not say the colt sold for five pounds more than you
expected? You would not be poorer if you did buy this one."

The farmer slowly felt my legs, which were much swelled and strained;
then he looked at my mouth. "Thirteen or fourteen, I should say; just
trot him out, will you?"

I arched my poor thin neck, raised my tail a little and threw out my
legs as well as I could, for they were very stiff.

"What is the lowest you will take for him?" said the farmer as I came
back. "Five pounds, sir; that was the lowest price my master set."

"'Tis a speculation," said the old gentleman, shaking his head, but at
the same time slowly drawing out his purse, "quite a speculation! Have
you any more business here?" he said, counting the sovereigns into his
hand. "No, sir, I can take him for you to the inn, if you please."

"Do so, I am now going there."




CHAPTER XVI


MY LAST HOME

One day, during this summer, the groom cleaned and dressed me with such
extraordinary care that I thought some new change must be at hand; he
trimmed my fetlocks and legs, passed the tar-brush over my hoofs, and
even parted my forelock. I think the harness had an extra polish. Willie
seemed half-anxious, half-merry, as he got into the chaise with his
grandfather. "If the ladies take to him," said the old gentleman,
"they'll be suited and he'll be suited; we can but try."

[Illustration]

At the distance of a mile or two from the village, we came to a pretty,
low house, with a lawn and shrubbery at the front, and a drive up to the
door. Willie rang the bell, and asked if Miss Blomefield or Miss Ellen
was at home. Yes, they were. So, while Willie stayed with me, Mr.
Thoroughgood went into the house. In about ten minutes he returned,
followed by three ladies; one tall, pale lady, wrapped in a white shawl,
leaned on a younger lady, with dark eyes and a merry face; the other, a
very stately-looking person, was Miss Blomefield. They all came and
looked at me and asked questions. The younger lady--that was Miss
Ellen--took to me very much; she said she was sure she should like me, I
had such a good face. The tall, pale lady said she should always be
nervous in riding behind a horse that had once been down, as I might
come down again, and if I did she should never get over the fright."

"You see, ladies," said Mr. Thoroughgood, "many first-rate horses have
had their knees broken through the carelessness of their drivers,
without any fault of their own, and from what I see of this horse, I
should say that is his case; but, of course, I do not wish to influence
you. If you incline, you can have him on trial, and then your coachman
will see what he thinks of him."

"You have always been such a good adviser to us about our horses," said
the stately lady, "that your recommendation would go a long way with me,
and if my sister Lavinia sees no objection, we will accept your offer of
a trial, with thanks."

It was then arranged that I should be sent for the next day. In the
morning a smart-looking young man came for me; at first, he looked
pleased; but when he saw my knees, he said in a disappointed voice: "I
didn't think, sir, you would have recommended a blemished horse like
that."

"'Handsome is that handsome does,'" said my master; "you are only taking
him on trial, and I am sure you will do fairly by him, young man; if he
is not safe as any horse you ever drove, send him back."

I was led to my new home, placed in a comfortable stable, fed, and left
to myself. The next day, when my groom was cleaning my face, he said:
"That is just like the star that Black Beauty had, he is much the same
height, too; I wonder where he is now."

A little further on, he came to the place in my neck where I was bled,
and where a little knot was left in the skin. He almost started, and
begun to look me over carefully, talking to himself. "White star in the
forehead, one white foot on the off side, this little knot just in that
place"; then, looking at the middle of my back--"and as I am alive,
there is that little patch of white hair that John used to call
'Beauty's threepenny bit.' It must be Black Beauty! Why, Beauty!
Beauty! do you know me? little Joe Green, that almost killed you?" And
he began patting and patting me as if he was quite overjoyed.

I could not say that I remembered him, for now he was a fine grown young
fellow, with black whiskers, and a man's voice, but I was sure he knew
me, and that he was Joe Green, and I was very glad. I put my nose up to
him, and tried to say that we were friends. I never saw a man so
pleased.

"Give you a fair trial! I should think so, indeed! I wonder who the
rascal was that broke your knees, my old Beauty! you must have been
badly served out somewhere; well, well, it won't be my fault if you
haven't good times of it now. I wish John Manly was here to see you."

In the afternoon I was put into a low Park chair and brought to the
door. Miss Ellen was going to try me, and Green went with her. I soon
found that she was a good driver, and she seemed pleased with my paces.
