just as if their feet had been cut off, and they had to walk on stumps.

The Chinese do not count their daughters among their children. Mr. Doty
says, he one day asked his Chinese teacher how many children he had. He
replied, that he had several. "How many of these," he then inquired,
"are daughters?" "We do not count our daughters among our children," he
answered. "I have three daughters, but we Chinese count our sons only as
children."

When this missionary was in a Chinese village where he had never been
before, a man called to see him, bringing with him two pretty little
girls, neatly dressed, about six and seven years old. He said that they
were his daughters and that he wished to sell them. Mr. Doty refused to
buy them, as it was wicked to buy and sell children; but he told him,
that if he would commit them to him, he would take them home with him,
and educate them, and that they might return home after they had grown.
To this proposal he would not consent but said, that if he would buy
them, they should be his for ever. He could have bought them both for
about twenty-six dollars.

The Chinese have many schools, but none for their daughters, as they do
not teach them, to read. When they are about thirteen years old, they
shut them up in what are called "women's apartments," where they remain
until the time of their marriage. Then the parents sell them to those
who wish to have wives for their sons. In this way, they are frequently
married to persons whom they never before saw.

Many parents in China destroy their little girls soon after they are
born, or while they are very small. This they frequently do by throwing
them into rivers, or into the sea, after they have wrapped them up in
coarse mats. There is a little Chinese girl, named Ellen, now living in
Newark, New Jersey, whose father was about to kill her when she was
three weeks old. An English lady heard of his intentions, and sent a
person with ten dollars to see if she could not be bought. He was
offered the ten dollars, but refused to take them. She sent ten dollars
more. He consented to take the twenty dollars. This little girl was
brought by this English lady to America, when she was about six years
old. The friends who have her under their care, are educating her with
the hope that she may go back to China, to tell its females of the
Saviour.

Did you ever, my dear girls, think why it is that your parents love you,
and educate you--why it is that they try to make you happy, instead of
cramping your feet, shutting you up, and, perhaps, at last selling you?
It is because they have the Bible. Then, how anxious should you be to
save what money you can, to buy Bibles to send to those poor heathen.

As I am now speaking of the destruction of infants, I would observe,
that this crime is common in other heathen countries. It was quite
common, until lately, in the island of Tahiti, and other places in the
South Pacific Ocean. When the missionaries of the London Missionary
Society went there, many years ago, they found the females in a very
degraded situation. Mr. Nott, one of these missionaries, declared that
three out of four of the children were murdered as soon as they were
born. He met a woman soon after this dreadful crime had been abolished
to whom he said, "How many children have you?" "This one in my arms,"
was her answer. "And how many did you kill?" She replied, "Eight."
Another woman, who was asked the same question, said that she had
destroyed _seventeen_. Infanticide, or, in other words, the destruction
of infants, says the Rev. Mr. Williams, was carried to an almost
incredible extent in Tahiti, and some other islands. He writes, "During
the visit of the deputation, G. Bennet, Esq., was our guest for three or
four days; and on one occasion, while conversing on this subject, he
expressed a wish to obtain accurate knowledge of the extent to which
this cruel practice had prevailed. Three women were sitting in the room
at the time, making European garments, under Mrs. Williams direction;
and, after replying to Mr. Bennet's inquiries, I said, 'I have no doubt
but that each of these women has destroyed some of her children.' Mr.
Bennet exclaimed, 'Impossible; such motherly, respectable women could
never have been guilty of so great an atrocity.' 'Well,' I added, 'we
will ask them.' Addressing the first, I said to her, 'Friend, how many
children have you destroyed?' She was startled at my question, and at
first charged me with unkindness, in harrowing up her feelings, by
bringing the destruction of her babes to her remembrance; but upon
learning the object of my inquiry, she replied, with a faltering voice,
'I have destroyed _nine_.' The second, with eyes suffused with tears,
said, 'I have destroyed _seven_;' and the third informed us that she had
destroyed _five_. Had the missionaries gone there but a few years
before, with the blessing of God, they would have prevented all this.
These mothers were all Christians at the time this conversation was
held."

"On another occasion," says Mr. Williams, "I was called to visit the
wife of a chief in dying circumstances. She had professed Christianity
for many years, had learned to read when about sixty, and was a very
active teacher in our adult school. In the prospect of death, she sent a
pressing request that I would visit her immediately; and on my entering
her apartment she exclaimed, 'O, servant of God, come and tell me what I
must do.' Perceiving that she suffered great mental distress, I
inquired the cause of it, when she replied, 'I am about to die.' 'Well,'
I rejoined, 'if it be so, what creates this agony of mind?' 'O, my sins,
my sins,' she cried; 'I am about to die.' I then inquired what the
particular sins were which so greatly distressed her, when she
exclaimed, 'O, my children, my murdered children! I am about to die, and
shall meet them all at the judgment-seat of Christ.' Upon this I
inquired how many children she had destroyed, and to my astonishment she
replied, 'I have destroyed _sixteen_, and now I am about to die.'" After
this Mr. Williams tried to comfort her, by telling her that she had done
this when a heathen, and during the times of ignorance, which God winked
at. But she received no consolation from this thought, and exclaimed
again, "O, my children, my children." He then directed her to the
"faithful saying, which is worthy of all acceptation, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners." This gave her a little comfort;
and after visiting her frequently, and directing her to that blood which
cleanseth from all sin, he succeeded, with the blessing of God, in
bringing peace to her mind. She died soon after, rejoicing in the hope
that her sins, though many, would be forgiven her. Well may you exclaim,
my dear children,

    "Holy Bible, book divine,
    Precious treasure, thou art mine."

Infanticide still prevails in India, but as I have given a particular
description of this crime in my Sermon to Children, on the Condition of
the Heathen, I will here say nothing farther on the subject.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE DUTY OF PRAYING AND CONTRIBUTING FOR THE SPREAD OF THE GOSPEL.


My dear children--There is another story connected with India, which I
might have mentioned in my last chapter while writing about the
destruction of infants. I will relate it now, in order that you may be
constrained to pray more frequently for the heathen. Some time ago, the
wife of a native prince had a little daughter. The father ordered it to
be put to death, immediately after it was born. Had it been a son, an
heir to the throne, he would have taken great care of it. A second, a
third, a fourth, a fifth little daughter was born. All these were also
put to death by the command of the father. When a sixth little daughter
was born, the mother's heart yearned over it. "I cannot part with it,"
said she; "I will have it taken away and hid, so that the king may know
nothing about it." This was done, but the poor mother never dared to
send for her little girl. She never saw her again, but died sometime
after.

Many of the little girls in India are very pretty. They have dark eyes,
and sweet, expressive countenances. This little child grew to be a very
beautiful girl; and when she was eleven years old, some of her relations
ventured to bring her to her father. They thought that he would be
struck with the sight of his sweet child, and that he would love her for
the sake of her mother who had died. The little girl fell at his feet
and clasped his knees, and looked up in his face and said, "My father."
And what do you think that father did? Do you think that he took her up
in his arms, and kissed her? No. He seized her by the hair of her head,
drew his sword from his belt, and with a single blow took off her head.

Now, my dear children, do you not think that you ought to pray for the
poor heathen--to pray that God will send the Gospel to them? I want to
tell you of a little boy who heard me preach some time ago about the
heathen. One night he said his prayers, and went to bed. After he got
into bed, he said to the nurse, "I have forgotten to pray for the
heathen, and I must get out of bed and pray for them." The nurse then
told him that it would not be necessary for him to get up, as he could
pray for them while in bed. "No," said he, "I must get out of bed and
pray for them." And the dear little boy would not rest until he got out
of bed and prayed for them. Now I want all of you, my dear children,
every morning and evening, to kneel down and pray for the heathen, as
this little boy did. And I want you to do something more. I want you
always to be punctual in attending _the usual monthly concerts of
prayer,_ provided there are no juvenile monthly concerts to which you
can go. I have long wished to see juvenile monthly concerts of prayer
established. They would be very interesting if I am to judge from the
account of one which I some time ago received from a friend of mine, the
Rev. Mr. V----. I will give you some extracts from his letter. He
writes, "According to promise, I send you an account of the first
children's monthly concert, so far as I can learn, held on Long Island.
As notice was not given either in the church or Sabbath-school, the
attendance was smaller than it otherwise would have been. Still, about
sixty interesting children attended. After a few remarks concerning the
object of the meeting by the superintendent of the Sabbath-school they
sung with melting eyes the hymn that describes the wretched heathen
mother casting her lovely babe into the jaws of the monster of the
Granges. Prayer then was made, of about two or three minutes in length.
Then I gave some of the most affecting accounts of the cruelties and
ignorance of the heathen, as related by the devoted Williams, that
martyr missionary. Their silent attention and subdued countenances told
that their hearts were with the wretched idolaters. After having thus
spent about ten minutes, the children sung in a sweet manner, a hymn--a
prayer for those laboring amid the heathen:

    "When worn by toil, their spirits fail,
    Bid them the glorious future hail;
    Bid them the crown of life survey,
    And onward urge their conquering way."

"After which, two resolutions were passed, unanimously, by the children.
First, that they will each one attend the monthly concert of prayer
regularly, when able, and bring with them all their companions whom they
can persuade to come.

"Secondly, that they, with the children of the various schools of W----,
will constitute ---- a life member of the W---- Bible Society. Some of
the smaller children had brought their little Bibles to give them to
----, that he might carry them to the poor children of the heathen. But
when informed that the heathen could not understand English, they
determined to raise money, and send it out to purchase Bibles for the
children. This interesting meeting was closed by prayer, the doxology,
and benediction."

But not only can you pray for the heathen, you can give _something_ to
send the Gospel to them. Do you say that you have no money to give? But
cannot you earn some? Many young persons have done so. One of whom I
have read, says, "Besides supporting a school in Ceylon, we are going to
support five Chinese boys. I earn six cents a week for not using tea,
one for not using sugar, and three for not using coffee."

Another says, "I, with three others, have been making matches to the
amount of ten dollars, and should have made more, but the people are
pretty well supplied. I am going to dig my father's garden, and my
mother is going to give me a quarter of a dollar for digging it, which I
shall give to the missionaries. I am going to do all I can, and to earn
all I can, and save all that I have, to support the missionaries."

Another says, "I am going to leave off buying candy." What is that? Can
little girls and boys do without sugar-candy? I am afraid that many of
you, my dear children, would find it difficult to go without it. But let
me quote all that this child wrote. "I am going to leave off buying
candy and such little notions, unless it is necessary, and save every
cent that I can get and give it to the missionaries."

Now, my dear children, I do think that if you would save some of those
cents which you spend in buying candy, fire-crackers, and similar
things, and buy Bibles and tracts for the poor heathen, you would do
much more good with them.

I want to tell you about a little boy who belonged to one of my schools
in Ceylon, who has, as I hope, gone to heaven through the means of a
tract which cost only two or three cents, and which was the cause of his
coming under my care. After he had attended preaching for some time, he
begged me to admit him to the church. As he was quite young, not eleven
years old, I was afraid to receive him. This feeling, perhaps, was
wrong. He never joined the church on earth. He has, however, I hope,
gone to join the church in heaven. When he was about eleven years of
age, he was attacked with the cholera and died. In this country, when
children are very ill, the father or mother will catch up a cocoa-nut or
a few plantains, and run off to the temple, and say, "Now, Swammie, if
you will cure my little boy or little girl, I will give you this
cocoa-nut, or these plantains." The mother of this boy saw that he was
very ill, and she told him that she wished to go to make offerings to
one of her idols, in order that he might get well. But he requested her
not to do so. "I do not worship idols," said he; "I worship Christ, my
Saviour. If he is pleased to spare me a little longer in the world, it
will be well; if not, I shall go to him." The last words he uttered
were, "I am going to Christ the Lord."

Now when you think about this little boy, I want you to ask yourselves,
whether it is not better to give two or three cents to try and save the
soul of some poor little heathen boy or girl, than to spend them in
buying candy, and other useless things.

But I must tell you about a little girl whom I saw some time ago, who
refused to buy candy while there are so many heathen without the Bible.
Her father is a sea-captain. Being absent from home, he sent her five
dollars to buy candy, or any thing else which she wished. As this little
girl had heard about the heathen, she determined to throw all her money
into the missionary-box, instead of spending it for her own pleasure.
The mother, on learning her intentions, asked her if she would not like
to spend a part of it for candy, and similar things. She replied, that
she would not, and in due time she put her five dollars into the
missionary-box. Not long after this, she was attacked with a severe
toothache. The mother proposed that the defective tooth should be
extracted. The little creature, for she was only about eight years old,
dreaded the operation, and seemed at first to be backward about having
it performed. To encourage her to submit to it, her mother offered her
twenty-five cents. This little girl did not then begin to reason, Now,
if I can only get those twenty-five cents, I can buy a doll, or I can
buy some sugar-candy; but she reasoned thus, Now, if I can get those
twenty-five cents, I can go and put them into the missionary-box. So she
said to her mother, I will go and have the tooth taken out. The tooth,
however, ceased to ache, but still she wished to have it extracted. Her
mother then interfered, and told her that, as it had ceased to ache, it
might be well for her not to have it drawn until it ached again. The
little girl, however, persisted, saying, that if it were not taken out,
she could not get the twenty-five cents to devote to the missionary
cause. She therefore went to the dentist's, submitted to the operation,
received her twenty-five cents, and went and threw them into the Lord's
treasury. Was not that a noble little girl? Doubtless you will all say
she was.

I must tell you about a noble little boy also. Some time ago, I was
preaching to the children of Canandaigua, in the western part of New
York. After I had preached there, I went on to Rochester. Returning from
that place, I met with a lady in the cars, who told me as follows:
"After you had preached in Canandaigua," said she, "a young lady there,
who had lost her mother, and who had six or seven or eight of her
brothers and sisters under her care, formed them into a missionary
society." Oh, I wish that all the dear children in America were formed
into missionary societies. After she had done this, she asked her little
brother how he was going to get money to put into the missionary-box.
"By catching mice," said he. His sister gave him two or three cents for
every mouse he caught. Thus it appears, that this dear little boy was
going to throw all his earnings into the Lord's treasury.

But let me tell you a little more about the children to whom I before
alluded. Another says, "In some of the day-schools of this city, the
girls have formed sewing societies, and make pin-cushions, needle-books,
emery-bags, and the like, and send the money that is raised from the
sale of them to the missionaries, to be used for the heathen. There are
seven Sabbath-schools in this town, and in each of them there is a
missionary association; so that in all about five hundred dollars are
sent from the Sabbath-schools every year."

Now, my dear girls, I want you to think of what has now been said about
the formation of sewing societies; and I want you to ask your mothers
whether they will not allow you to form such societies, to meet once a
week, or once in two weeks, or once a month to sew, to get some money to
send the Gospel to the heathen. Many societies of this kind have been
formed. After I had preached to the children in one of the churches in
Third-street, New York, the little girls who attend that church formed
such a society. The account which I received of it is as follows. "You
may remember, that in your address to our Sabbath-school, you related
instances of little girls knitting, sewing, etc., to earn something for
the missionary-box The examples which you related were not lost to the
girls of the Sabbath-school. Immediately they began to talk about
forming themselves into a sewing society, and making small articles, and
giving the proceeds to the missionary society. They did not stop here,
but went right to work, and soon formed their society, which they styled
the Juvenile Sewing Society. They are in a very prosperous and
flourishing condition at present. I know not the amount of funds they
possess--they pay a cent a week into their treasury--but they have a
large assortment of articles already made. I understand, also, they meet
once a week to sew."

After I had preached at a place called Little Falls, New York, the girls
formed a sewing society there. The following account of this society I
received from one of its little members. "When you were here last fall,
and told us how much good little girls had done in having sewing
societies, we thought we would see if _we_ could not do some good in the
world, as well as they; and, since October, we have met weekly, and by
holding a fair, we have succeeded in raising sixty-two dollars. We
hope it will be the means of saving some poor heathen children."

Now, as I said before, I want you, my dear girls, to ask your mothers if
you may not form such societies also. Will you think of it? I hope you
will.

Another of the children to whom I have twice referred, says, "I can try
and save their souls, if I am not there. I can work for them, and send
some money to you to buy them Bibles, and I can pray for them; and if I
should save some souls, O how would they thank me. But if I did not send
my money, nor care any thing about them, and I should not go to heaven,
and they should not, how would they rise up in judgment against me, and
say, If we had had the privileges that you had, we should not be here.
O, how thankful we ought to be, that we were not born in heathen lands.
O, if the poor heathen could only have such privileges as we have, how
thankful would they be; and if we were born in heathen lands, I have no
doubt that they would come and tell us about a Saviour."

I have received many letters from children, breathing the same spirit
which is manifested in the notes I have copied.

One writes, "Last winter I brought in the wood for mother, and she gave
me fifty cents. I now am very glad that I have not spent it, as I can
give it to you to buy tracts for the little heathen children of India."

A second writes, "The enclosed fifty cents my grandmother gave me when I
was a very little boy, for sitting still one hour. Will you please to
use it to furnish the Bible and missionary to the heathen."

A third writes, "I have always spent my money for candy and other
trifles, but since I have heard about the darkness and misery of the
heathen, I intend to save it all, and put it into the missionary-box."

A fourth writes, "The enclosed I earned by knitting. I intended to save
it, till I had sufficient to carry me a short journey to see some of my
friends; but when I heard you tell about the little heathen girls, I
thought I would give it to you, for the poor heathen children."

A fifth writes, "I have enclosed twelve and a half cents, which my
father gave me to go and see General Tom Thumb. When I heard you
lecture last evening, I came home and concluded to give it to you, and
let you buy Bibles for the poor heathen."

A sixth writes, "I remember, before my mother died, she used to tell me
a great deal about the children of India, and now she is in heaven. I
think she would like to have me give my heart to the Saviour, and go and
teach those poor children. I give you some money that was given to me to
see an exhibition, which I saved to give for such things, rather than
go."

A seventh writes, "You told us that two cents were the means of
converting a young man. I would give two cents every week, if it would
convert souls to Christ."

An eighth writes, "My mother told me, some time ago, that every day I
recited my lessons without missing a word, she would give me a penny;
and not being desirous to spend it, I do wish you would take it--fifty
cents--to the heathen. It may buy some tracts at the bazaar or market."

A ninth writes, "We feel sorry for those poor heathen children. We will
try to earn some money to buy Bibles for the heathen. Father has
promised us some land to work next summer, and we think we can raise
something and sell it to get the money."

A tenth writes, "Since you were here last spring, I have saved what I
could--one dollar--for the heathen children, and should be glad if I
could do more."

An eleventh writes, "The money which you will find enclosed, I earned by
working for my mother on Saturday, which I intended to keep to buy a
microscope; but when I heard you preach on Sabbath, I concluded to give
it to buy Bibles for the poor heathen children."

A twelfth writes, "The enclosed, five dollars, was a birthday present
from my father, but I want to give it to Dr. Scudder, for the poor
little boys in Ceylon."

A thirteenth writes, "Please accept my mite, by the hand of my brother.
