should pass by, they hoisted a signal of distress on a long pole. The
weather was very cold, and the day before they were wrecked, the deck
had been covered with ice; with much difficulty they managed to kindle a
fire, by means of a flint and some powder. They erected a small tent,
composed of pieces of canvas and boards, and were thus enabled to dry
their few clothes. The night was dreary and comfortless; but they
consoled themselves with the hope that their fire might be descried in
the dark, and taken for a signal of distress. Next day they were
delighted at the approach of a small whale-boat, manned by ten of their
comrades. When the vessel was wrecked, these men had lowered themselves
into the water, and had reached the island of Pera, but finding no fresh
water, were compelled to depart; and noticing the fire were enabled to
join their shipmates. But the waves ran so high that the boat could not
come to the shore, and some of those on the land endeavored to reach it.
One of the seamen called to Captain Palmer, inviting him to come to
them, but he steadily refused, saying, "No, Smith, save your unfortunate
shipmates; never mind me." After some consultation, they resolved to
take the Greek pilot on board, intending to go to Cerigotto, where, he
assured them, were a few families of fishermen, who might perhaps be
able to afford them some relief.

After the boat departed, the wind increased; in about two hours a
fearful storm came on. The waves mounted up, and extinguished their
fire; they swept over nearly the whole of the rock, compelling them to
flee for refuge to the highest part. Thus did nearly ninety pass a night
of the utmost horror; being compelled, lest they should be washed off,
to fasten a rope round the summit of a rock, and to clasp each other.
Their fatigue had been so great that several of them became delirious,
and lost their hold. They were also in constant terror of the wind
veering more to the north, in which case the waves would have dashed
over their position.

They now began to sink under their hardships, and many had suffered
deplorably. One had been so dashed against the rocks as to be nearly
scalped, exhibiting a dreadful spectacle; he lingered out the night, but
expired next morning. They were ill prepared to sustain famine, and they
were almost hopeless of escape. They dreaded lest the storm should come
on before the boat could have reached the island, for on her safety
their own depended. In the midst of these horrors the daylight broke,
and they saw the bodies of their departed shipmates, some still writhing
in the agonies of death. The sea had broken over them all night, and
some, among whom was the carpenter, had perished from cold.

Soon after, a vessel approached, and their hearts beat high with the
hope of deliverance. All her sails were set, and she came down before
the wind, steering right for the rock. They made repeated signals of
distress, and the vessel hove to, and hoisted out her boat. They hastily
prepared rafts to carry them through the surf, confident that the boat
was provided with supplies to relieve them. The boat came within
pistol-shot, full of men dressed in the European fashion. But what were
their indignation and grief, when the person who steered, after gazing
at them a few minutes, waved his hat, and then rowed off to the ship!
Their misery was increased by seeing the crew of the stranger-vessel
employed in collecting the floating fragments of the wreck. After this
grievous disappointment, their only hopes lay in the return of the boat.
They looked in vain; not a glimpse of her was to be seen. A raging
thirst tormented them; and some, in spite of warning, drank salt water;
raging madness soon followed, and their agonies were terminated by
death. Another awful night was passed by them. To preserve themselves
from the cold, they huddled close together, and covered themselves with
their few remaining rags. They were haunted by the ravings of those who
had drunk the sea-water, whom they tried in vain to pacify.

About twelve o'clock, the crew of the whale-boat hailed them; they cried
out in their agony for water. They could not procure it, for those in
the boat had none but earthen vessels, which could not be conveyed
through the surf. They were assured that they would be taken off by a
fishing vessel next morning; but there seemed to be little chance of
their surviving till then.

In the morning, the sun for the first time shone upon the rock. They
waited hour after hour, but there was no appearance either of the boat
or the vessel. Famine consumed them; but they looked with loathing on
the only means of appeasing it. When, however, the day wore on, after
praying for forgiveness of the sinful act, they were compelled to feed
on one of their number who had died the preceding night. Several
expired towards evening; among whom were the captain and first
lieutenant. During the night, some thought of constructing a raft which
might carry them to Cerigotto. The wind seemed favorable; and to perish
in the waters seemed preferable to remaining to die a lingering death
from hunger and thirst. At daylight, as fast as their feeble strength
permitted, they prepared to put their plan in execution, by lashing
together a number of larger spars. Scarcely had they launched it, when
it was destroyed. Five, rendered desperate, embarked on a few spars
hastily lashed together, which gave them scarcely room to stand; they
were soon carried away by unknown currents, and were no more heard of.

In the afternoon the whale-boat came again in sight. The crew told them
that they had experienced great difficulty in persuading the Greek
fishermen of Cerigotto to venture to put to sea, because of the stormy
weather; but they gave them hopes, that if the weather moderated, the
boats would come next day. Before they had done speaking, twelve men
plunged from the rock into the sea, and nearly reached the boat; two
were taken in, one was drowned, and the rest were so fortunate as to
recover their former station.

As the day wore on, their weakness increased. One of the survivors
described himself as feeling the approach of annihilation; his sight
failed, and his senses were confused; his strength was exhausted; he
looked towards the setting sun, expecting never to see it rise again.
Suddenly the approach of the boats was announced; and from the depth of
despair, they rose to the very summit of joy. Their parched frames were
refreshed with copious draughts of water.

Immediate preparations were made for departure. Of one hundred and
twenty-two persons on board the Nautilus, when she struck, fifty-eight
had perished. Eighteen were drowned when she was wrecked, five were lost
in the small boat, and thirty-four died of famine. About fifty now
embarked in four fishing vessels, and landed the same evening at
Cerigotto; making sixty-four in all, including those saved in the
whale-boat. During their six days sojourn on the rock, they had nothing
to subsist on, save human flesh.

They landed at a small creek. The Greeks received them with great
hospitality, but had not skill to cure their wounds, and had no bandages
but those procured by tearing up their own shirts. Wishing to procure
some medical assistance, they desired to reach Cerigo, an island twenty
miles distant, on which an English vice-consul resided. Fourteen days
elapsed before they could set sail. They bade adieu to these kind
preservers, and in six or eight hours reached Cerigo, where all possible
help was afforded them. Thence they were conveyed by a Russian ship to
Corfu; where they arrived on the 2d of March, 1807, about two months
after their melancholy disaster.




GALLANT EXPLOITS OF COMMODORE DECATUR.


Decatur is one of the most illustrious names in the naval annals of
America. Among the many officers who have borne this name, none was more
celebrated and admired in his life time and none more deeply lamented
at his untimely decease than Commodore Stephen Decatur.

[Illustration: BURNING OF THE PHILADELPHIA.]

His life was a series of heroic actions. But of these perhaps the most
remarkable of all is that which is recorded in the following language of
his biographer--the burning of the frigate Philadelphia.

Decatur had been sent out from the United States, in the Argus, to join
Commodore Preble's squadron before Tripoli. He exchanged this vessel
with Lieutenant Hull for the Enterprise.

After making that exchange, he proceeded to Syracuse, where the squadron
was to rendezvous. On his arrival at that port, he was informed of the
fate of the frigate Philadelphia, which had run aground on the Barbary
coast, and fallen into the hands of the Tripolitans. The idea
immediately presented itself to his mind of attempting her recapture or
destruction. On Commodore Preble's arrival, a few days afterwards, he
proposed to him a plan for the purpose, and volunteered his services to
execute it. The wary mind of that veteran officer at first disapproved
of an enterprise so full of peril; but the risks and difficulties that
surrounded it, only stimulated the ardour of Decatur, and imparted to it
an air of adventure, fascinating to his youthful imagination.

[Illustration: COMMODORE PREBLE.]

The consent of the commodore having been obtained, Lieutenant Decatur
selected for the expedition a ketch (the Intrepid) which he had captured
a few weeks before from the enemy, and manned her with seventy
volunteers, chiefly from his own crew. He sailed from Syracuse on the 3d
of February, 1804, accompanied by the United States brig Syren,
Lieutenant Stewart, who was to aid with his boats, and to receive the
crew of the ketch, in case it should be found expedient to use her as a
fire ship.

After fifteen days of very tempestuous weather, they arrived at the
harbor of Tripoli, a little before sunset. It had been arranged between
Lieutenants Decatur and Stewart, that the ketch should enter the harbor
about ten o'clock that night, attended by the boats of the Syren. On
arriving off the harbor, the Syren, in consequence of a change of wind,
had been thrown six or eight miles without the Intrepid. The wind at
this time was fair, but fast declining, and Lieutenant Decatur
apprehended that, should he wait for the Syren's boats to come up, it
might be fatal to the enterprise, as they could not remain longer on the
coast, their provisions being nearly exhausted. For these reasons he
determined to venture into the harbor alone, which he did about eight
o'clock.

An idea may be formed of the extreme hazard of the enterprise from the
situation of the frigate. She was moored within half gunshot of the
bashaw's castle, and of the principal battery. Two of the enemy's
cruisers lay within two cables' length, on the starboard quarter, and
their gunboats within half gunshot, on the starboard bow. All the guns
of the frigate were mounted and loaded. Such were the immediate perils
that our hero ventured to encounter with a single ketch, beside the
other dangers that abound in a strongly fortified harbor.

Although from the entrance to the place where the frigate lay, was only
three miles, yet, in consequence of the lightness of the wind, they did
not get within hail of her until eleven o'clock. When they had
approached within two hundred yards, they were hailed and ordered to
anchor, or they would be fired into. Lieutenant Decatur ordered a
Maltese pilot, who was on board the ketch, to answer that they had lost
their anchors in a gale of wind on the coast, and, therefore, could not
comply with their request. By this time it had become perfectly calm,
and they were about fifty yards from the frigate. Lieutenant Decatur
ordered a small boat that was alongside of the ketch, to take a rope and
make it fast to the frigate's fore-chains. This being done, they began
to warp the ketch alongside. It was not until this moment that the enemy
suspected the character of their visitor, and great confusion
immediately ensued. This enabled our adventurers to get alongside of the
frigate, when Decatur immediately sprang aboard, followed by Mr. Charles
Morris, midshipman. These two were nearly a minute on deck, before their
companions could succeed in mounting the side. Fortunately, the Turks
had not sufficiently recovered from their surprise to take advantage of
this delay. They were crowded together on the quarterdeck, perfectly
astonished and aghast, without making any attempt to oppose the
assailing party. As soon as a sufficient number of men had gained the
deck to form a front equal to that of the enemy, they rushed in upon
them. The Turks stood the assault for a short time, and were completely
overpowered. About twenty were killed on the spot, many jumped
overboard, and the rest flew to the maindeck, whither they were pursued
and driven to the hold.

After entire possession had been gained of the ship, and every thing
prepared to set fire to her, a number of launches were seen rowing about
the harbor. This determined Lieutenant Decatur to remain on board the
frigate, from whence a better defence could be made than from on board
the ketch. The enemy had already commenced firing on them from their
batteries and castle, and from two corsairs that were lying near.
Perceiving that the launches did not attempt to approach, he ordered the
ship should be set on fire, which was done, at the same time, in
different parts. As soon as this was done, they left her; and such was
the rapidity of the flames, that it was with the utmost difficulty they
preserved the ketch. At this critical moment a most propitious breeze
sprang up, blowing directly out of the harbor, which, in a few moments,
carried them out of reach of the enemy's guns, and they made good their
retreat without the loss of a single man, and with but four wounded.

For this gallant and romantic achievement, Lieutenant Decatur was
promoted to the rank of post captain, there being at that time no
intermediate grade. This promotion was peculiarly gratifying to him,
insomuch as it was done with the consent of the officers over whose
heads he was raised.

In the ensuing spring, it being determined to make an attack upon
Tripoli, Commodore Preble obtained from the King of Naples, the loan of
six gunboats and two bombards, which he formed into two divisions, and
gave the command of one of them to Captain Decatur, the other to
Lieutenant Somers. The squadron sailed from Syracuse, consisting of the
frigate Constitution, the brig Syren, the schooners Nautilus and Vixen,
and the gunboats.

Having arrived on the coast of Barbary, they were for some days
prevented from making the attack, by adverse wind and weather. At
length on the morning of the 3d of August, the weather being favorable,
the signal was made from the commodore's ship to prepare for action, the
light vessels towing the gunboats to windward. At nine o'clock, the
signal was given for bombarding the enemy's vessels and the town.

The gunboats were cast off, and advanced in a line ahead, led on by
Captain Decatur, and covered by the frigate Constitution, and the brigs
and schooners.

The enemy's gunboats were moored along the harbor under the batteries
and within musket shot. Their sails had been taken from them, and they
were ordered to sink, rather than abandon their position. They were
aided and covered, likewise, by a brig of sixteen, and a schooner of ten
guns.

Before entering into close action, Captain Decatur went alongside each
of his boats, and ordered them to unship their bowsprits and follow him,
as it was his intention to board the enemy's boats.

Lieutenant James Decatur commanded one of the boats belonging to
Commodore Preble's division, but, being farther to windward than the
rest of his division, he joined and took orders from his brother.

When Captain Decatur, who was in the leading boat, came within range of
the fire from the batteries, a heavy fire was opened upon him from them
and the gunboats. He returned the fire, and continued advancing, until
he came in contact with the boats. At this time, Commodore Preble seeing
Decatur advancing nearer than he thought prudent, ordered the signal to
be made for a retreat, but it was found that in making out the signals
for the boats, the one for a retreat had been omitted.

The enemy's boats had about forty men each; ours an equal number,
twenty-seven of whom were Americans, and thirteen Neapolitans.

Decatur, on boarding the enemy, was instantly followed by his
countrymen, but the Neapolitans remained behind. The Turks did not
sustain the combat hand to hand, with that firmness they had obtained a
reputation for. In ten minutes the deck was cleared. Eight of them
sought refuge in the hold, and, of the rest, some fell on the deck, and
others jumped into the sea. Only three of the Americans were wounded.

As Decatur was about to proceed out with his prize, the boat which had
been commanded by his brother, came under his stern, and the men
informed him that they had engaged and captured one of the enemy; but
that her commander, after surrendering, had treacherously shot
Lieutenant James Decatur, and pushed off with the boat, and was then
making for the harbor.

The feelings of the gallant Decatur, on receiving this intelligence, may
be more easily imagined than described. Every consideration of prudence
and safety was lost in his eagerness to punish so dastardly an act, and
to revenge the death of a brother so basely murdered. He pushed within
the enemy's line with his single boat, and having succeeded in getting
alongside of the retreating foe, boarded her at the head of eleven men,
who were all the Americans he had left. The fate of this contest was
extremely doubtful for about twenty minutes. All the Americans, except
four, were now severely wounded. Decatur singled out the commander as
the peculiar object of his vengeance. The Turk was armed with an
espontoon, Decatur with a cutlass; in attempting to cut off the head of
the weapon, his sword struck on the iron, and broke off close to the
hilt. The Turk, at this moment, made a push, which slightly wounded him
in the right arm and breast. He immediately seized the spear, and closed
with him. A fierce struggle ensued, and both fell, Decatur uppermost. By
this time the Turk had drawn a dagger from his belt, and was about to
plunge it into the body of his foe, when Decatur caught his arm, and
shot him with a pistol, which he drew from his pocket. During the time
they were struggling on the deck, the crews rushed to aid their
commanders, and a most sanguinary scene took place, insomuch that when
Decatur had despatched his adversary, it was with the utmost difficulty
he could extricate himself from the killed and wounded that had fallen
around him.

It is with no common feeling of admiration that we record an instance of
heroic courage, and loyal self-devotion, on the part of a common sailor.

During the early part of Decatur's struggle with the Turk, he was
assailed in the rear by one of the enemy, who had just aimed a blow at
his head which must have proved fatal; at this fearful juncture, a
noble-hearted tar, who had been so badly wounded as to lose the use of
his hands, seeing no other means of saving his commander, rushed between
him and the uplifted sabre, and received the blow on his own head, which
fractured his skull. We love to pause and honor great actions in humble
life, because they speak well for human nature. Men of rank and station
in society, often do gallant deeds, in a manner from necessity. Their
conspicuous station obliges them to do so, or their eagerness for glory
urges them on; but an act like this we have mentioned, so desperate, yet
so disinterested, done by an obscure, unambitious individual, a poor
sailor, can spring from nothing but nobleness of soul. We are happy to
add that this generous fellow survived, and long after received a
pension from government.

Decatur succeeded in getting, with both his prizes, to the squadron, and
the next day received the highest commendation, in a general order, from
Commodore Preble. When that able officer was superseded in the command
of the squadron, he gave the Constitution to Captain Decatur, who had
some time before received his commission. From that ship he was removed
to the Congress, and returned home in her, when peace was concluded in
Tripoli.




EXPLOITS OF COMMODORE HULL.


Commodore Hull became a sailor when he was only eight years old. He
distinguished himself greatly in the naval war with France, and in the
war with Tripoli, especially at the capture of Derne, in Africa.

[Illustration: COMMODORE HULL.]

At the commencement of the war of 1812, Hull having been advanced in the
meantime to the rank of captain, was placed in command of the frigate
Constitution, in which he was destined to perform those brilliant
actions which have rendered him one of the most celebrated heroes of our
navy. His first exploit was the escape of the Constitution from a
British squadron, which is justly regarded as one of the most remarkable
recorded in naval history. The account of it contained in the official
letter of Captain Hull has all the interest of a romance. It is as
follows:


     "SIR:--In pursuance of your orders of the 3d instant, I left
     Annapolis on the 5th instant, and the capes on the 12th, of which I
     advised you by the pilot who brought the ship to sea.

     For several days after we got out, the wind was light and ahead,
     which, with a strong southerly current, prevented our making much
     way to the northward. On the 17th, at two P.M., being in twenty-two
     fathoms water off Egg Harbor, four sail of ships were discovered
     from the masthead, to the northward and in shore of us, apparently
     ships of war. The wind being very light all sail was made in chase
     of them, to ascertain whether they were the enemy's ships, or our
     squadron having got out of New York, waiting the arrival of the
     Constitution, the latter of which I had reason to believe was the
     case.

     At four in the afternoon, a ship was seen from the masthead,
     bearing about north-east, standing in for us under all sail, which
     she continued so to do until sundown, at which time she was too far
     off to distinguish signals, and the ships in shore only to be seen
     from the tops; they were standing off to the southward and
     eastward. As we could not ascertain before dark what the ship in
     the offing was, I determined to stand for her, and get near enough
     to make the night signal.

     At ten in the evening, being within six or eight miles of the
     strange sail, the private signal was made, and kept up nearly one
     hour, but finding she could not answer it, I concluded she and the
     ships in shore were enemy.

     I immediately hauled off to the southward and eastward, and made
     all sail, having determined to lie off till daylight to see what
     they were. The ship that we had been chasing hauled off after us,
     showing a light, and occasionally making signals, supposed to be
     for the ships in shore.

     On the 18th, at daylight, or a little before it was quite light,
     saw two sail under our lee, which proved to be frigates of the
     enemy's. One frigate astern within about five or six miles, and a
     line of battle ship, a frigate, a brig, and a schooner, about ten
     or twelve miles directly astern, all in chase of us, with a fine
     breeze, and coming up fast, it being nearly calm where we were.
     Soon after sunrise, the wind entirely left us, and the ship would
     not steer, but fell round off with her head towards the two ships
     under our lee. The boats were instantly hoisted out, and sent ahead
     to tow the ship's head around, and to endeavor to get her farther
     from the enemy, being then within five miles of three heavy
     frigates. The boats of the enemy were got out and sent ahead to
     tow, by which, with the light air that remained with them, they
     came up very fast. Finding the enemy gaining on us, and but little
     chance of escaping from them, I ordered two of the guns on the gun
     deck to be ran out at the cabin windows for stern guns on the gun
     deck, and hoisted one of the twenty-four pounders off the gun deck,
