
She had drunk of the poisoned bowl the King had prepared for Hamlet, and
the King saw the Queen, whom, wicked as he was, he really loved, fall
dead by his means.

Then Ophelia being dead, and Polonius, and the Queen, and Laertes, and
the two courtiers who had been sent to England, Hamlet at last found
courage to do the ghost's bidding and avenge his father's murder--which,
if he had braced up his heart to do long before, all these lives
had been spared, and none had suffered but the wicked King, who well
deserved to die.

Hamlet, his heart at last being great enough to do the deed he ought,
turned the poisoned sword on the false King.

"Then--venom--do thy work!" he cried, and the King died.

So Hamlet in the end kept the promise he had made his father. And all
being now accomplished, he himself died. And those who stood by saw him
die, with prayers and tears, for his friends and his people loved him
with their whole hearts. Thus ends the tragic tale of Hamlet, Prince of
Denmark.




CYMBELINE



Cymbeline was the King of Britain. He had three children. The two sons
were stolen away from him when they were quite little children, and he
was left with only one daughter, Imogen. The King married a second
time, and brought up Leonatus, the son of a dear friend, as Imogen's
playfellow; and when Leonatus was old enough, Imogen secretly married
him. This made the King and Queen very angry, and the King, to punish
Leonatus, banished him from Britain.

Poor Imogen was nearly heart-broken at parting from Leonatus, and he was
not less unhappy. For they were not only lovers and husband and wife,
but they had been friends and comrades ever since they were quite little
children. With many tears and kisses they said "Good-bye." They promised
never to forget each other, and that they would never care for anyone
else as long as they lived.

"This diamond was my mother's, love," said Imogen; "take it, my heart,
and keep it as long as you love me."

"Sweetest, fairest," answered Leonatus, "wear this bracelet for my
sake."

"Ah!" cried Imogen, weeping, "when shall we meet again?"

And while they were still in each other's arms, the King came in, and
Leonatus had to leave without more farewell.

When he was come to Rome, where he had gone to stay with an old friend
of his father's, he spent his days still in thinking of his dear Imogen,
and his nights in dreaming of her. One day at a feast some Italian and
French noblemen were talking of their sweethearts, and swearing that
they were the most faithful and honorable and beautiful ladies in the
world. And a Frenchman reminded Leonatus how he had said many times that
his wife Imogen was more fair, wise, and constant than any of the ladies
in France.

"I say so still," said Leonatus.

"She is not so good but that she would deceive," said Iachimo, one of
the Italian nobles.

"She never would deceive," said Leonatus.

"I wager," said Iachimo, "that, if I go to Britain, I can persuade your
wife to do whatever I wish, even if it should be against your wishes."

"That you will never do," said Leonatus. "I wager this ring upon my
finger," which was the very ring Imogen had given him at parting, "that
my wife will keep all her vows to me, and that you will never persuade
her to do otherwise."

So Iachimo wagered half his estate against the ring on Leonatus's
finger, and started forthwith for Britain, with a letter of introduction
to Leonatus's wife. When he reached there he was received with all
kindness; but he was still determined to win his wager.

He told Imogen that her husband thought no more of her, and went on to
tell many cruel lies about him. Imogen listened at first, but presently
perceived what a wicked person Iachimo was, and ordered him to leave
her. Then he said--

"Pardon me, fair lady, all that I have said is untrue. I only told you
this to see whether you would believe me, or whether you were as much to
be trusted as your husband thinks. Will you forgive me?"

"I forgive you freely," said Imogen.

"Then," went on Iachimo, "perhaps you will prove it by taking charge of
a trunk, containing a number of jewels which your husband and I and some
other gentlemen have bought as a present for the Emperor of Rome."

"I will indeed," said Imogen, "do anything for my husband and a friend
of my husband's. Have the jewels sent into my room, and I will take care
of them."

"It is only for one night," said Iachimo, "for I leave Britain again
to-morrow."

So the trunk was carried into Imogen's room, and that night she went to
bed and to sleep. When she was fast asleep, the lid of the trunk opened
and a man got out. It was Iachimo. The story about the jewels was as
untrue as the rest of the things he had said. He had only wished to get
into her room to win his wicked wager. He looked about him and noticed
the furniture, and then crept to the side of the bed where Imogen
was asleep and took from her arm the gold bracelet which had been the
parting gift of her husband. Then he crept back to the trunk, and next
morning sailed for Rome.

When he met Leonatus, he said--

"I have been to Britain and I have won the wager, for your wife no
longer thinks about you. She stayed talking with me all one night in her
room, which is hung with tapestry and has a carved chimney-piece, and
silver andirons in the shape of two winking Cupids."

"I do not believe she has forgotten me; I do not believe she stayed
talking with you in her room. You have heard her room described by the
servants."

"Ah!" said Iachimo, "but she gave me this bracelet. She took it from
her arm. I see her yet. Her pretty action did outsell her gift, and yet
enriched it too. She gave it me, and said she prized it once."

"Take the ring," cried Leonatus, "you have won; and you might have
won my life as well, for I care nothing for it now I know my lady has
forgotten me."

And mad with anger, he wrote letters to Britain to his old servant,
Pisanio, ordering him to take Imogen to Milford Haven, and to murder
her, because she had forgotten him and given away his gift. At the same
time he wrote to Imogen herself, telling her to go with Pisanio, his old
servant, to Milford Haven, and that he, her husband, would be there to
meet her.

Now when Pisanio got this letter he was too good to carry out its
orders, and too wise to let them alone altogether. So he gave Imogen the
letter from her husband, and started with her for Milford Haven. Before
he left, the wicked Queen gave him a drink which, she said, would be
useful in sickness. She hoped he would give it to Imogen, and that
Imogen would die, and the wicked Queen's son could be King. For the
Queen thought this drink was a poison, but really and truly it was only
a sleeping-draft.

When Pisanio and Imogen came near to Milford Haven, he told her what was
really in the letter he had had from her husband.

"I must go on to Rome, and see him myself," said Imogen.

And then Pisanio helped her to dress in boy's clothes, and sent her
on her way, and went back to the Court. Before he went he gave her the
drink he had had from the Queen.

Imogen went on, getting more and more tired, and at last came to a cave.
Someone seemed to live there, but no one was in just then. So she went
in, and as she was almost dying of hunger, she took some food she saw
there, and had just done so, when an old man and two boys came into the
cave. She was very much frightened when she saw them, for she thought
that they would be angry with her for taking their food, though she
had meant to leave money for it on the table. But to her surprise they
welcomed her kindly. She looked very pretty in her boy's clothes and her
face was good, as well as pretty.

"You shall be our brother," said both the boys; and so she stayed with
them, and helped to cook the food, and make things comfortable. But one
day when the old man, whose name was Bellarius, was out hunting with
the two boys, Imogen felt ill, and thought she would try the medicine
Pisanio had given her. So she took it, and at once became like a dead
creature, so that when Bellarius and the boys came back from hunting,
they thought she was dead, and with many tears and funeral songs, they
carried her away and laid her in the wood, covered with flowers.

They sang sweet songs to her, and strewed flowers on her, pale
primroses, and the azure harebell, and eglantine, and furred moss, and
went away sorrowful. No sooner had they gone than Imogen awoke, and not
knowing how she came there, nor where she was, went wandering through
the wood.

Now while Imogen had been living in the cave, the Romans had decided to
attack Britain, and their army had come over, and with them Leonatus,
who had grown sorry for his wickedness against Imogen, so had come
back, not to fight with the Romans against Britain, but with the Britons
against Rome. So as Imogen wandered alone, she met with Lucius, the
Roman General, and took service with him as his page.

When the battle was fought between the Romans and Britons, Bellarius and
his two boys fought for their own country, and Leonatus, disguised as
a British peasant, fought beside them. The Romans had taken Cymbeline
prisoner, and old Bellarius, with his sons and Leonatus, bravely rescued
the King. Then the Britons won the battle, and among the prisoners
brought before the King were Lucius, with Imogen, Iachimo, and Leonatus,
who had put on the uniform of a Roman soldier. He was tired of his life
since he had cruelly ordered his wife to be killed, and he hoped that,
as a Roman soldier, he would be put to death.

When they were brought before the King, Lucius spoke out--

"A Roman with a Roman's heart can suffer," he said. "If I must die, so
be it. This one thing only will I entreat. My boy, a Briton born, let
him be ransomed. Never master had a page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
true. He has done no Briton harm, though he has served a Roman. Save
him, Sir."

Then Cymbeline looked on the page, who was his own daughter, Imogen, in
disguise, and though he did not recognize her, he felt such a kindness
that he not only spared the boy's life, but he said--

"He shall have any boon he likes to ask of me, even though he ask a
prisoner, the noblest taken."

Then Imogen said, "The boon I ask is that this gentleman shall say from
whom he got the ring he has on his finger," and she pointed to Iachimo.

"Speak," said Cymbeline, "how did you get that diamond?"

Then Iachimo told the whole truth of his villainy. At this, Leonatus was
unable to contain himself, and casting aside all thought of disguise, he
came forward, cursing himself for his folly in having believed Iachimo's
lying story, and calling again and again on his wife whom he believed
dead.

"Oh, Imogen, my love, my life!" he cried. "Oh, Imogen!

Then Imogen, forgetting she was disguised, cried out, "Peace, my
lord--here, here!"

Leonatus turned to strike the forward page who thus interfered in his
great trouble, and then he saw that it was his wife, Imogen, and they
fell into each other's arms.

The King was so glad to see his dear daughter again, and so grateful to
the man who had rescued him (whom he now found to be Leonatus), that he
gave his blessing on their marriage, and then he turned to Bellarius,
and the two boys. Now Bellarius spoke--

"I am your old servant, Bellarius. You accused me of treason when I had
only been loyal to you, and to be doubted, made me disloyal. So I stole
your two sons, and see,--they are here!" And he brought forward the two
boys, who had sworn to be brothers to Imogen when they thought she was a
boy like themselves.

The wicked Queen was dead of some of her own poisons, and the King, with
his three children about him, lived to a happy old age.

So the wicked were punished, and the good and true lived happy ever
after. So may the wicked suffer, and honest folk prosper till the
world's end.




MACBETH



When a person is asked to tell the story of Macbeth, he can tell two
stories. One is of a man called Macbeth who came to the throne of
Scotland by a crime in the year of our Lord 1039, and reigned justly
and well, on the whole, for fifteen years or more. This story is part
of Scottish history. The other story issues from a place called
Imagination; it is gloomy and wonderful, and you shall hear it.

A year or two before Edward the Confessor began to rule England, a
battle was won in Scotland against a Norwegian King by two generals
named Macbeth and Banquo. After the battle, the generals walked together
towards Forres, in Elginshire, where Duncan, King of Scotland, was
awaiting them.

While they were crossing a lonely heath, they saw three bearded women,
sisters, hand in hand, withered in appearance and wild in their attire.

"Speak, who are you?" demanded Macbeth.

"Hail, Macbeth, chieftain of Glamis," said the first woman.

"Hail, Macbeth, chieftain of Cawdor," said the second woman.

"Hail, Macbeth, King that is to be," said the third woman.

Then Banquo asked, "What of me?" and the third woman replied, "Thou
shalt be the father of kings."

"Tell me more," said Macbeth. "By my father's death I am chieftain of
Glamis, but the chieftain of Cawdor lives, and the King lives, and his
children live. Speak, I charge you!"

The women replied only by vanishing, as though suddenly mixed with the
air.

Banquo and Macbeth knew then that they had been addressed by witches,
and were discussing their prophecies when two nobles approached. One of
them thanked Macbeth, in the King's name, for his military services, and
the other said, "He bade me call you chieftain of Cawdor."

Macbeth then learned that the man who had yesterday borne that title
was to die for treason, and he could not help thinking, "The third witch
called me, 'King that is to be.'"

"Banquo," he said, "you see that the witches spoke truth concerning me.
Do you not believe, therefore, that your child and grandchild will be
kings?"

Banquo frowned. Duncan had two sons, Malcolm and Donalbain, and he
deemed it disloyal to hope that his son Fleance should rule Scotland.
He told Macbeth that the witches might have intended to tempt them
both into villainy by their prophecies concerning the throne. Macbeth,
however, thought the prophecy that he should be King too pleasant to
keep to himself, and he mentioned it to his wife in a letter.

Lady Macbeth was the grand-daughter of a King of Scotland who had died
in defending his crown against the King who preceded Duncan, and by
whose order her only brother was slain. To her, Duncan was a reminder
of bitter wrongs. Her husband had royal blood in his veins, and when she
read his letter, she was determined that he should be King.

When a messenger arrived to inform her that Duncan would pass a night in
Macbeth's castle, she nerved herself for a very base action.

She told Macbeth almost as soon as she saw him that Duncan must spend
a sunless morrow. She meant that Duncan must die, and that the dead are
blind. "We will speak further," said Macbeth uneasily, and at night,
with his memory full of Duncan's kind words, he would fain have spared
his guest.

"Would you live a coward?" demanded Lady Macbeth, who seems to have
thought that morality and cowardice were the same.

"I dare do all that may become a man," replied Macbeth; "who dare do
more is none."

"Why did you write that letter to me?" she inquired fiercely, and with
bitter words she egged him on to murder, and with cunning words she
showed him how to do it.

After supper Duncan went to bed, and two grooms were placed on guard at
his bedroom door. Lady Macbeth caused them to drink wine till they were
stupefied. She then took their daggers and would have killed the King
herself if his sleeping face had not looked like her father's.

Macbeth came later, and found the daggers lying by the grooms; and soon
with red hands he appeared before his wife, saying, "Methought I heard a
voice cry, 'Sleep no more! Macbeth destroys the sleeping.'"

"Wash your hands," said she. "Why did you not leave the daggers by the
grooms? Take them back, and smear the grooms with blood."

"I dare not," said Macbeth.

His wife dared, and she returned to him with hands red as his own, but a
heart less white, she proudly told him, for she scorned his fear.

The murderers heard a knocking, and Macbeth wished it was a knocking
which could wake the dead. It was the knocking of Macduff, the chieftain
of Fife, who had been told by Duncan to visit him early. Macbeth went to
him, and showed him the door of the King's room.

Macduff entered, and came out again crying, "O horror! horror! horror!"

Macbeth appeared as horror-stricken as Macduff, and pretending that he
could not bear to see life in Duncan's murderers, he slew the two grooms
with their own daggers before they could proclaim their innocence.

These murders did not shriek out, and Macbeth was crowned at Scone.
