
"Shall we take the nest, Rose?"

"Oh no, Willie! We must not take it; but we will come and look at it
again, some time."


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

God made the little birds to sing,
   And flit from tree to tree;
'Tis He who sends them in the spring
   To sing for you and me.
]



LESSON LVII.

feathers    a go'    fly    worm    crumb    feed'ing

ug'ly        off     feed   brown   guess    things


[Illustration: Boy and girl examining bird's nest.]


"Willie, when I was feeding the birds just now, a little brown bird flew
away with a crumb in its bill."

"Where did it go, Rose?"

"I don't know; away off, somewhere."

"I can guess where, Rose. Don't you know the nest we saw some days ago?
What do you think is in it now?"

"O Willie, I know! Some little brown birds. Let us go and see them."

"All right; but we must not go too near. There! I just saw the old bird
fly out of the bush. Stand here, Rose. Can you see?"

"Why, Willie, what ugly little things! What big mouths they have, and no
feathers!"

"Keep still, Rose. Here comes the old bird with a worm in her bill. How
hard she must work to feed them all!"



LESSON LVIII.

fallin'g    counts    woes       nigh    be gun'   griefs

stars       tear      morn'ing   Lord    each      joys


[Illustration: Script Exercise:

When the stars at set of sun
  Watch you from on high
When the morning has begun
  Think the Lord is nigh.

All you do and all you say,
  He can see and hear:
When you work and when you play,
  Think the Lord is near.

All your joys and griefs He knows
  Counts each falling tear.
When to Him you tell your woes,
  Know the Lord is near.
]



LESSON LIX.

whis'tle (whis'l)    poc'ket   wil'low   note    filled     dead    sick

walk    ev'ery       blew      lane      lame    tak'ing    cane    took


[Illustration: Girl holding doll and boy with cane standing in woods.]


One day, when Mary was taking a walk down the lane, trying to sing her
doll to sleep, she met Frank, with his basket and cane.

Frank was a poor, little, lame boy. His father and mother were dead. His
dear, old grandma took care of him, and tried to make him happy.

Every day, Mary's mother filled Frank's basket with bread and meat, and a
little tea for his grandma.

"How do you do, Frank?" said Mary. "Don't make a noise; my doll is going
to sleep. It is just a little sick to-day."

"Well, then, let us whistle it to sleep." And Frank, taking a willow
whistle out of his pocket, blew a long note.

"Oh, how sweet!" cried Mary. "Do let me try."



LESSON LX.

turned    face    cried    low    al'most    soon    more    cry

once(wuns)        be cause'


[Illustration: Boy and Girl sitting on log.]


"Yes, Mary, I will give it to you, because you are so good to my grandma."

"Oh! thank you very much." Mary blew and blew a long time. "I can't make
it whistle," said she, almost ready to cry.

"Sometimes they will whistle, and sometimes they won't," said Frank. "Try
again, Mary."

She tried once more, and the whistle made a low, sweet sound. "It
whistles!" she cried.

In her joy, she had turned the doll's face down, and its eyes shut tight,
as if it had gone to sleep.

"There!" cried Frank, "I told you the way to put a doll to sleep, is to
whistle to it."

"So it is," said Mary. "Dear, little thing; it must be put in its bed
now."

So they went into the house. Frank's basket was soon filled, and he went
home happy.



LESSON LXI.

stood     him self'    flap'ping    first      twelve

flapped   walked       flap         o bey'     bet'ter

Chip'py   food         stone        be fore'   chick'ens    kept


[Illustration: Hen and chicks.]


There was once a big, white hen that had twelve little chickens. They were
very small, and the old hen took good care of them. She found food for
them in the daytime, and at night kept them under her wings.

One day, this old hen took her chickens down to a small brook. She thought
the air from the water would do them good.

When they got to the brook, they walked on the bank a little while. It was
very pretty on the other side of the brook, and the old hen thought she
would take her children over there.

There was a large stone in the brook: she thought it would be easy for
them to jump to that stone, and from it to the other side.

So she jumped to the stone, and told the children to come after her. For
the first time, she found that they would not obey her.

She flapped her wings, and cried, "Come here, all of you! Jump upon this
stone, as I did. We can then jump to the other side. Come now!"

"O mother! we can't, we can't, we can't!" said all the little chickens.

"Yes you can, if you try," said the old hen. "Just flap your wings, as I
did, and you can jump over."

"I am flapping my wings," said Chippy, who stood by himself; "but I can't
jump any better than I could before."



LESSON LXII.

chirped    nev'er     in deed'    slow'ly    re'ally    brood

be gan'    did n't    use         door       bite       piece


[Illustration: Hen with chicks.]


"I never saw such children," said the old hen. "You don't try at all."

"We can't jump so far, mother. Indeed we can't, we can't!" chirped the
little chickens.

"Well," said the old hen, "I must give it up." So she jumped back to the
bank, and walked slowly home with her brood.

"I think mother asked too much of us," said one little chicken to the
others.

"Well, I tried," said Chippy.

"We didn't," said the others; "it was of no use to try."

When they got home, the old hen began to look about for something to eat.
She soon found, near the back door, a piece of bread.

So she called the chickens, and they all ran up to her, each one trying to
get a bite at the piece of bread.

"No, no!" said the old hen. "This bread is for Chippy. He is the only one
of my children that really tried to jump to the stone."



LESSON LXIII.

last    slates    write     waste     neat     taken

