Apaches howling and rushing down upon them, to have the animal turn calmly
about and trot back to his former friends, carrying his two riders into
captivity, or leaving them to shift for themselves.

Nothing could be seen of the creature, but there was a fringe of wood on
the opposite side where he might be concealed, and Mickey slid off the
blanket with the intention of hunting for him.

"Don't let this spalpeen give ye the slip," he cautioned the lad, as he
gave the lariat into his hand; "for if mine is gone, this is the only one
we have to depend on, and we can't spare him."

Fred felt a little uncomfortable when he found himself alone and astride
of the fiery steed, which pricked up his ears as though he meditated
mischief; but the horse seemed to think better of it, and continued so
quiet that the young rider ventured to transfer his attention from him to
Mickey, who was moving across the open space in the direction of the wood
upon the opposite side.

The moonlight was so clear that he could be as plainly seen, almost, as if
it were midday. As he moved along, he brought his rifle around to the
front, so that he could use it at a moment's need, for he could not but
see the probability that, if his horse had been lately disturbed, it was
likely that those who did so were still in the vicinity, and no place was
more likely to be used for a covert than the same patch of timber which he
was approaching.

"Be the powers! but it looks a little pokerish!" he said to himself,
slowing his gait, and surveying the wood with no little distrust. "There
might be a dozen of the spalpeens slaaping there wid one eye open, or all
sitting up and expicting me."

He had proceeded so far however, that it was as dangerous to turn back as
it was to go on, for if any enemies were there, they were so close at hand
that they could easily capture or shoot him before he could reach his
horse. He was scarcely moving, and doing his utmost to penetrate the deep
shadow, when, beyond all question, he heard a movement among the trees. He
paused as if he had been shot and cocked his rifle, looking toward the
point from whence came the noise.

"Aisy there, now," he said in a solemn voice. "I won't stand any of your
thricks. I'm savage, and when I'm that way I'm dangerous, so if yees are
there spake out, or else come out like a man, and tell me your name, be
the token of which mine is Mickey O'Rooney from Ireland."

This characteristic summons produced no response, and, feeling the
peculiar peril of his exposed position, the Irishman determined upon
changing it and securing the shelter of a tree for himself. It was not
prudent to move directly toward the spot which gave forth the rustling
sound, as that would be likely to draw out a shot from a foe if he desired
to avoid a personal encounter. Accordingly, the Irishman made what might
be termed a flank movement by turning to the right, running rapidly
several paces and then diving in among the trees, as though he were
plunging into the water for a bath.

The few minutes occupied in making this change were those which Mickey
felt were of great danger; for, if he should reach the wood and find
himself opposed to but a single man, or even two, the situation would not
be so uneven by any means. No shots were fired, and he drew a great sigh
of relief when he gained the desired covert.

"Now I can dodge back and forth, and work me way up to them," he
concluded; "and when they stick their heads out from behind the trees,
I'll whack 'em for 'em, just as we used to do at Donnybrook when the fun
began."

He waited where he was for some time, in the expectation that his foe
would reveal himself by an attempt to draw out. But if there is any one
thing which distinguishes a scout, whether white or red, at such a time,
it is his patience. It is like that of the Esquimaux, who will sit for
sixteen hours, without stirring, beside an airhole in the ice, waiting for
a seal to appear. Mickey O'Rooney was not burdened with overmuch patience,
and acted upon the principle of Mohammed going to the mountain. He began
picking his way through the shadows and among the trees, determined to
keep forward until the mystery was solved.




CHAPTER XII.

THROUGH THE MOUNTAINS. CONTINUED.


When Mickey found himself under the shelter of the trees, something like
his old confidence returned.

"As I obsarved some minutes ago, it's mesilf that's not going to stand any
fooling," he added, loud enough for the redskins to hear. "Whither ye're
there or not, ye ought to spake, and come out and smoke the calomel of
peace, and give a spalpeen a chance to crack your head, as though ye're
his brother; but if ye're up to any of your thricks, make ready to go to
your hunting-grounds."

By this time he was within a dozen feet of the spot whence came the
rustling that so disturbed him, and was staring with all his eyes in quest
of the redskins. In spite of the bright moonlight, the Irishman could not
be certain of anything he saw. There were trees of large size, behind any
of which an Indian might have shielded himself effectually, and it was
useless for Mickey to look unless his man chose to show himself.

The Irishman had all the natural recklessness of his race, but he had been
in the Apache country long enough to learn to tone it down, for that was
the country where the most fatal attribute a man could have was
recklessness or rashness. In many instances of conflict with Indians it is
worse than cowardice.

But, in the face of Mickey's assurance to the contrary, he did not feel
altogether easy about the Apaches he had left at the cave. His humanity
had prevented him from depriving them of means of escape, and although he
was inclined to believe that they were not likely to climb the lasso until
many hours should elapse, there could be no certainty about it. They might
do so within an hour after the departure of the man and boy.

It was this reflection that caused Mickey to act with something of his
natural rashness. He felt that he could not afford to wait to fight the
thing out on scientific principles, so he determined, since he was so
close, to force it to an issue without delay. Accordingly, he prepared
himself to charge.

"I've been too kind already in giving ye warnings," he added, gathering
himself for the effort, "and if your indifference causes your ruin, it's
your own fault, as the bull remarked when he come down on a butt agin the
engine."

Compressing his lips, Mickey made his start, forcing out a few words, as
he would shoot bullets on the way.

"Nobody but a spalpeen of a coward would keep out of sight when he saw a
head coming down on him in such tempting style as mine. I can't understand
how he could."

In his furious hunt for antagonists, the belligerent fellow did not think
of looking upon the ground. He made the blunder of Captain John Smith, of
the Jamestown Colony, who, in retreating from Powhatan's warriors, became
mired, with the eventual result of making Pocahontas famous, and securing
an infinite number of namesakes of the captain himself.

Mickey O'Rooney had scarcely begun his charge when his feet came into
violent collision with a body upon the ground, and he turned a complete
somersault over it.

"Be the powers! but that's a dirty thrick!" he exclaimed, gathering
himself up as hurriedly as possible, and recovering very speedily from his
natural bewilderment. "A man who drops in the ring without a blow is
always ruled out, and be that token ye're not entitled to the respect of
illegant gintlemen."

During the utterance of these words the Irishman had carefully returned,
boiling over with indignation and fight, and at this juncture he
discovered the obstruction which had brought him to grief.

So far as appearances went, there was no Indian nearer than the cave. It
was his own horse that had made the noise which first alarmed him. While
the equine was stretched upon the ground, peacefully sleeping, his
bumptious owner, in charging over his body, had stumbled and fallen.

Mickey was thrown "all in a heap" for a minute or two, when he found how
the case stood, and then he laughed to himself as he fully appreciated the
situation.

"Well, well, well, I feel as chape as Jerry McConnell when he hugged and
kissed a gal for two hours, one evening, and found it was his wife, and
she felt chaaper yet, for she thought all the time that it was Mickey
O'Shaughnessy. I suppose me old swateheart," he added, as he stooped down
and patted the head of his horse, "that ye've been living so high here for
two or three days that ye're too fat to be good for anything. Come, up wid
ye, ye old spalpeen!"

The mustang recognized the voice of his master, and obeyed as promptly as
a child, coming upon his feet with the nimbleness of a racer, and ready to
do what he was bidden. Mickey led him out into the moonlight, when he left
him standing, while he went a short distance for the saddle and bridle,
which he had concealed at the time of leaving the spot. They were found
just as he had left them, and he returned in high feather, secured them in
a twinkling upon his animal and galloped back to where the lad was
waiting.

"Ye haven't seen or heard anything of redskins, have ye, while I was
procuring my cratur?"

"Nothing at all," replied the lad; "but I heard you talking pretty loud,
so I suppose you must have found several."

"No," answered Mickey, who did not care about explaining the whole affair.
"I'm always in the habit of exchanging a few words wid the cratur when I
maats, and such was the case a short time since, when I met him, after
being away so long."

"Well, Mickey, we haven't any time to spare."

"Ye're right, my laddy; all you've got to do is to folly me."

With this he headed his mustang at precisely right angles to the course
they followed in making their way to the spot; and Fred, who expected all
sorts of trouble in the way of traveling, noticed that he was following
some sort of path or trail, along which his horse trod as easily as upon
the open prairie. While this was an advantage in one respect it had its
disadvantage in another. The presence of a trail in that part of the world
implied that it was one made and traveled by Indians, who were likely to
be encountered at any moment, and Mickey was not insensible to the peril.
But, in the present instance, there seemed to be no other means of getting
along, and thus, in one sense, they were forced into it. The
probabilities, however, were that they would soon emerge into safer
territory, where it would be possible to take some precautions against
pursuers.

For some time the two galloped along without speaking. The hoofs of their
mustangs rang upon the rocks, and rattled over the gravel, and, in the
still night, could have been heard a long distance away. While the
Irishman kept as good a lookout ahead as possible, Fred Munson did his
best to guard their rear. He kept continually glancing over his shoulder
in the expectation of seeing some of their enemies, but nothing of the
kind occurred, and before he anticipated it, they emerged into what seemed
a deep valley, with high rocks upon both sides. Mickey drew up, and
allowed his young friend to move alongside.

"Do ye mind ever having seen this place before?" he asked.

"I don't remember anything about this country, and all I ask is that we
may get out of it as soon as possible."

"But don't ye mind ever having been here before?"

Thus questioned, Fred scanned his surroundings as best he could, but there
was nothing that he could identify, and he so said, adding:

"I'm sure I've never been here before."

"And I'm sure ye have. This is the path that Lone Wolf come along, and
that ye was hunting for when ye got lost, and fell into the basement story
of the mountain."

"Oh, this is the pass, is it?" exclaimed the delighted lad; "then we have
a clear road before us straight to New Boston."

"Clear of all but one thing."

"What's that?"

"The red spalpeens; they're always turning up when you don't expect 'em,
and don't want 'em."

"How far are we away from the cave, where we left the half dozen Apaches?"

"I don't think it's much more than a mile, though it may be a mile and a
half."

"Well, that's very good; we've got that much start, and it's worth
having."

"And there's where ye're mistook, as the gals used to obsarve when anybody
tried to run down my beauty. The path that we come along, ye'll mind,
makes many turns and twists, and the ind of it all is that it strikes the
pass on the other side of the cave, and we've got to ride right by the
spot which we lift."

This was not cheering information, although, everything considered, the
two had cause to congratulate themselves upon their extraordinary success
up to this time.

The night was about gone, and, while their mustangs halted, they observed
that it was growing light in the east. They would be forced to ride
through the dangerous territory by day, so that the risk of detection
would be proportionately greater if their enemies should be in the
vicinity. Both the mustangs were fresh and vigorous, however, having
enjoyed an unusually long rest, with plenty of food, and they were good
for many hours of speed and endurance. The one ridden by Fred had behaved
in a very seemly fashion, and there was ground for the hope that he would
keep up the line of conduct to the end. Still there could be no certainty
of what he would do in the presence of the Apaches.

"We'll take it aisy," said Mickey, as the two started off at an easy
gallop. "We'll not be afther putting 'em to a run till we have to do the
same, so that when there's naad for their spaad, we shall have it at
command." This prudent suggestion was carried out. Their horses dropped
into a sweeping gallop that was as easy as an ordinary walk. The riders
kept their senses awake, talking only a little, and then in guarded
voices.

As they galloped along the sun rose, and the day promised to be as warm
and pleasant as those which had preceded it. The sky was obscured only by
a few fleecy clouds, while the deep blue beyond was as beautiful as that
of Italy. Drawing near the cave in the mountain, they pulled their horses
down to a walk and carefully guided them into the softest places, so as to
make the noise of their hoofs as slight as possible. Nothing occurred
until they were a short distance beyond the dangerous spot, when Mickey
spoke.

"Do you obsarve that stream there?" he asked, pointing to a rather deep
brook which ran across the pass, and lost itself in the rocks upon the
opposite side. "Well, that's the water that comes through the cave over
the cascade, and that I expicted to swim out by, and I'm going to find out
what me chances were."




CHAPTER XIII.

IN THE NICK OF TIME.


Leaving his mustang in charge of Fred, the Irishman turned to the right,
and followed the stream into the rocks. The course was so winding that he
speedily disappeared from sight. The boy, who was compelled to sit still
and await his return, at perhaps the most dangerous portion of the road,
felt anything but comfortable over the erratic proceeding of his friend.
But, fortunately, the latter had been gone but a short time when he
reappeared, hurrying forward as if somebody was at his heels.

"It's all right," he remarked, as he sprang into the saddle, took up the
reins, and started on. "I think the Apaches are there, though I can't be
sartin; but I found out what I wanted to l'arn."

Then he explained that he followed up the stream to the place where it
came from beneath the rocks, which formed a part of the wall of the cave,
where a curious fact attracted his attention. In its passage beneath the
stone the tunnel widened and flattened, so that, where it shot forth to
the sunlight again, its width was some twenty feet, and its depth only a
few inches. The appearance it presented was very much like that of the
gates of a mill-pond when they have been slightly raised to allow a
discharge of water beneath. Through the passage-way thus afforded no
living person could have forced his way; and, had Mickey O'Rooney
attempted it, nothing in the world could have saved him from drowning. The
Irishman himself realized it, and was thankful enough that he had
refrained from making the desperate attempt.

The two continued their sweeping gallop for several hours, during which
