strange lamps. Through an open window he saw the stars. The few men that
had stood about the man in the grassy meadow were alone with him in that
upper chamber reclining about a table. The man lifted from the board a
cup of silver. He blessed it and gave it. The fragrance of wine came to
the watcher.

He rubbed his eyes and looked again and before him spread the smooth
unbroken surface of the monotonous sea. The woman's voice smote his ear
again, higher, shriller, with more painful entreaty.

"A priest--for the love of God--the sacrament," she whispered.

The man tore open the last canvas bread-bag. It was tough material but
it yielded to his insistence. In the corner there was a single tiny
crumb they had overlooked. He lifted it gently with his great hand. He
held it up in the air a moment striving to think. He was an English
sailor and in his boyhood had been a chorister in a great Cathedral. The
mighty words came back to him. He bent over the woman.

[Illustration: The cry for bread.]

"Bread," he whispered. "The body--"

He shattered the water breaker with his fist. There was a suggestion of
moisture on the inside of the staves of the cask. He drew his finger
across them and touched it to the woman's lips.

"Water," he said hoarsely. "The blood--"

The terror, the yearning, disappeared from the woman's eyes. She looked
at the man sanely, gratefully.

"God bless--" she faltered and then her lips stiffened.

Some tag of quaint old Scripture that had impressed him when he first
heard it because of its very strangeness, but of which he had never
thought in all the years of his rough life since boyhood, came into the
man's mind now. He lifted his head as if to see again that figure.

"A priest forever," he gasped, "after the order of Melchis--"

He did not finish the word. The woman was dead. He knew now for what he
had been kept alive. His task had been performed. He bowed his head in
his hands and entered into life eternal with the others.

Presently a little cloud flecked the sky. Out of the south the wind blew
softly. The smooth sea rippled blue and white in the gentle breeze. The
little boat, cradling its dead, rocked gently as it drifted on.




XI

The Stiller of the Storm




"BE OF GOOD CHEER; IT IS I; BE NOT AFRAID"




XI

The Stiller of the Storm


"It's Christmas eve at home," murmured the young lad after he had said
his prayers and tumbled into his narrow berth on the great ship. "I
suppose they're trimming the Christmas tree now and hanging up the
stockings. I wish I were there."

He was very young to serve his country, but not too young according to
the standards of mankind to be a midshipman on the great steel monster
keeping the leaden deep. It was the first time he had ever been away
from home on Christmas day, too. The youngsters had all laughed and
joked about it in the steerage mess. They had promised themselves some
kind of a celebration in the morning, but in his own cot with no one to
see, a few tears which he fondly deemed unmanly would come. He had the
midnight watch and he knew that he must get some sleep, but it was a
long time before he closed his eyes and drifted off to dream of home and
his mother.

Athwart that dream came a sudden, frightful, heart-stilling roar of
destruction; a hideous crash followed, a terrible rending, breaking,
smashing, concatenation of noises, succeeded by frightful detonations,
as through the gaping hole torn in the great battleship by the deadly
torpedo, the water rushed upon the heated boilers, the explosion of
which in turn ignited the magazines. By that deadly underwater thrust of
the enemy the battleship was reduced in a few moments to a disjointed,
disorganized, sinking mass of shapeless, formless, splintered steel.

As the explosions ceased, from every point rose shrieks and groans and
cries of men in the death-agony hurled into eternity and torn like the
steel. And then the boy heard the surviving officers coolly, resolutely
calling the men to their stations.

He had been thrown from his berth by the violence of the explosion. His
face was cut and bleeding where he had struck a near-by stanchion. His
left arm hung useless. He had lain dazed on the deck for a few moments
until he heard the orders of his lieutenant. He was one of the signal
midshipmen stationed on the signal bridge. Whatever happened that was
the place to which to go; he still had a duty to perform.

Picking himself up as best he could, he hurried to report to the
lieutenant. With such means as were available signals were made. Calls
for help? Oh, never! Warnings that the enemy's submarines were in the
near vicinity and that other ships should keep away.

The captain was on the half wrecked bridge above. The boy noticed how
quiet he was, yet his voice rang over the tumult.

"Steady, men, steady. Keep your stations. Stand by. Be ready."

The old quartermaster whose business it was to tell the hours saluted
the captain.

"Eight bells, sir," he said, "midnight. Christmas day," he added.

"Strike them," said the captain.

And, as clear as ever, the four couplets rang out over the chaos and the
disaster.

"Christmas day," the boy murmured.

"She's going, men," said the captain, as the cadences died away. "Save
yourselves. Abandon the ship."

"Christmas morning," said the boy. "I wonder what they're doing at
home."

"Overboard with you, youngster," said the signal lieutenant; "I wish I
had a life-preserver for you, but--"

"Merry Christmas, sir," said the lad suddenly.

"Good God!" said the man. "Merry Christmas! They will think of us at
home."

What was left of the ship gave a mighty reel.

"Quick or she'll suck you down," the officer roared, as he fairly flung
the boy into the water,--and how he hurt that broken arm! "You can swim.
Strike out. Good-by."

The boy had caught a glimpse of the captain standing on the bridge as
the wreck went down and then the wild waters closed over his head. It
was frightfully cold. A hard gale was blowing. The waves ran terribly
high. His left arm was helpless. His head ached fiercely. What was the
use? Still the boy struck out bravely with his free hand. The instinct
of life! It was too dark to see. The sky was covered with drifting
clouds. Only here and there a little rift of moonlight came through.

"Christmas morning," he sobbed out as the waves rolled him over. "Oh, my
God!"

He felt himself going down. All at once the waters seemed to grow still.
It was suddenly calm. He was no longer cold. He threw his head up for
one last look at the sky and life and then he hung, as it were,
suspended in some strange way. He saw a figure walking across the smooth
of the seas as it had been solid ground. The figure drew nearer, the
wind seemed to have died away, but the draperies that shrouded it swung
gently as they would while a man walked along. The face he saw dimly,
vaguely, but there was light in it somehow. It came slowly nearer.

"Christmas morning," whispered the boy.

The hand of the figure reached down. It caught the boy's right arm. He
was lifted up.

"Home and Christmas morning," whispered the boy, closing his eyes.

The moonlight broke through a cloud and fell upon him. A wave rolled
over him and the sea was empty as before.


