LESSON LXII.

THE INSOLENT BOY.

1. James Selton was one of the most insolent boys in the
village where he lived. He would rarely pass people in the
street without being guilty of some sort of abuse.

	THIRD READER. 	159
2. If a person were well dressed he would cry out,
"Dandy!" If a person's clothes were dirty or torn, he would
throw stones at him, and annoy him in every way.
3. One afternoon, just as the school was dismissed, a
stranger passed through the village. His dress was plain and
somewhat old, but neat and clean. He carried a cane in his
hand, on the end of which was a bundle, and he wore a
broad-brimmed hat.
4. No sooner did James see the stranger, than he winked to
his playmates, and said, "Now for some fun!" He then
silently went toward the stranger from behind, and, knocking
off his hat, ran away.
5. The man turned and saw him, but James was out of
hearing before he could speak. The stranger put on his hat,
and went on his way. Again did James approach; but this
time, the man caught him by the arm, and held him fast.
6. However, he contented himself with looking James a
moment in the face, and then pushed him from him. No
sooner did the naughty boy find himself free again, than he
began to pelt the stranger with dirt and stones.

	160 	ECLECTIC SERIES.


7. But he was much frightened when the "rowdy," as he
foolishly called the man, was struck on the head by a brick,
and badly hurt. All the boys now ran away, and James
skulked across the fields to his home.
8. As he drew near the house, his sister Caroline came out
to meet him, holding up

	THIRD READER. 	161
a beautiful gold chain and some new books for him to see.
9. She told James, as fast as she could talk, that their
uncle, who had been away several years, had come home,
and was now in the house; that he had brought beautiful
presents for the whole family; that he had left his carriage at
the tavern, a mile or two off, and walked on foot, so as to
surprise his brother, their father.
10. She said, that while he was coming through the
village, some wicked boys threw stones at him, and hit him
just over the eye, and that mother had bound up the wound.
"But what makes you look so pale?" asked Caroline,
changing her tone.
11. The guilty boy told her that nothing was the matter
with him; and running into the house, he went upstairs into
his chamber. Soon after, he heard his father calling him to
come down. Trembling from head to foot, he obeyed. When
he reached the parlor door, he stood, fearing to enter.
12. His mother said, "James, why do you not come in?
You are not usually so bashful. See this beautiful watch,
which your uncle has brought for you."
3, 11.

	162 	ECLECTIC SERIES,
13. What a sense of shame did James now feel! Little
Caroline seized his arm, and pulled him into the room. But
he hung down his head, and covered his face with his hands.
14. His uncle went up to him, and kindly taking away his
hands, said, "James, will you not bid me welcome?" But
quickly starting back, he cried, "Brother, this is not your son.
It is the boy who so shamefully insulted me in the street!"
15. With surprise and grief did the good father and mother
learn this. His uncle was ready to forgive him, and forget the
injury. But his father would never permit James to have the
gold watch, nor the beautiful books, which his uncle had
brought for him.
16. The rest of the children were loaded with presents.
James was obliged to content himself with seeing them
happy. He never forgot this lesson so long as he lived. It
cured him entirely of his low and insolent manners.



	THIRD READER. 	163

LESSON LXIII.

WE ARE SEVEN.

1. I met a little cottage girl:
She was eight years old, she said;
Her hair was thick with many a curl,
That clustered round her head.

2. She had a rustic, woodland air,
And she was wildly clad:
Her eyes were fair, and very fair;--
Her beauty made me glad.

3. "Sisters and brothers, little maid,
How many may you be?"
"How many? Seven in all," she said,
And, wondering, looked at me.

4. "And where are they? I pray you tell."
She answered, "Seven are we;
And two of us at Conway dwell,
And two are gone to sea.

	l64	ECLECTIC SERIES.

5. "Two of us in the churchyard lie,
My sister and my brother;
And, in the churchyard cottage, I
Dwell near them with my mother,"



6. "You say that two at Conway dwell,
And two are gone to sea,
Yet ye are seven! I pray you tell,
Sweet maid, how this may be."

	THIRD READER. 	165

7. Then did the little maid reply,
"Seven boys and girls are we;
Two of us in the churchyard lie,
Beneath the churchyard tree."

8. "You run about, my little maid,
Your limbs, they are alive;
If two are in the churchyard laid,
Then ye are only five."

9. "Their graves are green, they may be seen,"
The little maid replied,
"Twelve steps or more from mother's door,
And they are side by side.

10. "My stockings there I often knit,
My kerchief there I hem;
And there upon the ground I sit,
And sing a song to them.

11. "And often after sunset, sir,
When it is light and fair,
I take my little porringer,
And eat my supper there.

12. "The first that died was sister Jane;
In bed she moaning lay,

166 	ECLECTIC SERIES.

Till God released her from her pain;
And then she went away.

13. "So in the churchyard she was laid;
And, when the grass was dry,
Together round her grave we played,
My brother John and I.

14. "And when the ground was white with snow,
And I could run and slide,
My brother John was forced to go,
And he lies by her side."

15. "How many are you, then?" said I,
"If they two are in heaven?"
Quick was the little maid's reply,
"O master! we are seven."

16. "But they are dead; those two are dead!
Their spirits are in heaven!"
'T was throwing words away: for still
The little maid would have her will,
And said, "Nay, we are seven."
William Wordsworth.




	THIRD READER. 	167

LESSON LXIV.

MARY'S DIME.
1. There! I have drawn the chairs into the right corners,
and dusted the room nicely. How cold papa and mamma will
be when they return from their long ride! It is not time to
toast the bread yet, and I am tired of reading.
2. What shall I do? Somehow, I can't help thinking about
the pale face of that little beggar girl all the time. I can see
the glad light filling her eyes, just as plain as I did when I
laid the dime in her little dirty hand.
3. How much I had thought of that dime, too! Grandpa
gave it to me a whole month ago, and I had kept it ever since
in my red box upstairs; but those sugar apples looked so
beautiful, and were so cheap--only a dime apiece--that I
made up my mind to have one.
4. I can see her--the beggar girl, I mean--as she stood
there in front of the store, in her old hood and faded dress,
looking at the candies laid all in a row. I wonder

168 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
what made me say, "Little girl, what do you want?"
5. How she stared at me, just as if nobody had spoken
kindly to her before. I guess

she thought I was sorry for her, for she said, so earnestly and
sorrowfully, "I was thinking how good one of those
gingerbread rolls would taste. I have n't had anything to eat
to-day."

	THIRD READER. 	169
6. Now, I thought to myself, "Mary Williams, you have
had a good breakfast and a good dinner this day, and this
poor girl has not had a mouthful. You can give her your
dime; she needs it a great deal more than you do."
7. I could not resist that little girl's sorrowful, hungry
look--so I dropped the dime right into her hand, and, without
waiting for her to speak, walked straight away. I'm so glad I
gave her the dime, if I did have to go without the apple lying
there in the window, and looking just like a real one.



LESSON LXV.
MARY DOW.

1. "Come in, little stranger," I said,
As she tapped at my half open door;
While the blanket, pinned over her head,
Just reached to the basket she bore.

170	ECLECTIC SERIES.

2. A look full of innocence fell
From her modest and pretty blue eye,
As she said, "I have matches to sell,
And hope you are willing to buy.



3. "A penny a bunch is the price,
I think you'll not find it too much;
They are tied up so even and nice,
And ready to light with a touch."

4. I asked, "'What's your name, little girl?"
"'Tis Mary," said she, "Mary Dow;"

	THIRD READER. 	171

And carelessly tossed off a curl,
That played on her delicate brow.

5. "My father was lost on the deep;
The ship never got to the shore;
And mother is sad, and will weep,
To hear the wind blow and sea roar.

6. "She sits there at home, without food,
Beside our poor, sick Willy's bed;
She paid all her money for wood,
And so I sell matches for bread.

7. "I'd go to the yard and get chips,
But then it would make me too sad
To see the men building the ships,
And think they had made one so bad.

8. "But God, I am sure, who can take
Such fatherly care of a bird,
Will never forget nor forsake
The children who trust in his word.

9. "And now, if I only can sell
The matches I brought out to-day,
I think I shall do very well,
And we shall rejoice at the pay."

	172 	ECLECTIC SERIES,

10. "Fly home, little bird," then I thought,
"Fly home, full of joy, to your nest;"
For I took all the matches she brought,
And Mary may tell you the rest.



LESSON LXVI.
THE LITTLE LOAF.
1. Once when there was a famine, a rich baker sent for
twenty of the poorest children in the town, and said to them,
"In this basket there is a loaf for each of you. Take it, and
come back to me every day at this hour till God sends us
better times."
2. The hungry children gathered eagerly about the basket,
and quarreled for the bread, because each wished to have the
largest loaf. At last they went away without even thanking
the good gentleman.
3. But Gretchen, a poorly-dressed little girl, did not
quarrel or struggle with the rest,

	THIRD READER. 	173



but remained standing modestly in the distance. When the
ill-behaved girls had left, she took the smallest loaf, which
alone was left in the basket, kissed the gentleman's hand, and
went home.
4. The next day the children were as ill behaved as before,
and poor, timid Gretchen received a loaf scarcely half the
size of the one she got the first day. When she came home,
and her mother cut the loaf open, many new, shining pieces
of silver fell out of it.

	174 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
5. Her mother was very much alarmed, and said, "Take
the money back to the good gentleman at once, for it must
have got into the dough by accident. Be quick, Gretchen! be
quick!"
6. But when the little girl gave the rich man her mother's
message, he said, "No, no, my child, it was no mistake. I had
the silver pieces put into the smallest loaf to reward you.
Always be as contented, peaceable, and grateful as you now
are. Go home now, and tell your mother that the money is
your own."


LESSON LXVII.

SUSIE AND ROVER.
1. "Mamma," said Susie Dean, one summer's morning,
"may I go to the woods, and pick berries?"

	THIRD READER. 	175
2. "Yes," replied Mrs. Dean, "but you must take Rover
with you."
3. Susie brought her little basket, and her mother put up a
nice lunch for her. She tied down the cover, and fastened a
tin cup to it.
4. The little girl called Rover--a great Newfoundland
dog--and gave him a tin pail to carry. "If I bring it home
full, mamma," she said, "won't you make some berry
cakes for tea?"
5. Away she tripped, singing as she went down the lane
and across the pasture. When she got to the woods, she put
her dinner basket down beside a tree, and began to pick
berries.
6. Rover ran about, chasing a squirrel or a rabbit now and
then, but never straying far from Susie.
7. The tin pail was not a very small one. By the time it
was two thirds full, Susie began to feel hungry, and thought
she would eat her lunch.
8. Rover came and took his place at her side as soon as
she began to eat. Did she not give him some of the lunch?
No, she was in a selfish mood, and did no such thing.

	176 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
9. "There, Rover, run away! there's a good dog," she said;
but Rover staid near her, watching her steadily with his clear
brown eves.

10. The meat he wanted so much, was soon eaten up; and
all he got of the nice dinner, was a small crust of gingerbread
that Susie threw away.
11. After dinner, Susie played a while by

	THIRD READER. 	177
the brook. She threw sticks into the water, and Rover swam
in and brought them back. Then she began to pick berries
again.
12. She did not enjoy the afternoon as she did the
morning. The sunshine was as bright, the berries were as
sweet and plentiful, and she was neither tired nor hungry.
13. But good, faithful Rover was hungry, and she had not
given him even one piece of meat. She tried to forget how
selfish she had been; but she could not do so, and quite early
she started for home.
14. When she was nearly out of the woods, a rustling in
the underbrush attracted her attention. "I wonder if that is a
bird or a squirrel," said she to herself. "If I can catch it, how
glad I shall be!"
15. She tried to make her way quietly through the
underbrush; but what was her terror when she saw it large
snake coiled up before her, prepared for a spring!
16. She was so much frightened that she could not move;
but brave Rover saw the snake, and, springing forward,
seized it by the neck and killed it.
17. When the faithful dog came and rubbed his head
against her hand, Susie put her
3, 12.

178 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
arms 'round his neck, and burst into tears. "O Rover," she
cried, "you dear, good dog! How sorry I am that I was so
selfish!"
18. Rover understood the tone of her voice, if he did not
understand her words, and capered about in great glee,
barking all the time. You may be sure that he had a plentiful
supper that evening.
19. Susie never forgot the lesson of that day. She soon
learned to be on her guard against a selfish spirit, and
became a happier and more lovable little girl.
Mrs. M. O. Johnson--Adapted.


LESSON LXVIII.
THE VIOLET.

1. Down in a green and shady bed,
A modest violet grew;
Its stalk was bent, it hung its head,
As if to hide from view

	THIRD READER. 	179



2. And yet it was a lovely flower,
Its colors bright and fair;
It might have graced a rosy bower
Instead of hiding there.

3. Yet there it was content to bloom,
In modest tints arrayed,
And there it spread its sweet perfume,
Within the silent shade.

4. Then let me to the valley go,
This pretty flower to see;
That I may also learn to grow
In sweet humility.
Jane Taylor.

	180 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
LESSON LXIX.
NO CROWN FOR ME.
1. "Will you come with us, Susan?" cried several little
girls to a schoolmate. "We are going to the woods; do come,
too."
2. "I should like to go with you very much," replied
Susan, with a sigh; "but I can not finish the task grandmother
set me to do."
3. "How tiresome it must be to stay at home to work on a
holiday!" said one of the girls, with a toss of her head.
"Susan's grandmother is too strict."
4. Susan heard this remark, and, as she bent her head over
her task, she wiped away a tear, and thought of the pleasant
afternoon the girls would spend gathering wild flowers in the
woods.
5. Soon she said to herself, "What harm can there be in
moving the mark grandmother put in the stocking? The
woods must be very beautiful to-day, and how I should like
to be in them!"
6. "Grandmother," said she, a few minutes afterwards, "I
am ready, now." "What, so

	THIRD READER. 	181
soon, Susan?" Her grandmother took the work, and looked at
it very closely.
7. "True, Susan," said she, laying great stress on each
word; "true, I count twenty turns from the mark; and, as you
have never deceived me, you may go and amuse yourself as
you like the rest of the day."
8. Susan's cheeks were scarlet, and she did not say,
"Thank you." As she left the cottage, she walked slowly
away, not singing as usual.
9. "Why, here is Susan!" the girls cried, when she joined
their company; "but what is the matter? Why have you left
