
"Now, Bobby, I understand your plan," said Mr. Bayard, when they
reached the store; "but the details must be settled.  Where do you
intend to go?"

"I hardly know, sir.  I suppose I can sell books almost any where."

"Very true; but in some places much better than in others."

Mr. Bayard mentioned a large town about eighteen miles from the city,
in which he thought a good trade might be carried on, and Bobby at once
decided to adopt the suggestion.

"You can make this place your head quarters for the week; if books do
not sell well right in the village, why, you can go out a little way,
for the country in the vicinity is peopled by intelligent farmers, who
are well off, and who can afford to buy books."

"I was thinking of that; but what shall I take with me, sir?"

"There is a new book just published, called 'The Wayfarer,' which is
going to have a tremendous run.  It has been advertised in advance all
over the country, so that you will find a ready sale for it.  You will
get it there before any one else, and have the market all to yourself."

"The Wayfarer?  I have heard of it myself."

"You shall take fifty copies with you, and if you find that you shall
want more, write, and I will send them."

"But I cannot carry fifty copies."

"You must take the cars to B----, and have a trunk or box to carry your
books in.  I have a stout trunk down cellar which you shall have."

"I will pay for it, sir."

"Never mind that, Bobby; and you will want a small valise or carpet bag
to carry your books from house to house.  I will lend you one."

"You are very kind, sir; I did not mean to ask any favors of you except
to trust me for the books until my return."

"All right, Bobby."

Mr. Bayard called the porter and ordered him to bring up the trunk, in
which he directed Mr. Timmins to pack fifty "Wayfarers."

"Now, how much will these books cost me apiece?" asked Bobby.

"The retail price is one dollar; the wholesale price is one third off;
and you shall have them at what they cost me."

"Sixty-seven cents," added Bobby.  "That will give me a profit of
thirty-three cents on each book."

"Just so."

"Perhaps Mr. Timmins will sell me one of those blank books now; for I
like to have things down in black and white."

"I will furnish you with something much better than that;" and Mr.
Bayard left the counting room.

In a moment he returned with a handsome pocket memorandum book, which
he presented to the little merchant.

"But I don't like to take it unless you will let me pay for it," said
Bobby, hesitating.

"Never mind it, my young friend.  Now you can sit down at my desk and
open your accounts.  I like to see boys methodical, and there is
nothing like keeping accounts to make one accurate.  Keep your books
posted up, and you will know where you are at any time."

"I intend to keep an account of all I spend and all I receive, if it is
no more than a cent."

"Right, my little man.  Have you ever studied book-keeping?"

"No, sir, I suppose I haven't; but there was a page of accounts in the
back part of the arithmetic I studied, and I got a pretty good idea of
the thing from that.  All the money received goes on one side, and all
the money paid out goes on the other."

"Exactly so; in this book you had better open a book account first.  If
you wish, I will show you how."

"Thank you, sir; I should be very glad to have you;" and Bobby opened
the memorandum book, and seated himself at the desk.

"Write 'Book Account' at the top of the pages, one word on each.  Very
well.  Now write 'To fifty copies of Wayfarer, at sixty-seven cents,
$33.50,' on the left hand page, or debit side of the account."

"I am not much of a writer," said Bobby, apologetically.

"You will improve.  Now, each day you will credit the amount of sales
on the right hand page, or credit side of the account; so, when you
have sold out, the balance due your debit side will be the profit on
the lot.  Do you understand it?"

Bobby thought a moment before he could see through it; but his brain
was active, and he soon managed the idea.

"Now you want a personal account;" and Mr. Bayard explained to him how
to make this out.

He then instructed him to enter on the debit-side all he spent for
travel, board, freight, and other charges.  The next was the "profit
and loss" account, which was to show him the net profit of the business.

Our hero, who had a decided taste for accounts, was very much pleased
with this employment; and when the accounts were all opened, he
regarded them with a great deal of satisfaction.  He longed to commence
his operations, if it were only for the pleasure of making the entries
in this book.

"One thing I forgot," said he, as he seized the pen, and under the cash
account entered, "To Cash from mother, $1.00."  "Now I am all right, I
believe."

"I think you are.  Now, the cars leave at seven in the morning.  Can
you be ready for a start as early as that?" asked Mr. Bayard.

"O, yes, sir, I hope so.  I get up at half past four at home."

"Very well; my small valise is at the house; but I believe every thing
else is ready.  Now, I have some business to attend to; and if you will
amuse yourself for an hour or two, we will go home then."

"I shall want a lodging-place when I am in the city; perhaps some of
your folks can direct me to one where they won't charge too much."

"As to that, Bobby, you must go to my house whenever you are in the
city."

"Law, sir! you live so grand, I couldn't think of going to your house.
I am only a poor boy from the country, and I don't know how to behave
myself among such nice folks."

"You will do very well, Bobby.  Ellen would never forgive me if I let
you go any where else.  So that is settled; you will go to my house.
Now, you may sit here, or walk out and see the sights."

"If you please, sir, if Mr. Timmins will let me look at some of the
books, I shouldn't wish for any thing better.  I should like to look at
the Wayfarer, so that I shall know how to recommend it."

"Mr. Timmins _will_ let you," replied Mr. Bayard, as he touched the
spring of a bell on his desk.

The dapper clerk came running into the counting-room to attend the
summons of his employer.

"Mr. Timmins," continued Mr. Bayard, with a mischievous smile, "bring
Mr. Bright a copy of 'The Wayfarer.'"

Mr. Timmins was astonished to hear "Country" called "Mister,"
astonished to hear his employer call him "Mister," and Bobby was
astonished to hear himself called "Mister;" nevertheless, our hero
enjoyed the joke.

The clerk brought the book; and Bobby proceeded to give it a thorough,
critical examination.  He read the preface, the table of contents, and
several chapters of the work, before Mr. Bayard was ready to go home
"How do you like it, Bobby?" asked the bookseller.

"First rate."

"You may take that copy in your hand; you will want to finish it."

"Thank you, sir; I will be careful of it."

"You may keep it.  Let that be the beginning of your own private
library."

His own private library!  Bobby had not got far enough to dream of such
a thing yet; but he thanked Mr. Bayard, and put the book under his arm.

After tea, Ellen proposed to her father that they should all go to the
Museum.  Mr. Bayard acceded, and our hero was duly amazed at the
drolleries perpetrated there.  He had a good time; but it was so late
when he went to bed, that he was a little fearful lest he should
oversleep himself in the morning.

He did not, however, and was down in the parlor before any of the rest
of the family were stirring.  An early breakfast was prepared for him,
at which Mr. Bayard, who intended to see him off, joined him.
Depositing his little bundle and the copy of "The Wayfarer" in the
valise provided for him, they walked to the store.  The porter wheeled
the trunk down to the railroad station, though Bobby insisted upon
doing it himself.

The bookseller saw him and his baggage safely aboard of the cars, gave
him a ticket, and then bade him an affectionate adieu.  In a little
while Bobby was flying over the rail, and at about eight o'clock,
reached B----.

The station master kindly permitted him to deposit his trunk in the
baggage room, and to leave it there for the remainder of the week.

Taking a dozen of the books from the trunk, and placing them in his
valise, he sallied out upon his mission.  It must be confessed that his
heart was filled with a tumult of emotions.  The battle of life was
before him.  He was on the field, sword in hand, ready to plunge into
the contest.  It was victory or defeat.

  "March on, brave youth! the field of strife
    With peril fraught before thee lies;
  March on! the battle plain of life
    Shall yield thee yet a glorious prize."

It was of no use to shrink then, even if he had felt disposed to do so.
He was prepared to be rebuffed, to be insulted, to be turned away from
the doors at which he should seek admission; but he was determined to
conquer.

He had reached a house at which he proposed to offer "The Wayfarer" for
sale.  His heart went pit pat, pit pat, and he paused before the door.

"Now or never!" exclaimed he, as he swung open the garden gate, and
made his way up to the door.

He felt some misgivings.  It was so new and strange to him that he
could hardly muster sufficient resolution to proceed farther.  But his
irresolution was of only a moment's duration.

"Now or never!" and he gave a vigorous knock at the door.

It was opened by an elderly lady, whose physiognomy did not promise
much.

"Good morning, ma'am.  Can I sell you a copy of 'The Wayfarer' to-day?
a new book, just published."

"No; I don't want none of your books.  There's more pedlers round the
country now than you could shake a stick at in a month," replied the
old lady petulantly.

"It is a very interesting book, ma'am; has an excellent moral."  Bobby
had read the preface, as I before remarked.  "It will suit you, ma'am;
for you look just like a lady who wants to read something with a moral."

Bravo, Bobby!  The lady concluded that her face had a moral expression,
and she was pleased with the idea.

"Let me see it;" and she asked Bobby to walk in and be seated, while
she went for her spectacles.

As she was looking over the book, our hero went into a more elaborate
recommendation of its merits.  He was sure it would interest the young
and the old; it taught a good lesson; it had elegant engravings; the
type was large, which would suit her eyes; it was well printed and
bound; and finally, it was cheap at one dollar.

"I'll take it," said the old lady.

"Thank you, ma'am."

Bobby's first victory was achieved

"Have you got a dollar?" asked the lady, as she handed him a two dollar
bill.

"Yes, ma'am;" and he gave her his only dollar, and put the two in its
place, prouder than a king who has conquered an empire.  "Thank you,
ma'am."

Bidding the lady a polite good morning, he left the house, encouraged
by his success to go forward in his mission with undiminished hope.




CHAPTER X.

IN WHICH BOBBY IS A LITTLE TOO SMART.

The clouds were rolled back, and Bobby no longer had a doubt as to the
success of his undertaking.  It requires but a little sunshine to
gladden the heart, and the influence of his first success scattered all
the misgivings he had cherished.

Two New England shillings is undoubtedly a very small sum of money; but
Bobby had made two shillings, and he would not have considered himself
more fortunate if some unknown relative had left him a fortune.  It
gave him confidence in his powers, and as he walked away from the
house, he reviewed the circumstances of his first sale.

The old lady had told him at first she did not wish to buy a book, and,
moreover, had spoken rather contemptuously of the craft to which he had
now the honor to belong.  He gave himself the credit of having
conquered the old lady's prejudices.  He had sold her a book in spite
of her evident intention not to purchase.  In short, he had, as we have
before said, won a glorious victory, and he congratulated himself
accordingly.

But it was of no use to waste time in useless self-glorification, and
Bobby turned from the past to the future.  There were forty-nine more
books to be sold, so that the future was forty-nine-times as big as the
past.

He saw a shoemaker's shop ahead of him; and he was debating with
himself whether he should enter and offer his books for sale.  It would
do no harm, though he had but slight expectations of doing any thing.

There were three men at work in the shop--one of them a middle-aged
man, the other two young men.  They looked like persons of
intelligence, and as soon as Bobby saw them his hopes grew stronger.

"Can I sell you any books to-day?" asked the little merchant, as he
crossed the threshold.

"Well, I don't know; that depends upon how smart you are," replied the
eldest of the men.  "It takes a pretty smart fellow to sell any thing
in this shop."

"Then I hope to sell each of you a book," added Bobby, laughing at the
badinage of the shoemaker.

