was apparently casual it was moving down the stream at a great rate.

The canoe had gone fully four hundred yards when an Abenaki warrior on
the far side of the river caught a glimpse of a shadow moving in the
shadow of the bank, and a sustained gaze soon showed to him that it was
a canoe, and, in his opinion, a derelict, washed by the flood from some
camp a long distance up the stream. He watched it for a little while,
and was then confirmed in his opinion by its motion as it floated lazily
with the current.

The darkness was not too great to keep the Abenaki from seeing that it
was a good canoe, a fine shell of Iroquois make, and canoes were
valuable. He had not been able to secure any scalp, which was a sad
disappointment, and now Manitou had sent this stray craft to him as a
consolation prize. He was not one to decline the gifts of the gods, and
he ran along the edge of the cliff until he came to a low point well
ahead of the canoe. Then he put his rifle on the ground, dropped lightly
into the stream, and swam with swift sure strokes for the derelict.

As the warrior approached he saw that his opinion of the canoe was more
than justified. It had been made with uncommon skill and he admired its
strong, graceful lines. It was not often that such a valuable prize came
to a man and asked to be taken. He reached it and put one hand upon the
side. Then a heavy fist stretched entirely over the canoe and struck him
such a mighty blow upon the jaw that he sank senseless, and when he
revived two minutes later on a low bank where the current had cast him,
he did not know what had happened to him.

Meanwhile the uncaptured canoe sailed on in lonely majesty down the
stream.

"That was a shrewd blow of yours, Dave," said Robert. "You struck fairly
upon his jaw bone."

"It's not often that I fight an Indian with my fists, and the chance
having come I made the most of it," said the hunter. "He may have been a
sentinel set to watch for just such an attempt as we are making, but
it's likely they thought if we made a dash for it we'd be in the canoe."

"It was great wisdom for us to swim," said Tayoga. "Another sentinel
seeing the canoe may also think it was washed away somewhere and is
merely floating on the waters. I can see a heap of underbrush that has
gathered against a projecting point, and the current would naturally
bring the canoe into it. Suppose we let it rest there until it seems to
work free by the action of the water, and then go on down the river."

"It's a good idea, Tayoga, but it's a pretty severe test to remain under
fire, so to speak, in order to deceive your enemy, when the road is open
for you to run away."

"But we can do it, all three of us," said Tayoga, confidently.

A spit of high ground projected into the river and in the course of time
enough driftwood brought by the stream and lodged there had made a raft
of considerable width and depth, against which the canoe in its
wandering course lodged. But it was evident that its stay in such a port
would be but temporary, as the current continually pushed and sucked at
it, and the light craft quivered and swayed continually under the action
of the current.

The three behind the canoe thrust themselves back into the mass of
vegetation, reckless of scratches, and were hidden completely for the
time. Since he was no longer kept warm by the act of swimming Robert
felt the chill of the water entering his bones. His physical desire to
shiver he controlled by a powerful effort of the will, and, standing on
the bottom with his head among the boughs, he remained quiet.

None of the three spoke and in a few minutes a warrior on the other side
of the stream, watching in the bushes, saw the dim outline of the canoe
in the darkness. He came to the edge of the water and looked at it
attentively. It was apparent to him, as it had been to the other savage,
that it was a stray canoe, and valuable, a fine prize for the taking.
But he was less impulsive than the first man had been and at that point
the river spread out to a much greater width. He did not know that his
comrade was lying on the bank farther up in a half stunned condition,
but he was naturally cautious and he stared at the canoe a long time.
He saw that the action of the current would eventually work it loose
from the raft, but he believed it would yet hang there for at least ten
minutes. So he would have time to go back to his nearest comrade and
return with him. Then one could enter the water and salvage the canoe,
while the other stayed on the bank and watched. Having reached this wise
conclusion he disappeared in the woods, seeking the second Indian, but
before the two could come together the canoe had worked loose and was
gone.

The three hidden in the bushes had watched the Indian as well as the
dusk would permit and they read his mind. They knew that when he turned
away he had gone for help and they knew equally well that it was time
for the full power of the current to take effect.

"Shove it off, Tayoga," whispered Willet, "and I think we'd better help
along with some strokes of our own."

"It is so," said Tayoga.

Now the wandering canoe was suddenly endowed with more life and purpose,
or else the current grew much swifter. After an uneasy stay with the
boughs, it left them quickly, sailed out toward the middle of the
stream, and floated at great speed between banks that were growing high
again. The friendly dark was also an increasing protection to the three
who were steering it. The heavy but rainless clouds continued to gather
over them, and the canoe sped on at accelerated speed in an opaque
atmosphere. A mile farther and Willet suggested that they get into the
canoe and paddle with all their might. The embarkation, a matter of
delicacy and difficulty, was made with success, and then they used the
paddles furiously.

The canoe, suddenly becoming a live thing, leaped forward in the water,
and sped down the stream, as if it were the leader in a race. Far behind
them rose a sudden war cry, and the three laughed.

"I suppose they've discovered in some way that we've fled," said Robert.

"That is so," said Tayoga.

"And they'll come down the river as fast as they can," said Willet, "but
they'll do no more business with us. I don't want to brag, but you can't
find three better paddlers in the wilderness than we are, and with a
mile start we ought soon to leave behind any number of warriors who have
to run through the woods and follow the windings of the stream."

"They cannot catch us now," said Tayoga, "and I will tell them so."

He uttered a war whoop so piercing and fierce that Robert was startled.
It cut the air like the slash of a sword, but it was a long cry, full of
varied meaning. It expressed satisfaction, triumph, a taunt for the foe,
and then it died away in a sinister note like a threat for any who tried
to follow. Willet laughed under his breath.

"That'll stir 'em, Tayoga," he said. "You put a little dart squarely in
their hearts, and they don't like it. But they can squirm as much as
they please, we're out of their reach now. Hark, they're answering!"

They heard a cry from the savage who had besieged them, but it was
followed by a long silence. The three paddled with their utmost
strength, the great muscles on their arms rising and falling with their
exertions, and beads of perspiration standing out on their foreheads.

Hours passed. Mile after mile fell behind them. The darkness began to
thin, and then the air was shot with golden beams from the rising sun.
Willet, heaving an immense sigh of relief, laid his paddle across the
canoe.

"The danger has passed," he said. "Now we'll land, put on our clothes
and become respectable."




CHAPTER V

THE MOHAWK CHIEF


The canoe was passing between low shores, and they landed on the left
bank, lifting out of the water the little vessel that had served them so
well, and carrying it to a point some distance in the bushes. There they
sat down beside it a while and drew long, deep and panting breaths.

"I don't want to repeat that experience soon," said Robert. "I think
every muscle and bone in me is aching."

"So do mine," said Willet, "but they ache in a good cause, and what's of
more importance just now a successful one too. Having left no trail the
Indians won't be able to follow us, and we can rest here a long time,
which compels me to tell you again to put on your clothes and become
respectable."

They were quite dry now, and they dressed. They also saw that their arms
and ammunition were in order, and after Willet had scouted the country a
bit, seeing that no human-being was near, they ate breakfast of the deer
meat and felt thankful.

"The aches are leaving me," said Willet, "and in another half-hour I'll
be the man I was yesterday. Not I'll be a better man. I've been in
danger lots of times and always there's a wonderful feeling of
happiness when I get out of it."

"That is, risk goes before real rest," said Robert.

"That's about the way to put it, and escaping as we've just done from a
siege, this dawn is about the finest I've ever seen. Isn't that a big
and glorious sun over there? I suppose it's the same sun I've been
looking at for years, but it seems to me that it has a new and
uncommonly splendid coat of gilding this morning."

"I think it was put on to celebrate our successful flight," said Robert.
"It's not only a splendid sun, Dave, but it's an uncommonly friendly one
too. I can look it squarely in the eye for just a second and it fairly
beams on me."

"My brothers are right," said Tayoga gravely. "If it had not been the
will of Manitou for us to escape from the trap that had been set for us
the sun rising newly behind the mountains would not smile upon us."

"I take that as allegorical," said Robert. "We see with our souls, and
our eyes are merely the mirrors through which we look. Seeing, or at
least the color of it, is a state of mind."

Tayoga followed him perfectly and nodded.

"You are getting too deep," interrupted the hunter. "Let's be satisfied
with our escape. Here, each of you take another piece of venison. I'm
glad you still have your bow and arrows, Tayoga, because it won't be
long before we'll have to begin looking for another deer."

"The woods swarm with game. It will not be difficult to find one," said
Tayoga.

"But for the present I think we'd better lie close. Of course the chief
danger of attack from those savages has passed, but we're some distance
from Canada, and it's still doubtful ground. Another wandering band may
run upon us and that Ojibway, Tandakora, will never quit hunting us,
until a bullet stops him. He has a terrible attack of the scalp fever.
We want to make good time on our journey, but we mustn't spoil
everything by trying to go too fast."

"It might be wise for us to remain the entire day in the forest,"
replied the Onondaga. "After the great and long trial of our strength
last night, we need much rest. And tonight we can make speed on the
river again. What says Lennox?"

"I'm for it," replied Robert, "but I suggest that we go deeper into the
forest, taking the canoe with us, and hide our trail. I think I see the
gleam of water to our right and if I'm correct it means a brook, up
which we can walk carrying the canoe with us."

"A good idea, Robert," said Willet. "Suppose you look first and see if
it's really a brook."

The lad returned in a moment or two with a verification. The water of
the little stream was clear, but it had a fine sandy bottom on which
footprints were effaced in a few seconds. They waded up it nearly a mile
until they came to stony ground, when they left the brook and walked on
the outcrop or detached stones a considerable distance, passing at last
through dense thickets into a tiny open space. They put the canoe down
in the center of the opening, which was circular, and stretched their
own bodies on the grass close to the bushes, through which they could
see without being seen.

"That trail is well hidden," said Willet, "or rather it's no trail at
all. It's just about as much trace as a bird leaves, flying through the
air."

"Do you know where we are, Dave?" asked Robert.

"We're not so far from the edge of the wilderness. Before long the land
will begin to slope down toward the St. Lawrence. But it's all wild
enough. The French settlements themselves don't go very far back from
the big river. And the St. Lawrence is a mighty stream, Robert. I reckon
there's not another such river on the globe. The Mississippi I suppose
is longer, and carries more volume to the sea, but the St. Lawrence is
full of clear water, Robert, think of that! Most all the other big
rivers of the world, I hear, are muddy and yellow, but the St. Lawrence,
being the overflow of the big lakes, is pure. Sometimes it's blue and
sometimes it's green, according to the sunlight or the lack of it, and
sometimes it's another color, but always it's good, fresh water, flowing
between mighty banks to the sea, the stream getting deeper and deeper
and broader and broader the farther it goes, till beyond Quebec it's
five and then ten miles across, and near the ocean it's nigh as wide as
Erie or Ontario. I'm always betting on the St. Lawrence, Robert. I
haven't been on all the other continents, but I don't believe they can
show anything to beat it."

"Have you seen much of the big lakes, Dave?"

"A lot of Erie and Ontario, but not so much of those farther west,
Michigan, Huron and Superior, although they're far bigger and grander.
Nothing like 'em in the lake line in this world. We don't know much
about Superior, but I gather from the Indians that it's nigh to four
hundred miles long, and maybe a hundred and fifty miles across in the
middle. What a power of water! That's not a lake! It's a fresh-water
sea. I've seen Niagara, too, Robert, where the river comes tumbling over
two mighty cliffs, and the foam rises up to the sky, and the rainbow is
always arching over the chasm below. It's a tremendous sight and it
keeps growing on you the longer you look at it. The Indians, who like
myths and allegories, have a fine story about it. They say that Heno, to
whom Manitou gave charge of the thunderbolt, once lived in the great
cave or hollow behind the falls, liking the damp and the eternal roar of
the waters. And Manitou to help him keep a watch over all the
thunderbolts gave him three assistants who have never been named. Now,
the nations of the Hodenosaunee call themselves the grandchildren of
Heno, and when they make invocation to him they call him grandfather.
But they hold that Heno is always under the direction of Hawenneyu, the
Great Spirit, who I take it is the same in their minds as Manitou. The
more you learn of the Indians, and especially of the Hodenosaunee,
Robert, the more you admire the beauty and power of their minds."

Willet spoke with great earnestness, his own mind through the
experiences of many years being steeped in forest lore and imagery.
Robert, although he knew less of Indian mythology, nevertheless knew
enough to feel for it a great admiration.

"I studied the myths of the Greeks and Romans at Albany," he said, "and
I don't see that they were very much superior to those of the Indians."

"Maybe they weren't superior at all," said Willet, "and I don't believe
the Greeks and Romans ever had a country like the one in which we are
roaming. The Book says God made the world in six days, and I think He
must have spent one whole day, and His best day, too, on the country in
here. Think of the St Lawrence, and all the big lakes and middle-sized
lakes and little lakes, and the Hudson and the other splendid rivers,
and the fine mountains east of the Hudson and west of it, and all the
grand valleys, and the great country of the Hodenosaunee, and the
gorgeous green forest running hundreds and hundreds of miles, every way!
I tell you, Robert--and it's no sacrilege either--after He did such a
splendid and well-nigh perfect job He could stop for the night and call
it a good and full day's work. I reckon that nowhere else on the earth's
surface are so many fine and wonderful things crowded into one region."

He took a deep breath and gazed with responsive eyes at the dim blue
crests of the mountains.

"It's all that you call it," said Robert, whose soul was filled with the
same love and admiration, "and I'm glad I was born within its limits.
I've noticed, Dave, that the people of old lands think they alone have
love of country. New people may love a new land just as much, and I love
all this country about us, the lakes, and the rivers, and the mountains
and the valleys and the forests."

He flung out his arms in a wide, embracing gesture, and he, too, took
deep long breaths of the crisp air that came over the clean forest.
Tayoga smiled, and the smile was fathomless.

"I, Tayoga, of the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, of the
great League of the Hodenosaunee, can rejoice more than either of you,
my white friends," he said, "because I and my fathers for ages before me
were born into this wonderful country of which you speak so well, but
not too well, and much of it belongs to the Hodenosaunee. The English
and the French are but of yesterday. Tododaho lighted the first council
fire in the vale of Onondaga many generations before either came across
the sea."

"It's true, Tayoga," said Willet, "and I don't forget it for a moment.
All of us white people, English, French, Dutch, Germans and all other
breeds, are mere newcomers, and I'm not one ever to deny the rights of
the Hodenosaunee."

"I know that the Great Bear is always our friend," said the young
Onondaga, "and Lennox too, no less."

"I am, Tayoga," said Robert fervently.

The white lad went to sleep by and by, the others to follow in their
turn, and when he woke it was afternoon. About midway of his comrade's
nap Tayoga had gone to sleep also, and now Willet followed him, leaving
Robert alone on guard.

His eyes could pierce the bushes, and for some distance beyond, and he
saw that no intruder had drawn near. Nor had he expected any. The place
was too remote and well hidden, and the keenest warriors in the world
could not follow a vanished trail.

He ate two or three strips of the deer meat, walked around the complete
circle of the opening, examining the approaches from every side, and
having satisfied himself once more that no stranger was near, returned
to his place on the grass near his comrades, full of the great peace
that can come only to those of sensitive mind and lofty imagination. His
