sure that it would be safe.

So Reddy lay flat behind the old tree trunk, with just his nose and his
eyes showing around the end of it, and studied what would be best to do.
He was sure that he could get one of those fat hens, but he wanted more.
Early that morning Reddy would have been quite contented with one, but
now that he was sure that he could get one, he wanted more. If he were
too bold and frightened those hens while catching one, they would make
such a racket that they would be sure to bring some one from the
farmhouse. The thing to do was to be patient until he could catch one
without alarming the others. Then perhaps he would be able to catch
another. Reddy decided to be patient and wait.




CHAPTER XXXIV

PATIENCE AND IMPATIENCE

    Patience is a virtue
      In a cause that's right.
    In a cause that isn't,
      It's a cause for fright.

    _Bowser the Hound._


One of the first things that the little people of the Green Forest and
the Green Meadows who hunt other little people learn is patience.
Sometimes it takes a long time to learn this, but it is a necessary
lesson. Reddy Fox had learned it. Reddy knew that often even his
cleverness would not succeed without patience. When he was young he had
lost many a good meal through impatience.

Reddy could not remember when he had been more hungry than he was now.
Lying there behind the fallen tree, watching the fat hens walking about
unsuspectingly just a little way from him, it seemed to him that he
simply must rush out and catch one of them. But Reddy was smart enough
to know that if he did this there would at once be such a screaming and
squawking that some one would be sure to rush out from the farmhouse to
find out what was going on. If he were discovered, there would be small
chance for him to get another fat hen. Reddy is keen enough to make the
most of an opportunity. He knew that if he could get one of these hens
without frightening the others, he would have a chance to get another.
He might have a chance to get several in this way.

So, though he was so eager and so hungry, he made himself keep perfectly
still, while he studied out a plan. By and by he stole ever so carefully
around back of the barn to the cowyard. Some of those fat hens were
scratching in the straw of the cowyard. Just outside the cowyard was a
pile of old boards. Reddy crawled behind this pile of old boards and
then crouched and settled himself to be patient. He knew that sooner or
later one of those fat hens would be likely to come out of the cowyard.
In this way he might be able to catch one without the others knowing a
thing about it.

Blacky the Crow sat in the top of a tall tree where he could see all
that was going on. Blacky was as impatient as Reddy was patient. "Why
doesn't the red rascal rush in and get one of those fat hens?" muttered
Blacky. "What is the matter with him, anyway? I wonder if he is afraid.
He could catch one of them without half trying, and there he lies as if
he expected them to run right into his mouth. I don't want to sit here
all day. Yet I can't do a thing until he catches one of those hens."

So Reddy waited patiently and Blacky waited impatiently, and the fat
hens wandered about unsuspectingly, and for a long, long time nothing
happened.




CHAPTER XXXV

THINGS HAPPEN ALL AT ONCE

    The cleverest Fox is almost certain to visit the chicken yard
    once too often.

    _Bowser the Hound._


Jolly, round, bright Mr. Sun, high in the blue, blue sky, looked down on
as peaceful a scene as ever was. In the cowyard back of the barn of this
particular farm stood several cows contentedly chewing their cuds as
they took their daily airing. Half a dozen fat hens were walking about
among them and scratching in the straw. Out in the farmyard in front of
the barn were many more fat hens. Behind a pile of old boards just
outside the cowyard was a spot of red. In the top of a tall tree not far
distant was a spot of black. The smoke from the chimney of the farmhouse
floated skyward in a lazy way. Looking down on the Great World, jolly,
round, bright Mr. Sun saw no more peaceful scene anywhere.

By and by a fat hen walked over to the bars of the cowyard and hopped up
on the lower bar. There she sat for some time. Then, making up her mind
that she would see what was outside, she hopped down and walked over to
the pile of old boards. Right then things happened all at once. That red
spot behind the pile of old boards suddenly came to life. There was a
quick spring, and that fat hen was seized by the neck so suddenly that
she didn't have time to make a sound. At the same instant the black spot
in the top of the tall tree came to life, and Blacky the Crow flew over
to the roof of the barn, screaming at the top of his lungs. Now those
who know Blacky well, know when he is screaming "Fox! Fox! Fox!"
although it sounds as if he were saying "Caw! Caw! Caw!"

In a moment the door of the farmhouse flew open, and a man stepped out
with a dog at his heels. The man looked up at Blacky, and he knew by
Blacky's actions that something was going on back of the barn. Right
away he guessed that there must be a Fox there, and calling the dog to
follow, he ran around to see what was happening. Of course Reddy heard
him coming, and with a little snarl of anger at Blacky the Crow, he
seized the fat hen by the neck, threw her body over his shoulder, and
started for the near-by swamp as fast as his legs could take him.

Just as Reddy reached the edge of the swamp, he heard the roar of a
great voice behind him. He knew that voice. It was the voice of Bowser
the Hound. It could be no one else but Bowser who was behind him, for
there was no other voice quite like his. Dismay awoke in Reddy's heart.
He knew that Bowser was wise to the tricks of Foxes, and that he would
have to use all his cunning to get rid of Bowser. To do it he would have
to drop that fat hen he had come so far to get. Do you wonder that Reddy
was dismayed?




CHAPTER XXXVI

REDDY HIDES THE FAT HEN

    Dishonesty will run away
    Where Honesty will boldly stay.

    _Bowser the Hound._


Reddy Fox was in a fix! He certainly was in a fix! Here he was with the
fat hen which he had come such a long, long way to get, and no chance to
eat it, for Bowser the Hound was on his trail. Ordinarily Reddy Fox can
run faster than can Bowser, but it is one thing to run with nothing to
carry, and another thing altogether to with a burden as heavy as a fat
hen. Reddy's wits were working quite as fast as his legs.

"I can't carry this fat hen far," thought Reddy, "for Bowser will surely
catch me. I don't want to drop it, because I have come such a long way
to get it, and goodness knows when I will be able to catch another. The
thing for me to do is to hide it where I can come back and get it after
I get rid of that pesky dog. Goodness, what a noise he makes!"

As he ran, Reddy watched sharply this way and that way for a place to
hide the fat hen. He knew he must find a place soon, because already
that fat hen was growing very heavy. Presently he spied the hollow stump
of a tree. He didn't know it was hollow when he first saw it, but from
its looks he thought it might be. The top of it was only about two feet
above the ground. Reddy stopped and stood up on his hind legs so as to
see if the top of that stump was hollow. It was. With a quick look this
way and that way to make sure he wasn't seen, he tossed the fat hen over
into the hollow and then, with a sigh of relief, darted away.

With the weight of that fat hen off his shoulders, and the worry about
it off his mind, Reddy could give all his attention to getting rid of
Bowser the Hound. He had no intention of running any farther than he
must. In the first place he had traveled so far that he did not feel
like running. In the second place he wanted to get back to that hollow
stump and the fat hen just as soon as possible.

It wasn't long before Reddy realized that it was not going to be so easy
to fool Bowser the Hound. Bowser was too wise to be fooled by common
tricks such as breaking the trail by jumping far to one side after
running back on his own tracks a little way; or by running along a
fallen tree and jumping from the end of it as far as he could. Of course
he tried these tricks, but each time Bowser simply made a big circle
with his nose to the ground and picked up Reddy's new trail.

Reddy didn't know that country about there at all, and little by little
he began to realize how much this meant. At home he knew every foot of
the ground for a long distance in every direction. This made all the
difference in the world, because he knew just how to play all kinds of
tricks. But here it was different. It seemed to him that all he could do
was to run and run.




CHAPTER XXXVII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY HAS A GLAD SURPRISE

    The sweetest sound in the world is the voice of one you love.

    _Bowser the Hound._


Farmer Brown's boy had an errand which took him far from home. He
harnessed the horse to a sleigh and started off right after dinner. Now
it happened that his errand took him in the direction of the farm where
Bowser the Hound had been taken such good care of, and where Reddy Fox
had that very day caught the fat hen. Farmer Brown's boy was not
thinking of Bowser. You see, he had already visited most of the farms in
that direction in his search for Bowser and had found no trace of him.

It was a beautiful day to be sleighing, and Farmer Brown's boy was
whistling merrily, for there is nothing he enjoys more than a sleigh
ride. He had almost reached the place he had started for when 'way off
across the fields to his right he heard a dog. Now Farmer Brown's boy
enjoys listening to the sound of a Hound chasing a Fox. There is
something about it which stirs the blood. He stopped whistling and
stopped the horse in order that he might listen better.

At first that sound was very, very faint, but as Farmer Brown's boy
listened, it grew louder and clearer. Suddenly Farmer Brown's boy leaped
up excitedly. "That's Bowser!" he cried. "As sure as I live that's good
old Bowser! I would know that voice among a million!"

He leaped from the sleigh and tied the horse. Then he climbed over the
fence and began to run across the snow-covered fields. He could tell
from the sound in what direction Bowser was running. He could tell from
the appearance of the country about where Reddy Fox would be likely to
lead Bowser, and he ran for a place which he felt sure Reddy would be
likely to pass.

Louder and louder sounded the great voice of Bowser, and faster and
faster ran Farmer Brown's boy to reach that place before Bowser should
pass. The louder that great voice sounded, the more absolutely certain
Farmer Brown's boy became that it was the voice of Bowser, and a great
joy filled his heart. At last he reached an old road. He felt certain
that Reddy would follow that road. So he hid behind an old stone wall on
the edge of it.

He did not have long to wait. A red form appeared around a turn in the
old road, running swiftly. Then it stopped and stood perfectly still. Of
course it was Reddy Fox. He was listening to make sure just how far
behind him Bowser was. He listened for only a moment and then started on
as swiftly as before. Right down the road past Farmer Brown's boy Reddy
ran, and never once suspected he was being watched.

A few minutes later another form appeared around the turn in the road.
It was Bowser! Yes, Sir, it was Bowser! With a glad cry Farmer Brown's
boy jumped over the stone wall and waited.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

REDDY GOES BACK FOR HIS FAT HEN

    Joy will make a puppy of an old dog.

    _Bowser the Hound._


When Bowser the Hound is following the trail of Reddy Fox, it takes a
great deal to make him leave that trail. His love of the hunt is so
great that, as a rule, nothing short of losing the trail will make him
stop. He will follow it until he cannot follow it any longer.

But for once Bowser actually forgot that he was following Reddy Fox.
Yes, Sir, he did. As he came down that old road with his nose in
Reddy's tracks, he was so intent on what he was doing that he didn't see
Farmer Brown's boy waiting for him. He didn't see him until he almost
ran into him.

For just a second Bowser stared in utter surprise. Then with a little
yelp of pure joy he leaped up and did his best to lick his master's
face. Could you have seen Bowser, you might have thought that he was
just a foolish young puppy, he cut up such wild antics to express his
joy. He yelped and whined and barked. He nearly knocked Farmer Brown's
boy down by leaping up on him. He raced around in circles. When at last
he was still long enough, Farmer Brown's boy just threw his arms around
him and hugged him. He hugged him so hard he made Bowser squeal. Then
two of the happiest folks in all the Great World started back across the
snow-covered fields to the sleigh.

Bowser and Farmer Brown's boy were not the only ones who rejoiced. Reddy
Fox had been badly worried. Although he had tried every trick he could
think of, he had not been able to get rid of Bowser, and he had just
about made up his mind that there was nothing for it but to start back
to the Old Pasture which was so far away. That would mean giving up the
fat hen which he had hidden in the hollow stump.

Of course, Reddy knew the instant that Bowser began to yelp and bark
that something had happened. What it was he couldn't imagine. He sat
down to wait and listen. Then he heard the voice of Farmer Brown's boy.
Reddy knew that voice and he grinned, for he felt sure that Bowser would
give up the hunt. He grinned because now he would have a chance to go
back for that fat hen. At the same time that grin was not wholly a happy
grin, because Reddy knew that now Bowser would return to his home.

Presently Reddy very carefully crept back to a place where he could see
what was going on. He watched Farmer Brown's boy start back for the
road and the sleigh, with Bowser jumping up on him and racing around him
like a foolish young puppy. He waited only long enough to make sure that
Bowser would not come back; then he turned and trotted swiftly along his
own back trail towards that hollow stump into which he had tossed that
fat hen. Reddy's thoughts were very pleasant thoughts, for they were all
of the fine dinner of which he now felt sure.


