
"Would Mademoiselle and Mr. Scott wish us to serve their dinner here?"
asked Antoine gravely, the duties of his position ever uppermost in his
mind.

"Not now, Antoine," said Julie, "but we will later. I'm glad to see,
though, that you are making the best of it. You show a spirit worthy of
a Picard."

Picard bowed and smiled with gratification. John suggested that they
look upstairs for rooms, and then, after putting them in order, they
could return for dinner. But before ascending the grand stairway, they
lighted several candles which Suzanne had found, and put them at
convenient places. They were not sufficient to illuminate the interior
of the hotel, but they threw a soft glow which John found warm and
pleasing.

Above was the main drawing-room, and a great array of guest chambers,
continued also on the third floor, which was the last. John selected the
best suite, looking over the river, for Julie and also for Suzanne, who,
under the circumstances, must remain with her. A running water system
had not been installed in the houses of Chastel but the great pitchers
were filled, and the stalwart Suzanne could easily bring more. They were
good rooms, perhaps with an excess of gilt and glass after the
continental fashion, but they were comfortable, and John said to Julie:

"Maybe you'd like to remain here a half-hour or so, while Antoine and I
choose a place for ourselves. It's best that the members of our party
remain close together in view of possible emergencies."

"Yes, Suzanne and I will stay," said Julie. "I felt no weariness a few
moments ago, but I've grown suddenly tired. A short rest will restore
me."

"Very well," said John. "I bid you a brief _au revoir_, and when you
hear a knock on your sitting-room door don't be alarmed, because it will
be Antoine and I returning. Come, Antoine, we'll let the ladies rest
while you and I look for the state apartments for ourselves."

Picard permitted a grin to pass over his broad face. His heart belonged
to his daughter Suzanne and the Lannes family, and it was not moved
easily by outsiders. Yet, this young John Scott from across the sea was
beginning to find a favorable place in his mind. He spoke good French,
he fought well for the French, he was highly esteemed by Monsieur
Philip, he had done great service for Mademoiselle Julie and in the
present crisis he was a tower of strength for them all. His daughter,
Suzanne, regarded young Scott with a certain fear, but he, Antoine,
could not share it. Henceforth John would have his distinct approval,
and he felt a measure of pride in being now his comrade in danger.

When John had closed the door of the sitting-room and he knew that
neither Julie nor Suzanne could hear him, he said:

"Picard, have you any weapon?"

Picard drew a heavy automatic revolver from the pocket of his jacket.

"Before I started I provided myself with this, knowing the dangers of
the journey," he replied.

"Good, but don't use it, except in the last resort. Remember how near
you came to execution as a _franc-tireur_."

"Does Monsieur apprehend an attack?"

"I scarcely know, Antoine. But things have come about too easily. We
find here a furnished hotel waiting for us. I've no doubt that the
kitchens of the Hotel de l'Europe are well stocked, and we have all the
comforts, even the luxuries sufficient for a hundred guests. So far as
we know there is not a soul in all this town save our four selves. It
doesn't look natural, my good Antoine. It's positively uncanny."

"But, sir, if what we want is here waiting for us, why shouldn't we take
it?"

"That's true, wise Antoine. 'Take the goods the gods provide thee whilst
the lovely Thais sits beside thee,' as Mr. Dryden said."

"Who is Mr. Dryden? Must I infer, sir, from his name, that he is one of
our brave English allies?"

"Doubtless he would be if he were living, but he has been dead some
time, Antoine."

"Alas, sir, the way of all flesh!"

"So it is, Antoine, but I refuse to grieve about it or get morbid over
it. I like to live and living I mean to live. What do you think of this
big room, Antoine? It has two beds in it, one for you and one for me,
and it's near enough to hear any call from the suite, occupied by
Mademoiselle Julie and your daughter."

"A wise precaution. Monsieur Scott thinks of everything."

"No, not of everything, Antoine, but the presence of Mademoiselle Lannes
is bound to sharpen the wits of anyone who is trying to take care of
her."

"Will you make your toilet here, sir? I will call Suzanne and we will
prepare dinner. When it is ready we will serve Mademoiselle Lannes and
you."

The stalwart Picard had become all at once the discreet and thoughtful
servant, and John felt a sudden sense of restfulness. Intense democrat
that he was, he realized in his moment of weariness that all could not
be masters.

"Thank you, Picard," he said gratefully. "The afternoon is wearing on
and I do need to shake myself up."

"You'll find plenty of water in the pitchers, sir, and there are clean
towels on the rack. One would think, sir, that the manager of the Hotel
de l'Europe before taking his departure, made careful preparation for
our coming."

"It looks like it, Picard, and it certainly will be true, if you and
Suzanne find the well-filled kitchen that you predict."

"Never a doubt of it, sir. The perfect condition in which we find
everything above-stairs indicates that we shall find the same below."

He went out, leaving the door open, according to John's wish, and the
young American heard his firm step pass down the hall and to the
stairway. He drew a deep sigh of content, and lying down on a red plush
sofa rested for a little while. It was luck, most wonderful luck, that
he had come into Chastel, and had found Julie and her servants, and it
was luck, most marvelous luck, that this well-equipped hotel was here
waiting for them.

He rose and looped back the heavy lace curtains from the windows which
looked over the river. But the snow was falling so fast that he could
not see far into the dense, white cataract. The stream was completely
hidden, and so, of course, was the hospital camp beyond. Yet through all
the driving storm came a faint moan, a light pulsing of the air, which
he knew to be the far throb of the great guns.

He turned impatiently away. Why couldn't they stop at such a time? As
for himself, he would think of Julie, and a very handsome, tanned young
man looking into the glass over the dresser smiled, although it was not
at his own reflection. Then he bathed his face and hands, straightened
out his hair with the small pocket comb and brush that he, like most
other young officers, carried, and felt as if he had been made over.

He hung up his hat and heavy overcoat, and, resuming his place on the
sofa, waited until Julie should announce her readiness. But she took
more than a half-hour. He had not expected anything else. Truly a girl
in her position was entitled to at least an hour if she wanted it. So he
continued to wait with great patience. Besides it was very comfortable
there on the sofa, and the swish of the driving snow against the
window-panes was soothing. Now and then the low mutter of the guns came,
but it did not disturb him.

"I'm ready if you are, Mr. John," called a clear voice, and springing
from the sofa he joined Julie in the hall. She had smoothed her hair and
her Red Cross dress, and the rest had restored all her brilliant color.
She was as calm, too, as if they were not alone under the cloud of war,
and the hotel was full of real guests. It was her courage as much as
her beauty that appealed to John. At no time in all the dangers through
which they had gone had he seen her flinch. He had heard much of the
courage shown by the women in the great Civil War in his own country,
and this maid of France was proving anew that a girl could be as brave
as a man.

"May I take you down to dinner, Mademoiselle Lannes?" he asked.

"You may, Mr. Scott," she replied, and they walked together down the
hall and the stairway into the great dining-room. Antoine, a napkin on
his arm, ceremoniously held open the door for them and Suzanne showed
them to opposite seats at a small table by the window.

"We have found an abundance, Mademoiselle," she said, "and you shall be
served as if you were real guests."

The memory of that dinner will always be vivid in the mind of John
Scott, though he live to be a hundred. Julie and he were invincible
youth that always blooms anew. War and its horrors and dangers fell from
them. Their sportive fancy that they were guests in the hotel and
nothing ailed the world just then held true. As Antoine and his daughter
served the excellent dinner that Suzanne had prepared these two found
amusement in everything. The barrier of race that had been becoming more
slender all the time melted quite away, and they were boy and girl
looking into each other's eyes across a narrow table.

Picard and Suzanne even felt a touch of their fantastic spirits.
Suzanne from the north of France, powerful in her prejudices, a
Frenchwoman to the core, had viewed John from the first with a distinct
hostility, softening slowly, very slowly, as time passed. It was not
that she disliked his voice, his figure, his manner, or anything about
him. He was a brave and true young man and he had rendered great service
to the contemporary house of Lannes, but he was not a Frenchman.

But it seemed to Suzanne, as she served the courses and watched with an
eye which nothing escaped, that Monsieur Jean the Scott was becoming a
Frenchman--almost at least. She had seen young Frenchmen act very much
as the young American was acting. The Frenchman, too, would lean forward
to speak when the girl to whom he was speaking was as lovely as her
Mademoiselle Julie. No, that was impossible! None other was as lovely as
her Mademoiselle Julie. The glow that illumined his face was just the
same, quite of the best French manner, too. She had seen people who
_were_ people and she knew. She admitted, too, that he was very
handsome, with the slenderness of youth, but strong and muscular, and
above all, his face was good.

Antoine with the napkin over his arm did most of the serving, and being
a man the conventional differences did not seem to him so great as they
did to his daughter.

"A handsome pair," he said to her.

But while willing to admit much to herself, Suzanne would not admit it
to her father.

"Aye, handsome," she replied in a fierce whisper, "but not well
matched. He comes from an uncivilized continent on the other side of the
world, and soon he'll be going back there. I would that her brother,
Monsieur Philip, were here where he ought to be. Perhaps he'd be
foolish, too, because he likes the strange American, but it would
relieve us of care."

"But America is not a barbarous continent, Suzanne, at least some of it
is not. I have heard that in the eastern part of their country many of
them act very much as we do, and we have seen those in Paris who appear
to be quite civilized. And Suzanne, often they are rich, very rich.
Before I left Paris the second time I made it a point to inquire about
this young man, and I discovered that he had an immensely wealthy uncle,
whose sole heir he is."

"Ah!" said Suzanne, making a long intake of the breath. It was easier
than she had thought for John to become French.

"And the fortunes of the house of Lannes are moderate now, as you and I
know quite well, Suzanne," continued the wise Antoine. "Surely it must
have occurred to Madame her mother, when our little Mademoiselle Julie
was yet but a beautiful young child, that she might make a great
marriage some day. In this world of ours, Suzanne, many millions of good
francs should not be allowed to escape from France."

"It is so, my father," said Suzanne. "France will need numberless
millions when this war is over. Here is the vinegar for the salad. Not
too much. Mademoiselle Julie likes only a little of it. What fortune it
was to find a hotel furnished with everything! The faint sighing sound
that still comes on the wind, is it not that of the guns, my father?"

"Aye, Suzanne, it's that of the cannon thundering far away, but
Mademoiselle Julie and Mr. Scott have forgotten all about it, and it
would be a pity to recall them to it."

Suzanne nodded. For a little space she, too, was compelled to relax. The
salad now being complete she served it herself, and as she did so she
relaxed still further, murmuring that they were just boy and girl
together, but that they were very handsome. She had lifted two of the
candles and put them upon the table, their light touching Julie's hair
of deep gold with a ruddy tint and heightening the brilliant color of
her cheeks. The heavy curtains before the window near them had been
looped back a little, and the glass revealed the snow pouring down like
a cataract, but they did not see it.

"It's the best dinner I ever ate," said John.

"Now you are finding what capable people Antoine and Suzanne are," said
Julie.

"I give them all the credit due them," said John, as he made mental
reservations.

"They're wonderfully capable, but it will always be Antoine's bitter
regret that he does not serve in this war. If he could, he would be glad
to represent himself fifteen years younger than he really is."

"His chance will come. Again I say to myself, Miss Julie, what luck I
had in arriving at Chastel!"

"And it was lucky for us, too. We need your courage and resource, Mr.
John. I know that Philip cannot come today or tonight and perhaps not
tomorrow."

"In that event, what plans have you, Miss Julie?"

"To remain in Chastel. We have an excellent hotel here at our service,
and as we're behind the French army we're in perfect safety."

John opened his lips to speak, but changed his intention and did not say
what was in his thought. He said instead:

"Antoine is looking unusually important. He is going to serve us wine.
He has mineral water, too. Will you take a little of it with your wine?
It's a white wine, and the water improves it for me."

"Yes, Mr. John, I'll take mine the same way."

Any dinner, although it may have a flavor which the food and drink
themselves, no matter how good, cannot give, must draw to an end, and
when the dessert had been served and eaten John looped back the heavy
curtain still further and looked out at the white cataract.

"The snowfall will certainly continue the rest of the day," he said,
"and perhaps all through the night. Suppose we go to the smoking-room.
Antoine and Suzanne must eat also. It's their hour now."

"That is true, Mr. John. The smoking-room is a good place, but I'm
afraid that you have no cigarette."

"I don't smoke, but we can talk there, of your brother Philip, of your
mother, safe now, of Paris, delivered as if by a miracle from the German
menace, and of other good events that have happened."

He held open the door of the dining-room and when she went out he
followed her, leaving Picard and Suzanne to their hour.




CHAPTER V

THE REGISTER


John and Julie in the smoking-room were not lonely. They talked of many
of the events he had suggested, and of more. Two of the windows looked
out upon the town instead of the river, but they could see little there
save the towering spire of the cathedral and the blank and ruined walls.
The snow was already very deep, but the fall was not diminishing. The
gray gloom of coming twilight, however, was beginning to show through it
and once more John returned silent thanks that he had come into Chastel
and found Julie. He was serving vicariously for Philip who undoubtedly
had been held back by the snow.

"It will be night soon," he said. "It's likely that the snow will cease
in the morning, and then I'm quite sure that Philip will come for you.
It must have been his intention for you to help at the hospital camp
below."

"I think so, too."

