rich let us be brethren to the other rich, if we are wise let us be
brethren to the other wise, if we are foolish let us be brethren to the
other foolish. Ah, that is not difficult; it is an easy task. But that
is not enough. Brotherhood is broader, thank God! Let the poor be
brethren to the rich and the rich to the poor, the wise to the ignorant,
the misguided to the well-directed, the ignorant to the wise, the
foolish to the discreet, the discreet to the foolish, the glad to the
sorrowful, the sorrowful to the glad, the servants of the Lord to the
sinners against Him!

  "Then none was for a party;
    Then all were for the state;
  Then the great man helped the poor,
    And the poor man loved the great:
  Then lands were fairly portioned;
    Then spoils were fairly sold:
  The Romans were like brothers,
    In the brave days of old."


Let us make out of the old pagan ideals present-day realities in our
hearts as we go even unto Bethlehem and look into the cradle of the
King; realities in His own nobler and better words:

     "_Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again those
     things which ye do hear and see: the blind receive their sight, and
     the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead
     are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them. And
     blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in Me_."


Peace, goodwill toward men! Peace to men of goodwill! That is what the
angels sang. But there is nothing on earth to prevent us from making it
our human song as well. As we stand by the cradle of the Master and peer
into the manger at that which every human being loves, a baby, our
earthly differences of nationality, of rank, power, station, and
influence--things that are but the guinea's stamp upon the gold of
character and personality--fade into insignificance and become as
nothing. The little child in life notices none of these distinctions, he
marks nothing of them. Let us come as little children before Him. We may
be war-battered, sin-marked, toil-stained, care-burdened. Let us forget
it all this Christmas morning.

It was a poor place, that manger--the poorest place on earth--but it was
a place. It was somewhere. Let us give humanity even as little as a
manger. Let us not take up the Christ Child as we see Him and throw Him
out into the streets, or into no man's land. That is what we do when we
mock Him, when we deny Him, when we laugh Him to scorn. Let us not shut
Him out of His home place in our souls. Let us not refuse to open when
His hand knocks upon the door. That is what we do when we are
indifferent to Him. Let us take him out of the manger cradle, each one
of us, and enthrone Him in the most precious place we have, our inmost
hearts.

It all happened a very long time ago and much water has run in the
brooks of the world under the bridges thereof since that time, but the
mangers of the world are never empty. They are always full. In one
sense, Christ is being born everywhere at this very hour and at all
hours.

Let us give the Child the best we have, the best we can. Let us even now
go down unto Bethlehem, laden with what we have for the use of the
King, and let us see in every child of man that lacks anything this
Christmas morning the image of Him who in that manger lay in Bethlehem
and let us minister to their needs in love.


  "The little Christ is coming down[1]
    Across the fields of snow;
  The pine trees greet Him where they stand,
  The willows bend to kiss His hand,
  The mountain laurel is ablush
  In hidden nooks; the wind, ahush
  And tiptoe, lest the violets wake
  Before their time for His sweet sake;
  The stars, down dropping, form a crown
    Upon the waiting hills below---
  The little Christ is coming down
    Across the fields of snow.

  "The little Christ is coming down
    Across the city streets;
  The wind blows coldly from the north,
  His dimpled hands are stretching forth,
  And no one knows and no one cares,
  The priests are busy with their prayers,
  The jostling crowd hastes on apace,
  And no one sees the pleading face,
  None hears the cry as through the town
    He wanders with His small cold feet--
  The little Christ is coming down
    Across the city streets."

What welcome shall we have for Him, my friends?

[Illustration]




CHRISTMAS IN THE SNOWS

_Being Some Personal Adventures in the Far West_[2]


The love of Christmas is as strong in the West as it is in any section
of the country--perhaps, indeed, stronger, for people who have few
pleasures cherish holidays more highly than those for whom many cheap
amusements are provided. But when the manifestation of the Christmas
spirit is considered, there is a great difference between the West and
the East. There are vast sections of country in which evergreens do not
grow and to which it would not pay to ship them; consequently Christmas
trees are not common, and therefore they are the more prized when they
may be had. There are no great rows nor small clusters of inviting shops
filled with suggestive and fascinating contents at attractive prices.
The distances from centres of trade are so great that the things which
may be purchased even in the smallest towns in more favourable
localities for a few cents have there almost a prohibitive price put
upon them. The efforts of the people to give their children a merry
Christmas in the popular sense, however, are strong and sometimes
pitiful.

It must not be forgotten that the West is settled by Eastern people, and
that no very great difference exists between them save for the
advantages presented by life in the West for the higher development of
character. Western people are usually brighter, quicker, more
progressive and less conservative, and more liberal than those from whom
they came. The survival of the fittest is the rule out there and the
qualities of character necessary to that end are brought to the top by
the strenuous life necessitated by the hardships of the frontier. If the
people are not any better than they were, it is because they are still
clinging to the obsolete ideas of the East.

The Eastern point of view always reminds me of the reply of the bishop
to the layman who was deploring the poor quality of the clergy. "Yes,"
said the bishop, "some of them are poor; but consider the stock from
which they come. You see, we have nothing but laymen out of which to
make them."

The East never understands the West--the real West that is, which lies
beyond the Mississippi, the Missouri, and the Rocky Mountains. They know
nothing of its ideas, its capacities, its possibilities, its
educational facilities, its culture, its real power, in the East. And
they do not wish to learn, apparently. The Easterners fatuously think,
like Job, that they are the people, and wisdom will die with them. Some
years since an article in the "Forum" on the theme, "Kansas more
civilized than New York" conclusively proved the proposition to the
satisfaction of the present writer at least.

Yet I know numberless dwellers in Gotham whose shibboleth is "nothing
outside of New York City but scenery," and they are a little dubious
about admitting that. When one describes the Grand Canyon or the Royal
Gorge they point to Nassau or Wall Street, and the Woolworth tower
challenges Pike's Peak!

I sat at a dinner table one day when the salted almonds were handed me
with the remark: "I suppose you never saw anything like these out West.
Try some." And my wife has been quite gravely asked if we feared any
raids by the Indians and if they troubled us by their marauding in
Kansas. I have found it necessary to inform the curious that we did not
live in tepees or wigwams when in Nebraska or Colorado.

Shortly after I came East to live I was talking with a man and a very
stupid man at that, who informed me that he graduated from Harvard; to
which surprising statement he added the startling information, for the
benefit of my presumably untutored occidental mind, that it was a
college near Boston! They have everything in the West that the East has
so far as their sometimes limited means will provide them and when they
have no money they have patience, endurance, grim determination, and
courage, which are better than money in the long run.

The cities and smaller towns especially as a rule are cleaner, better
governed, more progressive, better provided with improvements and
comforts than corresponding places in the East. Scarcely a community
exists without its water works, electric light plant, telephone system,
trolleys, paved streets, etc. Of course, this does not apply to the
extreme frontier in which my field of work largely lay so many years
ago. The conditions were different there--the people too in that now
far-distant time.

But to return to Christmas. One Christmas day I left my family at one
o'clock in the morning. Christmas salutations were exchanged at that
very sleepy hour and I took the fast express to a certain station whence
I could drive up country to a little church in a farming country in
which there had never been a Christmas service. It was a bitter cold
morning, deep snow on the ground, and a furious north wind raging.

The climate is variable indeed out West. I have spent Christmas days on
which it rained all day and of all days in the year on which to have it
rain, Christmas is the worst. Still, the farmers would be thankful. It
was usually safe to be thankful out there whenever it rained. I knew a
man once who said you could make a fortune by always betting two to one
that it would not rain, no matter what the present promise of the
weather was. You were bound to win nine times out of ten.

I hired a good sleigh and two horses, and drove to my destination. The
church was a little old brick building right out in the prairie. There
was a smouldering fire in a miserable, worn-out stove which hardly
raised the temperature of the room a degree although it filled the place
with smoke. The wind had free entrance through the ill-fitting window
and door frames and a little pile of snow formed on the altar during
the service. I think there were twelve people who had braved the fury of
the storm. There was not an evergreen within a hundred miles of the
place and the only decoration was sage-brush. To wear vestments was
impossible, and I conducted the service in a buffalo overcoat and a fur
cap and gloves as I have often done. It was short and the sermon was
shorter. Mem.: If you want short sermons give your Rector a cold church
or a hot one!

After service I went to dinner at the nearest farm-house. Such a
Christmas dinner it was! There was no turkey, and they did not even have
a chicken. The menu was corn-bread, ham, and potatoes, and mighty few
potatoes at that. There were two children in the family, a girl of six
and a boy of five. They were glad enough to get the ham. Their usual
bill of fare was composed of potatoes and corn-bread, and sometimes
corn-bread alone. My wife had put up a lunch for me, fearing that I
might not be able to get anything to eat, in which there was a small
mince-pie turnover; and the children had slipped a small box of candy in
my bag as a Christmas gift. I produced the turnover which by common
consent was divided between the astonished children. Such a glistening
of eyes and smacking of small lips you never saw!

"This pie makes it seem like Christmas, after all," said the little
girl, with her mouth full.

"Yes," said the boy, ditto, "that and the ham."

"We didn't have any Christmas this year," continued the small maiden.
"Last year mother made us some potato men" (_i.e._, little animal and
semi-human figures made out of potatoes and matches with buttons for
eyes; they went into many stockings among the very poor out West then).

"But this year," interrupted the boy, "potatoes are so scarce that we
couldn't have 'em. Mother says that next year perhaps we will have some
real Christmas."

They were so brave about it that my heart went out to them. Children and
no Christmas gifts! Only the chill, bare room, the wretched, meagre
meal. I ransacked my brain. Finally something occurred to me. After
dinner I excused myself and hurried back to the church. There were two
small wicker baskets there which were used for the collection--old but
rather pretty. I selected the best one. Fortunately I had in my grip a
neat little "housewife" which contained a pair of scissors, a huge
thimble, needles, thread, a tiny little pin-cushion, an emery bag,
buttons, etc. I am, like most ex-sailors, something of a needleman
myself. I emptied the contents into the collection basket and garnished
the dull little affair with the bright ribbon ties ripped off the
"housewife" and went back to the house.

To the boy I gave my penknife which happened to be nearly new, and to
the girl the church basket with the sewing things for a work-basket. The
joy of those children was one of the finest things I have ever
witnessed. The face of the little girl was positively filled with awe as
she lifted from the basket, one by one, the pretty and useful articles
the "housewife" had supplied and when I added the small box of candy
that my children had provided me, they looked at me with feelings of
reverence, as a visible incarnation of Santa Claus. They were the
cheapest and most effective Christmas presents it was ever my pleasure
to bestow. I hope to be forgiven for putting the church furniture to
such a secular use.

Another Christmas day I had a funeral. There was no snow, no rain. The
day was warm. The woman who died had been the wife of one of the largest
farmers in the diocese. He actually owned a continuous body of several
thousands of acres of fine land, much of it under cultivation. She had
been a fruitful mother and five stalwart sons, all married, and several
daughters likewise, with numerous grandchildren represented her
contribution to the world's population. They were the people of the most
consideration in the little community in which they lived. We had the
services in the morning in the Methodist church, which was big enough to
hold about six hundred people. As it was a holiday, it was filled to the
very doors. One of my farmer friends remarked as we stood on the front
steps watching the crowd assembling:

"My, doc, all of them wagons gatherin' here makes it seem more like
circus day than a funeral."

I had been asked to preach a sermon, which I essayed to do. The
confusion was terrific. In order to be present themselves the mothers in
Israel had been obliged to bring their children, and the most domestic
of attentions were being bestowed upon them freely. They cried and
wailed and expostulated with their parents in audible tones until I was
nearly frantic. I found myself shouting consoling platitudes to a
sobbing, grief-stricken band of relatives and endeavouring to drown the
noise of the children by roaring--the lion's part a la Bottom. It was
distracting. I was a very young minister at the time and the
perspiration fairly rained from me. That's what makes me remember it was
a warm day.

When we got through the services after every one of the six hundred had,
in the language of the local undertaker, "viewed the remains," we went
to the cemetery. I rode behind a horse which was thirty-eight years old.
I do not know what his original colour had been but at present he was
white and hoary with age.

"I always use him for funerals," said the undertaker, "because he
naturally sets the proper pace for a funeral procession."

"Mercy," said I, "I hope he won't die on the road."

"Well, if he does," continued the undertaker, "your services will come
in handy. We can bury him proper. I am awful fond of that horse. I
shouldn't wonder if he hadn't been at as many as a thousand funerals in
his life."

I thought that he had all the gravity of his grewsome experiences,
especially in his gait. The Christmas dinners were all late on account
of the funeral but they were bountiful and good nevertheless and I much
enjoyed mine.

Another Christmas I was snow-bound on one of the obscure branches of a
Western railroad. If the train had been on time I would have made a
connection and have reached home by Christmas Eve, but it was very
evident, as the day wore on, that it was not going to be on time. Indeed
it was problematical whether it would get anywhere at all. It was
snowing hard outside. Our progress had become slower and slower. Finally
in a deep cut we stopped. There were four men, one woman, and two little
children in the car--no other passengers in the train. The train was of
that variety known out West as a "plug" consisting of a combination
baggage and smoker and one coach.

One of the trainmen started on a lonely and somewhat dangerous tramp of
