not! You see, when danger is over, it is quickly forgotten. No sooner
had Peter been made comfortable in the old house behind the big stump
on the hill where Prickly Porky lives than the four scamps began to
wonder who else they could scare with the terrible creature without
head, legs, or tail which had so frightened Reddy and Old Granny Fox.

"There is Old Man Coyote; he is forever frightening those smaller and
weaker than himself. I'd just love to see him run," said Peter Rabbit.

"The very one!" cried Jimmy Skunk. "I wonder if he would be afraid.
You know he is even smarter than Granny Fox, and though she was
frightened at first, she soon got over it. How do you suppose we can
get him over here?"

"We-uns will take Brer Jay into our secret. Brer Jay will tell Brer
Coyote that Brer Rabbit is up here on Brer Porky's hill, hurt so that
he can't get home," said Unc' Billy Possum. "That's all Brer Jay need
to say. Brer Coyote is gwine to come up here hot foot with his tongue
hanging out fo' that dinner he's sho' is waiting fo' him here."

"You won't do anything of the kind!" spoke up little Mrs. Peter, who,
you know, had bravely left the dear Old Briar-patch and come up here
in the Green Forest to take care of Peter. "Peter has had trouble
enough already, and I'm not going to let him have any more, so there!"

"Peter isn't going to get into any trouble," spoke up Jimmy Skunk.
"Peter and you are going to be just as safe as if you were over in the
Old Briar-patch, for you will be in that old house where nothing can
harm you. Now, please, Mrs. Peter, don't be foolish. You don't like
Old Man Coyote, do you? You'd like to see him get a great scare to
make up for the scares he has given Peter and you, wouldn't you?"

Little Mrs. Peter was forced to admit that she would, and after a
little more teasing she finally agreed to let them try their plan for
giving Old Man Coyote a scare. Sammy Jay happened along just as Jimmy
Skunk was starting out to look for him, and when he was told what was
wanted of him, he agreed to do his part. You know Sammy is always
ready for any mischief. Just as he started to look for Old Man Coyote,
Unc' Billy Possum made another suggestion.

"We-uns have had a lot of fun with Reddy and Granny Fox," said he,
"and now it seems to me that it is no more than fair to invite them
over to see Old Man Coyote and what he will do when he first sees the
terrible creature that has frightened them so. Granny knows now that
there is nothing to be afraid of, and perhaps she will forget her
anger if she has a chance to see Old Man Coyote run away. Yo' know she
isn't wasting any love on him. What do yo' alls say?"

Peter and Mrs. Peter said "No!" right away, but Jimmy Skunk and
Prickly Porky thought it a good idea, and of course Sammy Jay was
willing. After a little, when it was once more pointed out to them how
they would be perfectly safe in the old house behind the big stump,
Peter and Mrs. Peter agreed, and Sammy started off on his errand.




XXI

SAMMY JAY DELIVERS HIS MESSAGE


Sammy Jay has been the bearer of so many messages that no one knows
better than he how to deliver one. He knows when to be polite, and no
one can be more polite than he. First he went over to the home of
Reddy and Granny Fox and invited them to come over to the hill where
Prickly Porky lives and see the terrible creature which had frightened
them so give Old Man Coyote a scare. Both Reddy and Granny promptly
said they would do nothing of the kind, that probably Sammy was
engaged in some kind of mischief, and that anyway they knew that there
was no such creature without head, legs, or tail, and though they had
been fooled once, they didn't propose to be fooled again.

"All right," replied Sammy, quite as if it made no difference to him.
"You admit that smart as you are you were fooled, and we thought you
might like to see the same thing happen to Old Man Coyote."

With this he flew on his way to the Green Meadows to look for Old Man
Coyote, and as he flew he chuckled to himself. "They'll be there," he
muttered. "I know them well enough to know that nothing would keep
them away when there is a chance to see some one else frightened,
especially Old Man Coyote. They'll try to keep out of sight, but
they'll be there."

Sammy found Old Man Coyote taking a sun-bath. "Good morning, Mr.
Coyote. I hope you are feeling well," said Sammy in his politest
manner.

"Fairly, fairly, thank you," replied Old Man Coyote, all the time
watching Sammy sharply out of the corners of his shrewd eyes. "What's
the news in the Green Forest?"

"There isn't any, that is, none to amount to anything," declared
Sammy. "I never did see such a dull summer. Is there any news down
here on the Green Meadows? I hear Danny Meadow Mouse has found his
lost baby."

"So I hear," replied Old Man Coyote. "I tried to find it for him. You
know I believe in being neighborly."

Sammy grinned, for as he said this, Old Man Coyote had winked one eye
ever so little, and Sammy knew very well that if he had found that
lost baby, Danny Meadow Mouse would never have seen him again. "By the
way," said Sammy in the most matter-of-fact tone, "as I was coming
through the Green Forest, I saw Peter Rabbit over on the hill where
Prickly Porky lives, and Peter seems to have been in some kind of
trouble. He was so lame that he said he didn't dare try to go home to
the Old Briar-patch for fear that he might meet some one looking for a
Rabbit dinner, and he knew that, feeling as he did, he wouldn't be
able to save himself. Peter is going to come to a bad end some day if
he doesn't watch out."

"That depends on what you call a bad end," replied Old Man Coyote with
a sly grin. "It might be bad for Peter and at the same time be very
good for some one else."

Sammy laughed right out. "That's one way of looking at it," said he.
"Well, I should hate to have anything happen to Peter, because I have
lots of fun quarreling with him and should miss him dreadfully. I
think I'll go up to the Old Orchard and see what is going on there."

Off flew Sammy in the direction of the Old Orchard, and once more he
chuckled as he flew. He had seen Old Man Coyote's ears prick up ever
so little when he had mentioned that Peter was over in the Green
Forest so lame that he didn't dare go home. "Old Man Coyote will start
for the Green Forest as soon as I am out of sight," thought Sammy. And
that is just what Old Man Coyote did.




XXII

OLD MAN COYOTE LOSES HIS APPETITE


Hardly was Sammy Jay out of sight, flying towards the Old Orchard,
before Old Man Coyote started for the Green Forest. He is very sharp,
is Old Man Coyote, so sharp that it is not very often that he is
fooled. If Sammy Jay had gone to him and told him what a splendid
chance he would have to catch Peter Rabbit if he hurried up to the
Green Forest right away, Old Man Coyote would have suspected a trick
of some kind. Sammy had been clever enough to know this. So he had
just mentioned in the most matter-of-fact way that he had seen Peter
over on Prickly Porky's hill and that Peter appeared to have been in
trouble, so that he was too lame to go to his home in the dear Old
Briar-patch. There wasn't even a hint that Old Man Coyote should go
over there. This was what made him sure that the news about Peter was
probably true.

Now as soon as Sammy was sure that Old Man Coyote couldn't see him, he
headed straight for the Green Forest and the hill where Prickly Porky,
Jimmy Skunk, Unc' Billy Possum, and Peter and Mrs. Peter Rabbit were
waiting. As he flew, he saw Reddy Fox and old Granny Fox stretched
flat behind an old log some distance away, but where they could see
all that might happen.

"I knew they would be on hand," he chuckled.

When he reached the others, he reported that he had delivered the
message to Old Man Coyote, and that he was very sure, in fact he was
positive, that Old Man Coyote was already on his way there in the hope
that he would be able to catch Peter Rabbit. It was decided that
everybody but Peter should get out of sight at once. So Unc' Billy
Possum climbed a tree. Jimmy Skunk crawled into a hollow log. Sammy
Jay hid in the thickest part of a hemlock tree. Prickly Porky got
behind a big stump right at the top of the hill. Little Mrs. Peter,
with her heart going pit-a-pat, crept into the old house between the
roots of this same old stump, and only Peter was to be seen when at
last Old Man Coyote came tiptoeing along the hollow at the foot of the
hill, as noiseless as a gray shadow.

He saw Peter almost as soon as Peter saw him, and the instant he saw
him, he stopped as still as if he were made of stone. Peter took a
couple of steps, and it was very plain to see that he was lame, just
as Sammy Jay had said.

"That good-for-nothing Jay told the truth for once," thought Old Man
Coyote, with a hungry gleam in his eyes.

Whenever Old Man Coyote thought that Peter was not looking his way, he
would crawl on his stomach from one tree to another, always getting a
little nearer to Peter. He would lie perfectly still when Peter seemed
to be looking towards him. Now of course Peter knew just what was
going on, and he took the greatest care not to get more than a couple
of jumps away from the old house under the big stump, where Mrs. Peter
was hiding and wishing with all her might that she and Peter were back
in the dear Old Briar-patch. It was very still in the Green Forest
save for the song of happiness of Redeye the Vireo who, if he knew
what was going on, made no sign. My, but it was exciting to those who
were watching!

Old Man Coyote had crept half-way up the hill, and Peter was wondering
how much nearer he could let him get with safety, when a sudden
grunting broke out right behind him. Peter knew what it meant and
jumped to one side. Then down the hill, rolling straight towards Old
Man Coyote, started the strange, headless, tailess, legless creature
that had so frightened Reddy and Granny Fox.

Old Man Coyote took one good look, hesitated, looked again, and then
turned tail and started for the Green Meadows as fast as his long legs
would take him. It was plain to see that he was afraid, very much
afraid. Quite suddenly he had lost his appetite.




XXIII

BUSTER BEAR GIVES IT ALL AWAY


It was very clear that Old Man Coyote wasn't thinking about his
stomach just then, but about his legs and how fast they could go. He
had been half-way up the hill when he first saw the terrible creature
without head, tail, or legs rolling down straight at him. He stopped
only long enough for one good look and then he started for the bottom
of the hill as fast as he could make his legs go. Now, it is a very
bad plan to run fast down-hill. Yes, Sir, it is a very bad plan. You
see, once you are started, it is not the easiest thing in the world to
