


MISS MUFFET


It was the Christmas vacation and Boy Blue and Mary were at home every
day.

Boy Blue wished to go to his own home on the farm in his vacation.

He wished to see his father and mother, and little sister, and
fire-cracker, and his eight Snowballs.

But one night he had a letter from his mother.

Of course he could read it himself, because he was seven years old and
had been to school two years.

When he read the letter he danced up and down for joy.

He danced right through the hall into the dining-room and showed his
letter to Mary.

Then she danced, too, because the letter said that Boy Blue's father
and mother were coming to see him the very next day.

And, best of all, Little Sister was coming to stay two weeks.

When it was time to go to the station to meet Little Sister and her
mother. Boy Blue could hardly wait for the train.

At last it came, bringing the two dearest people in all the world, and
Boy Blue laughed, and cried, and asked questions, all in the same
minute.

"Where is Papa?

"Is he coming to-morrow?

"How is Fire-cracker?

"Are you going to stay two weeks?"

"Wait, wait, children!" said Mrs. Snow, "ask one question at a time."

They rode to Mary's house in a car, and all these questions and many
others were asked and answered.

It was the night before Christmas and the children were going to hang
up their stockings.

"Hang them by the chimney in your playroom," said Mary's mother. "Then
Santa Claus won't have far to go."

So the children ran up to the playroom with their stockings.

"Oh, look!" said Boy Blue. "Sister's stocking is so small that Santa
Claus can't get even a rag doll into it."

Mary found a basket for Little Sister.

"You can put this right under your stocking, dear," she said.

"I will write a letter to Santa Claus and tell him where to put your
presents."

So she wrote this letter and pinned it on the toe of the tiny stocking:

"Dear Santa Claus:--Little Sister's stocking is so small I have given
her a basket. Please put her presents in it."

Santa Claus must have read the note, for the next morning the basket
was full.

There was a basket under each of the other stockings, too.

On each one was a note, saying:--

"Your stockings were not large enough. I had to get a basket for you,
too."

                                                    SANTA CLAUS.


In Boy Blue's basket there were a horn and a drum, a box of tin
soldiers, and three books. Under the basket was a new red sled.

Mary found two dolls and a trunk full of dresses for them, a toy
kitchen, and a writing desk in her basket.

Little Sister sat on the floor and began to take the presents out of
her basket, one at a time.

First, there was a big wax doll in a doll carriage.

It was such a pretty doll, with a blue coat and white hood, all ready
to take out to ride!

Then there were some picture books and another doll,--a big one that
could open and shut her eyes.

[Illustration]

But what was this in the bottom of the basket? It was very soft and
white and had curly hair.

Little Sister picked it up carefully. "Put it on your head," said Boy
Blue. So Sister put it on. It was a fur cap.

Then she found a fur collar, and last of all, a dear little fur muff.

When she had them all on, she ran up to her mother.

"See my muff, Mamma!" she cried.

Then she ran to every one, saying:--"Muff! Muff! See my little muff!"

"What a dear little Miss Muffet you are!" said Uncle Jack.

"Oh." said Boy Blue, "we shall call you 'Miss Muffet'!"

"Merry Christmas, Miss Muffet!"




  Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall;
  Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
    All the king's horses,
    And all the king's men,
  Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again.




HUMPTY DUMPTY


Tommy Tucker had lived on the farm with Grandma and Grandpa Hall a long
time.

He and Rags were very happy in their new home.

Rags was getting fat now, and every Saturday he had a fine bath.

At least Tommy said it was a fine bath, but Rags did not seem to agree
with him.

"Bow-wow," he would say, when he saw the big tub full of water, "I must
run and hide."

But Tommy always found him, and Rags always had his bath.

When school began in September, Grandma Hall took Tommy to school.

He had a new suit of clothes, a new pair of boots, and a pretty cap to
match his suit.

The school was two miles from the farm, so that the first morning he
rode in the carriage with Grandma Hall because she could not walk so
far.

Every day after that Tommy walked to school in the morning and home
again at night.

He carried his dinner in a new pail, and he always found something very
good in that pail when he opened it at noon.

All the rest of the children brought their dinner, too, and if I should
tell you all the things those children did at noon, it would fill a
book.

When the nuts were ripe, they went into the woods and gathered big
baskets full.

They found pretty flowers and autumn leaves and made their school-room
bright with them.

They played ball, and hide and seek.

Oh, there were such beautiful places to hide,--behind the wood-pile, in
the wood-box, behind trees and fences, and in the woods!

Tommy had never had such a good time in his life.

He did not play all the time, because he was working very hard to catch
up with the other boys.

Before the winter was over he was in the class with Jack and Jill, and
Grandma said she was very proud of him.

But I must tell you of the Jack-o'-lanterns the children made for
Hallowe'en.

Tommy did not know much about Hallowe'en, for he had always lived in
the city.

He had seen boys make Jack-o'-lanterns out of paper boxes.

But he had never seen a real pumpkin Jack-o'-lantern in his life.

One day, near the last of October, the children were all talking about
Hallowe'en and the fun they would have with their lanterns.

"You'll make one, won't you, Tommy?" said Jack.

Of course Tommy wanted to make one if the boys would show him how.

"I know what would be fun," said

Jill. "Let's bring our pumpkins to school and make our lanterns at
noon."

"Yes, yes, that is just the thing!" they shouted.

"Then when they are finished we can ask Miss Phillips which is the
prettiest."

As if a Jack-o'-lantern could ever be pretty!

The next morning there was a funny sight in the dressing-room.

Under each hook was a pumpkin.

There were big ones, little ones, fat ones, long ones, short ones,
yellow ones, and green ones.

In fact, no two pumpkins were alike, except of course, Jack's and
Jill's.

"It will never do for us to have ours different," said Jill.

So they hunted a long time to find two that were just alike.

Tommy tried very hard to think of his arithmetic and geography and
spelling that morning.

But he couldn't help thinking of his pumpkin, which was waiting to be
made into a Jack-o'-lantern.

At last it was noon.

I am afraid the children did not care what they had for dinner that
noon, and they ate very fast.

They needed all the time they could get for their Jack-o'-lanterns.

First, they cut off the top of the pumpkin, and cut out all the seeds.
Then came the fun of making the lantern's face.

He must have two eyes, a nose, a mouth, and two ears.

Jack cut two round holes for eyes.

A long cut in the middle was the nose.

The mouth curved up at both ends, and the holes at the sides were ears.

Some of the lanterns had two very good rows of teeth.

Tom's pumpkin was long and narrow. He said it looked so much like a big
egg that he was going to name it "Humpty Dumpty."

"Oh, let's all name our lanterns!" said the children.

"Mine is so round I shall call it 'Tubby'," said Jack.

Then Jill named hers "Bubby."

One of the boys named his "Green Top," and another was "Big Eyes."

Just as the bell rang for school the last one was finished.

How Miss Phillips laughed when the children marched in, each one
carrying a funny Jack-o'-lantern!

She said she could not tell which one was the prettiest.

After she had been introduced to each one they were put into the hall
