doubt that the buck was much farther off.

"Well!" exclaimed the panting Herbert Watrous, "I can't say I see much
fun in this; it's too much like chasing a railroad train."

"No," added Nick, "I don't see that there is any hope of running down
the deer, who is more used to traveling than we are."

"Maybe he'll come round in a circle again," said Sam, "and we may have
another chance to see him sail by, while not one of us raises his gun."

"I suppose we ought to understand something more about the habits of
the deer, so that we would know what course he would be likely to take.
We could then get there ahead of him and fire as soon as he gave us a
chance."

"Well," added Sam, with a sigh, "he seems to have taken the route we
were going to follow to hunt the bear, so we may as well tramp along. We
may get a glimpse of a buffalo or elephant next."

The baying of the hound had ceased, and, though the boys often stopped
and listened, they heard nothing more of it.

"I guess he has caught the deer," said Herbert, who showed a desire to
speak well of Bowser since he had failed to shoot him, "and is waiting
for us."

But Sam shook his head; he knew the canine too well to believe him
capable of such an exploit as that.

"I don't think he ever ran down anything yet, unless it was a chicken or
cat--hallo!"

At that moment the subject of their conversation appeared on the scene,
approaching as quietly as though the boys were sheep that he wished to
surprise.

He slouched along with a lazy, tired gait, his tongue out, and dripping
with perspiration, while he panted as though he had been on the severest
chase of his life, which most likely was the fact.

He lay down at the feet of Sam Harper, and, stretching out his paws,
rested his head between them as much as to say, "Gentlemen, I have had
enough of this sport, and resign; you will now carry it on without my
assistance."

"He is tired out, and I don't wonder," said Sam, stooping over and
patting the head of the hound; "he ain't used to deer hunting, and don't
know much more about it than do we."

"Then he don't know anything," was the truthful observation of Nick
Ribsam.

"It's my opinion that it's best to give up hunting that particular deer
until we learn a little more about the right way to do it."




CHAPTER XVI.

THE DINNER IN THE WOODS.


By this time it was close to the hour of noon, and the young hunters
were hungry. They had brought no lunch with them, for that would have
been an admission that they doubted their own ability to provide food
for themselves in a country abounding with game.

Nick Ribsam had a paper of salt and pepper mixed, with which to season
their dinner as soon as it should be secured.

The common red squirrels, or chickarees, were so plentiful that they
were nearly always in sight, and, without moving from where they stood,
the lads descried several running along the limbs of the trees.

"Let each of us shoot one," said Sam, walking forth to get a better aim
at a fellow perched high on the branch of a large oak.

Slowly bringing his gun to his shoulder, he took careful aim, and the
game came tumbling through the leaves to the ground, his head punctured
by the cruel bullet. Bowser started at a lazy walk to bring the body in,
but Sam stopped him and picked it up himself.

"I think I will take _that_ one," said Herbert, indicating a squirrel
which was nearer than the others. It was sitting in the crotch of a
tree, nigh enough to be struck with a stone flung by a skillful thrower.

The other two watched his actions with some interest as he raised the
handsome breech-loader. He took a long and deliberate aim, and gave a
grunt the instant he pulled the trigger, and the sharp report broke the
stillness of the woods.

Nick and Sam laughed, for the frightened rodent scampered up the tree
and ran out upon a heavy branch, where he whisked from sight and then
back again, chattering in such a lively fashion that it was plain he had
suffered no inconvenience from the bullet sent after him.

"Well, I'll be hanged!" exclaimed the chagrined Herbert, "I don't
understand how that came about."

"The squirrel doesn't seem to understand it, either," said Sam; "let's
see whether you can do any worse, Nick."

"I'm going to try and bark him," remarked Nick, cocking his rifle and
sighting at the little animal.

Before he could make his aim sure, the chickaree started to run along
the limb, which was large and covered with thick, shaggy bark; but the
muzzle of the weapon swerved slowly in a corresponding direction, and
just as the game gathered itself to make a leap, the explosion came.

The others, who were watching the squirrel to note the result, saw
several pieces of bark suddenly fly upward with such force that the
rodent was hurled fully a foot above the limb, dropping like a wet rag
at the feet of the lad, killed, without its skin being broken.

"That was a good shot!" exclaimed Sam Harper admiringly; "no hunter in
the land could have barked him better than did you."

"What do you mean by barking a squirrel?" asked Herbert, who had never
seen anything of the kind before.

"It is easy enough; all you have to do is to cut the bark right under
the squirrel's body, so that the pieces fly upward with such force as to
knock the life from him."

"That's the way I'm going to kill them after this."

"It is best to practice hitting them with the ball first," Nick
suggested.

Herbert solemnly removed the shell of the cartridge from his
breech-loader and replaced it with a fresh one, pretending not to hear
the remark of Nick.

As the two squirrels were large and in excellent condition, it was
thought they would afford enough dinner for the boys, who went some
distance farther until they reached a small stream of clear, icy water,
where they decided to make their fire.

While Nick and Herbert busied themselves gathering some dry twigs and
sticks, Sam Harper, with his keen knife, skillfully skinned the
chickarees, dressed them, and then holding them over the flame on
green, forked sticks, they were soon cooked to a turn.

For a few minutes before they were ready, the odor of the broiling game
so sharpened the appetites of the boys that Nick sprang up, and,
hurrying out in the woods, shot another for Sam to dress and cook.

"Two ain't enough," he said in explanation, as he threw the last to his
friend; "I can eat a couple myself, and Bowser looks sort of faint."

"The waste parts ought to be enough for him," said Sam, glancing at the
hound, who had gulped down everything thrown him and was gazing
wistfully for the next tid-bits that should fall to his share.

The clear, pure air, the vigorous exercise, and the rugged health of the
boys gave them appetites scarcely less forceful than that of Bowser; and
when Nick had carefully sprinkled the seasoning over the juicy, crisp
flesh, and each, taking one of the squirrels in hand, began wrenching
off the tender meat, he was sure he had never tasted such a delicious
dinner in all his life.

Even Herbert Watrous, accustomed as he was to the delicacies and
refinements of a city home, admitted that there was something about the
meal which, washed down with clear, pure water, had a flavor surpassing
anything of the kind he had ever known.

The causes why it tasted thus I have already stated.




CHAPTER XVII.

A TEST OF MARKSMANSHIP.


The boys were so tired from their severe tramp, and the rest was so
grateful after finishing their dinner, that they stayed where they were
an hour longer. Then, realizing that nothing could be done by idleness,
they slung their reloaded rifles over their shoulders, took another
drink of water, and lazily made their way to higher ground.

"I have been thinking," said Nick, when they paused again, "that we will
be more likely to learn something of the bear if we separate."

"For how long?" Herbert asked.

"Until night, or until we find him."

"But how can we find each other at night?"

"That can be fixed easily enough; if necessary, we can signal to each
other, or we can pick out some landmark that can be seen a long ways
off and gradually approach that as the sun goes down."

There was nothing brilliant in this proposition, but after some
discussion it was agreed to by the others, and they began looking around
for something which might serve them as a guide.

Directly to the north, the woods rose in a series of hills of no great
elevation, but among them were numerous large rocks of limestone
formation, some of them of such a light color that they could be seen a
long distance.

"Right yonder," said Nick, pointing toward the largest, "is one which we
cannot mistake; let's agree to meet there at nightfall and go into camp.
If either one of us loses his reckoning he will fire his gun and the
others will answer him, so there need be no danger at all."

"I don't see as there would be any danger if we failed to find each
other before morning," said Sam; "we are not in a wild country where
Indians will hunt for us."

"There ain't any danger," said Herbert, "only it will be a great deal
more pleasant to spend the night together; you will feel safer by
knowing that I am with you with my patent breech-loader."

"Yes," said Nick, "for by keeping close to you there won't be half as
much likelihood of being hit when you fire at something else."

"I haven't tried yet," said Herbert; "my gun is a long-distance shooter:
there's where I get my work in. Show me a mark a good long distance off
and you'll open your eyes."

"Well, I declare, if that doesn't beat all!"

It was Sam Harper who uttered this exclamation. He had been gazing
steadily at a broad, flat rock about a quarter of a mile distant to the
northwest of them, and his words announced that he had made some
important discovery.

The peculiar tone in which he spoke caused the others to turn toward him
and ask the cause.

"Look at that yellowish white rock," he answered, pointing toward it,
"and tell me whether that isn't a little ahead of anything yet."

One brief searching glance showed that the young man had sufficient
cause for his excitement.

[Illustration: "Now I'll show you what my Creedmoor will do," said
Herbert Watrous.]

Standing on the top of the rock, so that his figure was thrown in clear
relief against the tinted sky behind him, was the very buck they had
been vainly chasing. He seemed to be looking back at the young hunters
as though he disdained their prowess and defied them to renew their
attempt to bring him down.

"_That's my chance!_" exclaimed Herbert, in excitement; "that's just my
distance; get out of my way! give me room! now I'll show you what my
Creedmoor will do, when aimed by a master of the art."

With great display and ceremony the youth prepared to give an exhibition
of shooting like that shown at the international matches. The others
stepped back, so as not to impede his movements, and he deliberately
threw off his cap, got down on his back, raised the rear sight, crossed
his feet and drew them half way up to his body, then rested the barrel
of his gun on the support thus furnished between the knees, and with his
left hand beneath his head, and turned so as to rest against the stock
of his gun, while his right was crooked around with the finger lightly
pressing the trigger, he was in the proper position to make a "crack
shot."

The others watched his actions with the closest attention, only fearful
that the deer would not keep his position long enough for Herbert to
obtain the aim he wished.

The conditions could not have been more favorable; the buck being to the
northwest, while the sun was high in the heavens, there was no confusion
of vision from that cause. The smokiness of the atmosphere was so slight
that it was scarcely perceptible at so brief a distance, while there was
not the least breath of air stirring.

"I am afraid he will lose his chance if he waits too long," said Nick
impatiently, in an undertone to Sam, who whispered back:

"The buck understands him and will wait."

It was evident that Mr. Herbert Watrous did not mean to spoil his aim by
haste. Shutting one eye, he squinted carefully through his sights,
lowering or raising the stock or barrel so as to shift the aim, until
at last he had it elevated and pointed to suit him.

Sam watched the buck, while Nick kept his eye on the marksman, who was
holding his breath, with his finger crowding the trigger harder and
harder until the explosion came.

As before, Herbert uttered a grunt the instant the piece was discharged,
and then, hastily clambering to his feet, he put on his cap and said
with the utmost assurance:

"That bullet struck him in the chest and will be found buried in his
body."

"He doesn't know you fired at him," said Sam Harper, as the buck, a
moment later, turned about and walked out of sight.

"The deer doesn't fall at once, even if you drive the bullet through his
heart. That buck may go a hundred yards or so, but he will then drop as
if struck by lightning."

The confidence with which these words were uttered puzzled Nick and
caused him to think that possibly the boaster was right after all, and
he had made the shot he claimed.

The truth would probably be learned during the afternoon, for Nick
meant to learn it for himself.

Now that they agreed to separate, it was decided that Herbert should
keep straight along the route they had been following. Sam should
diverge to the right, while Nick would swerve far enough to the left to
pass the rock whereupon the buck stood at the time he was shot or rather
shot at.

"I am bound to find out the truth," said Nick, with a shake of the head.

And so he did; but little did he dream of what was to happen to him
during this search for the truth.




CHAPTER XVIII.

A QUAIL.


As the hound belonged to Sam Harper and showed a disposition to go with
him, he was allowed to do so, the lad moving off to the right and Nick
Ribsam to the left, as was agreed upon.

Nick had not his father's watch with him, but Herbert Watrous carried a
handsome gold hunting-piece, which was now consulted and showed it was
nearly two o'clock.

"The days are getting short," said Sam Harper, with a doubtful shake of
the head; "that doesn't leave us more than three hours of daylight, and
it is hardly worth while to part company."

"What's the odds?" laughed Nick, who was anxious to look for the deer;
"we won't be far apart, as we may be to-morrow."

And, without waiting to discuss the question, he struck to the left with
his strong step, the others following the courses already mentioned.

No afternoon could have been more charming, with the summer lingering
and mellowing the approaching winter.

The faint, smoky haze of the atmosphere, the clear sky, the warm sun,
the brilliant-hued vegetation in the woods, the faint cawing of crows in
the distance, and the flight of birds overhead, looking like
mathematical figures in India-ink gliding across the blue heavens, the
delicious languor everywhere: all these were at their best, and he who
was wandering through the rainbow-tinted forest, where the sleepy waters
flowed, could well understand why it was the pioneers, like Daniel
Boone, Simon Kenton, and others, turned their backs on civilization,
and, plunging into the wilderness, buried themselves for months from the
sight of their fellow-men.

Sam Harper was moving quietly toward the north, when it seemed to him
that a large leaf suddenly blew forward from beneath his feet and was
carried swiftly over the ground, straight ahead and away from him.

Looking closely, he discovered that it was a plump quail which he had
startled, and which was speeding from him. Although the bird has short
legs it runs very swiftly, and it was gone almost before Sam identified
it.

"Ah, if I could only get a shot at you," said the lad, his mouth fairly
watering, "what a splendid supper you would make!"

The words were yet in his mouth, when a sudden whirring sound broke the
air, and he caught a glimpse of a second quail flying like an arrow
below the principal limbs.

Sam raised his rifle as quick as a flash, took aim as best he could, and
fired. Even the great Dr. Carver would have missed under such
circumstances, and the lad came nowhere near hitting the game.

So swift was the flight of the bird, that as soon as the trigger was
