men were making their way up the Xingu.  Waggaman and Burkhardt and I
set out to learn for ourselves and to stop them.  They went down the
other side of the river and I came down to the Aryk village.  I roused
them to kill you before you could pass above the rapids, but we were
able to slay only one of them."

"And it was a sad mistake that you did that; for he was a good man, who
wished you no evil.  Where are Waggaman and Burkhardt?"

The native shook his head.  He had picked up his spear, but made no
movement toward taking his departure.  Ashman hoped he would not, for
everything said not only convinced him of the first importance of
gaining the fellow's confidence, but encouraged him in the belief that
he was fast doing so.  He resolved to leave no stone unturned looking
to that end.

"Why did not your two white friends help you in the fight, to keep us
from going further up the Xingu?"

"_Maybe they did_," replied Ziffak, with a significant glance up
stream, which left no doubt that he referred to the conflict that had
taken place there while the couple were talking on the margin of the
river.

"I don't believe it," Ashman hastened to say, hopeful that such was the
case; for, with two white men and their firearms, the peril of his
friends must have been greatly increased.

"Why do you seek to enter our country?" asked the dusky giant, after a
brief pause.

"We want to learn about your people; but I pledge you we wish not to
harm a hair of their heads."

It was not to be expected that a savage who has heard nothing else for
years except that any penetration of his territory by white men meant
destruction, could give up that belief simply on the pledge of one of
the race accused.

But it was equally clear that this particular savage was favorably
disposed toward Ashman.  It may have been that his good will was won by
the neat manner in which he had got the best of Ziffak, the most
terrible warrior ever produced by that people.  A brave man respects
another brave man.

"Why did Waggaman and Burkhardt visit your villages and make their home
with you for so many years?"

"I do not know," replied Ziffak, with another shake of his head; "but
they have proven they are friends.  They do not want to go back to
their people, who are all bad."

The thought occurred to Ashman, though he did not express it, that the
strange white men were criminals.  They may have escaped from the
diamond mines, which were at no great distance, and naturally preferred
the free, wild life of the interior to the labor and tyranny which the
miserable wretches condemned to service in those regions undergo.

"Ziffak," said the explorer, lowering his weapon, "will you walk back
to the camp of my people?  You have my promise that no harm shall be
offered you by any one."

The herculean native nodded his head, and the strange couple started up
the bank in the direction of the camp, which was now as silent as
though not a hostile shot had been fired, or a savage blow been struck.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE LAND OF THE MURHAPAS.

It looked as if Fred Ashman had gained a double victory over the giant
Ziffak, and his second triumph was infinitely greater than his first.

His heart thrilled at the thought that this formidable antagonist had
been so suddenly transformed into a friend; and yet he could not
entirely free himself from a certain misgiving, as the two walked side
by side along the Xingu.  Recalling the dexterity of the native--all
the more wonderful because of his bulk--he reflected, that it was the
easiest thing in the world for him to turn like a flash and pierce him
with his poisoned javelin before the slightest defence could be made.

It was this thought which led him stealthily to place his hand on the
butt of the revolver at his hip, prepared to whip it out and fire as
quickly as he knew how.  At the same time he edged away from him, so as
to maintain considerable space between their bodies.

Ziffak suddenly changed his javelin from his right to his left hand,
the movement sending a shock of fear through the American, who the next
moment blushed from shame, for it was manifest that the shrewd savage
suspected the timidity of his new friend, and shifted the frightful
weapon to the side furthest from him to relieve any misgiving on his
part.

The conversation continued as they walked, the native showing a
surprising willingness to answer all questions.

Ashman gathered from what was told him that the Murhapas were a tribe
numbering fully a thousand men, women and children; that they occupied
a village or town on the right bank of the Xingu about twenty miles
above the rapids, where the incidents already recorded occurred, and
that they were far superior in intelligence, physical development and
prowess to any other tribes in the Matto Grosso.

It was about five years before that the two white men, Waggaman and
Burkhardt, suddenly made their appearance at the towns.  The fact that
they did not come up the Xingu, but from the forest to the south,
strengthened Ashman's suspicion that they were criminals who had
managed to escape from the Brazilian diamond mines, though it was a
mystery how they had secured the two rifles which they brought with
them.  They had no revolvers, and their guns were not of the repeating
pattern.  When their ammunition gave out, one of them made a journey of
several days' duration into the wilderness, invariably bringing back a
supply which lasted a long time.

Such weapons were entirely unknown to the Murhapas, who had never heard
of anything of the kind.  The exploits of the owners caused the natives
to look upon them with awe.  They were soon established on the best of
terms with their new associates, who allowed them to do as they chose
in everything.

It is not to be supposed that Ashman gathered all the information given
in this chapter, during his brief walk with Ziffak.  Indeed, that which
has already been stated was obtained only in part during the memorable
interview; but it may be as well to add other facts which afterwards
came to the knowledge of him and the explorers, since it is necessary
to know them in order to understand the strange series of incidents and
adventures in which they became speedily involved.

The Murhapa tribe was ruled by King Haffgo, whose complexion was almost
as fair as that of a European.  He had fifty wives, but only one child,
whose mother was dead.  This child was a daughter, Ariel, of surpassing
beauty and loveliness, the pride of her grim father and adored by all
his subjects.  From Waggaman and Burkhardt she had acquired a knowledge
of the English tongue, which Ziffak declared was superior to his own.
Both of these men had sought in turn to win her as his wife, and the
king was not unwilling, because of the awe in which he held them; but
Ariel would not agree to mate herself with either, though she once
intimated that when she became older she might listen favorably to the
suit of Waggaman, whose appearance and manner were less repulsive than
those of his comrade.

The first duty the guests took upon themselves was to impress King
Haffgo and his subjects that all white men except themselves were their
deadliest enemies, and, if any of them were allowed to visit the
village, they would assuredly bring others who would cause the utter
destruction of the inhabitants.

Three years before, a party of six white explorers ascended the Xingu,
and suddenly presented themselves to the Murhapas, without previous
announcement or knowledge.  Despite their professions of friendship,
and a most valiant defence, they were set upon and slain the same hour
they appeared among the fierce people.

Ariel, the daughter of the king, was but a child, at that time, just
entering her teens.  She did not know of the cruel massacre until it
was over, when she surprised all by expressing her sorrow and declaring
that a great wrong had been done the strangers.  From that time
forward, those who studied her closely saw that she had formed a strong
distrust, if not dislike, of Waggaman and Burkhardt, though, seeing the
high favor in which they were held in court, she sought to veil her
true feelings.

Ziffak was a younger brother of the king, and bore the title of
head-chieftain.  He was next in authority and power, and, because of
his immense size and prowess, led all expeditions against their
enemies, none of whom was held in fear.  Occasionally, he headed a
hundred warriors, who made excursions through the neighboring
wilderness and in pure wantoness spread destruction and death on every
hand.

The Aryks, after receiving several such terrible visits, sued for terms
and willingly agreed to consider themselves slaves of the Murhapas.
Their location was favorable to detect the advance of any of the
dreaded white men up the Xingu, and they agreed in consideration of
being left alone, to check any such approach, a fact which will explain
the fierceness and determination with which they contested the ascent
of the river by our friends.

If they allowed the whites to pass above the rapids, they knew that the
mighty Ziffak would sweep down upon them and visit frightful punishment
upon their heads.

Instead of bringing a body of his own warriors, Ziffak, as has been
intimated in another place, came alone down one side of the Xingu, with
Waggaman and Burkhardt on the other, the calculation being to rouse
enough Aryks to destroy the invaders, as they were regarded.  Enough
has been told to show how thoroughly the head-chieftain acquitted
himself of this duty.

Several of the powerful reasons for the jealousy of Waggaman and
Burkhardt of their race, was apparent in the fact that there was an
astonishing abundance of diamonds and gold among the Murhapas.
Although none was seen on Ziffak, it was only because he was on the
war-path.  He had enough at home to furnish a prince's ransom, while
the possessions of the beautiful princess Ariel were worth a kingdom.

These were obtained from some place among the mountains to the westward
of the town.  In the same mysterious region was a peak, whose interior
was a mass of fire that had burned from a date too remote to be known
even in the legends of the wild people.  There was a lake also, whose
waters were so clear that a boat floating over them seemed suspended in
mid air.

This wonderful section was claimed by King Haffgo, who would permit
none but his subjects and the two white men to visit it.  A party of
Aryks; presuming upon the friendly relations just established with
their masters, ventured to make their way to the enchanted place
without permission or knowledge of the Murhapas.

Before they could get away, they were discovered by some of the
lookouts, and every one slain with dreadful torture.  The lesson was
not lost upon their surviving friends, who never again ventured to
repeat the experiment.

The Murhapas were the first to use the spears with the deadly points.
They not only taught the Aryks how to prepare the poison from the venom
of several species of serpents and noxious vegetables, but imparted to
them the remedy,--a decoction of such marvellous power, that a single
swallow would instantly neutralize the effect of any wound received
from the dreaded missiles.

Among the tribes named, there was no knowledge of the use of iron
though the ore is abundant in that region.  The only objects composed
of the metal were the firearms of the white men, and the natives could
not comprehend how they were fashioned from the substance which
underwent such a change from its native state.

Every implement used by this people is made from stone, which however
seems almost the equal of iron and steel.  Spear points, axes and
cutting tools are shaped with remarkably keen edges, with which trees
are readily felled, and cut into any form desired.

Shells are used in the formation of knives, while the teeth of certain
fish, taken from the Xingu, enables them to construct still more
delicate implements for cutting and carving.

Indian corn, cotton and tobacco are raised from a soil whose fertility
cannot be surpassed, though strangely enough the tribes have no
knowledge of the banana, sugar cane and rice, which belong so
essentially to the torrid zones.  Dogs and fowls are entirely unknown,
and there is no conception of a God, though all have a firm belief that
they will live again after death.  A myth has existed among them from
time immemorial of the creation of the world, which, according to their
views, consists of the regions around the headwaters of the Xingu and
Tapajos.

Ziffak was a favorite of the beauteous Ariel, and it is not improbable
that, knowing as he did, her lamentation over the cruel death of the
white men, who appeared at her home three years before, he was more
willing than would otherwise have been the case to stay his hand, after
doing such yeoman service against the new-comers.

Where these tribes came from is a question yet unsolved by
anthropologists, though the theory has many supporters that most of the
isolated peoples are allied to the original stock of the once mighty
Caribs, who journeyed from the south to the sea.

Conscious of their own might, and knowing the prodigious mineral wealth
at their command, the Murhapas are naturally jealous of their
neighbors, and fight fiercely to resist anything that bears a
resemblance to an encroachment upon their rights.

It will be understood that Waggaman and Burkhardt met with little
difficulty in rousing their enmity particularly against the Caucasian
race, since the members of that, of all others, were the ones most to
be dreaded.

The foregoing, much of which is in the way of anticipation, we have
deemed best to incorporate in this place.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE NEW ALLY.

The amazement which so nearly overwhelmed Fred Ashman during the few
minutes succeeding the surrender of Ziffak, was shared in all its
entirety, when the two presented themselves before the astounded
explorers in the canoe.

In fact, Jared Long came within a hair of shooting the Hercules, before
the situation could be explained to him.  Even then he refused for
awhile to believe the astonishing story, but declared that some
infernal trickery was afoot.  Finally, however, he and the Professor
and Bippo and Pedros realized that the most powerful enemy had become
their ally.

Ziffak showed a strange talkativeness after joining the company.
Seating himself on the ground where all were now veiled in shadow, he
answered the questions that were rained upon him, until most of the
information given in the preceding chapter was told to the wondering
listeners.

The account of the dreadful reception that awaited their predecessors
three years before, would have deterred such brave men as the explorers
from pushing further, but for the fact that they had secured an
all-powerful friend at court.  Believing that he could pave the way for
a friendly reception, they were eager to visit what seemed to them an
enchanted land.

There was some uneasiness over Waggaman and Burkhardt, who, it could be
easily seen, would at the most do nothing more than disguise their
enmity under the guise of friendship, holding themselves ready for some
treachery that would bring about the death of the visitors.

The conversation lasted a long time, and was ended by the natural
question put to Ziffak as to what should be the next step.

From what he had already stated, it was evident they were not yet
through with the Aryks.  Despite their frightful repulse, they would
hold the Murhapas in greater dread than the whites; and, well aware of
the penalty of allowing them to pass above the rapids, would never
cease their efforts to prevent such a disaster.  It followed,
therefore, that something must be done to spike their guns, and Ziffak
was the only one who could do it.

The whites were not surprised, when he offered to return to the point
down the river, where he had left his canoe, recross to the other side,
and make known to the Aryks that it was his wish that the explorers
should be molested no further.

The announcement would be a surprise indeed to them, but there was none
who would dare question the authority of such a source.

During the absorbingly interesting conversation, Ziffak stated that his
object in coming from the other side was to reach the camp of the
whites at the same time that an attack was made by the Aryks who so
cunningly used the floating logs and trees as a screen to hide their
approach.  He preferred his course to that of accompanying them.

It will thus be seen, that, although the act of Fred Ashman in passing
down the Xingu seemed like a mistake, yet it was the most providential
thing that could have occurred.

Having made known his plan, the burly chieftain set about carrying it
out with characteristic promptness.  Without saying good-bye, he rose
to his feet, and walking rapidly off, soon disappeared in the direction
of the spot where took place his encounter with the puma and his
meeting with Fred Ashman.

He had not been gone long, when those left in camp caught sight of the
little boat skimming swiftly across the Xingu below them.  The
preliminaries of the singular movement in their favor was going on
according to programme.

But, with the departure of Ziffak, something like a distrust of his
friendship entered the minds of the three whites.  Bippo and Pedros
were so overcome by what they had seen that they were unable to
comprehend what it all meant.  They kept their places in the boat and
listened and wondered in silence.

The Professor hoped for the best, though he admitted that there was
something inexplainable in the business.  He had spent hours in
examining the strange fish of the Upper Xingu, in inspecting the
remarkable plants, which he saw for the first time, and in studying the
zoology and mineralogy of the region.  He had been delighted and
puzzled, over and over again, but all of these problems combined failed
to astonish him as did the action of Ziffak and the story he told.

Ashman was the most hopeful of all.  He had been with the native more
than the rest, and was given the opportunity to study him closely.  He
was confident that he read the workings of his mind aright, and that
the fellow would be their friend to the end.

Jared Long, the New Englander, was equally positive in the other
direction.  He maintained that since the leopard cannot change his
spots, no savage showing such relentless hatred of the white race as
did Ziffak, could be transformed into a friend for no other reason than
that he had been made a prisoner.

He insisted further that, if he succeeded in helping them through to
the Murhapa village, it would be only with the purpose of securing a
more complete revenge.  Such a powerful tribe as his need feel no
misgiving in allowing a small party to enter their town; for, after
that was done, they would be so completely at their mercy that there
was no possibility of any explorer ever living to tell the tale.

He especially dwelt upon the undoubted influence possessed by Waggaman
and Burkhardt.  They would never consent to yield the influence they
had held so long, nor could they be induced to share it with any of
their own countrymen.

Grimcke and Ashman laughed at his fears, but strive as much as they
chose, they could not help being affected more or less by his
pessimistic views.

However, the brave fellow declared that he would accompany them on the
hazardous journey, and stick by them to the end.  If they could not
survive, they would fall together.

By this time the night was far along.  A careful scrutiny of the other
bank failed to reveal anything of their enemies, though all believed
there were plenty of them along the shore.

Ashman proposed, that now, since they were entirely screened by the
projecting shadow of the wood, they should cautiously push their way up
