
9. "I feel now, mother, that all this was very wrong, and that these
naughty thoughts tempted me to break God's holy Sabbath."

10. "I am glad you feel this, my son; for, besides being sinful to
desire to have the little dog, which was coveting what belonged to
another, the time and place in which you indulged the thought was the
breaking of that commandment which says, 'Remember the Sabbath day, to
keep it holy.'"

11. "But, mother," asked Frank, impatiently, "how shall I keep these
thoughts out? They come before I know it. Sometimes a boy has a new suit
of clothes on, and I cannot help looking at him; and sometimes the
girls will play with their gloves, and tie and untie their bonnets; and
sometimes the little children get to sleep, and I can't help watching
them, to see if they will not slip off the seat.

12. "I think, mother, if we did not sit in the gallery, I shouldn't see
so many things to tempt me to wicked thoughts in church."

13. "If I really believed this myself, Frank, I should think it
important to change our seat: but the mischief does not lie here; it is
in your heart.

14. "If this were right, and you really loved God and his service, the
thought of his presence would keep out these troublesome intruders; not
altogether, my son, for the best of people are sometimes subject to
wandering thoughts; but it is a temptation which they overcome, by
turning their attention immediately to the services, and by taking their
eyes from the object that drew away their thoughts from God."




LESSON XLIV.

_The same subject, concluded._


1. "If some great king, who loved his people, and was continually giving
them some good things, should appoint a day when he would meet his
subjects, rich and poor, young and old, and should declare to them how
they may best please him; and a person should be appointed to read to
them, from a book he had himself written, directions for their conduct;
and that, as a reward for obedience, should promise they should be
admitted to his palace, where nothing that could trouble them should
ever be allowed to enter--"

2. "Why, mother," exclaimed Frank, "I should so admire to see a king,
that I should be willing to do everything he required; and should be
afraid, all the time, of doing something he did not like, while in his
presence. I should keep looking at him all the time, to see if he were
pleased;--but go on, mother."

3. "Well, my son, suppose this great person, who is also good, should
keep a book in which he noted down all your actions, and even looks;
and, on a certain day which he had appointed, and which was known to
himself, should call together a great multitude of people, his friends
and yours, and should read to them all that he had written there,--do
you think you would be careless or indifferent what was written against
your name?"

4. "O no, mother! I should be so anxious that I should want to hide
myself, for fear something should be read that I should be ashamed
of,--something very bad. But, mother, no king ever did this, that you
know of. If he did, pray tell me more about him; and if his subjects
were not all good and obedient."

5. "I have heard of a king, my son, who has done more than this; but not
an earthly king. Earthly kings are limited in their power; for they are
but men. But the king of whom I speak is the Lord of the whole earth."

6. "Do you mean God, mother?"--"I do, my son. You have told me how you
should behave in the presence of an earthly king on the day he should
appoint to meet his people; and would you treat with less reverence and
respect him who is the King of kings and Lord of lords?

7. "Can you, on entering his house, say, 'The Lord is in his holy
temple,' and feel no desire to meet him there; but allow any trifle that
meets your eye to carry your thoughts away? Do you, when his holy book
is read, feel no desire to hear the directions he has given to lead you
to your heavenly home?

8. "And when the petitions are sent up imploring his blessings, and
asking his forgiveness, have you none to offer? Are you so blest as to
have nothing to ask, and so good as to need no forgiveness?

9. "O my son, be careful how you neglect these gracious privileges! And
when his ministers, whom he has appointed to declare his will,--to
instruct you out of his word,--preach to you from the sacred pulpit,
will you turn a deaf ear, and lose their instructions, and at the same
time displease your heavenly Father?

10. "This great and powerful king is also your father and friend. He
loves you more than any earthly friend. He is willing to hear all your
petitions, and is even more ready to give than we are to ask. He has
appointed one day in seven in which to meet us, and this is the Sabbath,
about the keeping of which we are now talking.

11. "And he has also appointed a day in which he will judge the world,
from the book which he has kept of our accounts.

12. "On that day there will be assembled a great multitude, which no man
can number, out of every kindred and tongue; great and small, good and
bad. You and I will be there, my son.

13. "There will be the minister and his people, the Sunday-school
teacher and his scholars, all to receive either the sentence, 'Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world,' or, 'Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting punishment.'"

14. Frank was moved by this representation of the consequences of his
neglect of the duties he owed his heavenly Father, and said, "O, how sad
it would be, how dreadful, if, on that day I should be sent to dwell
forever where God is not, and where you and father are not!"

15. "Dreadful, indeed, my son, would be such a separation; and when you
think of this, let it make you more earnest to serve and please God; for
Jesus Christ, who came upon earth once to die for us all, and will come
again to judge the earth, has gone to prepare mansions in heaven for
those who love him, that they may dwell with him forever in perfect
happiness.

16. "Let us now, my son, pray to our heavenly Father to prepare us for
this blessedness, that where he is, there we may be also." Frank and his
mother knelt together, and offered up the following prayer:--


PRAYER FOR GOOD THOUGHTS.

17. Almighty and most merciful Father! teach us thy will, that we may
know how to please thee. Put good thoughts into our hearts, and right
words into our lips, that our services may be such as thou wilt please
to accept.

18. Forgive, we pray thee, the sins we have committed this day, in
thought, word, or deed, and make us truly sorry on account of them. Help
us to love thee more, and serve thee better, for the time to come.

[Illustration]

19. Bless all our friends, and make them thy friends. Make us a
household serving thee, that after this life is over, we may all meet in
heaven.

20. O then, great Shepherd, who neither slumberest nor sleepest, take us
under thy protection this night; and when the cheerful light of day
again returns, lead us forth in thy fold, and keep us from every
temptation that will draw us away from thee.

21. May our peaceful slumbers remind us of the sleep of death; and, on
the morning of the resurrection, wilt thou clothe us in the
righteousness of Christ, and receive us to dwell with him in life
everlasting! Amen.




LESSON XLV.

_Mary Dow._--H.F. GOULD.


    1. "Come in, little stranger," I said,
    As she tapped at my half-opened door,
    While the blanket pinned over her head
    Just reached to the basket she bore.

    2. A look full of innocence fell
    From her modest and pretty blue eye,
    As she said, "I have matches to sell,
    And hope you are willing to buy.

    3. "A penny a bunch is the price;
    I think you'll not find it too much;
    They're tied up so even and nice,
    And ready to light with a touch."

    4. I asked, "What's your name, little girl?"
    "'Tis Mary," said she,--"Mary Dow,"
    And carelessly tossed off a curl,
    That played o'er her delicate brow.

    5. "My father was lost in the deep,--
    The ship never got to the shore;
    And mother is sad, and will weep,
    When she hears the wind blow and sea roar.

    6. "She sits there at home, without food,
    Beside our poor sick Willie's bed;
    She paid all her money for wood,
    And so I sell matches for bread.

    7. "For every time that she tries
    Some things she'd be paid for to make,
    And lays down the baby, it cries,
    And that makes my sick brother wake.

    8. "I'd go to the yard and get chips,
    But, then, it would make me too sad,
    To see men there building the ships,
    And think they had made one so bad.

    9. "I've one other gown, and, with care,
    We think it may decently pass,
    With my bonnet that's put by to wear
    To meeting and Sunday-school class.

    10. "I love to go there, where I'm taught,
    Of One who's so wise and so good,
    He knows every action and thought,
    And gives e'en the raven his food.

    11. "For He, I am sure, who can take
    Such fatherly care of a bird,
    Will never forget or forsake
    The children who trust to his word.

    12. "And now, if I only can sell
    The matches I brought out to-day,
    I think I shall do very well,
    And mother'll rejoice at the pay."

    13. "Fly home, little bird," then I thought,
    "Fly home, full of joy, to your nest!"
    For I took all the matches she brought,
    And Mary may tell you the rest.




LESSON XLVI.

_It Snows._--H.F. GOULD.


    1. It snows! it snows! from out the sky,
    The feathered flakes, how fast they fly!
    Like little birds, that don't know why
    They're on the chase, from place to place,
    While neither can the other trace.
    It snows! it snows! a merry play
    Is o'er us, on this heavy day!

    2. As dancers in an airy hall,
    That hasn't room to hold them all,
    While some keep up and others fall,
    The atoms shift; then, thick and swift,
    They drive along to form the drift,
    That, weaving up, so dazzling white,
    Is rising like a wall of light.

    3. But now the wind comes whistling loud,
    To snatch and waft it, as a cloud,
    Or giant phantom in a shroud;
    It spreads, it curls, it mounts and whirls,
    At length a mighty wing unfurls,
    And then, away! but where, none knows,
    Or ever will.--It snows! it snows!

    4. To-morrow will the storm be done;
    Then out will come the golden sun,
    And we shall see, upon the run
    Before his beams, in sparkling streams,
    What now a curtain o'er him seems.
    And thus with life it ever goes,
    'Tis shade and shine!--It snows! it snows!




LESSON XLVII.

_The Dissatisfied Angler Boy._--H.F. GOULD.


[Illustration]

    1. I'm sorry they let me go down to the brook,
    I'm sorry they gave me the line and the hook,
    And I wish I had stayed at home with my book.
    I'm sure 'twas no pleasure to see
    That poor, little, harmless, suffering thing,
    Silently writhe at the end of the string;
    Or to hold the pole, while I felt him swing
    In torture, and all for me!

    2. 'Twas a beautiful speckled and glossy trout,
    And when from the water I drew him out
    On the grassy bank, as he floundered about,
    It made me shivering cold,
    To think I had caused so much needless pain;
    And I tried to relieve him, but all in vain;
    O! never, as long as I live, again
    May I such a sight behold!

    3. O, what would I give once more to see
    The brisk little swimmer alive and free,
    And darting about, as he used to be,
    Unhurt, in his native brook!
    'Tis strange how people can love to play,
    By taking innocent lives away;
    I wish I had stayed at home to-day,
    With sister, and read my book.




LESSON XLVIII.

_The Violet: a Fable._--CHILDREN'S MAGAZINE.


    1. Down in a humble dell
    A modest violet chanced to dwell
    Remote from gayer flowers;
    Its days were passed in simple ease,
    It sipped the dew and kissed the breeze,
    Nor thought of happier hours.

    2. Long lived it in this quiet way,
    Till, on a hot and sultry day
    About the midst of June,
    It chanced to spy a lady fair,
    All dressed in satins rich and rare,
    Come walking by, at noon.

    3. And thus the silly flower began:--
    "I much should like to live with man,
    And other flowers to see;--
    Why is it (for I cannot tell)
    That I forever here should dwell,
    Where there is none but me?"

    4. While thus it spoke, the lady stopped
    To pick up something she had dropped,
    And there the flower she spied;
    And soon she plucked it from its bed,
    Just shook the dew-drop from its head,
    And placed it at her side.

    5. Soon at the lady's splendid home
    The violet found that she was come,
    For all was bright and gay:
    And then upon the mantel-shelf,
    With many a flower beside herself,
    Was placed, without delay.

    6. And oh, how glad and proud was she
    In such a splendid place to be!--
    But short was her delight;
    For rose and lily turned away,
    And would not deign a word to say
    To such a country wight.

    7. She passed the day in much disgrace,
    And wished that she might change her place,
    And be at home again:
    She sighed for her own mossy bed,
    Where she might rest her aching head;
    But now to wish were vain.

    8. Next morn, the housemaid, passing by,
    Just chanced the little flower to spy,
    And then, without delay,
    She rudely seized its tender stalk,
    And threw it in the gravel walk,
    And left it to decay.

    9. And thus it mourned,--"O silly flower,
    To wish to leave its native bower!
    Was it for this I sighed?
    O, had I more contented been,
    And lived unnoticed and unseen,
    I might not thus have died!"

    10. Nor let this lesson be forgot:
    Remain contented with the lot
    That Providence decrees.
    Contentment is a richer gem
    Than sparkles in a diadem,
    And gives us greater ease.




LESSON XLIX.

_Captain John Smith._--JUVENILE MISCELLANY.


1. The adventures of this singular man are so various, and so very
extraordinary, that the detail of them seems more like romance than true
history. He was born in Lincolnshire, England, and was left an orphan at
an early age.

2. His love of adventure displayed itself while he was yet a school-boy.
He sold his satchel, books and clothes, and went over to France, without
the knowledge of his guardians.

3. Afterward, he served as a soldier in the Netherlands for several
years. At the end of his campaign, he returned to England, where he
recovered a small portion of the estate left him by his deceased father.

4. This money enabled him to resume his travels under more favorable
auspices, at the age of seventeen. He again went to France, and embarked
at Marseilles (_pronounced_ Mar-sales'), with some pious pilgrims,
bound to Italy.

5. During this voyage a violent tempest threatened destruction to the
vessel; and poor Smith being the suspected cause of the impending danger
was thrown, without mercy, into the sea.

[Illustration]

6. He saved himself by his great expertness in swimming; and soon after
went on board another vessel, bound to Alexandria, where he entered into
the service of the Emperor of Austria, against the Turks.

7. His bravery, and great ingenuity in all the stratagems of war, soon
made him famous, and obtained for him the command of two hundred and
fifty horsemen.

8. At the siege of Regal, the Ottomans sent a challenge, purporting that
Lord Turbisha, to amuse the ladies, would fight with any captain among
the Austrian troops. Smith accepted the challenge.

9. Flags of truce were exchanged between the two armies, and crowds of
fair dames and fearless men assembled to witness the combat. Lord
Turbisha entered the field well mounted and armed.

10. On his shoulders were fixed two large wings made of eagles'
feathers, set in silver, and richly ornamented with gold and precious
stones. A janizary, or Turkish soldier, bore his lance before him, and
another followed, leading a horse superbly caparisoned.

11. Smith came upon the ground with less parade. A flourish of trumpets
preceded him, and his lance was supported by a single page.

12. The Turk fell at the first charge, and Smith returned to his army in
triumph. This so enraged one of the friends of the slain that he sent a
challenge to Smith, offering him his head, his horse and his armor, if
he dared come and take them.

13. The challenge was accepted, and the combatants came upon the ground
with nearly the same ceremony and splendor. Their lances broke at the
first charge, without doing injury to either; but, at the second onset,
the Turk was wounded, thrown from his horse, and killed.




LESSON L.

_The same subject, continued._


1. The Christian army were at this time anxious to finish erecting some
fortifications, and were very willing to amuse their enemies in this
way. They therefore persuaded Captain Smith to send a challenge in his
turn, offering his head, in payment for the two he had won, to any one
who had skill and strength enough to take it.

2. The offer was accepted; and a third Turk tried his fortune with the
bold adventurer. This time Captain Smith was nearly unhorsed; but, by
his dexterity and judgment, he recovered himself, and soon returned to
the camp victorious.

3. These warlike deeds met with much applause; and the prince gave him a
coat of arms, signed with the royal seal, representing three Turk's
heads on a white field.

4. Not long after this, Captain Smith was left wounded on the field of
battle,--was taken prisoner by the Turks,--and sent as a slave to a
noble lady in the interior of the country.

5. He could speak Italian well, and his fair mistress was very fond of
that language. She listened to accounts of his bravery, his adventures,
and his misfortunes, with deepening interest; and finally sent him to
her brother, a powerful bashaw, with a request that he should be treated
with much kindness.

6. The proud officer was angry that his sister should trouble herself
about a vile European slave; and, instead of attending to her request,
he caused him to be loaded with irons, and abused in the most shameful
manner.

7. During the long and tedious period of his slavery, he suffered as
much as it is possible for man to endure; but at length he killed his
tyrannical master, and, with great peril, escaped through the deserts
into Russia.

8. His romantic genius would not long allow him to remain easy. He could
not be happy unless he was engaged in daring and adventurous actions. He
no sooner heard of an expedition to Virginia, under the command of
Christopher Newport, than he resolved to join it.

9. He arrived in this country with the first emigrants, who settled in
Jamestown, April 26, 1607. It is said this infant settlement must have
perished, had it not been for the courage and ingenuity of Captain
Smith.

[Illustration]

10. Once they were all nearly dying with hunger, and the savages utterly
refused to sell them any food. In this extremity, Smith stole the Indian
idol, Okee, which was made of skins stuffed with moss, and would not
return it until the Indians sold them as much corn as they wanted.




LESSON LI.

_The same subject, continued._


1. The colony were once in imminent danger of losing their brave and
intelligent friend. While exploring the source of the Chickahominy
river, he imprudently left his companions, and, while alone, was seen
and pursued by a party of savages. He retreated fighting, killed three
Indians with his own hand, and probably would have regained his boat in
safety, had he not accidentally plunged into a miry hole, from which he
could not extricate himself.

2. By this accident, he was taken prisoner; and the Indians would have
tortured him, and put him to death, according to their cruel customs,
had not his ever-ready wit come to his aid.

3. He showed them a small ivory compass, which he had with him, and, by
signs, explained many wonderful things to them, till his enemies were
inspired with a most profound respect, and resolved not to kill the
extraordinary man without consulting their chief.

4. He was, accordingly, brought into the presence of the king, Powhatan,
who received him in a robe of raccoon skins, and seated on a kind of
throne, with two beautiful young daughters at his side. After a long
consultation, he was condemned to die.

5. Two large stones were brought, his head laid upon one of them, and
the war-clubs raised to strike the deadly blow. At this moment,
Pocahontas, the king's favorite daughter, sprang forward, threw herself
between him and the executioners, and by her entreaties saved his life.

6. Powhatan promised him that he should return to Jamestown, if the
English would give him a certain quantity of ammunition and trinkets.
Smith agreed to obtain them, provided a messenger would carry a leaf to
his companions. On this leaf he briefly stated what must be sent.

7. Powhatan had never heard of writing;--he laughed at the idea that a
leaf could speak, and regarded the whole as an imposition on the part of
the prisoner.

8. When, however, the messenger returned with the promised ransom, he
regarded Smith as nothing less than a wizard, and gladly allowed him to
depart. It seemed to be the fate of this singular man to excite a
