Indiana. The leaders of this great body would sometimes gradually vary
their course, till it formed a large bend of more than a mile in
diameter, those behind tracing the exact route of their predecessors.
This would continue sometimes long after both extremities were beyond
the reach of sight; so that the whole with its glittering undulations
marked a space on the face of the heavens resembling the windings of a
vast majestic river. When this bend became very great, the birds, as if
sensible of the unnecessarily circuitous route they were taking,
suddenly changed their direction, so that what was in column before
became an immense front, straightening all its indentures until it swept
the heavens in one vast and infinitely extended line. Other lesser
bodies also united with each other as they happened to approach, and
with such ease and elegance of evolution, forming new figures and
varying these as they united or separated, that I was never tired of
contemplating them. Sometimes a hawk would sweep on a particular part of
the column from a great height, when almost as quick as lightning that
part shot downwards out of the common track, but soon rising again,
continued advancing at the same height as before. This inflection was
continued by those behind, who, on arriving at this point, dived down
almost perpendicularly to a great depth, and, rising, followed the exact
path of those that went before.

"Happening to go ashore one charming afternoon to purchase some milk at
a house that stood near the river, and while talking with the people
within doors, I was suddenly struck with astonishment at a loud rushing
roar, succeeded by instant darkness, which for the first moment I took
for a tornado about to overwhelm the house, and every thing around, in
destruction. The people observing my surprise, coolly said, 'It is only
the pigeons,' and on running out, I beheld a flock thirty or forty yards
in width, sweeping along very low between the house and the mountain or
height that formed the second bank of the river. These continued
crossing for more than a quarter of an hour, and at length varied their
bearing, so as to pass over the mountain, behind which they disappeared
before the rear came up."

"That is amazing, Uncle Thomas; two thousand millions of live birds! I
can scarcely form an adequate idea of such a mass of living creatures."

"There is something almost overwhelming in the idea, Frank; and yet in
some parts of the world are to be found flocks of animals hardly less
surprisingly numerous, when we consider how much less they are fitted
for moving about, travelling at stated intervals from the mountains to
the sea coast, and returning again to their old habitations, after
having fulfilled the purposes for which this instinctive feeling was
implanted in them."

"Which animals do you mean, Uncle Thomas?"

"I allude to the land-crab, which is a native of the Bahamas, and also
of most of the other islands between the tropics. They live in clefts of
the rocks, or holes which they dig for themselves among the mountains,
and subsist on vegetables. About the months of April and May, they
descend to the sea coast in a body of millions at a time, for the
purpose of depositing their spawn. They march in a direct line towards
their destination, and seldom turn out of their way, even should they
encounter a wall or a house, but boldly attempt to scale it. If,
however, they arrive at a river, they wind along the course of the
stream, and thus reach the sea.

"In their procession they are as regular as an army under the command of
an experienced general, and are usually divided into three battalions.
The first body consists of the strongest males, which march forward to
clear the route and face the greatest dangers. The main body is composed
of females, which are formed into columns, sometimes extending fifty or
sixty yards in breadth and three miles in depth. Three or four days
after these follows the third division or rear guard, a straggling
undisciplined tribe, consisting both of males and females, but neither
so robust nor so vigorous as the former.

"Though easily drowned, a certain proportion of moisture seems necessary
to the existence of these animals, and the advanced guard is often
obliged to halt from the want of rain. The females, indeed, never leave
the mountains till the rainy season has fairly set in. They march
chiefly during the night, but if it happens to rain during the day,
they always profit by it. When the sun is hot they halt till evening.
They march very slowly, and are sometimes three months in gaining the
shore. When alarmed they run in a confused and disorderly manner,
holding up and clattering their nippers with a threatening attitude, and
if suffered to take hold of the hand they bite severely. If in their
journey any of them should be so maimed as to be unable to proceed, the
others fall upon it and devour it.

"Arrived at the coast, they prepare to cast their spawn. They go to the
edge of the water, and suffer the waves to wash twice or thrice over
their bodies, and then withdraw to seek a lodging upon the land. After a
short time the spawn becomes ready for being deposited, when they again
seek the sea-side, and leave the spawn to be brought to maturity by the
heat of the sun. Much of the spawn, which exactly resembles the roe of a
herring, is devoured by the fishes; that which escapes soon arrives at
maturity, and millions of little crabs are then to be seen slowly
travelling towards the mountains.

"The old ones in the mean time seek to return to their old haunts, but
so feeble are they that they seem scarcely able to crawl along. Some of
them, indeed, are obliged to remain in the level parts of the country
till they recover, making holes in the earth, which they block up with
leaves and dirt. In these they cast their old shells, after which they
soon recover, and become so fat as to be delicious food.

"At the season of their descent from the mountains, the natives of the
islands which they inhabit, eagerly wait for them and destroy them in
thousands. On their descent they are only taken for the roe or spawn,
the flesh being then poor and lean: on their return from the sea-side
they are in greatest repute, being then fat and high flavoured.

"The crab-catchers adopt various modes of securing them, but they are
obliged to be very cautious, for when the animals perceive themselves
attacked, they throw themselves on their back, and snap their claws
about, pinching whatever they lay hold of very severely. The
crab-catchers, however, soon learn to seize them by the hind legs, in
such a manner as that the nippers cannot reach them."

"You said, Uncle Thomas, that the fishes watched the descent of the
crabs, that they might feed on the spawn. Do you think that they are
endowed with reasoning powers, as well as the higher classes of animals,
Uncle Thomas?"

"No doubt of it, Frank. Old Isaac Walton, the most amusing author on
angling who ever wrote, tells many curious stories about fishes, of
their coming to be fed at the sound of a bell, and so forth.

"Many fishes exhibit the migratory instinct quite as distinctly as those
animals which I have just told you about. The salmon leaves the sea, and
seeks its way up the rivers, stemming their most rapid currents, and
scaling highest waterfalls with a pertinacity which can only be the
result of an instinct implanted in them by their Creator."

"And the herring, Uncle Thomas; does not it come every year from the
Polar seas to spawn on our shores? I read a very interesting account of
their progress southwards somewhere lately."

"I can tell you where, Frank; I will show it you, and when you have read
it aloud, I will point out one or two mistakes, which it is as well to
clear your mind of. It is in old Pennant's work; here it is; will you
read it to us, John?"

"With pleasure, Uncle Thomas.

"This mighty army begins to put itself in motion in the spring. They
begin to appear off the Shetland Islands in April and May. This is the
first check this army meets in its march southward. There it is divided
into two parts; one wing of those destined to visit the Scottish coast
takes to the east, the other to the western shores of Great Britain, and
fill every bay and creek with their numbers; others proceed towards
Yarmouth, the great and ancient mart of herrings; they then pass through
the British channel, and after that in a manner disappear. Those which
take to the west, after offering themselves to the Hebrides, where the
great stationary fishery is, proceed towards the north of Ireland, where
they meet with a second interruption and are obliged to make a second
division; the one takes to the western side and is scarcely perceived,
being soon lost in the immensity of the Atlantic, but the other, which
passes into the Irish sea, rejoins, and feeds the inhabitants of most of
the coasts that border on it. The brigades, as we call them, which are
separated from the greater columns, are often capricious in their
motions, and do not show an invariable attachment to their haunts."

"Thank you, John. Now all this sounds very fine, and seems very
systematic. It has but one objection--it is quite untrue. It is in the
first place more than doubtful if the herring frequents the Polar seas
at all; and in the second place, the most distinguished naturalists are
of opinion that it never leaves the neighbourhood of our own shores, but
merely retires to the deep water after it has spawned, and there remains
till the return of another season calls it again to the shores to
undergo a similar operation. So you see, Frank, it does not follow that
an interesting account of an animal's habits is necessarily a true
one."




CHAPTER VIII.

     Uncle Thomas tells about the Baboons, and their Plundering
     Excursions to the Gardens at the Cape of Good Hope, also about Le
     Vaillant's Baboon, Kees, and his Peculiarities; the American
     Monkeys; and relates an amusing Story about a young Monkey deprived
     of its Mother, putting itself under the Fostering Care of a
     Wig-Block.

"Oh, Uncle Thomas, I saw such a strange looking creature to-day. It was
so ugly. It seemed to be a very large monkey, it was as big as a boy."

"I heard of it, Boys, though I did not see it. It was a baboon, and one
of the largest of the species.--It was what is called the dog-faced
baboon."

"Where do such animals come from, Uncle Thomas."

"From Africa, John, and I believe they are not to be found elsewhere.
They are very fierce and mischievous creatures, and are said sometimes
even to attack man, but this I believe to be an exaggeration. Immense
troops of them inhabit the mountains in the neighbourhood of the Cape of
Good Hope, whence they descend in bands to plunder the gardens and
orchards. In these excursions they move on a concerted plan, placing
sentinels on commanding spots to give notice of the approach of an
enemy. On the appearance of danger, the sentinel utters a loud yell,
upon which the whole troop retreats with the utmost precipitation."

"Do they carry the spoil with them when they are thus disturbed, Uncle
Thomas?"

"When disturbed they are said to break in pieces the fruit which they
have gathered, and cram it into their cheek pouches--receptacles with
which nature has furnished them for keeping articles of food till they
are wanted.

"Le Vaillant, a traveller in Africa, had a dog-faced baboon which
accompanied him on his journey, and he found its instinct of great
service to him in various ways. As a sentinel he was better than any of
the dogs. So quick was his sense of danger, that he often gave notice of
the approach of beasts of prey, when every thing else seemed sunk in
security. He was also very useful in guarding the people of the
expedition from danger, from using unwholesome or poisonous fruits. The
animal's name was Kees. Here is the very interesting account which his
master gives of him.

"Whenever we found fruits or roots, with which my Hottentots were
unacquainted, we did not touch them till Kees had tasted them. If he
threw them away, we concluded that they were either of a disagreeable
flavour, or of a pernicious quality, and left them untasted. The ape
possesses a peculiar property, wherein he differs greatly from other
animals, and resembles man,--namely, that he is by nature equally
gluttonous and inquisitive. Without necessity, and without appetite, he
tastes every thing that falls in his way, or that is given to him. But
Kees had a still more valuable quality,--he was an excellent sentinel;
for, whether by day or night, he immediately sprang up on the slightest
appearance of danger. By his cry, and the symptoms of fear which he
exhibited, we were always apprized of the approach of an enemy, even
though the dogs perceived nothing of it. The latter at length learned to
rely upon him with such confidence, that they slept on in perfect
tranquillity. I often took Kees with me when I went a hunting; and when
he saw me preparing for sport, he exhibited the most lively
demonstrations of joy. On the way he would climb into the trees, to look
for gum, of which he was very fond. Sometimes he discovered to me honey,
deposited in the clefts of rocks, or hollow trees. But if he happened to
have met with neither honey nor gum, and his appetite had become sharp
by his running about, I always witnessed a very ludicrous scene. In
those cases, he looked for roots, which he ate with great greediness,
especially a particular kind, which, to his cost, I also found to be
very well tasted and refreshing, and therefore insisted upon sharing
with him. But Kees was no fool. As soon as he found such a root, and I
was not near enough to seize upon my share of it, he devoured it in the
greatest haste, keeping his eyes all the while riveted on me. He
accurately measured the distance I had to pass before I could get to
him; and I was sure of coming too late. Sometimes, however, when he had
made a mistake in his calculation, and I came upon him sooner than he
expected, he endeavoured to hide the root, in which case I compelled
him, by a box on the ear, to give me up my share. But this treatment
caused no malice between us; we remained as good friends as ever. In
order to draw these roots out of the ground, he employed a very
ingenious method, which afforded me much amusement. He laid hold of the
herbage with his teeth, stemmed his fore feet against the ground, and
drew back his head, which gradually pulled out the root. But if this
expedient, for which he employed his whole strength, did not succeed, he
laid hold of the leaves as before, as close to the ground as possible,
and then threw himself heels over head, which gave such a concussion to
the root, that it never failed to come out.

"When Kees happened to tire on the road, he mounted upon the back of one
of my dogs, who was so obliging as to carry him whole hours. One of
them, which was larger and stronger than the rest, hit upon a very
ingenious artifice, to avoid being pressed into this piece of service.
As soon as Kees leaped upon his back he stood still, and let the train
pass, without moving from the spot. Kees still persisted in his
intention, till we were almost out of his sight, when he found himself
at length compelled to dismount, upon which both the baboon and dog
exerted all their speed to overtake us. The latter, however, gave him
the start, and kept a good look-out after him, that he might not serve
him in the same manner again. In fact, Kees enjoyed a certain authority
with all my dogs, for which he perhaps was indebted to the superiority
of his instinct. He could not endure a competitor; if any of the dogs
came too near him when he was eating, he gave them a box on the ear,
which compelled him immediately to retire to a respectful distance.

"Serpents excepted, there were no animals of whom Kees stood in such
great dread as of his own species,--perhaps owing to a consciousness,
that he had lost a portion of his natural capacities. Sometimes he heard
the cry of the other apes among the mountains, and, terrified as he was,
he yet answered them. But if they approached nearer, and he saw any of
them, he fled, with a hideous cry, crept between our legs, and trembled
over his whole body. It was very difficult to compose him, and it
required some time before he recovered from his fright.

"Like all other domestic animals, Kees was addicted to stealing. He
understood admirably well how to loose the strings of a basket, in order
to take victuals out of it, especially milk, of which he was very fond.
My people chastised him for these thefts; but that did not make him
amend his conduct. I myself sometimes whipped him; but then he ran away,
and did not return again to the tent, until it grew dark. Once as I was
about to dine, and had put the beans which I had boiled for myself upon
a plate, I heard the voice of a bird, with which I was not acquainted. I
left my dinner standing, seized my gun, and run out of my tent. After
the space of about a quarter of an hour, I returned, with the bird in my
hand; but to my astonishment, found not a single bean upon the plate.
Kees had stolen them all, and taken himself out of the way. When he had
committed any trespass of this kind, he used always, about the time when
I drank tea, to return quietly, and seat himself in his usual place,
with every appearance of innocence, as if nothing had happened; but this
evening he did not let himself be seen; and on the following day, also,
he was not seen by any of us; and in consequence, I began to grow
seriously uneasy about him, and apprehensive that he might be lost for
ever, but on the third day, one of my people, who had been to fetch
water, informed me that he had seen Kees in the neighbourhood; but that
as soon as the animal espied him, he had concealed himself again. I
immediately went out and beat the whole neighbourhood with my dogs. All
at once, I heard a cry, like that which Kees used to make when I
returned from my shooting, and had not taken him with me. I looked about
and at length espied him, endeavouring to hide himself behind the large
branches of a tree. I now called to him in a friendly tone of voice, and
made motions to him to come down to me. But he would not trust me, and I
was obliged to climb up the tree to fetch him. He did not attempt to
fly, and we returned together to my quarters; here he expected to
receive his punishment; but I did nothing, as it would have been of no
use.

"When exhausted with the heat of the sun, and the fatigues of the day,
with my throat and mouth covered with dust and perspiration, I was ready
to sink gasping to the ground, in tracts destitute of shade, and longed
even for the dirtiest ditch-water; but after seeking long in vain, lost
all hopes of finding any in the parched soil. In such distressing
moments, my faithful Kees never moved from my side. We sometimes got out
of our carriage, and then his sure instinct led him to a plant.
Frequently the stalk was fallen off, and then all his endeavours to pull
it out were in vain. In such cases, he began to scratch in the earth
with his paws; but as that would also have proved ineffectual, I came to
his assistance with my dagger, or my knife, and we honestly divided the
refreshing root with each other.

"An officer, wishing one day to put the fidelity of my baboon, Kees, to
the test, pretended to strike me. At this Kees flew in a violent rage,
and, from that time, he could never endure the sight of the officer. If
he only saw him at a distance, he began to cry and make all kinds of
grimaces, which evidently showed that he wished to revenge the insult
that had been done to me; he ground his teeth, and endeavoured, with
all his might, to fly at his face, but that was out of his power, as he
was chained down. The offender several times endeavoured, in vain, to
conciliate him, by offering him dainties, but he remained long
implacable.

[Illustration: DOG AND BABOON--Page 185.]

"When any eatables had been pilfered at my quarters, the fault was
always laid first upon Kees; and rarely was the accusation unfounded.
For a time the eggs which a hen laid me were constantly stolen away, and
I wished to ascertain whether I had to attribute this loss also to him.
For this purpose, I went one morning to watch him, and waited till the
hen announced by her cackling that she had laid an egg. Kees was sitting
upon my vehicle; but the moment he heard the hen's voice he leapt down,
and was running to fetch the egg. When he saw me he suddenly stopped,
and affected a careless posture, swaying himself backwards upon his hind
legs, and assuming a very innocent look; in short, he employed all his
art to deceive me with respect to his design. His hypocritical
manoeuvres only confirmed my suspicions, and, in order in my turn to
deceive him, I pretended not to attend to him, and turned my back to the
bush where the hen was cackling, upon which he immediately sprang to the
place. I ran after him, and came up to him at the moment when he had
broken the egg, and was swallowing it. Having caught the thief in the
fact, I gave him a good beating upon the spot; but this severe
chastisement did not prevent his soon stealing fresh-laid eggs again. As
I was convinced that I should never be able to break Kees of his natural
vices, and that, unless I chained him up every morning, I should never
get an egg, I endeavoured to accomplish my purpose in another manner: I
trained one of my dogs, as soon as the hen cackled, to run to the nest,
and bring me the egg without breaking it. In a few days the dog had
learned his lesson; but Kees, as soon as he heard the hen cackle, ran
with him to the nest. A contest now took place between them, who should
have the egg; often the dog was foiled, although he was the stronger of
the two. If he gained the victory, he ran joyfully to me with the egg,
and put it into my hand. Kees, nevertheless, followed him, and did not
cease to grumble and make threatening grimaces at him, till he saw me
take the egg,--as if he was comforted for the loss of his booty by his
adversary's not retaining it for himself. If Kees had got hold of the
egg, he endeavoured to run with it to a tree, where, having devoured it,
he threw down the shells upon his adversary, as if to make game of him.
In that case, the dog returned, looking ashamed, from which I could
conjecture the unlucky adventure he had met with.

"Kees was always the first awake in the morning, and when it was the
proper time he awoke the dogs, who were accustomed to his voice, and, in
general, obeyed without hesitation the slightest motions by which he
communicated his orders to them, immediately taking their posts about
the tent and carriage, as he directed them."

