possibly be disputed.

"Run, Orion!" she said; "be quick, and fetch as many dock leaves as
possible. I will thread a needle so as to sew up the poor dead 'uns in
their coffins. We must get through the pwivate funerals as quick as
possible this morning, and then we'll be weady for poor Rub-a-Dub."

"Rub-a-Dub is to be buried exactly at eleven o'clock," said Iris.

"We'll all wear mourning, course?" asked Diana.

"Yes; black bows."

"And are the dogs and the other animals to wear mourning?"

"Black bows," repeated Iris.

"That is most lovely and 'citing," said Diana.

Orion left the dead-house, and presently returned with a great pile of
dock leaves. Then the children sat down on the floor and began to sew
coffins for the different dead 'uns. They were accustomed to the work
and did it expeditiously and well. When all the poor dead 'uns were
supplied with coffins they were carried in a tray across the garden
to the far-famed cemetery. Here they were laid in that part of the
ground apportioned to private funerals. Apollo made small holes with
his spade, and each dead 'un in his small coffin was returned to
mother earth. The ground was immediately covered over, and Apollo
trampled on it with his feet. He did this on the present occasion with
right good will. "I'll be rather glad when the funerals are over," he
said, looking at Iris as he spoke, "for I want to get on with my ship.
I have got hold of some canvas the gardener brought me from town, and
I really believe I may be able to make a funnel and a place for
boiling water. You would like to see my ship when it is afloat; would
you not, Iris?"

"Yes; very much indeed," answered Iris.

"I call ships stupid," said Diana. "I don't see no use in 'em. Now, do
let us hurry back. Poor Rub-a-Dub will be so lonely."

"It's you who is silly now," said Orion. "You know Rub-a-Dub can't
feel; don't you, Di?"

"I know nothing 'bout it," said Diana. "I want to hurry back to get
his beautiful public funeral weady. Now, look here, 'Rion; will you go
into the house to steal the cotton wool, or shall I?"

"What is that I hear?" said a voice which seemed to come from right
over the children's heads.

They all looked up in alarm, to see Aunt Jane Dolman and their father
standing close by. Mr. Delaney wore an amused, and Aunt Jane a scared
expression.

"What were you saying, little girl?" she continued, taking Diana by
her arm and giving her a slight shake; "that you wished to _steal_
something?"

"Yes; some cotton wool," said Diana; "it's most 'portant; it's for a
public funeral."

Mrs. Dolman turned her round black eyes on her brother. Horror was
expressed in each movement of her face.

"My dear Jane," he said, _sotto voce_, "there are several things which
these children do which will astonish you very much. Don't you think
you had better give up the scheme?"

"Not I, David," she replied. "The more I see of the poor neglected
mites the more I long to rescue them from evident destruction."

He shook his head and looked with some pity at Iris.

"Shall Orion go to steal the cotton wool?" repeated Diana, who looked
as if it was impossible for anyone in this world to terrify her in the
very least.

"If it must be stolen, and if you ask me," said Mr. Delaney, "perhaps
Orion may as well be the thief as anyone else. In the old times of the
heathen deities I believe they did now and then stoop to that small
crime."

"David, it is appalling to hear you speak," said Mrs. Dolman. "Orion,
I hate to pronounce your name, but listen to me, little boy. I forbid
you to go if you are bent on theft."

"But I must go," said Orion. "Poor Rub-a-Dub must be buried, and I
must have a box for his coffin and cotton wool to lay him in."

"See here, Orion," said the father; "where do you get the cotton
wool?"

"We gen'ly get it from Fortune's box in the night-nursery," replied
Orion.

"And you steal it?"

"Oh, yes; she would make _such_ a fuss if we asked her for some. We
always steal it for public funerals."

"Well, on this occasion, and to spare your aunt's feelings, tell
Fortune that I desire her to give you some.

"Now, Jane," continued Mr. Delaney, "as you are here, and as I am
here, we may both of us as well witness this ceremony. The children
are fond of doing all honor to their pets, even after the supreme
moment of dissolution. Shall we witness this public funeral?"

Mrs. Dolman looked wonderfully inclined to say "No," but as her object
now was to humor her brother as far as possible, she agreed very
unwillingly to wait.

Accordingly he and she began to pace up and down the lovely garden,
and soon, in the interest which the sight of the unforgotten
playground of her youth excited within her, her brow cleared, and she
became pleasant and even talkative. The two were in the midst of a
very interesting conversation, and were pacing up and down not far
from the summer-house, when Orion's clear voice was heard. "The public
funeral is going to begin," he shouted, "so you had best come along if
you want to see it. If you don't, Diana and me, and Apollo and
Iris--why, we don't care."

"Oh, we'll come, you rude little body," said his father, laughing and
chuckling as he spoke. "You mark my words, Jane," he continued, "you
will have a handful with those children."

"Oh, I'll manage them," said Mrs. Dolman. "I have not lived my
thirty-five years for nothing; they certainly need managing, poor
little spoilt creatures."

They both hurried to the cemetery, where Apollo was standing, having
dug a grave nearly a foot deep, and large enough to hold a square
cardboard box. He stood leaning on his spade now, his hat pushed off,
his handsome little face slightly flushed with the exercise, his eyes
full of a sort of gloomy defiance. But now the funeral procession was
coming on apace. Orion's mouth was much puffed out because he was
blowing vigorously on his Jew's harp, Diana followed him beating a
little drum, and Iris, with long black ribbons fastened to her flowing
chestnut locks, was walking behind, carrying the tiny coffin. Iris, as
she walked, rang an old dinner bell in a very impressive manner, and
also sang a little dirge to the accompaniment of the bell and the two
other children's music. These were the words Iris sang:

    "Ding-a-dong, Rub-a-Dub's dead;
        Good-by, Rub-a-Dub.
    Sleep well in your little bed;
        Good-by, Rub-a-Dub.

    "We'll put a stone at your head and your feet;
        Good-by, Rub-a-Dub.
    And you shall sleep very sound and sweet;
        Good-by, Rub-a-Dub.
    And you'll never know fear any more;
        Little dear;
    Good-by, Rub-a-Dub."

Iris was a poet on occasions, and she had made up these impressive
lines in great haste while the other children were arranging minor
details of the funeral.

As the mourning party approached the open grave, Apollo came forward
and dropped on his knees. The coffin was supplied with strings of
white satin ribbon, and was lowered with great solemnity into the
grave. Then the four mourners stood over it and each of them sang the
last words of Iris' poem:

    "And you'll never know fear any more,
        Little dear;
    Good-by, Rub-a-Dub."

The moment this was over flowers were strewn upon the box, and Apollo
with great vigor began to shovel in the earth.

"Make a nice high mound," said Diana; "let it look as like a weal
gwave as possible." Then she turned eagerly to her sister. "When are
we to see about making the tombstone for the head and the feet?" she
asked.

"We'll talk it over this evening," answered Iris.

It may here be noted that none of the four mourners took the slightest
notice of Mr. Delaney or of Mrs. Dolman. To them it was as if these
two grown-up spectators did not exist--they were all lost in their own
intensely important world.

"Well," said Mrs. Dolman, as she turned away with her brother, "of all
the heathenish and wicked nonsense that I was ever permitted to
witness, this beats everything. It is a right good thing--yes, I will
say it frankly, David--that you are going abroad, and that your
benighted children are handed over to me. When you come back in a year
or two--I assure you, my dear brother, I do not wish to hurry you--but
when you come back in a few years you will see, please Providence,
very different children waiting to welcome you."

"Well, Jane," said David Delaney, "I have arranged to give the
children to you, and I hope to Heaven I am doing right; but do not
spoil them whatever you do, for to me and to their sainted mother
they were ever the sweetest little quartette that breathed the breath
of life." Mr. Delaney's eyes filled with sudden tears as he said these
words. "Good-by, Rub-a-Dub," he whispered as he left the garden. "Yes,
there are many good-bys in the air just now."




CHAPTER VII.

BUT ANN COULD NOT HELP LETTING OUT NOW AND THEN.


The Rectory at Super-Ashton was a large, sunny, cheerful house. It was
filled with every modern convenience, and possessed plenty of rooms
papered with light, bright-looking papers, and painted also in
cheerful colors. The windows were large and let in every scrap of
sunshine; the passages and hall and stairs were broad and roomy; the
nurseries and the children's rooms were models of comfort; the
servants were all well behaved and thoroughly accustomed to their
duties; the meals were punctual to a moment; in fact, nothing was left
to chance at Super-Ashton Rectory.

Mrs. Dolman was the life and soul of this extremely orderly English
home. She was one of the most active little women in the world. She
invariably got up, summer and winter, soon after six o'clock, and
might be seen bustling about the house, and bustling about the garden,
and bustling about the parish from that moment until she retired to
rest again, somewhere between ten and eleven at night. She was never
exactly cross, but she was very determined. She had strict ideas, and
made everyone in the parish not only respect her and look up to her,
but live up to her rule of life. She was, as a matter of fact, thought
a great deal more of by the parishioners than her husband, the
Reverend William Dolman, and the real Rector of Super-Ashton.

Mr. Dolman was a very large man, tall in stature and broad. He was
also fat and loosely built. He had a kindly face and a good-humored
way of talking. He preached very fair sermons on Sundays, and attended
to his duties, but without any of the enthusiasm which his wife
displayed.

When Mrs. Dolman wrote to her husband to say that she was returning
home with the four little Delaneys, it caused considerable excitement
at the breakfast table. Five little hearts beat considerably faster
than usual; but so great were the order and regularity of the
household that the five little faces to which the hearts belonged
remained apparently impassive.

Miss Ramsay, the governess, was presiding at the head of the table.
The Dolman girls were neatly dressed in print frocks with white
pinafores; the boys wore holland blouses and knickerbockers. The boys
happened to be the two youngest of the family, and none of the
children had yet gone to school. The name and ages of the five were as
follows: First came Lucy, aged twelve; then Mary, aged ten; then Ann,
aged nine; then Philip and Conrad, aged respectively seven and a half
and six. The faces of the whole five bore a curious resemblance to
both father and mother, the eldest girl having the round, black eyes
of her mother, and the large, somewhat irregular features of the
father. Mary resembled Lucy in being fat and largely built, but her
eyes were blue instead of black; while little Ann had a small face,
with gray eyes and rather sensitive lips. The complexions of the three
were fair, and their good looks were rather above the average. They
were proper, neat-looking little girls, and, notwithstanding their
inward excitement, they ate their breakfast tidily, and took good care
not to express any emotion before Miss Ramsay or their good-natured
father.

"Yes," said Mr. Dolman, looking at them, and pushing his spectacles up
on his forehead, "yes, that is the news. Your mother returns to-night,
and the four Delaneys with her. Let me see what else she says." He
replaced his spectacles on his nose and looked over his wife's letter
again. "These are the very words," he said; "Observe, Miss Ramsay,
that I read from the letter. 'I return by the train which reaches
Super-Ashton at six o'clock, and will bring the four Delaneys with
me.' Four, you see, Lucy; that is the number. But mamma does not
mention the sex of the children. How many boys or how many girls? I
really am quite out of date with regard to your cousins, my love."

"But I know all about them, papa," burst from Ann's eager lips.

"You forget your French, Ann," said Miss Ramsay, laying her hand on
the little girl's arm. "You will be punished if you speak English
again at meals."

Ann colored and dropped her eyes. She began to eat her bread and
butter hastily; she longed beyond words to tell the others the
knowledge she had secretly acquired about her cousins the Delaneys.

"'Please send the wagonette to the station,'" continued Mr. Dolman,
reading his wife's letter, and holding it close to his eyes,
"'and--yes, the cart for the luggage, as the children'--um, um, um,
that part is private, my dears."

Mr. Dolman dropped his spectacles and nodded at the eager little group
round the table.

"Well," he continued, "I am glad mamma is coming home. I have really
been quite bothered by the parishioners since she went away. There is
always a vast deal of work left undone when mamma is absent, eh,
children? eh, Miss Ramsay?"

"I agree with you, Mr. Dolman," said Miss Ramsay. "Mrs. Dolman does
not spare herself; she will have her reward some day."

"God grant it!" said Mr. Dolman, with a heavy sigh. "She certainly
will need rest whenever she does leave this world, for I never did
come across such an active woman."

He left the room, hitching up his huge shoulders as he did so, and
slammed the door noisily behind him.

"Papa would not do that if mamma were here," whispered Philip to Ann.

Ann said "Hush!" in a frightened tone, and then Miss Ramsay folded her
hands as an intimation to the children that the meal was at an end,
and that one of them was to say grace.

Immediately after breakfast they went upstairs to the schoolroom, and
lessons began, just as if no four little Delaneys were to arrive to
turn everything topsy-turvy that evening.

Lessons proceeded without any interruption until twelve o'clock. Then
