"I want an answer!" cried Captain Putnam, sternly. "Who started that
fire?"

He looked around from one cadet to another. But nobody spoke.




CHAPTER XI

A MYSTERIOUS HAPPENING


It was a rule of honor among the cadets of Putnam Hall that no student
should tell on another. To do that would have been to put one's self
down as a sneak, and none of our friends wanted such a reputation.

"I ask again, who started that fire?" went on Captain Putnam, with
increased sternness.

"I rather think I know the guilty parties," said George Strong, who had
walked away on an errand and had just returned, "Ritter and Coulter,
what have you to say?"

The two culprits started, and Coulter turned pale.

"Why, I--er----" stammered Gus. "I--that is----" He did not know how to
proceed. He did not dare deny his guilt, not knowing but what the
assistant teacher might have seen him and his crony light the
tar-barrels.

"Well, if you--er--want to know the truth, Captain Putnam,
we--er--started the fire," stammered Reff Ritter. "But it was an
accident."

"An accident?"

"Yes, sir. We were--er--going to roll the barrels down to the
lake--going to hide 'em so that Ditmore and his friends couldn't find
'em, you know. Well, we didn't want to get the tar on our hands, so
we--er--started a little fire to see by--it was dark under the trees.
All of a sudden the barrels blazed up. We--er--didn't expect such a big
blaze."

"That's it," cried Coulter, eagerly. "We just made the fire at first to
see by."

"Then you didn't really want to fire the barrels under the trees?"

"No, sir," came from both of the guilty ones.

"It was a rash thing to do, to start such a blaze. In this wind you
might have burnt down the whole woods and endangered the school
buildings."

"I don't believe Ritter and Coulter," whispered Andy to Pepper.

"Neither do I," was the reply.

"Ditmore, you said the barrels belonged to you?" went on the owner of
the school.

"Yes, sir. I bought them from the tar-roofer in Cedarville and he
delivered them. We were going to have a great bonfire--and we did!" And
The Imp said this so dryly that even Captain Putnam had to smile.

"Well, I presume I shall have to drop the matter," said the captain,
after a few more questions. "But let me warn you all about fires in
those woods in the future. If a fire gained headway here we might burn
everything down to the ground."

So, from an official standpoint, the matter was dropped. Ritter beckoned
to Coulter, and they hurried away, followed by Nick Paxton and one or
two others.

"Well, that ends the tar-barrel celebration," said Pepper, rather
mournfully. "I really ought to make Ritter and Coulter pay for the
barrels."

"You won't get any money out of Ritter," remarked Bart Conners.

"How do you know, Bart?"

"Because he hasn't any. He asked for credit at the store yesterday--to
buy some cigarettes--and the shopkeeper refused, saying Ritter owed him
eighty cents already."

"Humph!" mused Pepper, and said no more.

"Come on--forget it!" cried Jack. "We'll celebrate anyway."

"We've got other barrels," came from Dale.

The cadets rushed out and to the lake-shore, and soon several bonfires
were blazing merrily. Around these the students congregated, and sang
songs and "cut up" generally. Dale had to make a speech, and the boys
caught him up on their shoulders and carried him around the campus.

"Isn't it grand!" murmured Bert Field. "I am mighty glad I came to
Putnam Hall."

"So am I," answered Fred Century. "It's much different from what it was
at Pornell Academy."

"It was a great victory, Fred, wasn't it?"

"It certainly was, Bert. I am only sorry for one thing."

"What is that?"

"That it wasn't Pornell we beat instead of that other club."

"Oh, well, we'll get a chance at Pornell some day," answered Bert Field.

The celebration along the lake-shore lasted until half-past eleven. Then
the bell was rung, and laughing and singing, the cadets trooped off to
their various dormitories.

"All quiet by midnight!" came the order.

"Fifteen minutes yet," cried Andy, consulting his watch. "Whoop-la! Here
goes!" And in the joyousness of high spirits he turned a handspring over
one of the beds. Then he turned another spring over a table and stood on
his head on one of the chairs.

"Hurrah for Snow's Imperial Consolidated Circus!" cried Pepper. "The
one and only aggregation of stupendous wonders on the face of the globe!
The marvelous twisting and death-defying acrobat! Walk up and see the
blood-curdling exhibition! It will cost you but the small sum of a dime,
ten cents; children double price, and no grandfathers unaccompanied by
their parents admitted. Line will form on the left and everybody will
please have his cash ready. Transfers not accepted on this line."

"Good for Pepper!" came from Jack. "When he fails as a student he can
turn dime-museum shouter."

"On the right you will see our most mysterious wonder, Major Jacobus
Ruddonowsky, the royal Russian sword swallower," went on The Imp,
pointing to his chum. "He swallows two swords for breakfast, three for
lunch and six to eight for dinner, with daggers for dessert. He is
wonderfully strong, and can carry on his arms an amount of gold lace
that would break a camel's back. As soon as the tent is full he will
sing for you that famous ditty, entitled, 'How I Love to Line You Up
When I'm Major of the Gang.'"

"Wow! that is where you caught it, Jack!" cried Dale, with a grin.

"And here we have a third wonder," went on Pepper, pointing to the
football captain. "Commodore Daleo, the leather-ball juggler. The most
renowned juggler of the spheroid in the world! You think it is here, but
it is not, for lo! he has juggled it over the line and kicked it as high
as an airship. He will show you----"

"Silence in here!" came a voice from the doorway, and Josiah Crabtree
appeared. "I will have silence!"

"Oh, dear!" murmured Pepper. "Anybody got any silence to spare? Mr.
Crabtree wants some."

"You must all be in bed by midnight, and the light must be out," went on
the teacher. "This unseemly revel must cease!" And then he walked on, to
stop the noise coming from the other dormitories.

"Say, Pepper, how do you like that?" murmured Fred.

"I knew there would be frost," sighed The Imp. "Every time old Crabtree
appears we get a cold wave."

"Be thankful he didn't mark you down for extra lessons," said Andy.

"If he did that I'd rebel," returned Pepper.

After that the talk was carried on in whispers, and each cadet lost no
time in disrobing. A few minutes after midnight all were in bed, and one
after another lost himself in the land of dreams.

The day had been a particularly strenuous one for Jack and the young
major slept soundly until the rising-bell rang loudly. Then he rubbed
his eyes sleepily and stretched himself.

"Wish I didn't have to get up just yet," he murmured. "I could sleep
another hour without half trying."

"Same here," responded Pepper.

"I never feel awake until after I've had a wash," came from Andy, who
had just leaped up.

Soon all of the cadets in the dormitory were dressing, and one by one
they washed up and went below. Andy and Jack were the last to leave.

"What's the matter?" asked the acrobatic youth, as he saw the young
major searching around for something.

"I'm looking for my watch and chain, Andy."

"Where did you put it?"

"Where I always do--on the stand at the head of my bed."

"Maybe it fell on the floor."

"If it did, it isn't there now." Jack got down on his knees to look
around, and then turned over the bedclothes and some other things.

"Maybe Pepper played a joke on you, Jack."

"That may be so. I'll go down and ask him about it."

The young major looked through his clothing and all over the dormitory,
and then hurried below. As it was Sunday morning, there was no drill,
and the cadets were gathering in the mess-hall for breakfast.

"Pepper, did you see my watch?" asked Jack, coming up to his chum.

"Your watch? No," was the ready reply.

"You didn't?" cried the young major, and now he was more concerned than
ever.

"Saw it last night, when you put it on the stand as usual."

"You didn't hide it? Come, now, tell the truth."

"Honor bright; the last I saw of it was when you placed it on the stand
when you went to bed."

"It's gone; and the chain with it."

"You don't mean it, Jack! Did you look all around?"

"Everywhere."

"Did you ask the other fellows about it?"

"No; but I will, right away."

The young major walked to one roommate after another and asked about his
watch and chain. All denied knowing anything about the timepiece.
Several had seen him place the watch on the stand at the head of the
bed, but that was all.

"Well, it's a mystery what has become of it, that's sure," was Jack's
comment. "It certainly couldn't walk off by itself."

"Well, a good watch knows how to run," remarked Pepper, dryly, for he
couldn't help having his joke. "But, seriously, Jack, do you think
somebody stole the watch and chain?"

"I don't know what to think."

"I don't imagine anybody in our dormitory would do such a thing."

"Neither do I. But the watch and chain are gone. The question is,
Where?"

"Hadn't you better report the matter to Captain Putnam?"

"I will, after I have taken another look around," answered the young
major, and left the mess-room just as the bell rang for breakfast.

"Why did Major Ruddy leave?" asked Josiah Crabtree, harshly, as he saw
that the young officer was missing.

"He had something of importance to attend to," answered Pepper.

"Humph! It is his duty to be at the table on time, if he wants his
breakfast," muttered the dictatorial teacher.

Jack did not come back for the best part of half an hour. By that time
the breakfast was nearly over.

"Major Ruddy, what does this mean?" demanded Josiah Crabtree.

"A matter of importance, Mr. Crabtree," answered the young officer.

"I cannot permit cadets to come in late to breakfast."

"This couldn't be helped, sir. I will explain to you and to Captain
Putnam directly after I have finished."

"Very well. If it is of real importance I will let it pass. But
otherwise I shall mark you for being tardy," returned Josiah Crabtree,
harshly.

Jack merely bowed and then he sat down and ate his breakfast. While he
was doing so, Pepper leaned over to him.

"Find the watch?" he whispered.

"No--not the least trace of it," answered Jack.

The young major did not feel much like eating. The watch was a gold one
and the chain was also of gold, and both were valuable. They had been a
birthday gift from his parents.

"Say, Jack, this is as bad as my loss," came from Andy, in a low tone.
"What are you going to do about it?"

"I don't know. I want to talk the matter over with Captain Putnam
first," answered the young officer.




CHAPTER XII

AN INVITATION ACCEPTED


Captain Putnam looked very grave when Jack reported the loss of the gold
watch and chain.

"You are certain you left them on the stand when you went to sleep?" he
questioned.

"Yes, sir. Pepper Ditmore saw me put them there, and Dale Blackmore saw
it, too."

"And you have looked everywhere for them?"

"Yes, sir."

"I will go up and look around with you."

"All right, sir. But it will do no good," answered the young major.

"You say that all your roommates deny taking the watch and chain."

"Yes, sir. They say they didn't see the watch at all after we went to
bed."

"Major Ruddy, do you suspect anybody of this crime?" demanded the owner
of the school, looking Jack full in the face.

"No, sir," was the prompt answer. "It's a complete mystery to me. All I
know about it is, that I left the watch and chain on the stand at the
head of my bed when I went to sleep and this morning they were gone."

"Did any of the other cadets enter your dormitory during the night?"

"Not that I know of."

"They may have been skylarking and may have carried the watch and chain
off by--accident, let us say," finished the captain, significantly.

"If anybody came in, nobody who sleeps in our room seems to be aware of
it."

Captain Putnam and Jack passed up to the dormitory, followed by Josiah
Crabtree. They were soon joined by Pepper and the other occupants of the
apartment. Another search was made, but the gold watch and chain were
not found, nor were any clues concerning the timepiece unearthed.

"What were the watch and chain worth?" asked Fred.

"I don't know; maybe fifty or sixty dollars," answered Jack.

"Then if they were stolen, the thief made quite a haul."

"Do you think they were stolen, Century?" demanded the owner of the
school.

"Doesn't it look like it, sir?"

"But if they were stolen, who is guilty?" asked Josiah Crabtree, glaring
around from one cadet to another.

For the moment nobody spoke.

"I don't suspect any of my roommates," said Jack, quickly. "I think it
was done by some outsider."

"Some other cadet?" asked Crabtree.

"Possibly; or else by some of the help."

"Gracious, Ruddy, I--er--I hope you don't suspect me!" stammered the
teacher.

"No, sir; I meant some of the servants."

"Ah, I see!" Josiah Crabtree looked relieved. "You may be right. Perhaps
some of the new colored help took the watch," he went on, to Captain
Putnam.

"I will start an investigation," returned the owner of the school.

Captain Putnam was as good as his word, and over an hour was spent in
questioning the help, and the other cadets, but without results. The
investigation was continued Monday morning. But not the first trace of
the missing watch and chain was discovered anywhere.

"It assuredly is a mystery," said Captain Putnam at last. "What do you
make of it, Mr. Strong?" he asked of his second assistant.

"It is a very unfortunate occurrence," answered George Strong. "If
there is a thief in Putnam Hall we ought to locate him. As long as he
remains undetected none of us will be safe."

"How are you going to catch him?"

"I don't know. We might try to trace up the watch and chain through the
authorities."

"I hate to let the authorities know anything has been stolen in the
school. It gives us a bad name in public." The two men were alone, so
they could speak freely.

"It will give the school a worse name if we don't get the watch and
chain back. I am afraid Major Ruddy can hold you for the worth of them."

"He can, and I expect to pay for them if we don't get them back. I will
think it over, and perhaps I'll report the loss."

Later on, the authorities were notified that a watch and chain were
missing. No details were given, but the police were asked to look out
for the watch and chain in pawnbroking establishments and elsewhere.

"I shall also offer a reward," said the owner of the school, and the
next day a bulletin was posted, offering a reward of ten dollars for
information leading to the recovery of the timepiece and conviction of
the thief.

"It's tough to go without your watch, Jack," said Pepper.

"Captain Putnam is going to loan me one for the present," was the young
major's reply. "It's only a silver affair, but he says it keeps good
time, and that's the main thing."

A day or two after the reward was offered, Jack, Pepper and Andy
