
Ingred's face was tragic. She turned to Beatrice and Verity, who had
joined her.

"It's no use! We shall have to go back!"

But the lady was whispering something to the gentleman, and he beckoned
to the girls with a smile.

"Don't run away!" he said. "Look here, we'll punt you across if you
like."

"Like!" The girls hardly knew how to express their gratitude.

"The three of you'd be too heavy a load. I think I'd better take just
one at a time. Can you manage to get in? It's rather swampy here. Give
me your hand!"

Ingred splashed ankle deep in oozy mud as she scrambled on board, but
that was a trifle compared with the relief of being ferried over the
river. Her knight-errant was neither young nor handsome, being, indeed,
rather bald and stout, but no orthodox interesting hero of fiction could
have been more welcome at the moment. She tendered her utmost thanks as
she landed, again with damage to her shoes, on the rushy bank opposite.
Their friends in need, having successfully punted over Beatrice and
Verity also, bade them a laughing good-bye, and resumed their easy
course down stream, leaving three very grateful girls behind them.

[Illustration: A FRIEND IN NEED]

"That's helped us out of a fix! Don't say again we've no luck!" cried
Beatrice, wiping her boots carefully on the grass.

"They were angels in disguise!" sighed Ingred.

"Rather stout angels!" chuckled Verity. "Now, how are we going to get
out of this field?"

"Over the hedge, I suppose. There's a piece of fence that looks
climbable!" returned Beatrice, swinging herself up with elephantine
grace, and dropping with a heavy thud on the other side. "Oh! good biz!
We're on a cinder path!"

They were indeed in a back lane which led at the bottom of some gardens,
then behind a row of stables, and finally through a gate on to the high
road.

"I know where we are now!" exclaimed Beatrice gleefully. "It's only
quite a short way to the Morton's. They live in the next terrace but
two. I believe we're within measurable distance of some lunch."

This was such good news that they strode along in renewed spirits.
Considering all, they thought the adventure was turning out well. A meal
would undoubtedly be most acceptable, if Beatrice's friends were
hospitable enough to offer it.

"It's the fourth house," said Beatrice, "the one with the copper beech
over the gate. Linden Lea--yes, here we are! Oh, I say, what are all the
blinds down for?"

The girls faced each other blankly.

"Is anyone dead?" faltered Ingred.

"I'll ring and inquire, at any rate," murmured Beatrice.

So she rang, and rang again and yet again. She could hear the bell
clanging quite plainly and unmistakably somewhere in the back regions,
yet nobody came to the door.

"It's funny! I don't hear anybody in the house either," she remarked.
"Their dog generally barks at the least sound."

At that moment a small face peeped over the top of the wall which
divided the garden from that of the next house, and a childish voice
asked:

"Do you want the Mortons?"

"Yes. Isn't anybody in?"

"They're all gone away to Llandudno, for a month."

"All? Isn't anyone here?"

"No, the house is locked up."

Here a warning call of "Willie!" caused their informant to disappear as
suddenly as he had come, but the girls had heard enough. All their hopes
were suddenly blighted. They had arrived at the end of their journey
only to draw a blank. They were indeed in a worse position than when
they had missed the train at Denscourt, for they were farther from home,
and it was much later. Almost ready to cry, they turned down the garden
again.

"We've got to get home to-night somehow!" said Ingred through her set
teeth.

"Shall we go to the police station?" quavered Verity.

"And give ourselves up like lost children? No, it's too undignified!
Wait a moment, I've got an idea!" said Beatrice. "We passed the post
office just now, and I noticed it had a 'Public Telephone.' I'll ring up
Mother and tell her where we are, and ask her to come over for us."

"But you can't telephone for nothing, and we haven't so much as a
solitary penny amongst us!"

"I know. I thought I'd explain that to the people at the post office,
and ask them to let me have the call, and Mother will pay when she
comes. I could give them my watch as a security."

"It's worth trying!"

So, with just a little grain of hope, they retraced their steps to the
post office, which was also a stationer's and newsagent's. Nobody was in
the shop, but when the girls thumped on the counter a rosy-cheeked young
person appeared from the back regions.

"Want to telephone without paying? It's against the post office rules,"
she snapped, as Beatrice briefly explained the circumstances.

"My mother will pay when she comes, and if you'd take my watch----"

"I can't go against post office rules! All calls must be paid for
beforehand. That's our instructions."

"But just for once----"

"What's the matter, Doris?" asked a voice, and a kindly-looking little
man emerged from the back parlor, wiping his mouth hastily, and took his
place behind the counter. Beatrice turned to him with eagerness, and
again stated the urgency of their peculiar situation.

"Well, of course we've our instructions from the post office, and we've
got to account for the calls, but in this particular case we might let
you have one, and pay afterwards," he replied. "Oh, never mind the
watch; it's all right!"

Beatrice lost no time in ringing up Number 167 Grovebury, and to her
immense delight, when she got the connection, she heard her mother's
voice at the instrument. A short explanation was all that was necessary.

"Stay where you are at the Waverley post office, and I will get a taxi
and fetch you myself immediately," returned Mrs. Jackson. "It's the
greatest relief to know what has become of you. I was going to ring up
the police station, and describe you as 'missing!'"

The girls had to wait nearly three-quarters of an hour before the taxi
made its appearance, and the welcome form of Mrs. Jackson stepped out of
it. She paid what was owing for the call, thanked the postmaster for his
civility, and hustled the girls into the conveyance as quickly as
possible.

"I suppose girls will be girls," she said, "but I think you've been very
silly ones to-day! Why didn't you keep with the rest of the school, as
you ought to have done?"

"It sounds a most horrible greedy confession," replied Beatrice
guiltily, "but I'm afraid it was all the fault of--buns! They just threw
us late, and we missed the others. We'll never buy buns again! Never!
Never! _O peccavi!_ We have sinned!"

And she looked so humorously contrite that Mrs. Jackson, who was
inclined to scold, laughed in spite of herself, and forgave the
delinquents.

"On condition that such a thing doesn't happen again!" she declared.

"Trust us! We wouldn't go through such an experience again for all the
buns in the world! Next time we'll cling to the College apron strings
like--like----"

"Like adhesive sticking-plaster!" supplied Ingred gently.

"Or oysters to a mermaid's tail!" murmured Verity.




CHAPTER IX

A Hostel Frolic


"The Foursome League," which Verity had instituted with her room-mates
at the hostel, was kept by them as a solemn compact. They stuck to one
another nobly, though often in the teeth of great inconvenience. It
generally took three of them to urge Fil through her toilet in the
mornings and drag her down to breakfast in time. She was always so
terribly sleepy at seven o'clock, and so positive that she could whisk
through her dressing in ten minutes, and that it was quite unnecessary
to get up so soon: even when the others mercilessly pulled the
bed-clothes from her, and pointed to their watches, she would dawdle
instead of "whisking," and spend much superfluous time over manicure or
dabbing on cucumber cream to improve her complexion. She was so innocent
about her little vanities, and conducted them with such child-like
complacency, that the girls tolerated them quite good humoredly, and
even assisted sometimes. One of them generally volunteered to brush her
long flaxen hair, and tie her ribbon, and half out of habit the others
would tidy her cubicle, which was apt to be chaotic, and put her things
away in her drawers. They did it almost automatically, for they had come
to look upon Fil somewhat in the light of a big doll, the exclusive
property of "The Foursome League," and to be treated as the mascot of
the dormitory.

Mrs. Best, the hostel matron, was what the girls called "rather an old
dear." Her gray hair was picturesque, and the knowledge that she had
lost her husband and a son in the war added an element of pathetic
interest to her personality. She was experienced in the ways of girls,
and contrived to keep order without seeming to be constantly obtruding
rules. Among her various sane practices she instituted the plan of
awarding marks for good conduct and order to each dormitory, and
allowing the one which scored the highest to give an entertainment to
the others during the last hour before bedtime on Thursday night.
Naturally this was a privilege to be desired. It was fun to act variety
artistes before the rest of the hostel, and well worth being in time for
meals, preserving silence during prep., or getting up a little earlier
so as to leave cubicles in apple-pie order. The Foursome League had not
yet earned distinction, chiefly owing to lapses on the part of Fil, and
Nora's incorrigible love of talking in season and out of season. One
week, however, after a really heroic series of efforts, they succeeded
in establishing a record, and sat perking themselves at dinner-time when
Mrs. Best read out the score.

"We've not had you on the boards before," said Susie Wakefield, one of
the Sixth, as the girls filed from the room when the meal was over;
"we're all expecting something extra tiptop and thrillsome, so play up!"

"Hope we shan't let you down!" replied Ingred. "Please don't expect too
much, or you mayn't get it!"

Dormitory 2 held a hurried conclave before afternoon school.

"It's a great stunt!" rejoiced Nora.

"What _are_ we to act?" fluttered Fil.

"Especially when we've to play up!" twittered Verity.

"What silly idiots we were not to plan it all out beforehand! But I
really never dreamt we'd ever get the chance!"

"No more did I," said Ingred, sitting with her head in her hands,
considering. "On the whole, it doesn't matter. Sometimes a quite
impromptu thing goes off best. It's largely a question of what costumes
we can rake up out of nothing.

"The cleverer those are, the more we'll get applauded. I've one or two
ideas simmering. Thank goodness it's drawing this afternoon, and I shall
have time to think them over."

"We'll all think!" agreed Verity. "Then we'll compare notes at four
o'clock, and fix on what we're going to do. Great Minerva! It'll be a
hectic evening! I'm shivering in my shoes!"

"And I'm absolutely green with stage-fright! What a life!" proclaimed
Fil.

If Miss Godwin, the drawing-mistress, noticed a slacking off in accuracy
on the part of four of her pupils, that afternoon, she perhaps set it
down to want of artistic feeling. It is difficult to copy with absolute
exactness when only your fingers are busy, and your brain is far away.
Ingred planned enough entertainments to supply a Pierrot troupe for a
month, but abandoned most of them as being quite impossible to act with
the very limited resources that were available at the hostel. At a
select Foursome Committee after school, however, she presented the pick
of the performances, and as nobody else had thought of anything better,
or indeed quite so good, her suggestions, with a few amendments and
alterations, were carried unanimously.

At eight o'clock that evening, when preparation was finished, the
boarders' room was rapidly transformed into an amateur theater. The
trestle tables were carried to one end to form the gallery, rows of
chairs represented the dress circle, and cushions in front either the
pit or the stalls, according to individual taste, or, as Mrs. Best said,
the behavior of the occupants.

There was no curtain, but, as the scenery preserved Shakespearian
methods of simplicity, that did not matter. Part of the charm of these
Thursday night entertainments was their absolutely spontaneous
character, and the fact that many details had to be left to the
imagination of the spectators only made things more amusing.

When the audience, after a slight struggle for gallery seats, had
settled itself, and Mrs. Best and Nurse Warner had taken possession of
the arm-chairs specially reserved for them, Dollie Ransome, who had been
requisitioned by the performers to act as Greek chorus, placed some
stools by the fire-place, and announced importantly:

"King Alfred and the Cakes. A Historical Drama."

The little old woman who entered, carrying some sticks and a basin, was
difficult to identify as Fil. Her fair hair had been powdered, wrinkles
were painted on her smooth forehead, a handkerchief was knotted on her
head for a cap, and she wore an apron borrowed from the cook, and a
check table-cover arranged as a shawl. She bestowed the sticks in the
fender to represent a fire on the hearth, and taking some biscuits from
her basin, placed them amongst the supposed embers, indulging meanwhile
in a soliloquy about the hardness of the times for poor folk, and the
danger from the Danes.

A violent knocking on the door was followed by the entrance of such a
magnificent object that the spectators immediately applauded his advent.
Nora, with her large build, short-cut hair, and generally boyish
appearance, was the very one to act King Alfred. She had folded a plaid
traveling rug into a kilt which reached just to her bare knees, borrowed
a velvet coatee and a leather belt from Mrs. Best, and, by the aid of
bandages from the ambulance cupboard, had made quite a good imitation of
Saxon leg-gear. Armed with a bow and arrows, hastily constructed from
twigs cut in the garden, she advanced with a manly stride, begged for
hospitality, and was accommodated with a stool by the hearth, where she
sat whittling arrows in an abstracted fashion, and heaving gusty sighs.

The audience had hardly recovered from its astonishment when it was
thrilled again by the entrance of an ancient and elderly peasant man, so
disguised that it was almost impossible to recognize Ingred. A
water-proof with a broad leather belt served as coat, and, being padded
inside with a pillow, gave the effect of bent and bowed shoulders. Some
tow, supplied by Mrs. Best, was fastened as a long straggling beard, and
bushy eyebrows of the same material were fixed on with soap. Leaning
heavily upon a stick, he came limping in, complaining in a tremulous
voice of his rheumatism, started with amazement at the sight of the
handsome stranger seated by his hearth, and drew his wife aside for
explanations. The old couple, after conversing in audible whispers,
decided to go out for more firewood, and as a last charge the dame
commended her cakes to the care of their guest. King Alfred, on being
left alone by the hearth, whittled away at his arrows with more energy
than discrimination, and showed indeed a sad lack of practical skill for
so well seasoned a warrior. Perhaps, however, he was not accustomed to
have to make them for himself, and missed his chief archer. Throwing
them down at last, he sank his head in his hands in an absolute cinema
pose of despondency, and sighed to an extent which must have been
painful to his lungs. The dame returned to sniff burning cakes and fly
to the rescue of her cookery. Fil was quite a good little actress, and
produced what she considered her _piece de resistance_. She had spent
her summer holidays in Somerset, and had there picked up a local ballad
which dealt with the legend in dialect. She brought out a verse of it
now with great effect:

    "Cusn't ee zee the ca-akes, man?
      And cusn't ee zee 'em burrn?
    I'se warrant ee eat 'em fast enough,
      Zoon as it be ee turn!"

And catching up a biscuit, carefully blackened beforehand by toasting it
over the gas, she flaunted it in the face of the embarrassed monarch.

The dramatic situation was slightly spoilt by the delay in the entrance
of the courtier, who ought to have come in at that psychological moment,
and didn't. The fact was that Verity, finding it dull waiting in the
passage, had run upstairs to make some additions to her costume, and had
miscalculated the length, or rather shortness, of the act. It is
difficult for the most accomplished actor to go on looking embarrassed
for any length of time, and as Fil's eloquence in the scolding line
suddenly failed her, there was an awful pause while the peasant husband,
with wonderful agility considering his rheumatism, hopped to the door
and called agitatedly for the missing performer. The courtier flew
downstairs like a whirlwind, tripped into the room, and fell upon his
red-stockinged knees to do homage to his sovereign, who rose
majestically and extended a hand of pardon to the now grovelling
peasant.

The audience, particularly that portion seated in the gallery, clapped
and cheered to such an extent that one of the trestles, which had been
carelessly fixed, collapsed, and sent a whole row of girls sliding on to
the floor, whence they were rescued speechless with laughter, but
uninjured. They came crowding round the performers to admire the
costumes.

"They're topping!"

"How _did_ you think of them?"

"I like King Alfred's legs!"

"Ingred, you look about a hundred!"

"Fil _could_ scold!"

"Verity, what was a courtier doing rambling about a forest in a blue
dressing-gown? It would get torn on the bushes!"

"I know. We told her so, but she _would_ wear it!" declared Ingred. "She
was just pig-headed over that dressing-gown!"

"Well, go and look at the Saxon pictures for yourself, in the history
book!" retorted Verity, sticking to her point. "You'll see the courtiers
in long flowing garments very like dressing-gowns. I think it was a
