
          One watch, inexpensive but trustworthy. Do not
          take your gold watch.

          One package of common post-cards, with lead pencil
          attached. The postals to take the place of
          letters.

          One package writing-paper and stamped envelopes,
          if post-cards do not meet the needs.

          One pocket-knife, a big, strong one, with
          substantial, sharp, strong blades, for outdoor
          work and to use at meals.

          One loaded camera, in case which has secure
          leather loops through which your belt can be
          slipped to carry camera and hold it steady,
          leaving the hands free and precluding danger of
          smashing the instrument should a misstep on mossy
          stone or a trip over unseen vine or root suddenly
          throw you down and send the camera sailing on a
          distance ahead. Such an accident befell a girl
          camper who was too sure that her precious camera
          would be safest if carried in her hand. Wear the
          camera well back that you may not fall on it
          should you stumble, or the camera can be carried
          on strap slung from the right shoulder.

          Three or more rolls of extra films, the quantity
          depending upon your length of stay at camp and the
          possibilities for interesting subjects.

          One fishing-rod and fishing-tackle outfit. Choose
          the simple and useful rather than the fancy and
          expensive. Select your outfit according to the
          particular kind of fishing you will find near
          camp. There is a certain different style of rod
          and tackle for almost every variety of fish. If
          fishing is not to be a prominent feature of the
          camp, you might take line and hooks, and wait
          until you reach camp to cut your fishing-pole.

          One tin cup, with open handle to slide over belt.
          The cup will serve you with cool sparkling water,
          with cocoa, coffee, or tea as the case may be, and
          it will also be your soup bowl. Keep the inside of
          the cup bright and shiny. While aluminum is much
          lighter than other metal, it is not advisable to
          take to camp either cup, teaspoon, or fork of
          aluminum because it is such a good conductor of
          heat that those articles would be very apt to burn
          your lips if used with hot foods.

          One dinner knife, if you object to using your
          pocket-knife.

          One dinner fork, not silver.

          One teaspoon, not silver.

          One plate, may be of aluminum or tin, can be kept
          bright by scouring with soap and earth.

          Two warm wool double blankets, closely woven and
          of good size. The U.S. Army blankets are of the
          best. With safety-pins blankets can be turned into
          sleeping-bags and hammocks.

          One poncho, light in weight to wear over
          shoulders, spread on ground rubber side down to
          protect from dampness, can be used in various
          ways.

          One pillow-bag.

          One mattress-bag.

          One water-proof match-safe.

          One belt hatchet in case, or belt sheath small
          axe, for chopping wood and felling small trees,
          but, be very careful when using either of these
          tools. Before going to camp find some one who can
          give you proper instructions in handling one or
          both, and practise carefully following directions.
          Be very _cautious_ and go slow until you become an
          expert. Outdoor books and magazines should be
          consulted for information, and if you do not feel
          absolutely confident of your ability to use the
          hatchet or axe after practising, _do not take them
          with you_. For the sake of others as well as
          yourself, you have not the right to take chances
          of injuring either others or yourself through
          inability to use safely any tool. Do not attempt
          to use a regular-sized axe, it is very dangerous.
          One guide told me that after a tenderfoot chopped
          a cruel gash nearly through his foot when using
          the guide's axe, that axe was never again loaned,
          but kept in a safe place and not allowed to be
          touched by any one except the owner.


=Check List for First Aid=

          One hot-water bag, good for all pains and aches,
          and a comfort when one is chilly.

          One package pure ginger pulverized or ground, to
          make hot ginger tea in case of chill, pains in the
          bowels, or when you have met with an accidental
          ducking or are wet through to the skin by rain.
          Never mind if the tea does burn, ginger always
          stings when helping one. Be a good sport, take
          your medicine.

          One box of charcoal tablets for dyspepsia or
          indigestion.

          One package bicarbonate of soda (baking-soda);
          good for burns, sprinkle well with soda, see that
          the burn is completely covered, then cover lightly
          with cloth, and do not disturb it for a long time.

          One bottle of ammonia well corked. Tie the cork
          down firmly in the bottle (Fig. 32); a flannel
          case or raffia covering will protect the glass
          from breakage. Good to smell in case of faintness,
          but care must be taken _not_ to hold it _too near_
          the _nose_, as the ammonia might injure the
          delicate membranes, as would also smelling-salts.
          Safer to move the bottle or cloth wet with ammonia
          slowly back and forth near the nose. Good also for
          insect bites.

          One roll of adhesive plaster. Cut into lengths for
          holding covered ointment or poultice in place, the
          strips criss-cross over the poultice, but are not
          attached, the ends only are pressed on the bare
          skin to which they firmly adhere.

          Two rolls of 2-1/2 or 3 inch wide surgeon bandages
          (not gauze) for general use where bandages are
          needed.

          One small package of absorbent cotton.

          Two mustard plasters, purchased at drug store;
          good for stomachache.

          One package of powdered licorice to use as a
          laxative. Dissolve a little licorice in water and
          drink it. To keep the bowels open means to ward
          off a host of evils. It is even more essential
          that the inside of the body be kept clean than it
          is to have the outside clean. To this end make a
          practise of drinking a great deal of pure water;
          drink it before breakfast, between meals (not at
          meals), and before retiring. If you do this, you
          will probably not need other laxative, especially
          if you eat fruit either fresh or stewed. Fruit
          should form part of every day's fare. _Keep your
          bowels open._

          One tube of Carron oil, to use for burns or
          scalds.

          One small bottle of camphor, for headaches.

          One small bag of salt--good dissolved in water, 1
          teaspoonful to 1 pint of water, for bathing tired
          or inflamed eyes, often effects a cure. Good for
          bathing affected spots of ivy poison, good for
          sore-throat gargle, also for nosebleed; snuff,
          then plug nose. Good for brushing teeth. For all
          these dissolve salt in water in proportion as
          given above.

          One white muslin 24-inch triangular bandage, for
          arm sling or chest, jaw, and head bandage. A man's
          large-sized white handkerchief can be used; never
          bind broken skin with colored cloth.

          One bottle of fly dope, warranted to keep off
          pestiferous flies and mosquitoes. All these may be
          kept in one-half of a linen case of pockets, your
          toilet articles in the other half, and the case
          can be opened out and hung to the side of your
          tent or shelter.


=Check List for General Camp=

          Two basins, of light metal, paper or collapsible
          rubber. The last is easy to pack and light to
          carry. One basin will serve for several girls. If
          you camp near a body of fresh water let that be
          your basin; it will always be ready filled. No
          need then to bring water to your shelter, for a
          delightful dip in the river or lake every morning
          before breakfast will obviate all necessity, and
          do away with the otherwise needful hand-basin.

          One reliable map of location and surrounding
          country for constant reference.

          One water-pail, light weight, for every two or
          three girls. Can be canvas, aluminum, paper,
          rubber, or your own selection in other materials.

          Six toilet-paper packages or more.

          One or more tents of water-proof material.

          One or more sod cloths for tent flooring.

          One or more inner tents of cheesecloth for
          protection from mosquitoes, etc. These can be made
          at home or purchased with the tents at the regular
          camp-outfitters'. There is on the market a spray,
          claimed to be absolutely effective against
          mosquitoes, etc., and to keep both tent and camp
          free from pests. One quart is said to last two
          weeks with daily use. Cost, fifty cents per quart.

          One carborundum stone for sharpening all cutting
          tools.

          One or more lanterns. Folding candle lanterns may
          be purchased, but the simple ten-cent kind with
          lamp-chimney for protection of candle are good.
          They can be had at country stores in Cresco, Pa.
          May possibly be found at camp-outfitters'. If a
          glass chimney is to be used, pack most carefully.
          Fill the inside of the chimney with stockings,
          handkerchiefs, etc.; then wrap the chimney all
          over with other soft clothing and tie securely.
          Have this outside wrap very thick.

          One package of one-half length candles to use in
          lantern.

          One _tin_ box of one or two dozen safety-matches.
          _Tin_ will not catch fire from the matches.

          One strong tool-bag with separate labelled pockets
          for different tools; each pocket with flap to
          fasten securely with dress snaps. In this tool-bag
          put assorted nails, mostly big, strong ones,
          screws, awl, well-sealed bottle of strong glue,
          ball of stout twine, a few rawhide thongs, three
          or four yards of soft strong rope, a pair of
          scissors, two spools of wire, and several yards of
          cheesecloth.

          One rope--long for mountain-climbing.


=Check List of Kitchen Utensils=

          Two dish-pans, one for piping-hot sudsy water for
          washing dishes, the other for scalding-hot rinsing
          water. The last pan can also be used for mixing
          and bread-making. Select pans strong and of light
          weight--canvas, aluminum, or tin--and be sure they
          nest or fold.

          Two water-pails, fitted one within the other, both
          light weight.

          One coffee-pot, size to fit in pails, must not be
          too high. Cocoa can be made in the coffee-pot.

          One frying-pan, for corn-dodgers, flapjacks, fried
          mush, eggs, etc.

          One folding camp-oven, for hot biscuits, bread
          puddings, and many other good things relished by
          hungry campers.

          One wash-basin, to be kept strictly for washing
          hands, when cooking.

          One large spoon, for stirring and general use.

          One kitchen-knife, suitable for cutting bread,
          carving meat, turning pancakes, etc.

          One kitchen-fork, strong and big, but not a
          toasting-fork.

          One Dutch oven pot, a strong seamless pot with
          cover, to use for baking, boiling, and stewing.

          Three dish-towels, washed after every meal.

          One dish mop or cloth, washed and dried after each
          meal; dry in sun when possible.

          Four large cakes of soap.

          One thick holder, for lifting pots. Hang this up
          in a certain place where it may always be found
          when needed.

          One pepper and one salt shaker, small and light in
          weight.

          One net air-bag, for meat, fish, and anything that
          must be kept fresh (Fig. 33) and protected from
          the flies. Use strong net and two or more hoops
          for the air-bag. With pincers you can twist the
          two ends of strong wire together and make the
          hoops of size large enough to hold the net out
          away from a large piece of meat. Cut the net long
          enough to stand above and hang below the meat.
          Gather the top edge tightly together and sew it
          fast; then sew the hoop near the top of the bag.
          Other hoops on either side of centre of bag and a
          hoop near bottom of bag, or sew only one hoop at
          the top and one at the bottom. Have strong
          draw-strings in the bottom of the bag, and fasten
          a pendent hook at the top to hold the meat hanging
          free inside of the bag. With copper wire attach a
          good-sized ring on top of the bag, wire it through
          the handle of the pendent hook and weld them
          together. When in use, the bag should be suspended
          high from the ground by means of a rope pulley run
          through the top ring and over the limb of a
          near-by tree. Similar air-bags can be obtained, if
          desired, from camp-outfitters.

When selecting cooking utensils for the camp, you will find those with
detachable handles pack better and for that reason are desirable.

Do not forget that every check-list given may be reduced; don't think
you must include all the items. For these lists give outfits for
permanent as well as temporary camps. If you can manage with _one towel_
by washing it every day, or evening, allowing it to dry during the
night, one towel will be sufficient; leave the others at home. Drop
from the various lists every article you can possibly dispense with and
still be comfortable in camp.

If you wear the camp suit travelling from home to camp, its weight and
bulk will be omitted from your camp pack, and be so much to your gain,
and you will maintain a good appearance notwithstanding, for if well
made and of proper fit the dress will be a suitable travelling costume.


=Camp Packs=

When you intend carrying your belongings and striking the trail either
part or all the way to camp, the easiest method for portage is to stow
the things in a regular pack and fasten the pack on your back by means
of strong, long straps attached to the pack, and passed over your
shoulders and under your arms.

A square of water-proof canvas makes a simple and good camp pack. Get a
nine-by-nine-feet (more or less) square of cloth, and it will be found
useful as shelter, fly, ground-cloth, windbreak, and in other ways after
reaching camp.


=What to Put in Your Pack=

Open out your pack-cloth flat on the floor, and place your folded
mattress-bag in the centre.

Fill the pillow-bag with your first-aid case and case of toilet
articles, and if there is space for other things pack them in. Lay the
pillow-bag on top of the mattress-bag, place clothing by the side and on
top of the pillow-bag, being careful to keep the contents of your pack
rectangular in shape and of size to fit well over your back.

[Illustration: 32

CAMP PACK

BLANKET PACK

33
