Here they saw several deer grazing, and as the wind blew from them
toward the hunters they had taken no alarm.

"Pick the fat buck there on the right," whispered Ross to Henry.

Henry said not a word. He had learned the taciturnity of the woods, and
leveling his rifle, took sure aim. There was no buck fever about him
now, and, when his rifle cracked, the deer bounded into the air and
dropped down dead. Ross, all business, began to cut up and clean the
game, and with Henry's aid, he did it so skillfully and rapidly that
they returned to the camp, loaded with the juicy deer meat, by the time
the fire and everything else was ready for them.

Henry and Paul ate with eager appetites and when supper was over they
wrapped themselves in their blankets and lay down before the fire under
the trees. Paul went to sleep at once, but Henry did not close his eyes
so soon. Far in the west he saw a last red bar of light cast by the
sunken sun and the deep ruddy glow over the fringe of the forest. Then
it suddenly passed, as if whisked away by a magic hand, and all the
wilderness was in darkness. But it was only for a little while. Out came
the moon and the stars flashed one by one into a sky of silky blue. A
south wind lifting up itself sang a small sweet song among the branches,
and Henry uttered a low sigh of content, because he lived in the
wilderness, and because he was there in the depths of the forest on an
important errand. Then he fell sound asleep, and did not awaken until
Ross and the others were cooking breakfast.

A day or two later they reached the wonderful Big Bone Lick, and they
approached it with the greatest caution, because they were afraid lest
an errand similar to theirs might have drawn hostile red men to the
great salt spring. But as they curved about the desired goal they saw no
Indian sign, and then they went through the marsh to the spring itself.

Henry opened his eyes in amazement. All that the schoolmaster and Paul
had told was true, and more. Acres and acres of the marsh lands were
fairly littered with bones, and from the mud beneath other and far
greater bones had been pulled up and left lying on the ground. Henry
stood some of these bones on end, and they were much taller than he.
Others he could not lift.

"The mastodon, the mammoth and I know not what," said Mr. Pennypacker in
a transport of delight. "Henry, you and Paul are looking upon the
remains of animals, millions of years old, killed perhaps in fights with
others of their kind, over these very salt springs. There may not be
another such place as this in all the world."

Mr. Pennypacker for the first day or two was absolutely of no help in
making the salt, because he was far too much excited about the bones and
the salt springs themselves.

"I can understand," said Henry, "why the animals should come here after
the salt, since they crave salt just as we do, but it seems strange to
me that salt water should be running out of the ground here, hundreds of
miles from the sea."

"It's the sea itself that's coming up right at our feet," replied the
schoolmaster thoughtfully. "Away back yonder, a hundred million years
ago perhaps, so far that we can have no real conception of the time, the
sea was over all this part of the world. When it receded, or the ground
upheaved, vast subterranean reservoirs of salt water were left, and now,
when the rain sinks down into these full reservoirs a portion of the
salt water is forced to the surface, which makes the salt springs that
are scattered over this part of the country. It is a process that is
going on continually. At least, that's a plausible theory, and it's as
good as any other."

But most of the salt-makers did not bother themselves about causes, and
they accepted the giant bones as facts, without curiosity about their
origin. Nor did they neglect to put them to use. By sticking them deep
in the ground they made tripods of them on which they hung their kettles
for boiling the salt water, and of others they devised comfortable seats
for themselves. To such modern uses did the mastodon come! But to the
schoolmaster and the two boys the bones were an unending source of
interest, and in the intervals of labor, which sometimes were pretty
long, particularly for Mr. Pennypacker, they were ever prowling in the
swamp for a bone bigger than any that they had found before.

But the salt-making progressed rapidly. The kettles were always boiling
and sack after sack was filled with the precious commodity. At night
wild animals, despite the known presence of strange, new creatures,
would come down to the springs, so eager were they for the salt, and the
men rarely molested them. Only a deer now and then was shot for food,
and Henry and Paul lay awake one night, watching two big bull buffaloes,
not fifty yards away, fighting for the best place at a spring.

Ross and Shif'less Sol did not do much of the work at the salt-boiling,
but they were continually scouting through the forest, on a labor no
less important, watching for raiding war parties who otherwise might
fall unsuspected upon the toilers. Henry, as a youth of great promise,
was sometimes taken with them on these silent trips through the woods,
and the first time he went he felt badly on Paul's account, because his
comrade was not chosen also. But when he returned he found that his
sympathy was wasted. Paul and the master were deeply absorbed in the
task of trying to fit together some of the gigantic bones that is, to
re-create the animal to which they thought the bones belonged, and Paul
was far happier than he would have been on the scout or the hunt.

The day's work was ended and all the others were sitting around the camp
fire, with the dying glow of the setting sun flooding the springs, the
marshes and the camp fire, but Paul and the master toiled zealously at
the gigantic figure that they had up-reared, supported partly with
stakes, and bearing a remote resemblance to some animal that lived a few
million years or so ago. The master had tied together some of the bones
with withes, and he and Paul were now laboriously trying to fit a
section of vertebrae into shape.

Shif'less Sol who had gone with Henry sat down by the fire, stuffed a
piece of juicy venison into his mouth and then looked with eyes of
wonder at the two workers in the cause of natural history.

"Some people 'pear to make a heap o' trouble for theirselves," he said,
"now I can't git it through my head why anybody would want to work with
a lot o' dead old bones when here's a pile o' sweet deer meat just
waitin' an' beggin' to be et up."

At that moment the attempt of Paul and the schoolmaster to reconstruct a
prehistoric beast collapsed. The figure that they had built up with so
much care and labor suddenly slipped loose somewhere, and all the bones
fell down in a heap. The master stared at them in disgust and exclaimed:

"It's no use! I can't put them together away out here in the
wilderness!"

Then he stalked over to the fire, and taking a deer steak, ate hungrily.
The steak was very tender, and gradually a look of content and peace
stole over Mr. Pennypacker's face.

"At least," he murmured, "if it's hard to be a scholar here, one can
have a glorious appetite, and it is most pleasant to gratify it."

As the dark settled down Ross said that in one day more they ought to
have all the salt the horses could carry, and then it would be best to
depart promptly and swiftly for Wareville. A half hour later all were
asleep except the sentinel.




CHAPTER VIII

THE WILD TURKEY'S GOBBLE


Henry had conducted himself so well on his first scout and, had shown
such signs of efficiency that Ross concluded to take him again the next
day. Henry's heart swelled with pride, and he was no longer worried
about Paul, because he saw that the latter's interest and ambitions were
not exactly the same as his own. Henry could not have any innate respect
for heaps of "old bones," but if Paul and the master found them worthy
of such close attention, they must be right.

Henry and Ross slipped away into the undergrowth, and Henry soon noticed
that the guide's face, which was tense and preoccupied, seemed graver
than usual. The boy was too wise to ask questions, but after they had
searched through the forest for several hours Ross remarked in the most
casual way:

"I heard the gobble of a wild turkey away off last night."

"Yes," said Henry, "there are lots of 'em about here. You remember the
one I shot Tuesday?"

Ross did not reply just then, but in about five minutes he vouchsafed:

"I'm looking for the particular wild turkey I heard last night."

"Why that one, when there are so many, and how would you know him from
the others if you found him?" asked Henry quickly, and then a deep
burning flush of shame broke through the tan of his cheeks. He, Henry
Ware, a rover of the wilderness to ask such foolish questions! A child
of the towns would have shown as much sense. Ross who was looking
covertly at him, out of the corner of his eye, saw the mounting blush,
and was pleased. The boy had spoken impulsively, but he knew better.

"You understand, I guess," said Ross.

"Yes," replied Henry, "I know why you want to find that wild turkey, and
I know why you said last night we ought to leave the salt springs just
as soon as we can."

The smile on the face of the scout brightened. Here was the most
promising pupil who had ever sat at his feet for instruction; and now
they redoubled their caution, as their soundless bodies slipped through
the undergrowth. Everywhere they looked for the trail of that wild
turkey. It may be said that a turkey can and does fly in the air and
leaves no trail, but Henry knew that the one for which they looked might
leave no trail, but it did not fly in the air.

Time passed; noon and part of the afternoon were gone, and they were
still curving in a great circle about the camp, when Ross, suddenly
stopped beside a little brook, or branch, as he and his comrades always
called them, and pointed to the soft soil at the edge of the water.
Henry followed the long finger and saw the outline of a footstep.

"Our turkey has passed here."

The guide nodded.

"Most likely," he said, "and if not ours, then one of the same flock.
But that footprint is three or four hours old. Come on, we'll follow
this trail until it grows too warm."

The footsteps led down the side of the brook, and when they curved away
from it Ross was able to trace them on the turf and through the
undergrowth. A half mile from the start other footsteps joined them, and
these were obviously made by many men, perhaps a score of warriors.

"You see," said Ross, "I guess they've just come across the Ohio or we
wouldn't be left all these days b'il'n salt so peaceful, like as if
there wasn't an Indian in the whole world."

Henry drew a deep breath. Like all who ventured into the West he
expected some day to be exposed to Indian danger and attack, but it had
been a vague thought. Even when they came north to the Big Bone Lick it
was still a dim far-away affair, but now he stood almost in its
presence. The Shawnees, whose name was a name of terror to the new
settlements, were probably not a mile away. He felt tremors but they
were not tremors of fear. Courage was an instinctive quality in him.
Nature had put it there, when she fashioned him somewhat in the mold of
the primitive man.

"Step lighter than you ever did afore in your life," said Ross, "an'
bend low an' follow me. But don't you let a single twig nor nothin' snap
as you pass."

He spoke in a sharp, emphatic whisper, and Henry knew that he considered
the enemy near. But there was no need to caution the boy, in whom the
primal man was already awakened. Henry bent far down, and holding his
rifle before him in such a position that it could be used at a moment's
warning, was following behind Ross so silently that the guide, hearing
no sound, took an instant's backward glance. When he saw the boy he
permitted another faint smile of approval to pass over his face.

They advanced about three-quarters of a mile and then at the crest of a
hill thickly clothed in tall undergrowth the guide sank down and pointed
with a long ominous forefinger.

"Look," he said.

Henry looked through the interlacing bushes and, for the second time in
his life, gazed upon a band of red men. And as he looked, his blood for
a moment turned cold. Perhaps thirty in number, they were sitting in a
glade about a little fire. All of them had blankets of red or blue about
them and they carried rifles. Their faces were hideous with war paint
and their coarse black hair rose in the defiant scalp lock.

"Maybe they don't know that our men are at the Lick," said Ross, "or if
they do they don't think we know they've come, an' they're planning for
an attack to-night, when they could slip up on us sleepin'."

The guide's theory seemed plausible to Henry, but he said nothing. It
did not become him to venture opinions before one who knew so much of
the wilderness.

"It can't be more'n two o'clock," whispered Ross, "an' they'd attack
about midnight. That gives us ten hours. Henry, the Lord is with us.
Come."

He slid away through the bushes and Henry followed him. When they were a
half mile from the Indian camp they increased their speed to an
astonishing gait and in a half hour were at the Big Bone Lick.

"Have 'em to load up all the salt at once," said Ross to Shif'less Sol,
"an' we must go kitin' back to Wareville as if our feet was greased."

Shif'less Sol shot him a single look of comprehension and Ross nodded.
Then the shiftless one went to work with extraordinary diligence and the
others imitated his speed. To the schoolmaster Ross breathed the one
word "Shawnees," and Henry in a few sentences told Paul what he had
seen.

Fortunately the precious salt was packed--they had no intention of
deserting it, however close the danger--and it was quickly transferred
to the backs of the horses along with the food for the way. In a little
more than a half hour they were all ready and then they fled southward,
Shif'less Sol, this time, leading the way, the guide Ross at the rear,
eye and ear noticing everything, and every nerve attuned to danger.

The master cast back one regretful glance at his beloved giant bones,
and then, with resignation, turned his face permanently toward the south
and the line of retreat.

"O Henry," whispered Paul, half in delight, half in terror, "did you
really see them?"

"Yes," replied Henry, "twenty or more of 'em, and an ugly lot they were,
too, I can tell you, Paul. I believe we could whip 'em in a stand-up
fight, though they are three to our one, but they know more of these
woods than we do and then there's the salt; we've got to save what we've
come for."

He sighed a little. He did not wholly like the idea of running away,
even from a foe thrice as strong. Yet he could not question the wisdom
of Ross and Shif'less Sol, and he made no protest.

The men looked after the heavily laden horses--nobody could ride except
as a last resort--and southward they went in Indian file as they had
come. Henry glanced around him and saw nothing that promised danger. It
was only another beautiful afternoon in early spring. The forest glowed
in the tender green of the young buds, and, above them arched the sky a
brilliant sheet of unbroken blue. Never did a world look more
attractive, more harmless, and it seemed incredible that these woods
should contain men who were thirsting for the lives of other men. But he
had seen; he knew; he could not forget that hideous circle of painted
faces in the glade, upon which he and Ross had looked from the safe
covert of the undergrowth.

"Do you think they'll follow us, Henry?" asked Paul.

"I don't know," replied Henry, "but it's mighty likely. They'll hang on
our trail for a long time anyway."

"And if they overtake us, there'll be a fight?"

"Of course."

Henry, watching Paul keenly, saw him grow pale. But his lips did not
tremble and that passing pallor failed to lower Paul in Henry's esteem.
The bigger and stronger boy knew his comrade's courage and tenacity, and
he respected him all the more for it, because he was perhaps less fitted
than some others for the wild and dangerous life of the border.

After these few words they sank again into silence, and to Paul and the
master the sun grew very hot. It was poised now at a convenient angle in
the heavens, and poured sheaves of fiery rays directly upon them. Mr.
Pennypacker began to gasp. He was a man of dignity, a teacher of youth,
and it did not become him to run so fast from something that he could
not see. Ross's keen eye fell upon him.

"I think you'd better mount one of the horses," he said; "the big bay
there can carry his salt and you too for a while until you are rested."

"What! I ride, when everybody else is afoot!" exclaimed Mr. Pennypacker,
indignantly.

"You're the only schoolmaster we have and we can't afford to lose you,"
said Ross without the suspicion of a grin.

Mr. Pennypacker looked at him, but he could not detect any change of
countenance.

"Hop up," continued Ross, "it ain't any time to be bashful. Others of us
may have to do it afore long."

Mr. Pennypacker yielded with a sigh, sprang lightly upon the horse, and
then when he enjoyed the luxury of rest was glad that he had yielded.
Paul, and one or two others took to the horses' backs later on, but
Henry continued the march on foot with long easy strides, and no sign of
weakening. Ross noticed him more than once but he never made any
suggestion to Henry that he ride; instead the faint smile of approval
appeared once more on the guide's face.

The sun began to sink, the twilight came, and then night. Ross called a
halt, and, clustered in the thickest shadows of the forest, they ate
their supper and rested their tired limbs. No fire was lighted, but they
sat there under the trees, hungrily eating their venison, and talking in
the lowest of whispers.

Mr. Pennypacker was much dissatisfied. He had been troubled by the hasty
flight and his dignity suffered.

"It is not becoming that white men should run away from an inferior
race," he said.

"Maybe it ain't becomin', but it's safe," said Ross.

"At least we are far enough away now," continued the master, "and we
might rest here comfortably until dawn. We haven't seen or heard a sign
of pursuit."

"You don't know the natur' of the red warriors, Mr. Pennypacker," said
the leader deferentially but firmly, "when they make the least noise
then they're most dangerous. Now I'm certain sure that they struck our
trail not long after we left Big Bone Lick, an' in these woods the man
that takes the fewest risks is the one that lives the longest."

It was a final statement. In the present emergency the leader's
authority was supreme. They rested about an hour with no sound save the
shuffling feet of the horses which could not be kept wholly quiet; and
then they started on again, not going so quickly now, because the night
was dark, and they wished to make as little noise as possible, threshing
about in the undergrowth.

Paul pressed up by the side of Henry.

"Do you think we shall have to go on all night, this way?" he asked.
"Wasn't Mr. Pennypacker right, when he said we were out of danger?"

"No, the schoolmaster was wrong," replied Henry. "Tom Ross knows more
about the woods and what is likely to happen in them than Mr.
Pennypacker could know in all his life, if he were to live a thousand
years. It's every man to his own trade, and it's Tom's trade that we
need now."

After hearing these sage words of youth Paul asked no more questions,
but he and Henry kept side by side throughout the night, that is, when
neither of them was riding, because Henry, like all the others, now took
turns on horseback. Twice they crossed small streams and once a larger
one, where they exercised the utmost caution to keep their precious salt
from getting wet. Fortunately the great pack saddles were a protection,
and they emerged on the other side with both salt and powder dry.

When the night was thickest, in the long, dark hour just before the
dawn, Henry and Paul, who were again side by side, heard a faint,
