fell, as pursuit of the Prussians was hopeless, and the balls from
the Prussian batteries were falling thick.

"You are our prisoner, sir," an officer said to him.

"So I see," Fergus said bitterly. "It is hard luck, just at the
beginning of the campaign."

"It is the fortune of war," the Austrian said with a smile; "and
indeed, I don't think that you have any reason to grumble for, had
that shot struck a few inches farther back, it would have carried
off both your legs."

A sharp order was now given to retire. One of the troopers was
ordered to give his horse to Fergus, and to mount behind a comrade;
and they rode back to the Austrian main position, on the rising
ground. Fergus was at once taken to the marshal in command of the
Austrians.

"What is your name, sir?" the latter asked.

"Fergus Drummond. I have the honour to be an aide-de-camp on
Marshal Keith's staff."

"A Scotchman, I suppose?" the marshal said, breaking into English.

"Yes, sir."

"What force is there opposed to us?"

"That I cannot say, sir. I only joined the army two days ago, and
have been on the march ever since."

"Who is its commander?"

"Marshal Keith, sir; but the king himself is with it."

"I will see that you are made comfortable, presently, Mr. Drummond.

"Captain Wingratz, will you conduct this officer to the rear, and
place a couple of soldiers to see that he is not annoyed or
interfered with, in any way?"

Fergus was led away. Captain Wingratz called up two troopers and,
choosing an elevated spot of ground, told them to dismount and
allow no one to speak to the officer.

"From here," he said courteously to Drummond, "you will get a view
of the field of battle."

Fergus sat down on the grass, and remained a spectator of the fight
to the end of the day. He marked at once that the combat had rolled
down the hill, and that the Prussians were making their way in
force towards Lobositz. Then he saw heavy masses of infantry, from
the Austrian right, move forward to aid in its defence. For two
hours the battle raged round the village, the whole of the guns on
both sides aiding in the fight. Then volumes of smoke and flame
rose, and the Austrians were seen retiring. Sulowitz still kept up
a heavy fire, and he saw a strong body from the Austrian left move
down there; while the centre advanced to cover the retreat of the
defenders of Lobositz, and to check the advancing masses of the
Prussians; and he thought, for a time, that a general engagement
was about to take place. Then he saw the Prussian advance cease,
the roar of cannon gradually died away, and the battle was at an
end.

For an hour he remained, apparently unnoticed, then Captain
Wingratz rode up with another officer.

"I am sorry to have neglected you so long, Lieutenant Drummond; but
you see it was the fault of your own people, who have kept us so
busy. This is Lieutenant Kerr, a compatriot of yours, who will take
special charge of you."

"I am sorry that our meeting cannot take place under more
favourable circumstances," Kerr said, holding out his hand. "It
might well have been the other way.

"Now come with me to my tent. I have no doubt that you are hungry;
I can assure you that I am."

The two walked together for about a quarter of a mile, the Austrian
officer having left as soon as he had introduced them.

"There were three of us here this morning," Kerr said, as they
entered the tent. "The other two are missing. One I know is killed;
the other badly wounded, but whether he is dead or a prisoner I
cannot say.

"By the way, are you not the officer who cut his way through the
squadron of our regiment, and went on and joined your cavalry, who
at once fell back? I was in Lobositz, myself. My squadron was not
ordered out. As I hear that you were found by our cavalry as they
followed the Prussians, it struck me that it might be you; although
from Lobositz we could only see that it was a staff uniform that
the officer wore."

"Yes, it was I. I was carrying an order for the cavalry to retire."

"That was what we supposed, as soon as you were seen coming down
the valley; and as it would have suited us much better for the
Prussian cavalry to have stayed where it was for a little longer,
the general sent out a squadron to intercept you. It was a splendid
thing to do, on your part. Of course, there were a number of us
watching from the earthworks, and I can assure you that there was a
general inclination to cheer as you cut your way through our
fellows. I am sure that if I had known that it was a countryman I
should have done it, though the action was at the expense of my own
regiment.

"Our squadron suffered heavily as they rode back again, for that
battery from the Homolka turned its attention to them, as soon as
you had gone through. They had an officer and nearly thirty men
killed and wounded before they got back into shelter.

"How long have you been out here?"

"Only about two months."

"Really! You are lucky in getting onto Keith's staff."

"He is a cousin of my mother's," Fergus said.

"And he made you lieutenant, and aide-de-camp, at once."

"No. I was first a cornet, but I was promoted at Dresden. The king
had given strict orders about plundering, and it happened that I
came upon some marauders at their work, and had the good fortune to
rescue a gentleman of some importance from their hands; and the
king, who was furious at his orders being disobeyed, himself
promoted me.

"I had been lucky enough to get myself wounded in the affair. As I
lost a good deal of blood, I looked no doubt a good deal worse than
I was, and I expect that had a good deal to do with my getting the
step."

"Well, you are a lucky fellow. I was eight years a cornet before I
got promoted."

"I think my bad luck, in getting captured, balances my good fortune
in being promoted so soon."

"To some extent perhaps it does, but you will get the benefit when
you return. No doubt Fritz was watching you, as you rode. He must
have seen our cavalry coming down the slope, before the man in
command of your squadrons could have done so; and must have felt
that they were lost, unless his orders were received. He must have
been relieved, indeed, when he saw you reach them."

This had indeed been the case. The king and marshal had both been
watching through their glasses the Prussian cavalry, and marked how
the ground behind them was dotted thickly with the bodies of horses
and men.

"Will they never stop?" the king said impatiently. "These cavalry
men are always getting into scrapes with their impetuosity. Gorlitz
must have known that he was only sent forward to ascertain the
position of the Austrians, and not to fight their whole army. He
ought to have turned, as soon as that crossfire of their batteries
opened upon them."

"He knew that your majesty and the whole army would be watching
him, sire," Keith said quietly; "and I fancy that, under such
circumstances, few cavalry men would draw rein till they had done
something worthy of themselves."

At this moment the fog wreath moved away.

"See," the king exclaimed, "there is a great body of Austrian
cavalry moving along behind Sulowitz. That rise behind the village
must hide them from our men.

"Where is your messenger, Keith?"

"There he goes, sire. He is well out of the valley now and, by the
pace he is riding at, he won't be long before he reaches them."

"He won't reach them at all," the king said curtly, a minute later.
"See, there is a squadron of horse riding out from Lobositz, to cut
him off. No doubt they guess what his errand is."

"I see them, sire, and he must see them, too. He is checking his
horse, for his orderly is coming up to him."

"Then the cavalry will be lost," the king said. "The enemy's
batteries are playing havoc with them, and they will have the
Austrians down upon them in a few minutes.

"Ah! I expect Gorlitz sees them now. Our men are halting, and
forming up. I suppose he means to charge the Austrians when they
come up, but there are three to one against him. He is lost."

"There is hope yet, sire," Keith said, as he again turned his glass
on Fergus. "My aide-de-camp is going to charge the Austrian
squadron."

"So he is!" the king exclaimed, lowering his glass, for the
distance was little more than half a mile from the spot where he
stood. "He must be mad."

"It is possible he may do it, sire. His orderly is riding boot to
boot beside him. You know already that he is a good swordsman. He
will have the advantage that the enemy won't dream of his attacking
them, and the rate at which they are riding will help them through.

"There he goes!" and he raised the glass again to his eye. "Bravo!
They are through the first troop, and still together. Now they are
at it.

"There, sire, they are through the second troop. Bravo, Fergus!"

The king made no remark until he saw the Austrian squadron draw
rein. Then he said:

"Thank God, he has saved the cavalry! It was a glorious deed.
Marshal Keith, make out his commission as a captain, today."

"He is very young, sire," the marshal said hesitatingly.

"By Heaven, sir, I would promote him if he were an infant in arms!"
the king replied. "Why, Keith, the loss of half our cavalry would
have crippled us, and cavalry men are not made in a day.

"There, he has reached them now. I see they are wheeling. Well and
quickly done! Yes, they won't be overtaken; but three minutes
later, and not a man would have come back.

"Colonel Rogner," he said to one of the group of officers behind
him, "you will please ride down and meet the cavalry, when they
come in, and convey to Lieutenant Drummond my highest satisfaction
at the gallant manner in which he has carried out my orders. You
will also inform General Gorlitz that, in my opinion, he pushed his
reconnaissance much too far; but that I am well content with the
bravery shown by the troops, and at the manner in which he drew
them off on receipt of my order."

In five-and-twenty minutes the colonel returned, and said:

"I regret to say, your majesty, that Lieutenant Drummond is
missing. I have inquired among the officers and find that, as he
was following General Gorlitz, he and his horse suddenly pitched
forward and lay without movement. Evidently the horse was killed by
a cannon shot, but whether Mr. Drummond was also killed, they could
not say."

"We must hope not," the king said warmly. "I would not lose so
gallant a young officer, for a great deal.

"Keith, if we take Lobositz today, let a most careful search be
made, over the ground the cavalry passed, for his body. If it is
found, so much the worse. If not, it will be a proof that he is
either wounded or unhurt, and that he has been carried off by the
Austrian cavalry; who passed over the same ground as ours, and who
certainly would not trouble themselves to carry off his body."



Chapter 6: A Prisoner.


The next morning a horse was brought round for Fergus, and he at
once started, under the escort of a captain and Lieutenant Kerr and
fifty troopers, with thirteen other officers taken prisoners at
Lobositz. Seven hundred rank and file had also been captured.
These, however, were to march under an infantry escort on the
following day. Fergus afterwards learned that sixteen officers, of
whom eleven belonged to the cavalry, had been killed; and
eighty-one officers and about eighteen hundred men wounded in the
desperate fighting at Lobositz.

Fergus found that among the Austrians the battle of the previous
day was considered a victory, although they had lost their advanced
post at Lobositz.

"I cannot say it seemed so to me," he said to the lieutenant, as
they rode away from the camp.

"Why, we have prevented the king from penetrating into Bohemia."

"But the king could have done that three days ago, without fighting
a battle," Fergus said; "just as Schwerin did at Koeniggraetz.
There would have been no need to have marched night and day across
the mountains, in order to give battle to an army nearly twice the
strength of his own. His object was to prevent you from drawing off
the Saxons, and in that he perfectly succeeded."

"Oh, there are other ways of doing that! We had only to keep along
the other side of the Elbe until we faced Pirna, then they could
have joined us."

"It sounds easy," Fergus laughed, "but it would not be so easy to
execute. These mountain defiles are terrible, and you may be sure
that the king will not be idle while you and the Saxons are
marching to meet each other.

"However, it was a hard-fought battle, and I should think that our
loss must be quite as great as yours; for your artillery must have
played terrible havoc among our infantry, as they marched to the
assault of the village."

"Yes. I hear this morning that we have lost about a hundred and
twenty officers killed and wounded, and about two thousand one
hundred and fifty men, and nearly seven hundred missing or
prisoners. What your loss is, of course, I can't say."

"I cannot understand your taking so many prisoners," Fergus said.

"A great many of them belong to the cavalry. You see, all who were
dismounted by the fire of our guns were captured when our horse
swept down."

"Ah, yes! I did not think of that. I saw a good many men running
across the plain when I galloped out."

Two of the officers belonged to the 3rd Royal Dragoon Guards, half
of which regiment had taken part in the reconnaissance; and both
their horses, like his own, had been shot under them. As soon as
they were brought up from the tents where they had been lodged,
they exchanged a cordial greeting with Fergus. He no longer
belonged to the regiment, as on his promotion he had been gazetted
from it on to the staff; but during the time he had drilled with
them, in Berlin, he had come to be well known to all of them.

"I thought that it was you, lieutenant," one of them said. "I was
not far from you, when you charged through those Austrians. I was
unhorsed as we went forward, and was running back when I saw them
come out. There were a good many of us, and I thought their object
was to capture us. It was no use running, and I threw myself down,
in hopes they would think I had been knocked over. You passed
within thirty yards of me. Our guns opened so heavily on them,
after you had got through, that I thought it prudent to keep quiet
a little longer before I made a move; and the result was that the
Austrian cavalry, as it came along in the pursuit of our men,
picked me up.

"Do you know where we are bound for?"

"Prague in the first instance, but beyond that I cannot say. I
suppose it will depend a good deal on what takes place now. There
is no doubt the Saxons will have to surrender; and I suppose that,
anyhow, they will send us farther away, unless indeed there is an
exchange of prisoners."

A long day's ride took them to Prague. The news of the battle had
been sent off the night before, and as it had been reported as a
victory, the inhabitants were in a state of great delight. Bonfires
blazed in the streets, church bells rang in triumphant peals, and
the whole population was abroad. The arrival of this party, with
prisoners, afforded a welcome confirmation of the news.

There were a few yells and hoots, as they rode along in charge of
their escort; but as a rule the people stood silent, as if in
respect for their misfortunes, for most of the captives were
wounded. They were taken to the military prison, and comfortable
quarters assigned to them; and the wounds of those who required it
were redressed by a surgeon. There was a hearty parting between
Fergus and Kerr, as the latter, after handing over his prisoners,
turned to ride off with the escort to the barracks.

"I start early tomorrow for the camp again," he said. "If you are
kept here, I am sure to see you again before long."

Fergus shared a room with Captain Hindeman, an officer of the 3rd.

"I don't think it at all likely we shall remain here," the latter
said. "It is more probable that we shall be sent to Olmuetz, or to
one of the smaller fortresses in Moravia. The war is, they will
think, likely to be confined to Bohemia until the spring; if indeed
the king does not have to stand on the defensive. I cannot help
thinking, myself, that we should have done better if we had let
things go on quietly till the spring. It is not probable that
Russia and Austria would have been more ready, then, than they are
now; and we should have had the whole summer before us, and might
have marched to Vienna before the campaign was over. Now they will
all have the winter to make their preparations, and we shall have
France, Austria, and Russia, to say nothing of Poland, on our
hands. It is a tremendous job even for Frederick to tackle."

They remained for three weeks at Prague, and were then informed by
the governor that he had orders for them to be removed to Olmuetz.
Accordingly, the next day eight of the officers started on
horseback, under an escort. When they reached Bruenn they found
that they were to be separated, and the next morning Captain
Hindeman and Fergus were taken to the fortress of Spielberg.

"An awkward place either to get in or out of, Drummond," the
captain said, as they approached the fortress.

"Very much so," Fergus agreed. "But if I see a chance, I shall
certainly do my best to escape before spring."

"I don't think there is much chance of that," the other said
gloomily. "If we had been left at Prague, or even at Bruenn, there
might have been some chance; but in these fortresses, where
everything is conducted on a very severe system, and they are
veritable prisons, I don't think that anything without wings has a
chance of getting away."

As a rule, officers taken prisoners in war enjoyed a considerable
amount of liberty; and were even allowed to reside in the houses of
citizens, on giving their parole. The enforced embodiment of the
Saxons in the Prussian army had, however, excited such a storm of
indignation throughout Europe that it greatly damaged Frederick's
cause. It was indeed an unheard-of proceeding, and a most mistaken
one, for the greater part of the Saxons seized opportunities to
desert, as soon as the next campaign began. It was the more
ill-advised, since Saxony was a Protestant country, and therefore
the action alienated the other Protestant princes in Germany, whose
sympathies would have otherwise been wholly with Prussia; and it
was to no small extent due to that high-handed action that, during
the winter, the Swedes joined the Confederacy, and undertook to
supply an army of 50,000 men; France paying a subsidy towards their
maintenance, and the members of the Confederacy agreeing that, upon
the division of Prussia, Pomerania should fall to the share of
Sweden. Thus it may be said that the whole of Central and Northern
Europe, with the exception only of Hanover, was leagued against
Prussia.

It was a result of this general outburst of indignation that,
instead of being kept in a large town and allowed various
privileges, the prisoners taken at the battle of Lobositz were
treated with exceptional severity, and confined in isolated
fortresses. Fergus and his companion were lodged in a small room in
one of the towers. The window was strongly barred, the floor was of
stone, the door massive and studded with iron. Two truckle beds, a
table, and two chairs formed the sole furniture.

"Not much chance of an escape here," Captain Hindeman said, as the
door closed behind their guards.

"The prospect does not look very bright, I admit," Fergus said
cheerfully; "but we have a proverb, 'Where there is a will there is
a way'. I have the will certainly and, as we have plenty of time
before us, it will be hard if we do not find a way."

He went to the window and looked out.

"Over a hundred feet," he said, "and I should say a precipice fully
as deep at the foot of the wall. At any rate, we have the advantage
of an extensive view.

"I am glad to see that there is a fireplace, for the cold will be
bitter here, when the winter sets in. I wonder whether the rooms
above and below this are tenanted?"

Hindeman shrugged his shoulders. He was not, at present, in a mood
to take interest in anything. It was now the end of October, and
Fergus was very glad when the door opened again, and a warder came
in with two soldiers, who carried huge baskets of firewood; and it
was not long before a large fire was blazing on the hearth.

Day after day passed. Fergus turned over in his mind every possible
method of escape, but the prospect looked very dark. Even if the
door were open, there would be difficulties of all sorts to
encounter. In the middle of the day many people went in and out of
the fortress, with provisions, wood, and other matters; but at
sunset the gates were shut, and sentries placed on the walls; and
on getting out he would have to cross an inner courtyard, and then
pass through a gateway--at which a sentinel was posted night and
day--into the outer court, which was surrounded by a strong wall
over thirty feet high, with towers at the angles.

Escape from the window would be equally difficult. Two long and
very strong ropes would be required, and the bars of the window
were so massive that, without tools of any kind, it would be
impossible to remove them.

A month later Captain Hindeman fell ill, and was removed to the
infirmary. Fergus was glad of his departure. He had been so
depressed that he was useless as a companion and, so long as he
remained there, he altogether prevented any plan of escape being
attempted; for difficult as it might be for one person to get away,
it would be next to impossible for two to do so.

For an hour in the day, the prisoners had leave to walk on the
wall. His fellow prisoner had never availed himself of this
privilege; but Fergus always took his daily exercise, partly to
keep himself in health, partly in hopes that a plan of escape might
present itself. A sentry, however, was always posted on the wall
while the prisoners were at exercise; and on the side allotted for
