weighed upon their more enterprising companions. Neither could Annie and
Rose quite shut their eyes to the increase of wrinkles on their father's
face, and to their mother's red eyes when she came down of a morning.
If it had not been for these small drawbacks, it is to be feared that
Annie and Rose would have arrived at such a height of _tete exaltee_
that they would have begun to rejoice in their own and their neighbours'
misfortunes. There was something so fresh and exciting in looking about
for openings and careers, in calculating how they were to earn their
bread--which would taste so sweet to those who earned it--and at the
same time save money. They were not quite so insane as to propose to
amass fortunes and fling them into the gulf caused by the crumbling away
of the late bank in order to redeem their father's pledge as a
shareholder. But surely in the course of a year or two they might help
him, and generally assist in keeping the old folks at home in state and
bounty.

Annie and Rose looked on working for themselves in a very different
light from that in which they regarded Tom Robinson's sticking to his
father's and grandfather's shop. To be sure, they did not start with any
intention of keeping shops. Even if they had done so, the descent might
have been redeemed by a dash of sentiment and romance which did not
apply in the least to a man with only himself to look to, a man of
independent means to boot, who had forgotten what was expected from a
gentleman.

There was no danger of Dora or May's being infected with their sisters'
frame of mind. Dora and May were mortally ashamed of themselves. They
feared they were not of the stuff of which heroines--not to say
martyrs--were made. They looked back almost as fondly and sadly as their
mother looked on the old state of matters. They dreaded with a shrinking
terror going away from home, leaving their people, facing the cold,
critical world, being left to their own slender resources. It was bad
enough in Dora, but it was really dreadfully disappointing in May, with
her youthful learning, to have so little spirit and courage; still so it
was, and in the meantime there was no help for it. Dora might have been
glad for purely personal reasons to get away from Redcross for a time;
but she was not thrown into Tom Robinson's company, and the fact of his
refusal had been kept so quiet by the Millars that, unless he himself
betrayed it, which was not likely, the greatest gossip in the place
could only suspect the truth.

It was a small comfort to the unheroic pair, and perhaps to Annie and
Rose also, though they did not consciously take it into account, that
all the older professional men in the town, the leaders and those who
were on most intimate terms, were "in the same boat," as Dr. Millar had
said. But there was a family named Dyer lately settled at Redcross, a
semi-retired stockbroker, with his wife and daughters, who had come from
London to occupy Redcross Manor-house--naturally they had nothing to do
with Carey's Bank, and were still supposed to be rolling in wealth, as
they had been reported from the first. However, there was a notion that
the Dyers' riches had not been acquired in any very refined fashion.
Cyril Carey had always insisted, as he settled his collar and twirled
his cane, that stockbroker was simply pawnbroker writ large. Anyhow the
Dyers were not so distinguished in mind and manners as they were
wealthy. Old conservative folks sighed at the idea of Redcross
Manor-house, which had belonged to the Cliftons from time immemorial,
till the last Clifton fell into the hands of the Jews before he was
twenty, and was driven to break the entail by the time he was forty,
passing to a family of Dyers. The best that could be said of them was,
that the old people were comparatively inoffensive and the young were
presentable. They were inclined to be friendly with the town--it might
be till they could secure a footing with the county people, if that were
possible. They dressed well, thanks to their milliners and dressmakers,
kept a good table, a good stable, and a good staff of domestics, and
furnished Redcross--especially young Redcross--with country-house
hospitalities and gay gatherings, which they would otherwise have
lacked. Yet fanatics of young people like Annie and Rose Millar, who
were persuaded that they were now well acquainted with a reverse of
fortune, began to behave as if they considered it was no longer the
_creme de la creme_ of human experience to amass and retain a fortune.
They began to pity the rampantly prosperous family for the lack on their
part of any knowledge of life's vicissitudes, with their trumpet call to
earnest effort and supreme self-devotion--all that makes man or woman
worthy of the name. As for the younger Dyers, they were content to echo
the sentiments of their mouthpiece, the head of their house. He spoke in
the privacy of his family with a half-affable, half-contemptuous concern
for those unfortunate beggars of uppish Redcross townspeople who had all
come to smash by the failure of one paltry twopenny-halfpenny local
bank.

The Millars were constantly hearing of fresh examples of hardship, and
courage to meet the hardship, piquing and inciting them to enterprise
and self-sacrifice on their own account. Now it would be May, who would
come in from Miss Burridge's with a blanched face, crying, "Oh! you
girls, do you know Ella Carey has gone and is not coming back again?
Phyllis is crying her eyes out, because she and Ella were never
separated before. No, Ella has not gone to be a lady-help, as she
thought she might do, after she had got a little more practice in
washing dishes and peeling potatoes. It is nothing bad, except that she
is gone for good and all, and it has been so sudden. And Mrs. Carey says
Ella is not to come back. One of her sisters, the one without children,
Mrs. Tyrrel, wrote and offered to take either of the girls. And what do
you think Mrs. Carey said? That Ella must go, because if she went there
would be a mouth less to feed. She was sorry, because she said it was
giving up Ella, and she told her she must not expect to have much more
to do with Phyllis and the rest of them at home, for it would be out of
the question, in the different circumstances of the Tyrrels and Careys,
for them to carry on frequent or intimate intercourse. Ella would have
refused if she had dared, for she is so fond of Phyllis and all of them,
even of her mother, though she has grown very hard since the bank
failed. She used to let the girls have their own way. Don't you
remember, Rose, she allowed us to dress up for charades out of her
wardrobe? Why, you once wore her wedding-gown pinned up round you. But
Mrs. Carey would not give Ella any choice. She repeated that there would
be one mouth the less to feed. She said Ella was the elder, and it was
her duty to her father and his creditors to go. So all poor Ella's
things were sought out and packed up last night--the letter only came
yesterday. She has had no time to bid Rose and me, or any of her other
friends, good-bye. She started with Cyril early this morning, and I
don't know what Phyllis will do without her."

"She must do the best she can," said Annie promptly, "and occupy herself
with something better than gossiping with you when she chances to meet
you coming from school. I suppose that was the manner in which you heard
all this; I don't think Mrs. Carey will approve of such a waste of
time."

"But, Annie," pled May, with her dark eyes ready to brim over, "poor
Phyllis has only me now, and she has a great many messages to go,
because their single servant has so much work to do in the house that
she cannot get out marketing. Mrs. Carey is always walking or sitting
with Mr. Carey. If it were not so, Phyllis is sure that her mother would
go out and not mind taking the market-basket herself--a rough, heavy
market-basket. The Careys' servants used to complain because one of them
was expected to carry it in the mornings. Phyllis is glad to let me have
it sometimes, her arms get tired and ache so. You see Jack and Dick are
not often home from school in time, and then they have the boots and
knives to clean. Cyril would carry it for her after it was dark, but
Mrs. Carey won't let her go out then, and sends her off to bed that she
may get up earlier for what she has to do in the morning."

That rough market-basket over which the Careys' former servants had
grumbled, was like a badge of honour in certain shining eyes--far more
so than Thirza Dyer's thoroughbred, or Camilla and Gussy Dyer's
exquisite hats and dainty parasols. Even Annie Millar was not too old or
too wise to refrain from wishing that Mrs. Millar, who still would not
let her daughters soil their fingers if she could help it, had sent them
out marketing in their native town, each in her turn flourishing a
market-basket.

At another time it would be Rose who would arrive flushed and breathless
with the great piece of news that Ned Hewett had taken the post of
station-master at a small station somewhere on the Yorkshire moors. He
had done it when nothing else turned up, without waiting to consult his
father. But the Rector had not forbidden him when he heard. Steadiness
and punctuality had always been Ned's strong points, so that, though he
had not taken his degree at the university, and his old masters had said
they were not surprised to hear it, he might be trusted not to wreck
trains, slay their passengers, and find himself tried for manslaughter.
The difficulty was to fancy a big, slow fellow like Ned rushing here and
there in a noisy, fussy little station. After all, it would only be
noisy and fussy at long intervals, and on rare occasions, "somewhere on
the Yorkshire moors." Ned might have time and space to walk about in.
But what of the uniform? Would the poor boy--they had all known him as a
boy--who had once cherished the notion of going into the army, have to
wear a railway company's coat and a station-master's cap? How funny it
sounded! Well, not altogether funny. There were Dora and May crying at
the bare anticipation. If they were ever on the Yorkshire moors, and had
to greet Ned in this extraordinary guise, it would be awkward for all
parties, to say the least. What were they thinking of? Of course they
would be proud to greet him when he was twice the man that he had ever
been. No doubt Cyril Carey would be glad to have Ned's chance; Cyril,
who had renounced his delicate plush vests and Indian gold chains and
charms, his loitering and dawdling, and taken to a shabby shooting-suit
and spade-husbandry. He was getting rid of his time and keeping out of
his mother's way by digging aimlessly in the garden. He was inquiring,
in a desultory fashion, all over Redcross for any opening in an office
which he could fill. He was not likely to find such an opening unless
it were made for him out of charity. He had not been trained to office
work, and he was far from having Ned Hewett's reputation for steadiness
and punctuality. If Tom Robinson should be the charitable man and ask
Cyril, a schoolfellow and college chum, to help him with his accounts,
the head of "Robinson's" would have to be at the trouble of running up
every column of figures over again. Cyril might ride to hounds and row
in a boat-race with the best; he might even have some elegant
acquaintance with the renaissance and old French, and be capable of
distinguishing himself in stately Latin verse, though that sounded more
than doubtful when he had been plucked at his university--the
inhabitants of Redcross did not, as a rule, pretend to be judges in such
matters. What they did know, because it had oozed out some time before,
was that Cyril Carey, though a banker's son, was lamentably weak in
arithmetic, and his handwriting would have been held a disgrace to any
shop-boy.

Money was required to start lads in the world in the humblest fashion.
Ned Hewett wanted an outfit, and if possible furniture for his
station-house, that he might not begin on credit. Even girls, though
they had been a good deal set aside in such consideration, could not
enter on an independent career without money any more than boys could.
The Millars were therefore thankful that Mrs. Millar had a little money
of her own, not above a hundred and fifty pounds a year, settled upon
her from the first, by one of those marriage contracts which are so hard
to break, and she could use it to supply what was needed for the girls,
who were going into the world with such dauntless spirits and light
hearts.




CHAPTER VII.

ROSE GOES WEST AND ANNIE GOES EAST.


In the end it was settled, to Annie and Rose's great satisfaction, and
no less to the temporary relief of Dora and May's quaking hearts, that
the two former were to take the first plunge into unknown waters. If
things had been as they were formerly, and there had been leisure to
spare from rougher rubs for highly delicate considerations, it might, as
has been hinted, have been held that Dora should have been the sister
selected to go away from Redcross--at least for a time.

But a great deal had happened since Tom Robinson's unsuccessful suit and
all connected with it had been in honour hushed up. People had too many
weighty matters to think of to keep in mind that small sentimental
episode between a couple of young people.

Rose's fate was chalked out from the first. She was to be an
artist--that went without saying. She had certainly artistic talent, she
might have genius. But though she had been tolerably well trained so
far, by a good drawing-master at Miss Burridge's, and by the lessons she
had received from the wandering exhibitor at the Academy and the
Grosvenor, neither she nor her family could be sufficiently infatuated
to imagine she wanted no more teaching. Their conceptions of art might
be crude, and their faith in Rose unbounded, but they did not suppose
that she had only to open her portfolio and sell its contents as often
as it was full. Dr. and Mrs. Millar made up their minds, Rose agreeing
with them, that she should have at least a year in a London studio.

All the three considered it very fortunate when the artist who had
given her lessons at Redcross, hearing of her intention, and of what
had rendered it incumbent on her to work for her living, not only
recommended a studio in which art classes were held, but good-naturedly
gave her a testimonial and helped her to a post as assistant
drawing-mistress in a ladies' school, a situation which she could fill
on two days of the week, while she attended the art classes on the
remaining four. The salary thus obtained was of the smallest, but it
would supplement Mrs. Millar's allowance to Rose, and help to pay her
board in some quiet, respectable family living midway between the
school and the studio. Rose was a lucky girl, and she thought herself
so. Indeed that minimum salary raised her to such a giddy pinnacle in
her own estimation that it nearly turned her head. It was only her
sisters, the wise Annie among them, who regarded the assistant
drawing-mistress-ship with impatience as a waste of Rose's valuable
time and remarkable talents.

A qualification came soon to Rose's exultation and to her pride in being
the first of her father's daughters--and she the third in point of
age--who had just left school, and had hardly been reckoned grown-up by
Annie till quite lately--to earn real tangible money, gold guineas,
however few. For something better still befell Annie. If Rose was lucky,
Annie was luckier. True, she would never be a great artist, she would
never get hundreds and thousands for a picture. At the utmost she would
only be at the head of a charitable institution. She might save the
greater part of her income then, and hand it over to her father, but
that was a very different prospect from the other. Still, from the
beginning Annie would be, so to speak, self-supporting; she need not
cost her mother or anybody else a penny, her very dress would be
provided for her. Above all Annie was going to do a great deal of good,
to be a comfort and blessing, not only to her people, but to multitudes
besides. She was, please God, to help to lessen the great crushing mass
of pain and misery in the world, not by passive, sentimental sympathy,
not by little fitful, desultory doles of practical aid, but by the
constant daily work of her life. Young as Rose was, and enamoured of art
in her way, she was able to comprehend that if Annie could do that
worthy deed, her life would be greater in a sense, fuller in its
humanity, perhaps also sweeter than that of the most famous and
successful painter.

Annie had always taken a lively interest in her father's profession, and
he had liked her to do so. He had been fond of talking to her about it,
and enlightening her on some of its leading principles. He had even
pressed her into his service in little things, and been gratified by the
hereditary firmness and lightness of grasp and touch, the control over
her own nerves and power of holding those of others in check, the quick
and correct faculty of observation she had displayed. But with all his
loyal allegiance to the calling which had been his father's before it
was his, which he would have liked to see his son fill, if a son had
been born to him, he was taken aback and well-nigh dismayed, as her
mother was, when Annie came and told them quietly that she had made up
her mind, if they would consent, to go into an hospital and be trained
for a nurse. He laid before her as calmly and clearly as he could the
conditions of the undertaking, and reminded her that it could not be
gone into by halves, while he thought, as he spoke, that Annie was not
the style of young woman to go into anything by halves.

Mrs. Millar followed with a trembling recital of the painfulness, the
absolute horror to a young girl of many of the details of the office.
But Annie was not shaken in the least. "I should not mind that," she
asserted with conviction. "I know there must be strict discipline and
hard trying work, with no respite or relaxation to speak of; but I am
young and strong, fitter to stand such an ordeal than most girls of my
age are qualified. I am too young, you say? Yes, I admit that; it is a
pity--at least I know I have always reckoned myself too young when the
thought crossed my mind six months--a year ago, of leaving home and
becoming trained for a nurse."

"You don't mean to say, Annie, that you ever thought of going out into
the world before our misfortunes in connection with the bank?" cried
both father and mother in one breath.

Annie hung her shapely head a little, then held it up, and confessed
frankly, "Yes, I have. Oh, you must forgive me. It was not from any
failure of kindness on your part, or, I trust, any failure on mine to
appreciate your kindness, for I believe you are the best, dearest father
and mother in the world," she cried, carried out of herself, and
betrayed into enthusiasm. "But what were you to do with a houseful of
girls, when one would have served to give you all the help you need,
mother, in your housekeeping and the company you see? I _have_ hated the
idea of being of no use in the world, unless I chanced to marry," ended
Annie, with a quick, impatient sigh.

"My dear, you are talking exaggerated nonsense." Mrs. Millar reproved
her daughter with unusual severity, dislodging her cap by the energy
of her remonstrance, so that Annie had to step forward promptly,
arrest it on its downward path, and set it straight before the
