"It was a friendly thought to ask your neighbors to share your good
fortune," said Mr. Lyon as he greeted Mrs. Weston.

"To tell the truth, 'twas Anna who first thought of it," she responded,
and was well pleased when Mrs. Lyon declared that she was not surprised
to hear it, as she considered Anna a very thoughtful and generous child.

Rebecca had forgotten for the time her own sense of unworthiness, and
was smiling happily as friend after friend arrived, when suddenly her
smile vanished. For coming up the path in a fine dress of pale yellow
muslin and wearing a flower-trimmed hat was Lucia Horton. No one but
Rebecca, of course, was surprised to see Lucia. It was to be expected
that she would be a guest at Rebecca's house. Anna and Luretta did not
see Lucia's arrival, but Rebby stood quite still, pale and angry, and
watched Lucia smiling and speaking to the neighbors. Then Lucia came
straight toward Rebecca, and, making an ugly face at her, exclaimed:

"Who is afraid of you, anyway, Rebecca Flora Weston?"




                               CHAPTER XV

                            REBBY AND LUCIA

Rebby was too astonished at Lucia's unexpected appearance to make any
response to this rude salutation; and, with another scornful glance,
Lucia went on her way to where Mrs. Lyon and Mrs. Weston were talking
together, and took a seat beside them, and was cordially welcomed by
Rebecca's mother, who, of course, knew nothing of the trouble between
the two girls.

"Lucia has forgotten her cup and spoon, Rebby; bring her your lustre
mug," called Mrs. Weston.

For a moment Rebby pretended not to hear. She was filling the cups with
cool spring water, and not until her mother called the second time did
she start toward the house for her cherished lustre mug. She was ready
to cry at the thought of Lucia's insulting words, and now she must carry
the pretty mug to her, and serve her as though she were a welcome
guest.

"I won't let her know that I care; and I must be polite because she is a
guest, even if she wasn't invited," thought Rebby, as carrying the
lustre mug and a birch-bark plate with a square of honeycomb and a
brownish crisp "spider-cake" she went toward Lucia.

Neither of the little girls spoke, and Rebby did not look at her former
friend who had led her into such sad mischief. Then suddenly there was a
crash, a loud cry from Lucia and from Rebby as the lustre mug fell to
the ground, and the contents of the frail plate streamed over the
delicate yellow muslin of Lucia's fine dress.

"Oh! She has spoiled my dress! She did it on purpose! She did! She did!"
wailed Lucia, while Rebecca stood looking at the pieces of her cherished
mug that had been brought from Boston when the Westons moved to Machias.

"She dropped it on purpose," Rebby said, but no one seemed to think of
her mug. Mrs. Lyon and Mrs. Weston were both endeavoring to comfort
Lucia, and to repair the harm done to the yellow muslin. But the honey
and water were not easily removed from the delicate fabric.

"I am going home. It's a cheap, foolish party anyway. Honey and water,
and corn-bread!" sobbed Lucia angrily, pulling away from the friendly
women, and running down the path.

Mrs. Lyon and Mrs. Weston looked after her in amazed disapproval.

"I begin to think there is something in the rumors that Captain Horton
and his wife are not trustworthy," Mrs. Lyon said. "The child is so
ill-bred she can be but indulged and spoiled at home," and Mrs. Weston
agreed. But neither of them imagined that Lucia's mother and father were
disloyal to the American cause, and only waiting a profitable
opportunity to betray the little settlement to its enemies.

Lucia's angry words cast but a brief shadow over the gathering, and no
one noticed that Rebecca had disappeared. At the moment Lucia started
for home Rebby had run toward the house. She hurried up the stairs to
the little room under the roof where she and Anna slept, and from the
closet she drew out the square wooden box that her father had made for
her. Her initials R. F. W. were carved inside a small square on the
cover, and it had a lock and key. Rebby was very proud of this box, and
in it she kept her most treasured possessions: a handkerchief of fine
lawn with a lace edge, a pin made from a silver sixpence, and the
prayer-book her Grandmother Weston had given her. When Lucia gave her
the silk mitts for a birthday present Rebby had put them carefully away
with these other treasures. Now she pulled them out hurriedly, and,
without waiting to close the box, she ran down the stairs through the
kitchen, keeping carefully out of sight of the group under the elm
trees, until she could not be seen from the house. Then she caught a
glimpse of Lucia's yellow dress, and ran faster than before. But she did
not call Lucia's name. She said to herself that she would never speak to
Lucia again.

Hearing the hurrying steps behind her Lucia looked over her shoulder,
and seeing Rebby she became frightened and ran faster than ever. Lucia
did not know why she was afraid, but she remembered that she had not
been asked to the party, that she had spoken insultingly to Rebby,
and--she had dropped the mug purposely. So it was small wonder that her
guilty conscience accused her, and that she was eager to reach home
before Rebby could overtake her.

On raced the two girls along the narrow path. A few men at the wharves
watched the flying figures, but no one imagined it more than a game.
Very soon the Horton house was in sight. Its front door opening on the
street stood open to admit the pleasant spring air. In a moment Lucia
was in the house and had slammed and fastened the door behind her.

Rebby stood on the step breathless, the silk mitts clasped in her hand.
After a moment she rapped loudly on the door. There was no response. But
in a moment an upper window opened, and Mrs. Horton looked down at
Rebby.

"Why, Rebecca Flora!" she exclaimed in her pleasant voice. "Lucia has
gone to your party."

"If you please, Mrs. Horton, I have brought back the mitts Lucia gave me
for a birthday present," responded Rebby, her voice faltering a little.

"Oh! Don't they fit? Why, that is a shame. Well, lay them on the step,"
said Mrs. Horton, wondering why Rebby should look so flushed and warm,
and why she had not given the mitts to Lucia. Later on, when she heard
Lucia's account of Rebby's turning honey and water over the pretty
yellow muslin, she decided that Rebecca was ashamed to keep a gift after
treating Lucia so badly.

Rebby went slowly toward home tired and unhappy. All the pleasure of
the party, she said to herself, was spoiled. She was not sorry to give
up the mitts, for everything that reminded her of Lucia made her think
of the night when they had pushed the liberty tree from its moorings.

When she was nearly home she heard Mr. Foster's whistle and in a moment
they were face to face.

"Well, Rebecca Flora, 'twas a fine party," he said smilingly, for Mr.
Foster had not seen the accident to the mug. "The neighbors are all
smiling and cheerful, and we are all the better for meeting in this
neighborly fashion," and Mr. Foster ended his sentence with a whistle
like a bird's note. "You must come with the others to the liberty pole
on Sabbath morning," he added. "Parson Lyon is to preach to us there,
and 'twill be a great occasion."

"Yes, sir," Rebby responded, and went slowly on up the slope. It began
to seem to her that she would never escape from the liberty pole. And
now she met Mr. and Mrs. Lyon, with Melvina dancing along in front of
them. "More like Danna than Danna is like herself," thought Rebby,
smiling, as she remembered how sedately and quietly Melvina had walked
before Danna and Luretta had played their mischievous pranks on the day
of the tempest.

The neighbors had all gone when Rebecca reached home, and Mrs. Weston
and Anna were in the house, while Mr. Weston and Paul were taking up the
seats under the elm trees. The pieces of the broken lustre mug lay on
the kitchen table, and Rebby's face clouded as she stood looking at
them.

"Lucia Horton dropped it on purpose!" she said. "I know she did."

"And nobody asked her to come to our party," added Anna; "'twas rude of
her to come."

Mrs. Weston looked in astonishment at her two little daughters.

"Not ask Lucia?" she questioned, and listened to Rebby's explanation:
that, because of the Hortons' store of dainties, and their scorn of the
simple fare of their neighbors, Rebby had decided not to ask Lucia to
her party.

But when the little girl had finished her story, Mrs. Weston shook her
head disapprovingly.

"I am not pleased with you, Rebecca," she said. "'Twas not a kind
thought to sit in judgment and decide to punish a friend for something
that is no fault of hers. Lucia did right to come. Of course she thought
you would welcome her."

"She didn't! She didn't!" exclaimed Rebby. "She made up faces at me, and
said--"

"Never mind, Rebecca. You see what comes from quarreling. Your mug is
broken, Lucia's dress is spoiled, and you had no pleasure from the
afternoon. Now, there is something for you to do to put this straight.
You must take off your pinafore, put on your sunbonnet, and go straight
to Mrs. Horton's and ask Lucia's pardon."

"Oh, Mother!" wailed Rebby. "It isn't fair. It isn't my fault."

But Mrs. Weston was firm. From Rebby's own story her mother decided that
she had been unfair to Lucia; she did not ask if Rebby had purposely
spilled the honey on Lucia's muslin dress, but she felt it was not the
time to allow any ill feeling among the families of the settlement, and
that Rebecca's failure to ask the Hortons to come with the other
neighbors to taste the wild honey could easily offend them.

Anna stood looking first at Rebby and then at her mother. It was so
seldom that Rebby cried, that it seemed a very dreadful thing to her
younger sister.

"I'll go, Mother, let me go!" she asked eagerly.

"Do not be so foolish, Anna," responded Mrs. Weston. "This is your
sister's duty. It has nothing to do with you. Take off your pinafore,
Rebecca, and do as I bid you."

Rebecca was sobbing bitterly. She could not believe that her mother
really meant that she should go and ask Lucia Horton's forgiveness.

"If you knew----" she began, tempted to tell her mother all that Lucia
had said about the liberty pole, and even what they had done to prevent
its erection. But the memory of her promise held her. She knew that her
mother expected obedience, and she took off her pinafore, took her
sunbonnet, and, still sobbing, went slowly from the room. Anna started
to follow her, but Mrs. Weston called her back sharply.

"Anna, you are not to go with your sister," she said, and the little
girl came slowly back.

"Oh, dear," she sighed, "I wish Lucia Horton would go sailing off to far
lands. To--to Egypt," she concluded. For Anna had never heard much that
was pleasant about Egypt, and was sure that all this trouble was
Lucia's fault.

Rebecca had never been so unhappy in her life as when she realized that
her mother expected her to go to the Hortons' and ask Lucia's pardon for
not inviting Mrs. Horton and Lucia to the honey party. There were robins
singing in the trees, bluebirds flitting about with gay little notes,
and the spring day was full of beauty, but Rebby was not conscious of it
as she went slowly along the path.

Very soon she was again standing in front of the Hortons' door, and
summoning all her courage she rapped loudly. There was no response, and
after a few moments she rapped again; but the house seemed silent and
deserted, and no one came to open the door.

And now Rebecca did not know what to do. If she went home she knew that
her mother would say that she must return at a later hour to fulfil her
errand. So the little girl decided to sit down on the steps and wait for
a time.

Twilight was near at hand. The sun was low in the western sky, and a
cool little breeze crept up from the river and stirred the tree-tops.
Shadows gathered about the house, and still there was no sign or sound
of the Hortons, and Rebby was about to start for home when a man came
around the corner of the house and spoke to her.

He was evidently a sailor, and in a great hurry. He asked no questions
but began speaking as if he had no time to lose.

"Tell your mother that the _Polly_ and _Unity_ will come into harbor
to-morrow, and that Captain Jones is on board the _Unity_. There's a
British gunboat along with them, and your father says there may be
trouble, and for you and your mother to keep close indoors until he
comes."

The sailor started to move off, but Rebby found courage to ask:

"Where--where are the sloops now?"

"Anchored below Round Island; but we'll be sailing in with morning tide.
The Captain bade me keep well out of sight and come straight back to the
sloop. Be sure you tell your mother," responded the man, speaking in
such low tones that Rebby had to listen sharply to understand.

"Yes, I'll tell my mother," she replied, and without a moment's
hesitation she started for home as fast as her feet could carry her. She
had entirely forgotten her anger toward Lucia, or her mother's reproof.
All she could think of was the news this sailor, evidently a member of
the _Polly's_ crew, had told her, believing that he was speaking to
Lucia Horton.

And now Rebecca recalled all that Lucia had told her of what might
befall the little village if a British gunboat sailed into harbor and
saw a liberty tree flaunting its courageous defiance to injustice. But
now she could tell her father, not Lucia's secret, but what the sailor
had told her.

"And Father will know what to do. Father and Mr. Lyon," she thought
breathlessly, as she ran swiftly up the path and burst into the kitchen,
where her father and mother and Anna were waiting her return.

She told her story quickly, and without any mention of what Lucia had
confided in her weeks before. "The sailor thought I was Captain Horton's
little girl," she concluded.

Mr. Weston questioned Rebby carefully, and then said:

"I'll take this news to Captain O'Brien and to Parson Lyon; but say
nothing about it to anyone until we see what news the _Polly_ brings."
And he hurried away to prepare his neighbors for possible danger.

"You see, Rebby, your obedience may have saved the settlement," said
Mrs. Weston, putting her arm about Rebecca.

"But I had not seen Lucia, Mother. I was waiting for her," said Rebecca.

Mrs. Weston made no answer; her thoughts were too full of the possible
dangers to the settlement from the British gunboat to think much of the
postponed apology; nor was the matter ever again mentioned.

"Now, Rebby, you really have done something for America," declared Anna,
as the sisters went up to their room that night. But Rebby shook her
head.

"No, Danna, I haven't. But perhaps I can sometime, and you too," she
replied. For some reason, that Rebby could not explain even to herself,
her thoughts centered around what her father had said on their trip to
the Falls of the store of powder and shot at Chandler's River
settlement. She had heard her father say that Machias was but ill
provided with munitions; and with a British gunboat coming into harbor
the next day who could tell how quickly powder and shot might be
needed?




                              CHAPTER XVI

                             REBBY DECIDES


The next morning dawned bright and tranquil. The fragrance of pine woods
and broad meadows filled the air, and practically all the inhabitants of
Machias gathered about the wharves to watch for the _Polly_ and _Unity_
to come sailing into harbor.

The provisions the sloops were bringing were greatly needed; but when
Mr. Weston had told the men of the settlement that the sloops were being
convoyed by a British war vessel their alarm and consternation can be
imagined. Mrs. Horton and Lucia were about the only ones absent from the
wharf when, silently and without a cheer of welcome, the _Polly_ and
_Unity_, and the boat flying the hated English flag came to anchor.

Captain Jones came ashore, greeting his old-time friends cordially, and
explaining that the presence of the gunboat was only to protect him from
attacks by British cruisers. But his explanation was received in
silence. The memory of the recent battle in Lexington was fresh in the
people's hearts, and much as they needed the provisions on the sloops
they were ready to do without them unless Captains Horton and Jones
could assure their fellow-townsmen of their loyalty and send the British
gunboat from the harbor.

Finally he received consent to land his goods, and commenced trading
with the people as usual, while the _Margaretta_, the British gunboat,
lay at anchor off White's Point, some distance below the town.

Mrs. Lyon received many packages from her Boston relatives, and there
were two dolls for Melvina, the ones of which Luretta had spoken on the
day when she and Anna had led Melvina to the shore to show her a "clam's
nest."

Rebecca's gold beads, intended for her birthday, were safely delivered;
and beside the beads was a pair of silk mitts for both Rebby and Anna.
To Rebby this seemed a very wonderful thing, and she felt it almost a
reward for carrying back those Lucia had given her.

Mrs. Horton now kept Lucia closely at home. Anna and Luretta were
invited to spend an afternoon with Melvina, and become acquainted with
the new dolls, and Melvina urged Luretta to bring Trit, resolving to
dress up the rabbit as she and Anna had done before.

Rebecca was more aware of the troubled condition of the settlement than
were these younger girls. Paul Foster told her that his Uncle Benjamin,
a bold and energetic man who had served in the old French War, said that
the Machias men ought to capture the British gunboat, and take the
sloops, making their captains and crews prisoners. Rebby listened
eagerly.

"But we couldn't capture them, Paul; I heard Father say there was but
little powder and shot in the settlement," she said.

"We'd get 'em," declared Paul. "If Jones and Horton think they are going
to load up their sloops with lumber for British barracks in Boston
they'll see trouble."

"And Parson Lyon is not to preach at the liberty pole," said Rebby a
little thoughtfully.

Paul made no response to this. He had come up to the Westons' on an
errand for his mother, and was now eager to get back to the wharves
where the sloops were being unloaded.

"If the Britisher fires on our liberty pole they'll hear a sermon all
right," he called back as he ran down the path.

It was difficult for Rebby to attend to the simple duties that her
mother required of her. Whenever her father entered the house she
watched his face anxiously, half-expecting him to say that the Machias
men were ready to capture the gunboat before it could attack the town.
When Anna came home eager to describe Melvina's new dolls, and to tell
of dressing up Trit, and that London Atus, coming into the room where
the little girls were playing and seeing the rabbit wearing a white
skirt and bonnet, had turned and run out muttering something about
"witches," Rebby listened, but with little interest.

"Danna," she said, as soon as the sisters were alone, "do you suppose
you and I could find the way to Chandler's River?"

"Of course we could," Anna declared. "Don't you remember that Father
showed us where the trail began, marked by 'spotted' trees?"

"Yes, I remember. Listen, Anna; there is hardly any powder or shot in
Machias; if there were the men could protect the liberty pole."

"Yes, yes," Anna responded quickly. "I heard Parson Lyon telling
Captain O'Brien that all the men ought to be ready to defend the
settlement."

"Oh, Anna! There are quantities of powder stored at Chandler's Mills.
Why couldn't we go after it?" Rebby whispered. "Then indeed we would be
helping, and perhaps 'twould save the liberty pole."

"Would Father let us?" Anna asked doubtfully.

"Don't you see? We must go after it without telling anyone; then when we
bring it back the men can drive off or capture the gunboat," Rebecca
explained.

"I think Father ought to know," persisted Anna, so that at last Rebby
said no more, after Anna had promised not to repeat Rebby's plan to
anyone.

But Rebby slept but little that night. If the gunboat fired on the town
she felt it would be her fault for having kept Lucia's secret to
herself; and yet she dared not break a promise. In some way Rebby felt
that she must do something to make right her foolish act in helping
Lucia set the liberty tree adrift.

The next day Captain Jones began his preparations to load the sloops
with lumber for Boston, and the Machias men, doubtful of the Captain's
loyalty, determined that the sloops should not return to Boston. Rebby
and Anna were in the lumber yard filling a basket with chips, when a
number of men talking of this decision passed them.

"If we only had more powder and shot," said one; "but we cannot spare a
single man to go to Chandler's River after supplies."

"There, Anna!" exclaimed Rebby. "Did you hear what those men said? Do
you not see that we can help as much as a real soldier? We can go to
Chandler's River. We must."

"Perhaps Father would give us permission if we asked him," Anna
persisted. But Rebecca shook her head at this suggestion; she dared not
risk the chance of a refusal.

"We ought to go at once," she said earnestly. "'Twill be a long tramp,
and the gunboat may come up the harbor and threaten the settlement any
day. Do say you will go, Anna."

Rebby knew that Anna's knowledge of the forest, her strength and
courage, would be all that could enable her to undertake the task.
Without Anna she feared that she might fail in finding her way, and
never reach Chandler's River.

"Think, Danna! The gunboat will shoot down our liberty pole! Perhaps
burn the church and our houses, and they may carry off our father a
prisoner! 'Tis what they try to do whenever Americans resist; and if the
Machias men have powder and shot they'll not let the gunboat come near.
And we can get the powder and save the settlement. Oh, Danna----"

Rebby's petition ended in a wail.

And now Anna was as eager to start as Rebby herself. The thought of her
father being taken a prisoner and that she and Rebby could prevent so
great a misfortune made her no longer hesitate.

"We will start to-morrow morning, early," she said. "We must make sure
that our moccasins are in good shape, Rebby; and we must take some
corn-bread, for 'twill be a good journey. How early can we start,
Rebby?"

"Before sunrise, surely," responded Rebby, "and I will write on a strip
of birch-bark what we are going to do, and pin it to Father's hat. Then
they will not worry about us."

"Worry! Why, Father will think it a brave deed," declared Anna. "I wish
we had started this morning."

That day seemed very long to the sisters. They made their preparations
carefully for the next day's journey, and at an early hour went to bed,
so that they might awaken in good season.

The next morning dawned clear. Before the sun was up Anna was wide
awake, and at her whispered "Rebby," her sister's eyes opened quickly,
and they slipped quietly out of bed. In a few moments they were fully
dressed for their tramp through the forest. Very cautiously they made
their way down the stairs. The house was silent. Neither Mr. nor Mrs.
Weston heard the faintest sound to disturb their slumbers.

On the piece of smooth birch-bark that Rebby had made ready on the
previous day, with a bit of charcoal from the fireplace she wrote:

"Dear Mother and dear Father: Anna and I are going to Chandler's River
to bring home powder and shot for Machias men to use to save the
settlement. We will be home to-morrow. Your loving Rebby and Danna."

They slipped this under the deerskin thong that was twisted about Mr.
Weston's hat, opened the kitchen door gently, and moved noiselessly
along in the shadow of the house, then ran swiftly up the path, and in a
short time were out of sight of the houses of the settlement.
