anything now, and even Marion began to get frightened at last, for only
murmured words among the crowd could tell them what was going on, but
there was a bustle and expectancy and a swaying to and fro of the
multitude that convinced Marion something unusual must be taking place,
for they did not move a step forward for all the pushing and squeezing.

"Oh, dear! how late we shall be," said Kate, after a few minutes'
waiting.  "Can't we get out, Marion?"

"No, that we can't until the crowd moves.  There, don't be frightened;
Mrs. Maple won't expect us yet," said Marion.

It was some time before there was any perceptible movement in the
crowd, but at last the two girls were released from their corner, and
pushed their way on with the rest.

Once outside, they began to look about for their former companions, but
could see nothing of them.  The crowd had almost dispersed now, for
they were nearly the last to leave the theatre, and so there was no
difficulty in looking round, but neither William nor his grand friends
could be seen.

"Well, that is mean of him to walk off and leave us like this!" said
Marion, crossly.

"Never mind; let us make haste home by ourselves," said Kate, who was
frightened at the lateness of the hour, for they had heard a clock
strike eleven several minutes before.

But Marion would stop and look round once more.  "I wonder where they
have gone?" she said.

"Oh, do come!" said Kate; "perhaps they thought we had gone on, as we
were so long getting out."

"Perhaps they are waiting for us at the corner," said Marion, who was
unwilling to give up the hope of seeing these grand new-found friends
again.  She hurried on by Kate's side, and at the corner of the street
stopped again and looked all round.

"Oh, don't wait, Marion, they are home by this time," said Kate,
hurrying on.

Marion was obliged to hurry after her, but she was cross and out of
humour.  "I will give it to Mr. William when he comes in to-morrow!"
she grumbled; "I never saw such bad behaviour in my life, leaving us to
go home by ourselves at this time of night.  There, do stop a minute,
Kate; how fast you are walking.  I thought I saw one of them then," and
Marion stopped and looked round.

But no one was to be seen; indeed, the street seemed to be deserted,
for no one was about but themselves, and, their footsteps ringing sharp
and clear on the hard, frosty ground, seemed to fill Kate with terror
again.

"Oh, pray do make haste, Marion," she cried, in a half-suppressed tone,
as though she was afraid of the sound of her own voice.

"Oh, all right, you need not be in such a fright.  I suppose you were
never out late at night before," said Marion.

"Not so late as this, and by myself too," said Kate.

"Oh, well, we shan't be long," and Marion hurried on now, and in a few
minutes they had reached the well-remembered street--quiet now, for a
wonder, as it seemed to Kate, and she began to breathe more freely.

The shop was shut up, of course, but Mrs. Maple came to let them in
almost as soon as they had rung the bell.  "Has your father gone?" she
said in some surprise, at seeing the girls by themselves.

"Yes, ma'am; he has gone to take a friend home," said Marion, quickly.

They went straight up to bed, and Kate put her bag into her box, where
she usually kept it, without thinking of the buns that were left.

"I'm so glad it is over and we are safe at home again," said Kate with
a sigh of relief.

"I hope we shall soon have another treat just like it," said Marion,
thinking of her new friends.




CHAPTER VII.

CONCLUSION.

The two girls were in the shop next morning when a man came in and
asked to see Mrs. Maple.

"I can serve you," said Marion who thought he looked at the window as
though he wanted to give an order.

"Thank you; I don't doubt your ability, young woman, but I want to see
your mistress."

Marion tossed her head rather disdainfully as she went into the little
back parlour, for she did not like being called "young woman" by this
stranger.

Mrs. Maple came out into the shop, and Marion returned to her work of
dusting, while the stranger said a few words in an undertone to the old
lady.

"What did you say?" she gasped, looking as though she had been shot,
"come in here and tell me, for I'm sure this is a mistake."

"No mistake at all ma'am, for I kept my eye on them all the way from
the theatre," he said.

He had followed Mrs. Maple into the back parlour, and the old lady had
sat down, for she seemed unable to stand after the shock the man's
words had caused her.

"Now tell me all about it," she said, "and I will call them in and ask
them."

"No need to do that, ma'am; at least not just yet.  They were both out
until nearly twelve o'clock last night, you admit, and I tell you I
watched them home from the ---- theatre, where they had spent the
evening among a gang of smart young thieves.  Three or four of them
were taken, but there are several watches and other valuables still
missing, and I have a warrant to search for these and arrest your two
shop-women."

"What, take them to prison!  But I tell you it must be a mistake; the
youngest is a young girl only a few months from the country, and the
other, her cousin, is a thoroughly respectable young woman, who has
been with me nearly a twelvemonth now."

"That may be, ma'am, but still they were there, and with a party of
thieves, too.  Will you call them in and let me question them?"

"Well, I will call the younger one first.  Kate!" said Mrs. Maple,
opening the door.

"Yes, ma'am," answered Kate readily.

"Come in and tell me where you went last night," said Mrs. Maple.  Kate
turned crimson as she looked from the stranger to her mistress.  "Now
tell the whole truth about it, Kate.  I don't believe what this person
says--that you were in bad company, but where did you go?"

"To the theatre," faltered Kate.

"You did!" exclaimed her mistress; "and who, did you go with?" she
added.

"With--with some friends," said Kate.

"And who were they, pray?" said Mrs. Maple, sternly.

But Kate shook her head.  "Most of them I did not know.  William Minn
took us; he brought us the orders."

The man noted her answers down in a book, and then said, "I must search
her boxes."

"Very well," said Mrs. Maple.  "Kate, you ought to know that this is a
policeman, and he must search your things for some property that was
stolen at the theatre last night."

"Mine," gasped Kate; but there was no time to say more, for Mrs. Maple
led the way to her room, and she slowly followed behind the detective.

"Which is your box, young woman?" asked the man.

Kate pointed to it, and handed him the key.

"I had that bag with me last night," she said, as he took it out.

The man instantly opened it, and took out some half-eaten buns and
cakes.  "From your shop, ma'am," he said grimly.

"I gave them to her before she went out," said Mrs. Maple, stiffly, for
she did not believe the policeman's story, though Kate had admitted
having been to the theatre.

But the next minute she and Kate both felt as if they had been struck,
for he drew out two gold watches with the broken links of the chains
still attached.

"Where did you get these?" asked the man coolly.

But poor Kate could only shake her head, and stare in blank
astonishment at the sight.  Mrs. Maple had dropped into a chair,
exclaiming, "Oh dear! oh dear!  I never could have believed it."

"No, ma'am, I daresay not; of course you have been cruelly deceived in
these two young women," said the detective, turning over the contents
of Kate's box in search of other stolen property; but there was nothing
more to reward his search, and in a few minutes he said, "Now, ma'am,
if you'll call the other young woman up I will soon finish."

"Yes, yes, to be sure, Marion must come," said Mrs. Maple; and in a
minute or two Marion came in, wondering not a little why she had been
called, and what could be the matter.

"You were at the theatre last night, Marion, and this is a policeman
come to search for some stolen property," said Mrs. Maple.

Marion saw it would be useless to deny the charge now, and did not
attempt it.  "I know we were at the theatre last night," she said, "but
I have nothing but what is my own;" and she handed her keys at once to
the policeman.

"All right, young woman; but whether I find anything or not you must
come with me to answer a few questions with the other prisoners when
they are brought before the magistrate to-morrow morning."

"The other prisoners!" gasped Marion, now turning as pale as her
mistress and Kate.

"Ah, the fine friends you were with last night.  One or two of them are
well-known gaol birds, and the rest are not much better."

Marion looked at Kate and then at her mistress, as the policeman
proceeded to turn out her box.

But Kate had not spoken since she saw the watches taken out of her bag,
and sat staring in a sort of dazed stupor at what was going on.

"Kate, why don't you speak and tell them we were not with thieves?"
said Marion indignantly.

But Kate shook her head.  "I don't know where they came from," she said.

"But you know William Minn is a very respectable young man," said
Marion, reproachfully.

But Kate did not seem to hear, and when the policeman told her to put
on her bonnet and shawl she did not attempt to move.  But she let
Marion put them on for her, and then went downstairs with the rest, but
said not a word in explanation of how the watches came into her bag.

Marion was crying bitterly now, and vehemently declaring her own and
her cousin's innocence, but Kate did not cry or say a word, and the
policeman looked at her in some alarm as he went to the door to send a
colleague who was in waiting to fetch a cab to remove his prisoners.
Crying he was used to, but he did not understand this silence, and knew
not what to think of it.

He told Mrs. Maple while he was waiting for the cab where he was going
to take the girls, and that Marion's father would be permitted to see
them if he came to the prison in the course of the day.  They would be
examined before the magistrate the next morning with the other
prisoners who had been taken at the theatre, and perhaps by that time
Kate would confess who had given her the watches.  But, alas! before
the next morning Kate had to be removed to the prison infirmary, and
her mother was sent for by Marion's father, who was so overwhelmed with
trouble at what had befallen his daughter and niece that he hardly knew
