"If you had depended on your friends you would even now be----" he
paused--"as my sister," he added with terrific intensity.

"Your pleasure shall be mine," said the young woman.

"If I could have a drink of wine!" said the young peasant, sinking down
into a chair.

"There is a flask which they did not get in the pocket of one of the
officers yonder," said the young Frenchwoman, looking sympathetically
at the poor exhausted lad.

Marteau quickly recovered it, in spite of the protestations of the
officer, who looked his indignation at this little betrayal by the
woman.  He gave some of it to the peasant and then offered it to
mademoiselle and, upon her declining it, took a long drink himself.  He
was weak and trembling with all he had gone through.

"Now, what's to be our further course?" asked the countess.

"I don't know yet.  I----"

But the answer was never finished.  Shots, cries, the sound of
galloping horses came faintly through the open door.

"My men returning!" cried the Russian officer triumphantly.  "Our turn
will come now, sir."

Two courses were open.  To run or to fight.  Duty said go; love said
stay.  Duty was stronger.  After a moment's hesitation Marteau dashed
for the door.  He was too late.  The returning Russian cavalry was
already entering the courtyard.  Fate had decided against him.  He
could not go now.  He thought with the swiftness of a veteran.  He
sprang back into the hall, threw the great iron-bound door into its
place, turned the massive key in its lock, thanking God that key and
lock were still intact, dropped the heavy bars at top and bottom that
further secured it, just as the first horseman thundered upon the door.

In his rapid passage through the house the young Frenchman had noticed
that all the windows were shuttered and barred, that only the front
door appeared to have been opened.  He was familiar with the chateau.
He knew how carefully its openings had been secured and how often his
father had inspected them, to keep out brigands, the waifs and strays,
the wanderers, the low men of the countryside.  For the moment he was
safe with his prisoners, one man and a boy guarding a score of men and
one woman, and holding a chateau against a hundred and fifty soldiers!
Fortunately, there would be no cannon with that troop of cavalry, there
were no cannon in that wagon train, so that they could not batter down
the chateau over his head.  What his ultimate fate would be he could
not tell.  Could he hold that castle indefinitely?  If not, what?  How
he was to get away and reach Napoleon with his vital news he could not
see.  There must be some way, however.  Well, whatever was to be would
be, and meanwhile he could only wait developments and hold on.

The troopers outside were very much astonished to find the heavy door
closed and the two sentries dead on the terrace.  They dismounted from
their horses at the foot of the terrace and crowded about the door,
upon which they beat with their pistols, at the same time shouting the
names and titles of the officers within.  Inside the great hall Marteau
had once more taken command.  In all this excitement Laure d'Aumenier
had stood like a stone, apparently indifferent to the appeals of the
four bound men on the floor and the Englishman in the chair that she
cut the ropes with which they were bound, while the French officer was
busy at the door.  Perhaps that young peasant might have prevented her,
but as a matter of fact, she made no attempt to answer their pleas.
She stood waiting and watching.  Just as Marteau reentered the room the
chief Russian officer shouted out a command.  From where he lay on the
floor his voice did not carry well and there was too much tumult
outside for anyone to hear.  In a second Marteau was over him.

"If you open your mouth again, monsieur," he said fiercely, "I shall
have to choose between gagging and killing you, and I incline to the
latter.  And these other gentlemen may take notice.  You, what are you
named?"

"Pierre Lebois, sir," answered the peasant.

"Can you fire a gun?"

"Give me a chance," answered the young fellow.  "I've got people dead,
yonder, to avenge."

The brigands had left the swords and pistols of the officers on chairs,
tables and the floor.  There were eight pistols.  Marteau gathered them
up.  The English baronet yielded one other, a huge, heavy,
old-fashioned weapon.

"There are loopholes in the shutters yonder," said the officer.  "Do
you take that one, I will take the other.  They will get away from the
door in a moment and as soon as you can see them fire."

"Mademoiselle," said the Russian officer desperately, "I shall have to
report to the commander of the guard and he to the Czar that you gave
aid and comfort to our enemies."

"But what can I do?" asked the young woman.  "Monsieur Marteau could
certainly shoot me if I attempted----"

"Assuredly," said Marteau, smiling at her in a way anything but fierce.

It was that implicit trust in her that restrained her and saved him.
As a girl the young countess had been intensely fond of Jean Marteau.
He certainly appeared well in his present role before her.  In the
revulsion of feeling in finding him not a bully, not a traitor, but a
devoted friend and servitor, he advanced higher in her estimation than
ever before.  Besides, the young woman was by no means so thoroughgoing
a loyalist as her old uncle, for instance.

"I can see them now, monsieur," said the young peasant from the
peep-hole in the shutter.

Indeed, the men outside had broken away from the door, groups were
running to and fro seeking lights and some other entrance.  Taking aim
at the nearest Marteau pulled the trigger and Pierre followed his
example.  The noise of the explosions was succeeded by a scream of
anguish, one man was severely wounded and another killed.  Something
mysterious had happened while they had been off on the wild goose chase
apparently, the Russians decided.  The chateau had been seized, their
officers had been made way with, it was held by the enemy.

"They can't be anything more than wandering peasants," cried an
imperious voice in Russian outside.  "I thought you had made thorough
work with them all, Scoref," continued the speaker.  "Your Cossacks
must have failed to complete the job."

"It will be the first time," answered Scoref, the _hetman_ of the
raiders.  "Look, the village burns!"

"Well, what's to be done now?" said the first voice.

"I don't know, Baron," was the answer.  "Besieging castles is more in
your line than in mine."

"Shall we fire again, monsieur?" asked Pierre within.

"No," was the answer.  "Remember we've only got eight shots and we must
wait."

"Let us have lights," cried the commander of the squadron.  "Here, take
one of those wagons and----"

In a few moments a bright fire was blazing in the courtyard.

"The shots came from those windows," continued the Russian.  "Keep out
of the way and----  Isn't that a window open up there?"

"It is, it is!" came the answer from a dozen throats.

All the talk being in Russian was, of course, not understood by the two
Frenchmen.

"One of you climb up there," continued the Russian.  "You see the
spout, and the coping, that buttress?  Ten roubles to the man who does
it."

A soldier sprang forward.  Those within could hear his heavy body rub
along the wall.  They did not know what he was doing or what was
toward.  They were in entire ignorance that a shutter had become
detached from its hinges in the room above the drawing-room and that
they would soon have to face an attack from the rear.  The man who
climbed fancied himself perfectly secure, and indeed he was from those
within.  It was a hard climb, but presently he reached the
window-ledge.  His hands clasped it, he made a brave effort, drew
himself up and on the instant from beyond the wagons came a pistol
shot.  The man shrieked, released his hold and fell crashing to the
ground.  The besiegers broke into wild outcries.  Some of them ran in
the direction whence the shot had come.  They thought they caught the
glimpse of a figure running away in the darkness.  Pistols were fired
and the vicinity was thoroughly searched, but they found nothing.

The shot, the man's cry overhead, the body crashing down to the ground,
enlightened Marteau.  He handed Pierre two of the six remaining
pistols, told him to run to the floor above and watch the window.  The
young peasant crossed himself and turned away.  He found the room
easily enough.  It was impossible to barricade the window, but he drew
back in the darkness and waited.

Having found no one in the grove beyond the baggage-wagons, the
Russians called for another volunteer and a second man offered.  Pierre
heard him coming, permitted him to gain the ledge and then thrust the
pistol in his face and pulled the trigger.  At the same time a big
Cossack coming within easy range and standing outlined between the
loophole and the fire, Marteau gave him his second bullet, with fatal
effect.  There flashed into his mind that the shot which had come so
opportunely from outside bespoke the arrival of his friend, the
grenadier.  He hoped the man would have sense enough to go immediately
to Sezanne and report the situation.  If he could maintain the defense
of the castle for two hours he might be rescued.  He stepped to the
hall and called up to Pierre.  Receiving a cheery reply to the effect
that all was well and that he would keep good watch, he came back into
the great hall and resumed his ward.




CHAPTER VIII

A TRIAL OF ALLEGIANCE

Mademoiselle d'Aumenier had seated herself at a table and remained
there in spite of the entreaties and black looks of the prisoners.
Marteau did not dare to leave his loophole, but the necessity for
watching did not prevent him from talking.  The men outside seemed to
have decided that nothing more could be done for the present.  They
withdrew from out of range of the deadly fire of the defenders and,
back of the wagons, kindled fires, and seemed to be preparing to make a
night of it.

The best officers of the detachment were prisoners in the chateau.  The
subordinate who had been entrusted with the pursuit was young and
inexperienced; the Cossack commander was a mere raider.  They
themselves belonged to the cavalry.  They decided, after inspecting the
whole building carefully as nearly as they dared in view of the
constant threat of discharge, that they would have to wait until
morning, unless something occurred to them or some chance favored them.
They trusted that at daylight they would have no difficulty in
effecting an entrance somewhere.  A total of three men dead and one
wounded, to say nothing of the sentries and officers, had a
discouraging effect on night work.  They did not dream that there was
an enemy, a French soldier, that is, nearer than Troyes.  They supposed
that the castle had been seized by some of the enraged country people
who had escaped the Cossacks and that they could easily deal with them
in the morning.

Incidentally, the wine cellars in which the peasants had been shut had
openings to the outer air, and through them came shouts and cries which
added to the mystification of the besiegers and increased their
prudence.  The walls of the chateau were massive, the floors thick, the
wine cellar far away, and no sound came from them to the inmates of the
great hall.  Indeed, in the exciting adventure that had taken place,
the raiders had been completely forgot by Marteau and the others.

The conversation in the hall was not animated.  The Countess Laure,
womanlike, at last began to ask questions.

"Monsieur Marteau," she asked persuasively, "will you hear reason?"

"I will hear anything, mademoiselle, from you," was the instant reply.

"Think of the unhappy state of France."

"I have had reason enough to think of it to-night, mademoiselle.  My
father and my sister----" his voice faltered.

"I know," said the girl sympathetically, and, indeed, she was deeply
grieved for the misfortunes of the faithful and devoted old man and the
young girl she had loved.  She waited a moment and then continued.
"The Emperor is at last facing defeat.  His cause is hopeless."

"He yet lives," answered the soldier softly.

"Yes, of course," said the woman.  "I do not understand the military
situation, but my friends----"

"Will monsieur allow me the favor of a word?" interposed the chief
Russian officer courteously.

"If it is not to summon assistance you may speak," replied Marteau.

"As a soldier you know the situation as well as I," continued the
Russian.  "Prince Von Schwarzenberg has Napoleon in his grasp.  He will
hold him until he is ready to seize him, while Field-Marshal Bluecher
takes Paris."

"The Emperor yet lives," said Marteau, repeating his former remark with
more emphasis and smiling somewhat scornfully.  "It is not wise to
portion the lion's skin while it covers his beating heart," he added
meaningly.

"Not even the genius of your Emperor," persisted the Russian more
earnestly, "will avail now, monsieur.  He is lost, his cause as well.
Why, this very convoy tells the story.  We intercepted letters that
told how pressing was its need.  Your army is without arms, without
food, without clothes."

"It still has its Emperor."

"Death!" cried the Russian impatiently.  "Must we kill him in order to
teach you a lesson?"

"You will not kill him while there is a soldier in France to interpose
his body."

"Very heroic, doubtless," sneered the Russian, beginning to get angry.
"But you know your cause is lost."

"And if it were?"

"Be reasonable.  There are many Frenchmen with the allied armies.  Your
rank is----?"

"I am a Major on the Emperor's staff if you are interested to know."

"Major Marteau, I have no doubt that my interest with my Emperor, the
Czar Alexander, with whom I am remotely connected--I may say I am a
favorite officer in his guard--would doubtless insure you a Colonel's
commission, perhaps even that of a General of Brigade, with my gracious
master, or in the army of King Louis after we have replaced him on his
throne if----"

"If what?"

"If you release us, restore us to our command.  Permit us to send for
horses to take the place of those we have killed to take the wagons of
the valuable convoy to our own army."

"And you would have me abandon my Emperor?"

"For the good of France," urged the Russian meaningly.

"Will you answer me a question, monsieur?" continued the young man
after a moment's deep thought.

"Certainly, if it be not treason to my master."

"Oh, you have views on treason, then," said the Frenchman adroitly and
not giving the other time to answer he continued.  "To what corps are
you attached?"

"Count Sacken's."

"And whose division?"

"General Olsuvieff's."

"Monsieur," said the young Frenchman calmly, "it is more than probable
that before to-morrow your division will be annihilated and the next
day the corps of General Sacken may meet the same fate."

The Russian laughed scornfully at what seemed to him the wildest
boasting.

"Are you mad?"

"Not so mad as you will be when it happens."

The Russian controlled himself with difficulty in the face of the
irritating observations.

"And who will do this?" he asked, at last.

"The Emperor."

"Does he command the lightning-flash that he could hurl the
thunder-bolt from Troyes?"

"Upon my word, I believe he does," laughed the Frenchman.

"This is foolish jesting, boy," broke out the Englishman.  "I am a man
of consideration in my own country.  The lady here will bear me out.  I
offered you fifty pounds.  I will give you five hundred if you will
release us and----"

