'True,' said Mr. Noah. 'You may if you choose, occupy for the present
the position of Pretender-in-Chief to the Claimancy of the
Deliverership, an office now and here created expressly for you. The
position of Claimant to the Destroyership is also,' he added
reflectively, 'open to you.'

'Then if he doesn't do it,' said the veiled lady, 'I can be the
Deliverer.'

'You can try,' said Mr. Noah. 'There are a special set of tasks to be
performed if the claimant to the Deliverership be a woman.'

'What are they?' said the veiled lady.

'If Sir Philip fails you will be duly instructed in the deeds required
of a Deliverer who is a woman. And now, my friends, let us retire and
leave Sir Philip to deal with the dragon. We shall watch anxiously from
yonder ramparts,' he added encouragingly.

'But isn't any one to help me?' said Philip, deeply uneasy.

'It is not usual,' said Mr. Noah, 'for champions to require assistance
with dragons.'

'I should think not indeed,' said the veiled lady; 'but you're not going
the usual way about it at all. Where's the princess, I should like to
know?'

'There isn't any princess,' said Mr. Noah.

'Then it won't be a proper dragon-killing,' she said, with an angry
shaking of skirts; 'that's all I can say.'

'I wish it _was_ all,' said Mr. Noah to himself.

'If there isn't a princess it isn't fair,' said the veiled one; 'and I
shall consider it's my turn to be Deliverer.'

'Be silent, woman,' said Mr. Noah.

'Woman, indeed,' said the lady. 'I ought to have a proper title.'

'Your title is the Pretender to the----'

'I know,' she interrupted; 'but you forget you're speaking to a lady.
You can call me the Pretenderette.'

Mr. Noah turned coldly from her and pressed two Roman candles and a box
of matches into Philip's hand.

'When you have arranged your plans and are quite sure that you will be
able to kill the dragon, light one of these. We will then have a
princess in readiness, and on observing your signal will tie her to a
tree, or, since this is a district where trees are rare and buildings
frequent, to a pillar. She will be perfectly safe if you make your plans
correctly. And in any case you must not attempt to deal with the dragon
without first lighting the Roman candle.'

'And the dragon will see it and go away.'

'Exactly,' said Mr. Noah. 'Or perhaps he will see it and not go away.
Time alone will show. The task that is without difficulties can never
really appeal to a hero. You will find weapons, cords, nets, shields and
various first aids to the young dragon-catcher in the vaults below this
tower. Good evening, Sir Philip,' he ended warmly. 'We wish you every
success.'

And with that the whole crowd began to go away.

'_I_ know who you ought to have for princess,' the Pretenderette said as
they went. And Mr. Noah said:

'Silence in court.'

'This isn't a court,' said the Pretenderette aggravatingly.

'Wherever justice is, is a court,' said Mr. Noah, 'and I accuse you of
contempt of it. Guards, arrest this person and take her to prison at
once.'

There was a scuffling and a shrieking and then the voices withdrew
gradually, the angry voice of even the Pretenderette growing fainter
and fainter till it died away altogether.

Philip was left alone.

His first act was to go up to the top of the tower and look out to see
if he could see the dragon. He looked east and north and south and west,
and he saw the ramparts of the fort where Mr. Noah and the others were
now safely bestowed. He saw also other towers and cities in the
distance, and he saw the ruins where he had met Mr. Perrin.

And among those ruins something was moving. Something long and jointed
and green. It could be nothing but the dragon.

'Oh, Crikey!' said Philip to himself; 'whatever shall I do? Perhaps I'd
better see what weapons there are.'

So he ran down the stairs and down and down till he came to the vaults
of the castle, and there he found everything a dragon-killer could
possibly need, even to a little red book called the _Young
Dragon-Catcher's Vade Mecum, or a Complete Guide to the Good Sport of
Dragon-Slaying_; and a pair of excellent field-glasses.

The top of the tower seemed the safest place. It was there that he tried
to read the book. The words were very long and most difficultly spelt.
But he did manage to make out that all dragons sleep for one hour after
sunset. Then he heard a loud rattling sound from the ruin, and he knew
it was the dragon who was making that sound, so he looked through the
field-glasses, frowning with anxiety to see what the dragon was doing.

And as he looked he started and almost dropped the glasses, and the
frown cleared away from his forehead and he gave a sigh that was almost
a sob and almost a laugh, and then he said

'That old thing!'

Then he looked again, and this is what he saw. An enormous green dragon,
very long and fierce-looking, that rattled as it moved, going in and out
among the ruins, rubbing itself against the fallen pillars. And the
reason Philip laughed and sighed was that he knew that dragon very well
indeed. He had known it long ago. It was the clockwork lizard that had
been given him the Christmas before last. And he remembered that he had
put it into one of the cities he and Helen had built together. Only now,
of course, it had grown big and had come alive like all the other images
of live things he had put in his cities. But he saw that it was still a
clockwork creature. And its key was sticking out of its side. And it was
rubbing itself against the pillars so as to turn the key and wind itself
up. But this was a slow business and the winding was not half done when
the sun set. The dragon instantly lay down and went to sleep.

'Well,' said Philip, 'now I've got to think.'

He did think, harder than he had ever done before. And when he had
finished thinking he went down into the vault and got a long rope. Then
he stood still a moment, wondering if he really were brave enough. And
then he remembered 'Rise up, Sir Philip,' and he knew that a knight
simply _mustn't_ be afraid.

So he went out in the dusk towards the dragon.

He knew it would sleep for an hour. But all the same---- And the
twilight was growing deeper and deeper. Still there was plenty of light
to find the ruin, and also to find the dragon. There it lay--about ten
or twelve yards of solid dark dragon-flesh. Its metal claws gleamed in
the last of the daylight. Its great mouth was open, and its breathing,
as it slept, was like the sound of the sea on a rough night.

'Rise up, Sir Philip,' he said to himself, and walked along close to the
dragon till he came to the middle part where the key was sticking
out--which Mr. Perrin had thought was a piece of an old spear with which
some one had once tried to kill the monster.

Philip fastened one end of his rope very securely to the key--how
thankful he was that Helen had taught him to tie knots that were not
granny-knots. The dragon lay quite still, and went on breathing like a
stormy sea. Then the dragon-slayer fastened the other end of the rope to
the main wall of the ruin which was very strong and firm, and then he
went back to his tower as fast as he could and struck a match and
lighted his Roman candle.

You see the idea? It was really rather a clever one. When the dragon
woke it would find that it was held prisoner by the ropes. It would be
furious and try to get free. And in its struggles it would be certain to
get free, but this it could only do by detaching itself from its key.
When once the key was out the dragon would be unable to wind itself up
any more, and would be as good as dead. Of course Sir Philip could cut
off its head with the silver-hilted sword if Mr. Noah really wished it.

It was, as you see, an excellent plan, as far as it went. Philip sat on
the top of his tower quite free from anxiety, and ate a few hairy red
gooseberries that happened to be loose in his pocket. Within three
minutes of his lighting his Roman candle a shower of golden rain went up
in the south, some immense Catherine-wheels appeared in the east, and in
the north a long line of rockets presented almost the appearance of an
aurora borealis. Red fire, green fire, then rockets again. The whole of
the plain was lit by more fireworks than Philip had ever seen, even at
the Crystal Palace. By their light he saw a procession come out of the
fort, cross to a pillar that stood solitary on the plain, and tie to it
a white figure.

'The Princess, I suppose,' said Philip; 'well, _she's_ all right
anyway.'

Then the procession went back to the fort, and then the dragon awoke.
Philip could see the great creature stretching itself and shaking its
vast head as a dog does when it comes out of the water.

'I expect it doesn't like the fireworks,' said Philip. And he was quite
right.

And now the dragon saw the Princess who had been placed at a convenient
spot about half-way between the ruins and Philip's tower.

It threw up its snout and uttered a devastating howl, and Philip felt
with a thrill of horror that, clockwork or no clockwork, the brute was
alive, and desperately dangerous.

And now it had perceived that it was bound. With great heavings and
throes, with snortings and bellowings, with scratchings and tearings of
its great claws and lashings of its terrible tail, it writhed and
fought to be free, and the light of thousands of fireworks illuminated
the gigantic struggle.

Then what Philip had known would happen, did happen. The great wall held
fast, the rope held fast, the dragon held fast. It was the key that gave
way. With an echoing grinding rusty sound like a goods train shunting on
a siding, the key was drawn from the keyhole in the dragon's side and
left still fast to its rope like an anchor to a cable.

_Left._ For now that happened which Philip had not foreseen. He had
forgotten that before it fell asleep the dragon had partly wound itself
up. And its struggles had not used up all the winding. There was go in
the dragon yet. And with a yell of fury it set off across the plain,
wriggling its green rattling length towards--the Princess.

And now there was no time to think whether one was afraid or not. Philip
went down those tower stairs more quickly than he had ever gone down
stairs in his life, and he was not bad at stairs even at ordinary times.

He put his sword over his shoulder as you do a gun, and ran. Like the
dragon he made straight for the Princess. And now it was a race between
him and the dragon. Philip ran and ran. His heart thumped, his feet had
that leaden feeling that comes in nightmares. He felt as if he were
dying.

Keep on, keep on, faster, faster, you mustn't stop. Ah! that's better.
He has got his second wind. He is going faster. And the dragon, or is it
fancy? is going not quite so fast.

How he did it Philip never knew. But with a last spurt he reached the
pillar where the Princess stood bound. And the dragon was twenty yards
away, coming on and on and on.

Philip stood quite still, recovering his breath. And more and more
slowly, but with no sign of stopping, the dragon came on. Behind him,
where the pillar was, Philip heard some one crying softly.

Then the dragon was quite near. Philip took three steps forward, took
aim with his sword, shut his eyes and hit as hard as he could. Then
something hard and heavy knocked him over, and for a time he knew no
more.

      .       .       .       .       .       .       .

When he came to himself again, Mr. Noah was giving him something nasty
to drink out of a medicine glass, Mr. Perrin was patting him on the
back, all the people were shouting like mad, and more fireworks than
ever were being let off. Beside him lay the dragon, lifeless and still.

[Illustration: Then something hard and heavy knocked him over.]

'Oh!' said Philip, 'did I really do it?'

'You did indeed,' said Mr. Noah; 'however you may succeed with the other
deeds, you are the hero of this one. And now, if you feel well enough,
prepare to receive the reward of Valour and Chivalry.'

'Oh!' said Philip, brightening, 'I didn't know there was to be a
reward.'

'Only the usual one,' said Mr Noah. 'The Princess, you know.'

Philip became aware that a figure in a white veil was standing quite
near him; round its feet lay lengths of cut rope.

'The Princess is yours,' said Mr. Noah, with generous affability.

'But I don't want her,' said Philip, adding by an afterthought, 'thank
you.'

'You should have thought of that before,' said Mr. Noah. 'You can't go
doing deeds of valour, you know, and then shirking the reward. Take her.
She is yours.'

'Any one who likes may have her,' said Philip desperately. 'If she's
mine, I can give her away, can't I? You must see yourself I can't be
bothered with princesses if I've got all those other deeds to do.'

'That's not my affair,' said Mr. Noah. 'Perhaps you might arrange to
board her out while you're doing your deeds. But at present she is
waiting for you to take her by the hand and raise her veil.'

'Must I?' said Philip miserably. 'Well, here goes.'

He took a small cold hand in one of his and with the other lifted, very
gingerly, a corner of the veil. The other hand of the Princess drew back
the veil, and the Dragon-Slayer and the Princess were face to face.

'Why!' cried Philip, between relief and disgust, 'it's only Lucy!'




CHAPTER V

ON THE CARPET


The Princess was just Lucy.

'It's too bad,' said Philip. 'I do think.' Then he stopped short and
just looked cross.

'The Princess and the Champion will now have their teas,' said Mr. Noah.
'Right about face, everybody, please, and quick march.'

Philip and Lucy found themselves marching side by side through the night
made yellow with continuous fireworks.

You must picture them marching across a great plain of grass where many
coloured flowers grew. You see a good many of Philip's buildings had
been made on the drawing-room carpet at home, which was green with pink
and blue and yellow and white flowers. And this carpet had turned into
grass and growing flowers, following that strange law which caused
things to change into other things, like themselves, but larger and
really belonging to a living world.

No one spoke. Philip said nothing because he was in a bad temper. And if
you are in a bad temper, nothing is a good thing to say. To circumvent a
dragon and then kill it, and to have such an adventure end in tea with
Lucy, was too much. And he had other reasons for silence too. And Lucy
was silent because she had so much to say that she didn't know where to
begin; and besides, she could feel how cross Philip was. The crowd did
not talk because it was not etiquette to talk when taking part in
processions. Mr. Noah did not talk because it made him out of breath to
walk and talk at the same time, two things neither of which he had been
designed to do.

So that it was quite a silent party which at last passed through the
gateway of the town and up its streets.

Philip wondered where the tea would be--not in the prison of course. It
was very late for tea, too, quite the middle of the night it seemed. But
all the streets were brilliantly lighted, and flags and festoons of
flowers hung from all the windows and across all the streets.

It was in the front of a big building in one of the great squares of the
city that an extra display of coloured lamps disclosed open doors and
red-carpeted steps. Mr. Noah hurried up them, and turned to receive
Philip and Lucy.

'The City of Polistopolis,' he said, 'whose unworthy representative I
am, greets in my person the most noble Sir Philip, Knight and Slayer of
the Dragon. Also the Princess whom he has rescued. Be pleased to enter.'

They went up the red-cloth covered steps and into a hall, very splendid
with silver and ivory. Mr. Noah stooped to a confidential question.

'You'd like a wash, perhaps?' he said, 'and your Princess too. And
perhaps you'd like to dress up a little? Before the banquet, you know.'

'Banquet?' said Philip. 'I thought it was tea.'

'Business before pleasure,' said Mr. Noah; 'first the banquet, then the
tea. This way to the dressing-rooms.'

There were two doors side by side. On one door was painted 'Knight's
dressing-room,' on the other 'Princess's dressing-room.'

'Look out,' said Mr. Noah; 'the paint is wet. You see there wasn't much
time.'

Philip found his dressing-room very interesting. The walls were entirely
of looking-glass, and on tables in the middle of the room lay all sorts
of clothes of beautiful colours and odd shapes. Shoes, stockings, hats,
crowns, armour, swords, cloaks, breeches, waistcoats, jerkins, trunk
hose. An open door showed a marble bath-room. The bath was sunk in the
floor as the baths of luxurious Roman Empresses used to be, and as
nowadays baths sometimes are, in model dwellings. (Only I am told that
some people keep their coals in the baths--which is quite useless
because coals are always black however much you wash them.)

Philip undressed and went into the warm clear water, greenish between
the air and the marble. Why is it so pleasant to have a bath, and so
tiresome to wash your hands and face in a basin? He put on his shirt and
knickerbockers again, and wandered round the room looking at the clothes
laid out there, and wondering which of the wonderful costumes would be
really suitable for a knight to wear at a banquet. After considerable
hesitation he decided on a little soft shirt of chain-mail that made
just a double handful of tiny steel links as he held it. But a
difficulty arose.

'I don't know how to put it on,' said Philip; 'and I expect the banquet
is waiting. How cross it'll be.'

He stood undecided, holding the chain mail in his hands, when his eyes
fell on a bell handle. Above it was an ivory plate, and on it in black
letters the word Valet. Philip rang the bell.

Instantly a soft tap at the door heralded the entrance of a person whom
Philip at the first glance supposed to be a sandwich man. But the second
glance showed that the oblong flat things which he wore were not
sandwich-boards, but dominoes. The person between them bowed low.

'Oh!' said Philip, 'I rang for the valet.'

'I am not the valet,' said the domino-enclosed person, who seemed to be
in skintight black clothes under his dominoes, 'I am the Master of the
