
"To be sure," said Tackleton. "Giddiness, frivolity, fickleness, love of
admiration! Not considered! All left out of sight! Hah!"

"You had best not interrupt me," said the Carrier with some sternness,
"till you understand me; and you're wide of doing so. If, yesterday, I'd
have struck that man down at a blow, who dared to breathe a word against
her, to-day I'd set my foot upon his face, if he was my brother!"

The toy merchant gazed at him in astonishment. He went on in a softer
tone:

"Did I consider," said the Carrier, "that I took her--at her age, and
with her beauty--from her young companions, and the many scenes of which
she was the ornament; in which she was the brightest little star that
ever shone, to shut her up from day to day in my dull house, and keep my
tedious company? Did I consider how little suited I was to her sprightly
humour, and how wearisome a plodding man like me must be to one of her
quick spirit? Did I consider that it was no merit in me, or claim in me,
that I loved her, when everybody must who knew her? Never. I took
advantage of her hopeful nature and her cheerful disposition; and I
married her. I wish I never had! For her sake; not for mine!"

The toy merchant gazed at him without winking. Even the half-shut eye
was open now.

"Heaven bless her!" said the Carrier, "for the cheerful constancy with
which she has tried to keep the knowledge of this from me! And Heaven
help me, that, in my slow mind, I have not found it out before! Poor
child! Poor Dot! _I_ not to find it out, who have seen her eyes fill
with tears when such a marriage as our own was spoken of! I, who have
seen the secret trembling on her lips a hundred times, and never
suspected it, till last night! Poor girl! That I could ever hope she
would be fond of me! That I could ever believe she was!"

"She made a show of it," said Tackleton. "She made such a show of it,
that, to tell you the truth, it was the origin of my misgivings."

And here he asserted the superiority of May Fielding, who certainly made
no sort of show of being fond of _him_.

"She has tried," said the poor Carrier with greater emotion than he had
exhibited yet; "I only now begin to know how hard she has tried, to be
my dutiful and zealous wife. How good she has been; how much she has
done; how brave and strong a heart she has; let the happiness I have
known under this roof bear witness! It will be some help and comfort to
me when I am here alone."

"Here alone?" said Tackleton. "Oh! Then you do mean to take some notice
of this?"

"I mean," returned the Carrier, "to do her the greatest kindness, and
make her the best reparation, in my power. I can release her from the
daily pain of an unequal marriage, and the struggle to conceal it. She
shall be as free as I can render her."

"Make _her_ reparation!" exclaimed Tackleton, twisting and turning his
great ears with his hands. "There must be something wrong here. You
didn't say that, of course."

The Carrier set his grip upon the collar of the toy merchant, and shook
him like a reed.

"Listen to me!" he said. "And take care that you hear me right. Listen
to me. Do I speak plainly?"

"Very plainly indeed," answered Tackleton.

"As if I meant it?"

"Very much as if you meant it."

"I sat upon that hearth, last night, all night," exclaimed the Carrier.
"On the spot where she has often sat beside me, with her sweet face
looking into mine. I called up her whole life day by day. I had her dear
self, in its every passage, in review before me. And, upon my soul, she
is innocent, if there is One to judge the innocent and guilty!"

Staunch Cricket on the Hearth! Loyal Household Fairies!

"Passion and distrust have left me!" said the Carrier; "and nothing but
my grief remains. In an unhappy moment some old lover, better suited to
her tastes and years than I, forsaken, perhaps, for me, against her
will, returned. In an unhappy moment, taken by surprise, and wanting
time to think of what she did, she made herself a party to his treachery
by concealing it. Last night she saw him, in the interview we witnessed.
It was wrong. But, otherwise than this, she is innocent, if there is
truth on earth!"

"If that is your opinion----" Tackleton began.

"So, let her go!" pursued the Carrier. "Go, with my blessing for the
many happy hours she has given me, and my forgiveness for any pang she
has caused me. Let her go, and have the peace of mind I wish her! She'll
never hate me. She'll learn to like me better when I'm not a drag upon
her, and she wears the chain I have riveted more lightly. This is the
day on which I took her, with so little thought for her enjoyment, from
her home. To-day she shall return to it, and I will trouble her no more.
Her father and mother will be here to-day--we had made a little plan for
keeping it together--and they shall take her home. I can trust her
there, or anywhere. She leaves me without blame, and she will live so I
am sure. If I should die--I may perhaps while she is still young; I have
lost some courage in a few hours--she'll find that I remembered her, and
loved her to the last! This is the end of what you showed me. Now, it's
over!"

"Oh no, John, not over! Do not say it's over yet! Not quite yet. I have
heard your noble words. I could not steal away, pretending to be
ignorant of what has affected me with such deep gratitude. Do not say
it's over till the clock has struck again!"

She had entered shortly after Tackleton, and had remained there. She
never looked at Tackleton, but fixed her eyes upon her husband. But she
kept away from him, setting as wide a space as possible between them;
and, though she spoke with most impassioned earnestness, she went no
nearer to him even then. How different in this from her old self!

"No hand can make the clock which will strike again for me the hours
that are gone," replied the Carrier with a faint smile. "But let it be
so, if you will, my dear. It will strike soon. It's of little matter
what we say. I'd try to please you in a harder case than that."

"Well!" muttered Tackleton. "I must be off, for, when the clock strikes
again, it'll be necessary for me to be upon my way to church. Good
morning, John Peerybingle. I'm sorry to be deprived of the pleasure of
your company. Sorry for the loss, and the occasion of it too!"

"I have spoken plainly?" said the Carrier, accompanying him to the door.

"Oh, quite!"

"And you'll remember what I have said?"

"Why, if you compel me to make the observation," said Tackleton,
previously taking the precaution of getting into his chaise, "I must say
that it was so very unexpected, that I'm far from being likely to forget
it."

"The better for us both," returned the Carrier. "Good-bye. I give you
joy!"

"I wish I could give it to _you_," said Tackleton. "As I can't, thankee.
Between ourselves (as I told you before, eh?) I don't much think I shall
have the less joy in my married life because May hasn't been too
officious about me, and too demonstrative. Good-bye! Take care of
yourself."

The Carrier stood looking after him until he was smaller in the distance
than his horse's flowers and favours near at hand; and then, with a deep
sigh, went strolling like a restless, broken man, among some
neighbouring elms; unwilling to return until the clock was on the eve of
striking.

His little wife, being left alone, sobbed piteously; but often dried her
eyes and checked herself, to say how good he was, how excellent he was!
and once or twice she laughed; so heartily, triumphantly, and
incoherently (still crying all the time), that Tilly was quite
horrified.

"Ow, if you please, don't!" said Tilly. "It's enough to dead and bury
the Baby, so it is if you please."

"Will you bring him sometimes to see his father, Tilly," inquired her
mistress, drying her eyes,--"when I can't live here, and have gone to my
old home?"

"Ow, if you please, don't!" cried Tilly, throwing back her head, and
bursting out into a howl--she looked at the moment uncommonly like
Boxer. "Ow, if you please, don't! Ow, what has everybody gone and been
and done with everybody, making everybody else so wretched? Ow-w-w-w!"

The soft-hearted Slowboy tailed off at this juncture into such a
deplorable howl, the more tremendous from its long suppression, that she
must infallibly have awakened the Baby, and frightened him into
something serious (probably convulsions), if her eyes had not
encountered Caleb Plummer leading in his daughter. This spectacle
restoring her to a sense of the proprieties, she stood for some few
moments silent, with her mouth wide open; and then, posting off to the
bed on which the Baby lay asleep, danced in a weird, St. Vitus manner on
the floor, and at the same time rummaged with her face and head among
the bedclothes, apparently deriving much relief from those extraordinary
operations.

"Mary!" said Bertha. "Not at the marriage!"

"I told her you would not be there, mum," whispered Caleb. "I heard as
much last night. But bless you," said the little man, taking her
tenderly by both hands, "_I_ don't care for what they say. _I_ don't
believe them. There an't much of me, but that little should be torn to
pieces sooner than I'd trust a word against you!"

He put his arms about her neck and hugged her, as a child might have
hugged one of his own dolls.

"Bertha couldn't stay at home this morning," said Caleb. "She was
afraid, I know, to hear the bells ring, and couldn't trust herself to be
so near them on their wedding-day. So we started in good time, and came
here. I have been thinking of what I have done," said Caleb after a
moment's pause; "I have been blaming myself till I hardly knew what to
do, or where to turn, for the distress of mind I have caused her; and
I've come to the conclusion that I'd better, if you'll stay with me,
mum, the while, tell her the truth. You'll stay with me the while?" he
inquired, trembling from head to foot. "I don't know what effect it may
have upon her; I don't know what she'll think of me; I don't know that
she'll ever care for her poor father afterwards. But it's best for her
that she should be undeceived, and I must bear the consequences as I
deserve!"

"Mary," said Bertha, "where is your hand? Ah! Here it is; here it is!"
pressing it to her lips with a smile, and drawing it through her arm. "I
heard them speaking softly among themselves last night of some blame
against you. They were wrong."

The Carrier's wife was silent. Caleb answered for her.

"They were wrong," he said.

"I knew it!" cried Bertha, proudly. "I told them so. I scorned to hear a
word! Blame _her_ with justice!" she pressed the hand between her own,
and the soft cheek against her face. "No, I am not so blind as that."

Her father went on one side of her, while Dot remained upon the other,
holding her hand.

"I know you all," said Bertha, "better than you think. But none so well
as her. Not even you, father. There is nothing half so real and so true
about me as she is. If I could be restored to sight this instant, and
not a word were spoken, I could choose her from a crowd! My sister!"

"Bertha, my dear!" said Caleb. "I have something on my mind I want to
tell you while we three are alone. Hear me kindly! I have a confession
to make to you, my darling!"

"A confession, father?"

"I have wandered from the truth, and lost myself, my child," said Caleb
with a pitiable expression in his bewildered face. "I have wandered from
the truth, intending to be kind to you; and have been cruel."

She turned her wonder-stricken face towards him, and repeated "Cruel!"

"He accuses himself too strongly, Bertha," said Dot. "You'll say so
presently. You'll be the first to tell him so."

"He cruel to me!" cried Bertha with a smile of incredulity.

"Not meaning it, my child," said Caleb. "But I have been: though I never
suspected it till yesterday. My dear blind daughter, hear me and forgive
me. The world you live in, heart of mine, doesn't exist as I have
represented it. The eyes you have trusted in have been false to you."

She turned her wonder-stricken face towards him still; but drew back,
and clung closer to her friend.

"Your road in life was rough, my poor one," said Caleb, "and I meant to
smooth it for you. I have altered objects, changed the characters of
people, invented many things that never have been, to make you happier.
I have had concealments from you, put deceptions on you, God forgive me!
and surrounded you with fancies."

"But living people are not fancies?" she said hurriedly, and turning
very pale, and still retiring from him. "You can't change them."

"I have done so, Bertha," pleaded Caleb. "There is one person that you
know, my dove----"

"Oh, father! why do you say, I know?" she answered in a term of keen
reproach. "What and whom do _I_ know? I who have no leader! I so
miserably blind!"

In the anguish of her heart, she stretched out her hands, as if she were
groping her way; then spread them, in a manner most forlorn and sad,
upon her face.

"The marriage that takes place to-day," said Caleb, "is with a stern,
sordid, grinding man. A hard master to you and me, my dear, for many
years. Ugly in his looks, and in his nature. Cold and callous always.
Unlike what I have painted him to you in everything, my child. In
everything."

"Oh, why," cried the Blind Girl, tortured, as it seemed, almost beyond
endurance, "why did you ever do this? Why did you ever fill my heart so
full, and then come in like Death, and tear away the objects of my love?
O Heaven, how blind I am! How helpless and alone!"

Her afflicted father hung his head, and offered no reply but in his
penitence and sorrow.

She had been but a short time in this passion of regret when the Cricket
on the Hearth, unheard by all but her, began to chirp. Not merrily, but
in a low, faint, sorrowing way. It was so mournful, that her tears began
to flow; and, when the Presence which had been beside the Carrier all
night, appeared behind her, pointing to her father, they fell down like
rain.

She heard the Cricket-voice more plainly soon, and was conscious,
through her blindness, of the Presence hovering about her father.

"Mary," said the Blind Girl, "tell me what my home is. What it truly
is."

"It is a poor place, Bertha; very poor and bare indeed. The house will
scarcely keep out wind and rain another winter. It is as roughly
shielded from the weather, Bertha," Dot continued in a low, clear voice,
"as your poor father in his sackcloth coat."

The Blind Girl, greatly agitated, rose, and led the Carrier's little
wife aside.

"Those presents that I took such care of; that came almost at my wish,
and were so dearly welcome to me," she said, trembling; "where did they
come from? Did you send them?"

"No."

"Who, then?"

Dot saw she knew already, and was silent. The Blind Girl spread her
hands before her face again. But in quite another manner now.

"Dear Mary, a moment. One moment. More this way. Speak softly to me. You
are true I know. You'd not deceive me now; would you?"

"No, Bertha, indeed!"

"No, I am sure you would not. You have too much pity for me. Mary, look
across the room to where we were just now--to where my father is--my
father, so compassionate and loving to me--and tell me what you see."

"I see," said Dot, who understood her well, "an old man sitting in a
chair, and leaning sorrowfully on the back, with his face resting on his
hand. As if his child should comfort him, Bertha."

"Yes, yes. She will. Go on."

"He is an old man, worn with care and work. He is a spare, dejected,
thoughtful, grey-haired man. I see him now, despondent and bowed down,
and striving against nothing. But, Bertha, I have seen him many times
before, and striving hard in many ways, for one great sacred object. And
I honour his grey head, and bless him!"

The Blind Girl broke away from her; and, throwing herself upon her
knees before him, took the grey head to her breast.

"It is my sight restored. It is my sight!" she cried. "I have been
blind, and now my eyes are open. I never knew him! To think I might have
died, and never truly seen the father who has been so loving to me!"

There were no words for Caleb's emotion.

"There is not a gallant figure on this earth," exclaimed the Blind Girl,
holding him in her embrace, "that I would love so dearly, and would
cherish so devotedly, as this! The greyer, and more worn, the dearer,
father! Never let them say I am blind again. There's not a furrow in his
face, there's not a hair upon his head, that shall be forgotten in my
prayers and thanks to Heaven!"

Caleb managed to articulate, "My Bertha!"

"And in my blindness I believed him," said the girl, caressing him with
tears of exquisite affection, "to be so different. And having him beside
me day by day, so mindful of me always, never dreamed of this!"

"The fresh smart father in the blue coat, Bertha," said poor Caleb.
"He's gone!"

"Nothing is gone," she answered. "Dearest father, no! Everything is
here--in you. The father that I loved so well; the father that I never
loved enough, and never knew; the benefactor whom I first began to
reverence and love, because he had such sympathy for me,--all are here
in you. Nothing is dead to me. The soul of all that was most dear to me
is here--here, with the worn face, and the grey head. And I am NOT
blind, father, any longer!"

Dot's whole attention had been concentrated, during this discourse, upon
the father and daughter; but looking, now, towards the little Hay-maker
in the Moorish meadow, she saw that the clock was within a few minutes
of striking, and fell, immediately, into a nervous and excited state.

"Father!" said Bertha, hesitating. "Mary!"

"Yes, my dear," returned Caleb. "Here she is."

"There is no change in _her_. You never told me anything of _her_ that
was not true?"

"I should have done it, my dear, I'm afraid," returned Caleb, "if I
could have made her better than she was. But I must have changed her for
the worse, if I had changed her at all. Nothing could improve her,
Bertha."

Confident as the Blind Girl had been when she asked the question, her
delight and pride in the reply, and her renewed embrace of Dot, were
charming to behold.

"More changes than you think for may happen, though, my dear," said Dot.
"Changes for the better, I mean; changes for great joy to some of us.
You mustn't let them startle you too much, if any such should ever
happen, and affect you. Are those wheels upon the road? You've a quick
ear, Bertha. Are they wheels?"

"Yes. Coming very fast."

"I--I--I know you have a quick ear," said Dot, placing her hand upon her
