my arms! and saddle my horse!"

"What means this!" cried all.  "Where go you, Sigurd?"

"I go to my brother," he said.

"Your brother!  Ulf is eight days' sail from here!"

"'Tis but five days across the forest," said the hero.

At this the ladies shrieked, and all looked on Sigurd as a man that is
mad.

"The forest, said you?" cried one.  "It swarms with wolves, Sigurd, and
where the wolves are not, the robbers lurk."

Sigurd smiled scornfully.  "It is wolves and robbers I go to seek," he
said.

"If thou wilt go," they said then, "we will go with thee."

"No!" cried Sigurd.  "I go alone.  Let him who loves me remain here and
guard my lady.  I can trust you to be true to a lady--but ye have yet to
learn to be loyal to a prince."

At this many hung their heads and were silent.

Sigurd meanwhile put on his armour, and turned hurriedly to bid farewell
to his wife.  The hero's voice trembled as he prayed Heaven to guard
over her.

They all accompanied him to the courtyard, where, quickly mounting, he
departed, and rode slowly forward into the forest.

Sigurd rode slowly forward into the forest, and as he entered it he
turned for one last look at the brave old castle which held within its
walls the joy of his life--and a soft voice at his ear whispered
"Return!"

Yet he halted not, nor did his courage waver, for another voice, louder
than the other, cried "Onward!"  It seemed like his brother's voice, as
he had known it years ago, before troubles came, and when as merry boys
the two lived with but one heart between them.  And at the sound he put
spurs to his horse and plunged into the wood.

Gloomy indeed was this forest of lonely pines, which rocked and groaned
in the wind, and in which a dim twilight deepening often into black
darkness reigned on every hand.  And gloomier still were those distant
cries which rose ever and again above the tempest, and caused even the
brave horse to shiver as he heard them.

But Sigurd shivered not, but rode forward, trusting in his God and
listening only to that old-remembered voice ahead.

For a league the road was easy and the perils few.  For thus far the
woodman's axe had often fallen amidst the thick underwood, clearing a
path among the trees and driving before it the sullen wolves into the
deeper recesses of the forest.

But as Sigurd rode on, and the boughs overhead closed in between him and
the light of day, these few traces of man's hand vanished.

His good horse stumbled painfully over the tangled ground, often hardly
finding himself a path among the dense trunks.  And all around, those
wild yells which had mingled with the tempest seemed to draw closer, as
though eagerly awaiting the horse and its rider somewhere not far off.

Sigurd heeded them not, but cheered himself as he rode on by calling to
mind some of the beautiful stories of the old religion of his land.  He
thought of the elves and fairies who were said to dwell in these very
forests, and at midnight to creep up from their hiding-places and gambol
and play tricks among the flowers and dewdrops with the wild bees and
the summer insects, or dance in magic circles on the greensward.  And it
did his heart good to feel he was not alone, but that these merry little
companions were with him, lightening his way and guiding his course all
the night through.  And he thought too of luckless dwarfs whom Odin had
condemned to dig and delve all day deep in the ground, and throw fuel on
the great central fire of the earth, but who at night, like the fairies,
might come above and revisit then old haunts.  And even these
mischievous little companions helped to cheer the heart of the wayfarer
and beguile his journey.

And so he plodded on all through the night, resolutely plunging deeper
and deeper into the forest, and leaving the Tower of the Norths
Waistcoat Wind league after league farther behind.

The day passed as the night had passed.  Save for an occasional halt to
rest his horse and refresh his body with food, nothing broke the
dullness of the journey.  The wolves alone were silent, waiting for the
night.  As the afternoon wore on Sigurd could see their gaunt forms
skulking among the trees, casting many a hungry sidelong glance that
way, and licking their cruel jaws as foretaste of the wished-for meal.

And now Sigurd needed to stop his ears closer than ever against the
voice which cried "Return!" and set his face still more steadfastly
towards Niflheim.  For though his heart never faltered, his spirits
drooped as another night closed in, and weary and oppressed he pushed
onward.

The fairies no longer cheered him, nor could he smile again at the
antics of the dwarfs.  The soft voice of one behind was all he heard,
and the music of its tones was sad.  The voice before still cried
"Onward," but it mingled dismally with the storm overhead and the wild
and ever-increasing howling of the wolves.  The horse, too, seemed to
share his master's trouble, for he stumbled forward spiritlessly,
hanging his head and trembling at each approaching howl.

Nearer and nearer those cruel voices closed in around him, not one but
half a score.  Stealthily at first they dogged their prey.  Then,
gaining boldness, advanced, and pressed more closely on the heels of the
horse.  Sigurd, as he glanced quickly round, saw a score of cruel eyes
flash out in the darkness, and almost felt the hot breath in his face.

One bolder than the rest made an angry snap at the horse's heel.  The
unhappy animal, who long ere this had lost his wonted nerve, made a
sudden bound forward, which almost unhorsed his rider.  The sudden
movement was the signal for the pack to leap forward with wild yells,
and next moment Sigurd and his gallant horse were fighting for dear
life.

Desperately fought Sigurd, swinging his trusty axe right and left, and
carrying at each stroke death among his savage assailants.

At length the horse, beset on all sides, exhausted, wounded, dropped to
the ground, unable longer to hold out.  With a cry of savage triumph the
wolves leapt upon him in a hideous, howling, struggling mass.  Sigurd,
scarcely gaining his feet after the fall, started forward alone.  For
the horse that was dead was more to the wolves than the hero who yet
lived.  And over the carcass they jostled and fought, and screamed
ravenously, till nought remained to fight for.

Sigurd knew well, as he hastened forward, axe in hand and sword in
belt--his spear had broken off short--that the respite was but short.  A
few minutes and the pack would be once more on the trail, and then it
would be his turn.  Yet he prayed his God to send him help and bring him
through the peril.

He hurried on, yet slowly, by reason of the tangled paths and dense
underwood of the forest, listening to the angry tumult behind and
wondering how long before the hue and cry began once more.

It was not long.  Scarcely had he forced his way a half-mile when he
could hear the pack following.  Onward they came at a rush with hideous
tumult, and Sigurd knew that the foremost would be upon him in a moment.
He strode on, casting a glance back at every step, and gripping fast
his trusty axe.  Presently, just as he reached a small clearing among
the trees, the brushwood behind him crackled, and a pair of eyes gleamed
close at hand.

Then Sigurd turned, and putting his back against a broad tree, waited.

On they came, half sated, doubly savage with the taste of blood on their
jaws.

Desperately once more fought Sigurd, swinging his axe right and left and
dealing death at every blow, till he stood surrounded by a half-circle
of dead or dying wolves.

Sigurd fought till he could scarce stand or wield his axe.  Many a cruel
wound weakened him, his eyes grew dim, his hand unsteady, his blows
uncertain.  He could do no more.  The axe fell from his grasp, and he
reeled back.

As he did so there rose, loud above the wind and above the howling of
the wolves, a cry which caused Sigurd to start once more to his feet,
and the wild beasts to pause midway in their mortal onslaught.

It was the deep-mouthed voice of a dog, and next moment a huge mastiff
dashed from out of the thicket and fastened on the throat of the
foremost wolf.

It was Sigurd's own watch-dog Thor, whom some dear hand had loosed from
his chain and sent forth into the forest to guard and maybe save his
master.

At the sight of the great champion, and at sound of his bark, the
cowardly wolves one by one slunk sullenly back into the woods, and
Sigurd felt that he was saved.

A joyous meeting was that between gallant master and gallant hound.

"Thor, my brave dog," cried Sigurd, "is it to thee, then, I owe my
life--my brother's life?  Yet not to thee so much as to the fair lady
who sent thee, a messenger of love and life to me.  Thanks, Thor, thanks
lady, thank most to God.  Now shall I reach Niflheim even yet."

Thor wagged his great tail and barked joyfully in answer.

All that night Sigurd lay secure, watched over by the sleepless Thor,
whose honest bark was the sweetest music that ever lulled a hero to
repose.

For two days Sigurd trudged safely onward through that dense forest,
with Thor, the dog, beside him.  The way was hard and painful, and the
hero's limbs, now his only support, crashed wearily through the
thickets.  But, faint and weary though he was, his bold heart and the
thought of his brother carried him through.

Four days had come and gone since he quitted the Tower of the North-West
Wind, and in three more Ulf would either be saved or slain.  Sigurd, as
he thought of it, strode sternly forward and shut his ears to all the
backward voices.

And, with Thor at his side, all danger from the wolves seemed at an end.
As the two pressed on many a distant how! fell on their ears, many a
gaunt form stole out from among the trees to gaze at them, and then
steal back.  Thor's honest bark carried panic among those cruel hordes,
while it comforted the heart of Sigurd.

For two days, without sleep, without rest, without proper food, the hero
walked on, till, on the fifth morning after quitting his castle, the
light broke in among the trees, the woodman's cheerful axe resounded
through the glades, the angry howling sounded far behind, and Sigurd
knew he was on the other side of the forest.

In one day he would reach Jockjen, and scarce two hours' march beyond
Jockjen lay Niflheim.

Thor seemed to guess his master's mind, and with a hopeful bark bounded
forward.  But Sigurd regarded his companion sadly and doubtfully.  He
called him to him, caressed him lovingly, and said--

"Good Thor, thou hast been like a messenger from God to bring me through
this wood.  Alas! that we must part."

Thor stopped short as he heard these last words, and moaned piteously.

"Yes, good Thor," said the hero, sadly, "for I cannot live another day
without sending a message to my lady that I am safe, thanks to her and
thee."

The dog, who seemed to understand it all, looked up in his master's face
beseechingly, as if to persuade him against his resolve.

"The danger now is past," said Sigurd.  "No wolves haunt the forest
betwixt here and Jockjen, and in the town thy presence may discover me.
So haste back, good Thor, to my lady with this my message."

So saying he took from the ground a smooth strip of bark, on which, with
the point of his sword, he wrote something.  Then, turning to Thor,
"Carry this," he said, "to her."

And as Thor turned and hastened off on his errand, Sigurd looked after
him and sighed, and wished he too were going that way.

But time forbade that he should linger long thus, and once more he
turned his face resolutely towards Jockjen and went on alone.

Although the forest stretched some leagues farther, the trees were no
longer dense or the path difficult.  In parts large clearings had been
made, and felled timber here and there betokened the busy hand of the
woodman.  Sigurd met more than one of these, who accosted him.  He would
not, however, tarry with any of them, but pressed eagerly forward, so
that they would turn and look after this noble knight and wonder who he
was, and whither he hasted.

One of these simple folk with whom he waited a few minutes to partake of
a hasty meal said, at parting--

"Beware, my lord, of the robbers who haunt the skirts of the forest.
They come suddenly upon the unwary traveller, and have no pity."

Sigurd smiled.

"I have passed the four-footed wolves," he said; "I fear not the two-
footed."

"Nay, but," said the peasant, "they are not to be despised.  Ever since
Sigurd was banished many of his soldiers have deserted the king, and now
live the robber's life in these woods.  Stay here, my lord, till a band
of us will be going to Jockjen together."

But Sigurd smiled scornfully, and, thanking the man, started forward,
fearing nothing save arriving too late at Niflheim.

Yet the woodman's warning was not lost upon him, for he walked with his
drawn sword in his hand, keeping both his eyes and ears open as he went.

All that day he pressed onward, and towards evening came to a lonely
part of the wood, where the trees for a short space all round closed
thickly overhead and shut out the light.  He had passed through this
spot, and was once more emerging into the open, when three men suddenly
sprang out of the thicket and faced him.

Two of them were in the garb of common peasants, and carried, the one a
club, the other a knife.  Sigurd guessed them at once to be two of the
robbers of whom the woodman had warned him.  Their companion was a
powerful man in the dress of a soldier, and carried a sword.  In him,
though he knew not the man, Sigurd recognised a soldier of the army of
the king, who, as he might guess, had deserted his lawful calling for
the life of a bandit.

The party was plainly unprepared to meet a knight fully armed.  They had
expected rather to find some defenceless merchant, or even woodman, whom
they might easily overcome and as easily rob.

They fell back an instant before the noble form of Sigurd, but the next,
true to their calling, rushed upon him, shouting to him to surrender and
yield up whatever of value he might possess on his person.

Sigurd wasted not a word in replying to this insolent challenge, but
defended himself against the sudden assault.  At the first onslaught the
two bandits were foremost, who thought to bear him down by sheer weight.
But Sigurd, stepping back a pace, caught the knife of the one on his
shield, while with his own sword he ran his comrade through the body.
So quickly was it done, that the soldier, advancing wildly to the
attack, stumbled and fell over the body of the prostrate man; and before
he could rise again to his feet, a second thrust from Sigurd's sword had
laid low the other bandit beside his comrade.

The soldier, therefore, was the only adversary that remained, and of him
Sigurd thought to make short work; but in this he judged wrongly, for
this robber proved to be a man of extraordinary strength and agility,
while Sigurd himself was faint and jaded with his long and painful
march.

For an hour that afternoon the woods resounded with the clash of swords.
The two men spoke not a word, but fought with teeth set and lips
closed.  Once and again, by common consent, they halted, leaning on
their swords for breath, but as often closed again more furiously than
ever.  It surprised Sigurd to find an adversary so resolute and
dextrous.  At another time it might have pleased him, for he loved
courage even in an adversary; but now, when every hour lost meant peril
to Ulf, his bosom swelled with wrath and disappointment.  By force of
superior weight he drove his adversary back inch by inch, till at the
