the wish of his heart had been gained!  No longer did he walk with the
burden of a broken promise weighting his neck; no longer did the
consciousness of having an enemy oppress him.

"Simpleton!" many of my readers will exclaim.  Perhaps he was; but even
if you laugh at him, I think you will hardly despise him for his simple-
mindedness, for who would not rather be such a one than the tempter, Tom
Drift?

All that week he was jubilant.  Boys looked round in astonishment at the
shrillness of his whistle and the ring of his laughter.  His corner of
the class room was a simple Babel, and the number of apples he bestowed
in charity was prodigious.

Something, every one could see, had happened to make him happier than
ever.  Few knew what that something was, and fewer still knew what it
meant.

"What are you up to to-morrow?" asked the elder Halliday of his fag on
the Friday evening.

"Fishing," briskly replied the boy.

"You're for ever fishing," said Joe.  "I suppose that young brother of
mine is going with you?"

"No; Jim's going to play in the match against the Badgers."

The "Badgers," let me explain, was the name of a scratch cricket eleven
made up of boys in the first, second and third forms.

"Are you going alone, then?"

Charlie felt uncomfortable as he answered,--

"No."

"Whom are you going with?" pursued the inquiring Joe.

"A fellow in the fifth who asked me to come."

"What's his name?"

Charlie had no help for it now.

"Tom Drift," he faltered.

"Tom Drift!  I thought you and he were at loggerheads."

"Oh, don't you know we've made it up?  He was awfully kind about it, and
said he was sorry, when it was really my fault, and we shook hands, and
to-morrow we are going to fish in a place he knows where there's no end
of trout."

"Where's that?"

"He didn't want me to tell, for fear everybody should come and spoil the
sport; but I suppose I can tell you, though; it's up the Sharle, near
Gurley."

"Humph!  I've fished there before now.  Not such a wonderful lot of
fish, either."

"I suppose you won't be there to-morrow?" asked Charlie nervously,
afraid of losing the confidence of Tom Drift by attracting strangers to
his waters.

"Not if I know it," replied Joe.  "I say, youngster, I thought you had
given up the notion of making up to that fellow?"

"I didn't make up to him, only I can't be sorry to be friends with
him--"

"Well, I hope you won't be sorry now you've done it.  Take care what
you're about, that's all."

Charlie was again perplexed to understand why Halliday seemed to have
such a dislike to poor Tom.

Just as he was going off to bed Joe stopped him and asked,--

"By the way, shall you be using your watch to-morrow?"

"Well, I promised I'd take it, to see how the time went; but I dare say
we could do without it, and I would like to lend it to you, Halliday."

"Not a bit of it," replied the other.  "I can do without it as well as
you.  I am going to walk over to Whitstone Woods and back."

"Hullo, that's a long trot," said Charlie.  "It must be nearly thirty
miles."

"Something like that," said Joe.  "Walcot and I are going to make a day
of it."

"Which way do you go?"

"Through Gurley, and then over Rushton Common and past Slingcomb."

"Never!  I wish I could do thirty miles at a stretch."

"So you will some day.  Good-night."

And Charlie went to bed, to dream of the lance-wood top of his rod and
the trout in the Sharle.

In the meanwhile the conspirators had had another meeting in Drift's
den.

"Well, have you hooked him?" asked Gus.

"Yes; it's all right.  He took it all in like a lamb."

"And all the school," said Margetson, "is talking of the great
reconciliation, and the gratification which that event will undoubtedly
afford to your venerable mother."

"Shut up, will you, Margetson?  I've had quite enough of that chaff."

"But I do assure you, Tom--"

"That'll do," said Tom, snappishly; and Margetson did not go the length
of saying what it was he was so ready to assure him of.

"Well," said Gus, "we'll meet you and the young cub at the cross roads
by Sharle Bridge.  The races don't begin till twelve, so we shall have
lots of time.  I mean to see if we can't get a trap at Gurley, and do
the thing in style.  What do you say?  We could get one for about ten
bob."

"All serene," said Margetson.  "I'll fork out my share."

"You'll pay for me, Tom," said Shadbolt, "won't you?"

"I'll see," said Tom.

"All right, that's settled; and you are seeing about grub, Tom, aren't
you?  Don't forget the etceteras.  What time have you told young mooney-
face?"

"Nine.  He's sure to be in time."

"Well, we'll start a little before, you know, and meet you quite by
accident, and the young beggar won't smell a rat till we are safe in
Gurley."

"And if he turns cantankerous?"

"Then we can put Shaddy to look after him."

"Who's going to win the Gulley Plate, Gus?"

And then the party fell to canvassing the entries for the morrow's
races, and making their bets, in which, of course, Tom stood almost
bound to lose, whichever horse won.

Long ere they had parted company Charlie was sound asleep and dreaming,
with me under his pillow.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

HOW MY MASTER DID NOT CATCH THE FISH HE EXPECTED.

About ten years before the time of my story it had happened that in a
famous battle fought between her Majesty's troops and those of a hostile
and savage king, the colours of the 300th Regiment were noticed to be in
imminent peril of capture.  The ensign who carried them was wounded, and
already a score of the enemy were rushing forward to seize the prize and
carry it off in triumph to their king.  Suddenly, however, there dashed
up to the spot a young cornet of dragoons, who, seeing the peril of his
fellow-officer and the colours he carried, dragged him, flag and all, up
nearly into his own saddle, and started off with his precious burden
towards a place of shelter from the fire and spears of the savages.
Before, however, he had gone twenty yards the poor ensign tumbled to the
ground, shot through the heart, yielding with his dying hands his
colours to the dragoon.  That plucky young soldier, wrapping the torn
and stained flag round his body, set his teeth, stooped forward in his
saddle, and, digging his spurs into his horse, galloped for his life.
He had a terrific gauntlet to run, and grandly he ran it.  The friendly
trench was in sight, the cheers of his comrades fell like music on his
ears, a vision of glory and honour flashed through his mind, and then
suddenly he reeled forward in his seat--a malignant shot had found him
out at last, and, with the colours round him, he dropped from his horse
into his comrades' arms a dead man.

This hero was an old Randlebury boy; and ever since that day, on every
anniversary of his glorious death, Randlebury kept, and still keeps,
holiday.

All this Charlie was informed of by his faithful chum, Jim Halliday, as
the former was dressing himself on the morning of the eventful holiday
in question.

What possessed him to get up at six, when he was not to start till nine,
I cannot say.  He even routed me from under his pillow at five, so
fidgety was he, and as soon as ever I pointed to six he bounced out of
bed as if he was shot.

"What are you up to, getting up at this time?" growled Jim, who, much to
the mutual delight of the boys, slept in the same room with Charlie.

"Oh, you know; I don't want to be behindhand," replied Charlie.

"Behindhand!  Why, do you know it's only just six?"

"I know that, and I mean to make the most of my holiday.  I say, Jim,
what do they want to give us a holiday for, do you know?"

"They don't want to at all; they've got to."

"Got to?  What do you mean?" inquired Charlie, dragging on his boots.

And then Jim, with many yawns and growls, told him the story; and,
without waiting for his comments thereon, rolled over and went off to
sleep again.

Charlie spent his early hour in polishing up things generally.  When he
had polished up his rod with the lance-wood top, he polished up his
green can and his hooks.  Then he warmed me up with a piece of wash-
leather, and then his many-fanged knife.

By the time these little jobs were accomplished, and Joe's study put in
order, the breakfast bell sounded, and he went down with a mouth sore
with whistling.

He caught sight of Tom Drift at another table, and nodded and waved his
green can to him; he informed every boy within hearing distance that it
was certain to be a fine day, whatever it looked like now; and he made
the wildest and most indiscriminate promises to entertain his whole
acquaintance at no end of a trout supper on the spoils of that day's
sport.  Twenty times during breakfast did he pull me out and look
impatiently at my minute-hand slowly making its way from eight to nine;
and as soon as ever the meal was over he rushed upstairs like mad for
his rod and bag, and then tore down again four steps at a time, nearly
knocking the head master over at the bottom.

"Gently, my man," said that gentleman, recognising in this cannon-ball
of a young fellow his little travelling companion.  "Why, what's the
matter?"

"I beg your pardon, doctor," said Charlie; "did I hurt you?"

"Not a bit.  So you are going to fish to-day?"

"Yes, sir," said the beaming Charlie.  "I say, sir, do you think it'll
be a fine day?"

"I hope so--good-bye.  I suppose this can will be full when you come
back?"

"Good-bye, sir," said Charlie, secretly resolving that if fortune
favoured him he would present the two finest of his trout to the doctor.

He found Drift ready for him when he reached that young gentleman's
study.

Besides his rod, Tom had a somewhat cumbersome bag, which, as it carried
most of the provisions for the whole party, he was not a little surly
about being burdened with.

Charlie, of course, thought it was his and Tom's dinner.

"Is that the grub?" he cried.  "Why, Tom Drift, you have been laying in
a spread!  What a brick you are!  Look here, I'd carry it--isn't it a
weight, though!  If we get all this inside us two we shan't starve!"

And so they started, Charlie lugging along the bag and whistling like a
lark.

"Looks cloudy," said Tom, who felt he must say something or other.

"Never mind, all the better for the trout, you know.  I say, I wish I
had my fly on the water this minute."

As Tom was silent, Charlie kept up the conversation by himself.

"I say, Tom Drift," said he, "if your mother could only see us two chaps
going off for a day's fishing she--"

"Look here, draw it mild about my mother, young un.  She can take care
of herself well enough."

Charlie blushed to the roots of his hair at this rebuke, and for some
time the flow of his conversation was arrested.

It was a good four miles from Randlebury to Sharle Bridge; and long ere
they reached it Charlie's arm ached with the ponderous bag he was
carrying.  He did not, however, like to say anything, still less to ask
Tom to take a turn at carrying it; so he plodded on, changing hands
every few minutes, and buoying himself up with the prospect of the river
and the trout.

Presently they came within sight of the signpost which marks the
junction of the Gurley and Sharle Bridge roads.

"Here we are at last!" cried Charlie, panting and puffing.  "I say, Tom
Drift, I don't believe I could have carried this bag any farther if I'd
tried."

"It'll be lighter when we go home.  Hullo! who are these three?" for at
this moment Gus, Margetson, and Shadbolt made their appearance.

"They look like Randlebury fellows by their caps.  Oh, I know who one of
them is," added Charlie-- "Margetson, in the fourth; don't you know
him?"

"Rather!" replied Tom; "and the other two are Shaddy and Gus.  Who'd
have thought of meeting _them_!" and he gave a whistle, which succeeded
in attracting the attention of the worthy trio.

Of course their surprise at meeting Tom and his companion was no less
great--in fact, they had to inquire who the youngster was.

"Where are you off to?" demanded Gus.

"We're going to try our luck up the Sharle," said Tom.

"You'll be sold if you do," said Gus.  "We were down looking at it, and
a pretty state it's in.  Old Skinner at the Tannery took it into his
head to leave his gates up last night, and his muck has got into the
