accordingly.  I could not help noticing, however, as we sallied forth
into the field, that fine feathers do not always make fine birds.  There
was Tom Sampson, for instance, the biggest duffer that ever thought he
could run a step, got up in the top of the fashion, in bran-new togs,
and a silk belt, and the most gorgeous of scarlet sashes across his
shoulders; while Hooker, who was as certain as Greenwich time to win the
quarter-mile, had on nothing but his old (and not very white) cricket
clothes, and no sash at all.  And there was another thing I noticed
about these old hands: they behaved in the laziest of manners.  They
sprawled on the grass or sat on the benches, appearing disinclined for
the slightest exertion; while others, less experienced, took preliminary
canters along the tracks, or showed off over the hurdles.  Fine fellows,
no doubt, they thought themselves; but they had reason to be sorry for
this waste of energy before the day was out.

Programmes!  With what excitement I seized mine and glanced down it!
There it was!  "Number 12.  Three-legged Race, 100 yards, for boys under
15. 1, Trotter and Walker (pink); 2, White and Benson (green); 3, Adams
and Slipshaw (blue)."  Reader, have you ever seen your name in print for
the first time?  Then you may imagine my sensations!

Things now begin to look like business.  The doctor has turned up, and a
party of ladies.  The visitors' enclosure is fast filling up, and there
is a fair show of carriages behind.  Those big fellows in the tall hats
are old Parkhurstians, come to see the young generation go through its
paces, and that little knot of men talking together in the middle of the
ground consists of the starter, judge, and umpire.  Not a few of us,
too, turn our eyes wistfully to that tent over yonder, where we know are
concealed the rewards of this day's combats; and in my secret heart I
find myself wondering more than once how it will sound to hear the names
"Adams and Slipshaw" called upon to receive the first prize for the
three-legged race.

Hark!  There goes a bell, and we are really about to begin.  "Number 1,
Junior 100 yards, for boys under 12," and 24 names entered!  Slipshaw
and 1, both over 12, go off to have a look at "the kids," and a queer
sight it is.  Of course, they can't all, 24 of them, run abreast, and so
they are being started in heats, six at a time.  The first lot is just
starting.  How eagerly they toe the line and look up at the starter!

"Are--" he begins, and two of them start, and have to be called back.
"Are you ready?" he says.  Three of them are off now, and can't
understand that they are to wait for the word "Off!"  But at last the
starter gets to the end of his speech and has them fairly off.  The
little fellows go at it as if their lives depended on it.  Their mothers
and big brothers are looking on, their "chums" are shouting to them
along the course, and the winning-post is not very far ahead.  On they
go, but not in a level row.  One has taken the lead, and the others
straggle behind him in a queer procession.  It doesn't last long.  Even
a Junior 100 yards must come to an end at last, and the winner runs,
puffing, into the judge's arms, half a dozen yards ahead of the next
boy, and 50 yards ahead of the last.  The other three heats follow, and
then, amid great excitement, the final heat is run off, and the best man
wins.

For the Senior 100 yards which followed only three were entered, and
each of these had his band of confident admirers.  Slipshaw and I were
very "sweet" on Jackson, who was monitor of our dormitory, and often
gave us the leavings of his muffins, but Ranger was a lighter-built
fellow, and seemed very active, while Bruce's long legs looked not at
all pleasant for his opponents.  The starter had no trouble with them,
but it was no wonder they all three looked anxious as they turned their
faces to him; for in a 100 yards' race the start is everything, as poor
long-legged Bruce found out, for he slipped on the first spring, and
never recovered his lost ground.  Between Ranger and Jackson the race
was a fine one to within twenty yards of home, when our favourite's
"fat" began to tell on him, and though he stuck gallantly to work he
could not prevail over the nimble Ranger, who slipped past him and won
easily by a yard.

This was a damper for Slipshaw and me, who, as in duty bound, attended
our champion back to where he had left his coat, and so missed the
throwing of the cricket-ball, which was easily won by the favourite.

But though we missed that event, we had no notion of missing the high
jump, which promised to be the best thing (next to the three-legged
race) that day.  Four fellows were in for it, and of these Shute and
Catherall were two of the best jumpers Parkhurst had ever had; and it
was well known all over the school that in practice each had jumped
exactly 5 foot 4 inches.  Who would win now?  The two outsiders were
soon got rid of, one at 4 foot 10 inches, and the other at 5 foot; and
the real interest of the event began when Shute and Catherall were left
alone face to face with the bar.  Shute was a tall fellow, of slight
make and excellent spring.  Catherall was short, but with the bounce of
an india-rubber ball in him, and a wonderful knack of tucking his feet
up under him in jumping.  It was a pretty sight to watch them advance
half-inch by half-inch, from 5 foot to 5 foot 3 inches.  There seemed
absolutely nothing to choose between them, they both appeared to clear
the bar so easily.  At 5 foot 31/2 inches.  Shute missed his first jump,
greatly to the dismay of his adherents, who saw Catherall clear it with
complete ease.  If he were to miss the second time, he would be out of
it, and that would be a positive tragedy.  So we all watched his next
jump with breathless anxiety.  He stood looking at the bar for a second
or two, as if doubting his own chance.  Then his face cleared up, and he
sprang towards it.  To our delight he rose beautifully and cleared it
easily.  At 5 foot 4 inches both missed the first jump, but both cleared
it at the second trial.  And now for the tug of war.  Both had
accomplished the utmost he had ever hitherto achieved, and it remained
to be seen whether the excitement of the occasion would assist either or
each to excel himself.  Shute came to grief altogether at 5 foot 41/2
inches, and again, to our dismay, Catherall bounded over the bar at his
first effort.  Shute's friends were in despair, and if that hero had
been a nervous fellow he might have been the same.  But he was a very
cool fish, and instead of losing his nerve, sat down on the grass and
tightened the lace of his shoe.  Then he slowly rose to his feet and
faced his task.  At that moment I forgot all about the three-legged
race, and gave my whole heart up to the issue of this jump.  He started
to run at last, slow at first, but gathering pace for his final leap.
Amid breathless silence he sprang forward and reached the bar, and
then--then he coolly pulled up and walked back again.  This looked bad;
but better to pull up in time than spoil his chance.  He kept us waiting
an age before he was ready to start again, but at last he turned for his
last effort.  We could tell long before he got to the bar that this
time, at any rate, he was going to jump, whether he missed or no.  Jump
he did, and, to our unbounded delight, just cleared the bar--so narrowly
that it almost shook as he skimmed over it.  That was the end of the
high jump; for though both attempted the 5 foot 5 inches, neither
accomplished it, and the contest was declared to be a dead heat.

After this several unimportant races followed, which I need hardly
describe.  Number 12 on the list was getting near, and I was beginning
to feel a queer, hungry sort of sensation which I didn't exactly like.
However, the mile was to be run before our turn came, and that would
give me time to recover.

For this race we had many of us looked with a curious interest, on
account of the new boy, of whom I have spoken, being one of the
competitors in it.  He didn't look a likely sort of fellow to win a
race, certainly, for he was slightly bow-legged and thick-set, and what
seemed to us a much more ominous sign, was not even arrayed in flannels,
but in an ordinary white shirt and light cloth trousers.  However, he
took his place very confidently at the starting-post, together with
three rivals, wearing respectively black, red, and yellow for their
colours.

The start for a mile race is not such a headlong affair as for a hundred
yards, and consequently at the word "Off!" there was comparatively
little excitement among us spectators.

Yellow went to the front almost immediately, with red and black close
behind, while the new boy seemed to confirm our unfavourable impression
by keeping considerably in the rear.  The mile was divided into three
laps round the field, and at the end of the first the positions of the
four were the same as at starting.  But it was soon evident yellow was
not destined to continue his lead, for before the half distance was
accomplished, red and black, who all along had been neck and neck, were
up to him and past him, and by the end of the lap the new boy had also
overtaken him.

And now we became considerably more interested in the progress of this
new boy, who, it suddenly occurred to us, seemed to be going very
easily, which was more than could be said of red, who was dropping a
little to the rear of black.  A big boy near me said, "That fellow's got
the wind of a balloon," and I immediately began to think he was not far
wrong.  For in this third lap, when two of the others were slacking
pace, and when the third was only holding his own, the new boy freshened
up remarkably.  We could watch him crawl up gradually nearer and nearer
to red, till a shout proclaimed him to be second in the running.  But
black was still well ahead, and in the short space left, as the big boy
near me said, "He could hardly collar his man."

But see!  The fellow is positively beginning to tear along!  He seems
fresher than when he started.  "Look out.  Black!" shout twenty voices.
All very well to say, "Look out!"  Black is used up, and certainly
cannot respond to this tremendous spurt.  Thirty yards from home the new
boy is up to his man, and before the winning-post is reached he is a
clear ten yards ahead.

"Bellows did it," said the big boy; "look at his chest"; and then for
the first time I noticed where the secret of this hero's triumph lay.

But, horrors! the next race is Number 12, and Slipshaw and I scuttle off
as hard as we can go, to get ready.

How miserable I felt then!  I hated athletic sports, and detested
"three-legged races."  As we emerged from the tent, we and the other two
couples, ambling along on our respective three legs, a shout of laughter
greeted our appearance.  I, for one, didn't see anything to laugh at,
just then.

"Adams," said Slipshaw, as we reached the starting-place, "take it easy,
old man, and mind you don't go over."

"All right," said I, feeling very much inclined to go over at that
instant.  Then that awful starter began his little speech.

"Are you ready?" he asked.

"Not at all," inwardly ejaculated I.

"Off!" he cried; and almost before I knew where I was, Slipshaw and I
were hopping along on our three legs amid the cheers of the crowd.

"Steady!" said he, as I stepped out rather _too_ fast.

Alas! we were last.  The other two couples were pounding along ahead at
a wonderful pace.

"Steady!" growled Slipshaw again, as I began to try to run, and nearly
capsized him.

You may laugh, reader, but it was no joke, that three-legged race.  The
others ahead of us showed no signs of flagging; they were going hard,
one couple close at the heels of the other, and we a full five yards
behind.  I was giving one despairing thought to the pots and prizes in
the tent, when a great roar of laughter almost made me forget which foot
to put forward.

What could it be?--and Slipshaw was laughing too!

"Steady, now," he said, "and come along!"

The laughter continued, and looking before me, I suddenly detected its
cause.  The leading couple in a moment of over-confidence had attempted
to go too fast, and had come on their noses on the path, and the second
couple, too close behind them, had not had time to avoid the obstacle,
but had plunged headlong on to the top of them!  It was all right now!
Slipshaw and I trotted triumphantly past the prostrate heap, and after
all won our prize!  You may fancy I was too excited to think of much
else after that, except indeed the hurdle race, which was most exciting,
and won most cleverly by Catherall, who, though he came to grief at the
last hurdle, was able to pick himself up in time to rush in and win the
race by a neck from the new boy, whom we found to be almost as good at
jumping as he was at running.

Then followed a two-mile race--rather dull to watch--and with that the
sports were at an end.

Need I say how proudly Slipshaw and I marched up arm-in-arm to receive
the prize for our race, which consisted of a bat for me and a telescope
for my companion?--or how the new boy was cheered?--or how Shute and
Catherall were applauded?

Before I left Parkhurst I was an old hand at athletic sports, but I
don't think I ever thought any of them so interesting as the day on
which Slipshaw and I, with our legs tied together, came in first in the
three-legged race!



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE SNEAK.

Sneak!  It's an ugly name, but not ugly enough, believe me, for the
animal it describes.

Like his namesake, the snake, he may be a showy enough looking fellow at
first sight, he may have the knack of wriggling himself into your
acquaintance, and his rattle may amuse you for a time, but wait till he
turns and stings you!

I am at a loss how to describe in a few words what I--and, I expect,
most of us--mean when we talk of a sneak.  He is a mixture of so many
detestable qualities.  There is a large amount of cowardice in his
constitution, and a similar quantity of jealousy; and then there are
certain proportions of falsehood, ingratitude, malice, and officiousness
to complete his ugly anatomy, to say nothing of hypocrisy and self-
conceit.  When all these amiable ingredients are compounded together, we
have our model sneak.

How we detest the fellow! how our toes tingle when he comes our way! how
readily we go a mile round to avoid him! how we hope we may never be
like _him_!

Let me tell you of one we had at our school.  Any one who did not know
Jerry would have said to himself, "That's a pleasant enough sort of
fellow."  For so he seemed.  With a knack of turning up everywhere, and
at all times, he would at first strike the stranger as only an extremely
sociable fellow, who occasionally failed to see he wasn't as welcome as
one would think he deserved to be.  But wait a little.  Presently he'd
make up to you, and become very friendly.  In your pleasure at finding
some one to talk to after coming away from home to a new and lonely
place, you will, in the innocence of your heart, grow confidential, and
tell him all your secrets.  You will perhaps tell him to whom your
sister is engaged; how much pocket-money your father allows you.  You'll
show him a likeness of the little cousin you are over head and ears in
love with, and tell him about the cake your old nurse has packed up
among the schoolbooks in your trunk.  He takes the greatest interest in
the narration; you feel quite happy to have had a good talk about the
dear home, and you go to bed to dream of your little sweetheart and your
new friend.

In the morning, when you wake, there is laughter going on in the beds
round you.  As you sit up and rub your eyes, and wonder where you are--
it's all so different from home--you hear one boy call out to another--

"I say, Tom, don't you wish you had a nurse to make you cakes?"

That somehow seems pointed at you, though addressed to another, for all
the other boys look round at you and grin.

"Wouldn't I?" replies the Tom appealed to.  "Only when a chap's in love,
you know, he's no good at cakes."

"Cakes!" "in love!"  They must be making fun of you; but however do they
know so much about you?  Listen!  "If _I_ had a sister, I'd take care
_she_ didn't go and marry a butter-man, Jack, wouldn't you?"

It must be meant for you; for you had told Jerry the evening before that
your sister was going to marry a provision merchant!  Then all of a
sudden it flashes upon you.  You have been betrayed!  The secrets you
have whispered in private have become the property of the entire school;
and the friend you fancied so genial and sympathising has made your
open-hearted frankness the subject of a blackguard jest, and exposed you
to all the agony of schoolboy ridicule!

With quivering lips and flushed face, half shame, half anger, you dash
beneath the clothes, and wish the floor would open beneath you.  When
the getting-up bell sounds, you slink into your clothes amid the titters
of your companions.  It is weeks before you hear the end of your nurse,
your pocket money, your sister, and your sweetheart; and for you all the
little pleasure of your first term at school has gone.

But what of Jerry?  He comes to you in the morning as if nothing had
happened, with a "How are you, old fellow?"

You are so indignant you can't speak; all you are able to do is to glare
in scorn and anger.

"Afraid you're not well," remarks the sneak; "change of scene, you know.
I hope you'll soon be better."

Just as he is going you manage, though almost bursting with the effort,
to stammer out--"What do you mean by telling tales of me to all the
fellows?"  He looks perplexed, as if at a loss for your meaning.  "Tell
tales of you?" says he.  "I don't know what you mean, old chap."

"Yes, you do.  How did they all know all about me this morning, if you
hadn't told them?"

Then, as if your meaning suddenly dawned upon him, he breaks into a
forced laugh, and exclaims--

"Oh, the chaff between Tom and Jack!  I was awfully angry with Jack for
beginning it--awfully angry.  We happened to be talking last night, you
know, about home, and I just mentioned what you had told me, never
thinking the fellow would be such a cad as to let it out."

You are so much taken aback at the impudence of the fellow, that you let
him walk away without another word.  If you have derived no other
advantage from your first day at school, you have at least learned to
know the character of Jerry.  And you find it out better as you go on.

If you quarrel with him, and threaten him with condign punishment, he
will report you to the doctor, and you'll get an imposition.  If you sit
up beyond hours reading, he'll contrive to let the monitors know, and
your book will be confiscated; if you happen to be "spinning a yarn"
with a chum in your study, you will generally find, if you open the door
suddenly, that he is not very far from the keyhole; if you get up a
party to partake of a smuggled supper in the dormitory, he will conduct
a master to the scene, and get you into a row.  There's no secret so
deadly he won't get hold of; nothing you want kept quiet that he won't
spread all round the school.  In fact, there's scarcely anything he does
not put his finger into, and everything he puts his finger into he
spoils.

If, in a weak moment of benevolence, you take him back into your
confidence and friendship, no one will be more humble and forgiving and
affable; but he will just use your new favour as a weapon for paying
back old grudges, and sorely will you repent your folly.

In fact, there is only one place for Jerry--that place is Coventry.
That city is famous for one sneak already.  Let Jerry keep him company.
There he can tell tales, and peep and listen and wriggle to his heart's
content.  He'll please himself, and do no one any harm.

A sneak has not always the plea of self-interest for his meanness.
Often enough his tale-bearing or his mischief-making can not only do his
victims incalculable harm, but cannot do him any possible good.

What good did the snake in the fable expect who, having been rescued,
and warmed and restored to life by the merciful woodcutter, turned on
his deliverer and stung him?  No wonder the good fellow knocked him on
the head!  I knew another sneak once who seemed to make a regular
profession of this amiable propensity.  He seemed to consider his path
in life was to detect and inform on whatever, to his small mind, seemed
a culpable offence.  In the middle of school, all of a sudden his raspy
voice would lift itself up in ejaculations like these, addressed to the
master,--

"Please, sir," (he always prefaced his remarks with "Please, sir"),
"Please, sir, Tom Cobb's eating an apple!"

"Please, sir, Jenkins has made a blot!"

"Please, sir, Allen junior is cutting his name on the desk!"

Perhaps the indignant Allen junior would here take occasion to
acknowledge his sense of this attention by a private kick under the
desk.  Then it would be--

"All right, Joe Allen; _I'll sneak of you_, you see if I don't!"

