good eyes.  You will find it near--in some naked fork, but not among the
twigs or leaves."

Basil and Francois set about looking for the nest, while Lucien
continued to watch the evolutions of the tiny little creatures.  The
"point" upon which our young naturalist wished to be satisfied was,
whether the humming-birds eat insects as well as honey--a point which
has been debated among ornithologists.

As he stood watching them a large humble-bee (_Apis bombylicus_) came
whizzing along, and settled in one of the flowers.  Its feet had
scarcely touched the bright petals, when the male ruby-throat darted
towards it, and attacked it like a little fury.  Both came out of the
flower together, carrying on their miniature battle as they flew; but,
after a short contest, the bee turned tail, and flew off with an
angry-like buzz,--no doubt, occasioned by the plying of his wings more
rapidly in flight.

A shout from Francois now told that the nest was discovered.  There it
was, in the fork of a low branch, but without eggs as yet--else the
birds would not both have been abroad.  The nest was examined by all
three, though they did not disturb it from its position.  It was built
of fine threads of Spanish moss (_Tillandsia_), with which it was tied
to the branch; and it was lined inside with the silken down of the
anemone.  It was a semi-sphere, open at the top, and but one inch in
diameter.  In fact, so small was the whole structure, that any one but
the sharp-eyed, bird-catching, nest-seeking Francois, would have taken
it for a knob on the bark of the tree.

All three now returned to watch the manoeuvres of the birds, that, not
having seen them by the nest, still continued playing among the flowers.
The boys stole as near as possible, keeping behind a large bunch of
hanging vines.  Lucien was nearest, and his face was within a few feet
of the little creatures, so that he could observe every motion they
made.  He was soon gratified with a sight that determined his "point"
for him.  A swarm of small blue-winged flies attracted his attention.
They were among the blossoms, sometimes resting upon them, and sometimes
flitting about from one to another.  He saw the birds several times dash
at them with open bills, and pick them from their perch; so the question
was decided--the humming-birds were insect-eaters.

After a while the female flew off to her nest, leaving the male still
among the flowers.

The curiosity of the boys was now satisfied, and they were about to
return to the tent, when Lucien suddenly made a motion, whispering the
others to remain silent.  Francois first caught sight of the object
which had caused this behaviour on the part of his brother, and then
Basil saw it.  A hideous object it was!

Crouching among the leaves, now crawling sideways, now making short
springs, and then hiding itself, went a fearful-looking creature.  It
was about the size of one of the birds, but far different in appearance.
Its body consisted of two pieces, joined about the middle, and covered
all over with a reddish-brown wool or hair, that stood upright like
bristles.  It had ten limbs--long, crooked, and covered with hair, like
the body--two curved claw-like antennae or feelers in front, and two
horns projecting behind, so that, but for the sharp fiery eyes of the
creature, it would have been difficult to tell its head from its hinder
part.  Its rusty colour, its ill-shaped body, and hairy legs, combined
with the piercing look from its eyes, gave it a most vicious appearance,
such as belongs, less or more, to all of its race--for it was of the
race _aranea_, or spiders.

"The _leaping tarantula_!" whispered Lucien to his brothers.  "See," he
continued, "it is after the ruby-throat!"

This was evident.  Step by step, and leap after leap, it was approaching
the cluster of blossoms where the humming-bird was at the moment
engaged.  Its eyes were bent eagerly upon the latter; and whenever it
flew up from the flowers and whirred idly about, the tarantula squatted
itself closely, hiding behind the leaves or shanks of the vines.  On the
other hand, when the bird settled a moment and appeared busily feeding,
the skulking creature would advance a stage nearer, either by a quick
run or a leap, when it would again conceal itself and await a fresh
opportunity.  As the bird flitted about a good deal, the spider had
frequently to change its direction in following.  The former after one
of its short flights, settled into a pet-flower directly in front of
where the latter lay crouching.  It did not enter the cup of the flower,
but remained at the mouth--poised upon its whirring wings--while with
its long prehensile tongue it drew out the honey.  It had scarcely been
a moment in this position, when the tarantula sprang forward and
clutched it round the body with his antennae.  The bird, with a wild
chirrup, like that of a distressed cricket, flew outward and upwards.
Its wings were still free, and all expected it would carry off the
spider that was now seen clinging around it.  Not so, however.  On
getting a few feet from the flower its flight appeared to be suddenly
checked; and, although it still kept in the air, flying first one way
and then another, it was evident that something restrained it from
getting clear off.  On looking more attentively a fine silk-like line
was seen stretching from the trees to the fluttering creature.  It was
the thread of the spider, and this it was that prevented his victim from
carrying him into the air.

The little wings soon ceased to move, and both bird and spider fell to
the end of the thread, where they hung for a moment suspended.  The boys
could see that the bird was dead, and the mandibles of the tarantula
were buried in its shining threat!

Francois would have rushed forward to kill the destroyer; but Lucien,
who was too ardent a naturalist to have his lesson thus interrupted,
restrained his more impetuous brother, and all three remained quiet as
before.

The tarantula now commenced reeling in his line, for the purpose of
carrying his prey up among the branches, where he had his nest.  The
boys looked upward to discover the latter.  There, sure enough, was the
web, in a shaded corner, stretching its meshes from a large liana to the
trunk of the tupelo; and towards this point the spider now slowly
progressed with his lifeless victim.

As they watched his motions, their eyes were caught by a shining object
that moved along the wrinkled bark of the liana.  As the vine was nearly
a foot in diameter, and of a deep ferruginous colour, this object was
the more apparent against its dark ground, for it was a creature of
brilliant hues.  It was an animal of the lizard species; and if any
lizard could be considered beautiful, this one might have been so
called.  But the hideous, half-human form of these animals, their
piercing looks, their stealthy and predatory habits, and, above all, the
knowledge that the bite of several of their species is poisonous,
combine to render them objects that excite disgust and awe, rather than
admiration.

This one, as we have already said, was of the most brilliant colour.
The whole of its upper surface was a golden green, vivid as the hues of
an emerald; while its body underneath was greenish-white.  But this
part, as it lay along the liana, was not seen; and a pure, uniform green
was the apparent colour of the whole animal.  There was one conspicuous
exception--the throat.  This was swollen out, as though by inflation,
exhibiting a surface of the brightest scarlet, that appeared in the sun
as if painted with vermilion.  The eyes of the animal shone like flame--
for the irides were, in fact, the colour of burnished gold, with small
pupils, sparkling like diamonds, in their midst.  Its arms and limbs
were of the same colour as the body; and its branching feet exhibited
the peculiarity of having small knots or tubercules at the ends of the
toes.  These tubercules, together with the loose dewlap of the throat,
told the genus to which the animal belonged,--an _anolius_ of the family
_Iguanidae_, and the only species of the anolius found in the territory
of the United States.

These facts were communicated by Lucien to his brothers in a whisper,
while they were observing the creature on the liana.  Basil and Francois
had often seen the species before, and were familiar with it under the
names of "green lizard" and "chameleon,"--both of which names are
applied to it in common phraseology.  The animal was not over six inches
in length; and its long coffin-shaped head, and slender, whip-like tail,
were at least two-thirds of this extent.  When first noticed, it was
passing up the liana, for the latter slanted upwards between the trees.
It did not see the boys; or, at all events, did not regard their
presence--for the chameleon is a bold little animal, and is not afraid
of man.  Up to this time it had not seen the tarantula either.  As it
was passing onward, its eyes fell upon the latter as he climbed up his
silken ladder.  All at once the lizard stopped, and put itself into a
crouching attitude.  Its colour suddenly changed.  The vermilion throat
became white, and then ashy pale; and the bright green of its body faded
into dark brown or rust colour, until it was difficult to distinguish
the animal from the bark of the liana!  Had the eyes of the spectators
not been already fixed upon it, they might have supposed that it had
disappeared altogether.  After crouching for a few seconds, it seemed to
have formed its plan of attack--for it was evident that it meant to
attack the spider--such, with flies and other insects, being its natural
food and prey.  It passed to the opposite side of the liana, and then
proceeded upward, making for the nest of the tarantula.  It reached this
point by a single run, although its back was downward as it crawled.
This it could easily do by means of the tubercules upon its toes--which
enable lizards of the genus anolius to walk upon perpendicular walls, up
glass windows, or along the smoothest ceilings.

For some moments it lay quiet in a crouching attitude, waiting the
approach of the spider, that, busied with his own affairs, did not dream
of a lurking foe so near him.  The tarantula was, no doubt, in high
spirits at the moment, exulting at the prospect of the banquet of blood
he should have, when he had carried the ruby-throat to his dark, silken
cave.  But he was destined never to reach that cave.  When he had got
within a few inches of its entrance, the chameleon sprang out from the
limb, seized the spider in his wide jaws, and all three--lizard, spider,
and bird--came to the ground together.  The bird was let go in the fall,
and became separated from the others.  Between these there was a short
struggle over the grass--for the tarantula fought fiercely; but he was
no match for his antagonist; who, in a few moments, had ground off his
legs with his powerful jaws, and left him a helpless and motionless
trunk.  The chameleon now seized his victim by the head, sunk his sharp,
conical teeth into its skull, and thus killed it outright.

What appeared singular to all was, that the moment the lizard had first
sprung upon his prey his bright colours returned like a flash, and he
again appeared with his green back and red throat, if possible more
brilliant than ever.

He now commenced dragging the body of the spider over the grass,
evidently making for some decayed logs, half covered with vines and
briars, that formed a heap near the spot.  Here, no doubt was his
retreat.

This time Francois did not attempt to interfere.  He had no desire to do
so.  He looked upon the death of the tarantula as a just punishment;
moreover, the chameleon, from its fine colours, its sportive habits, and
its harmlessness--so far as man is concerned--is a general favourite
with all; and it was so with Francois.  In fact, Francois, as well as
his brothers, who had often watched this little creature gambolling
among the leaves, and feeding upon flies and other small insects, had
never seen it exhibit so much ferocity before.  Notwithstanding this,
they all applauded it for killing the hideous tarantula; and so far as
they were concerned, it might have carried the body to its hole without
being molested.  It was destined, however, to meet with interruption
from another quarter.  Francois, whose quick eyes were wandering about,
suddenly exclaimed,--

"Look--brothers, look!  A _scorpion-lizard_!"

Basil and Lucien cast their eyes where Francois pointed--up to the trunk
of a tree that rose over the spot where the chameleon was crawling.
About twenty feet from the ground was a dark, round hole, evidently the
former nest of the red-bellied woodpecker (_Picus Carolinus_).  The
birds, however, who made that nest had deserted it; for it was now
occupied by a creature of a far different kind--a scorpion-lizard--whose
red head and brown shoulders at the moment protruded from the hole.

All who have travelled the great American forests are familiar with such
a sight--for this animal may be often observed in similar situations.  A
more disagreeable sight is rarely met with.  The scorpion-lizard, with
his red head and olive-brown body, is a hideous-looking reptile at best;
but when thus peering from his gloomy tree-cave, moving his pointed
snout from side to side, his dark eyes glancing all the while with a
fierce, malignant expression, it is difficult to conceive a more
vicious-looking creature.

His head was in motion when Francois spake--for it was this that had
caught the eye of the boy.  It was moving from side to side, protruded
out from the hole, the snout pointing downwards.  The animal was
watching the ground below, and evidently preparing to issue forth, and
come down.  The chameleon, rustling over the dead leaves, had attracted
his attention.

As quick as lightning his whole body appeared upon the tree, and lay
flat along the bark, head downwards.  Here he halted for a moment; then,
raising his shoulders, he ran nimbly down the trunk, and rushing
outwards, sprang upon the chameleon.  The latter, thus suddenly
attacked, dropped the spider; and at first showed an intention of
retreating.  Had he done so the scorpion would have followed him no
farther--as its only object in attacking him was to rob him of his prey.
The chameleon, however, is a courageous little animal; and seeing that
his assailant was not much bigger than himself--for the animal in
question was one of the smallest of the skink family--he turned again
and showed fight.  His throat swelled to its largest extent, and grew
brighter than ever.

Both now stood facing each other, and about twelve inches apart, in
threatening attitudes.  Their eyes sparkled; their forked tongues shot
forth, glittering in the sun; and their heads at intervals rose and
fell, in a manoeuvring manner, like a pair of pugilists "coming to the
scratch!"

After a short while they sprang at each other open-jawed; wriggled over
the ground a moment--their tails flying in the air--then separated, and
again assumed their defiant attitudes, manoeuvring as before.  In this
manner they met and parted several times, neither seeming to have gained
much advantage.

The weakest part of the green lizard lies in his tail.  So tender is
this appendage that the slightest blow of a small switch will separate
it from the body.  The skink seemed to be aware of this fact, as he
several times endeavoured to get around his antagonist, or, in military
phraseology, to "turn" him.  It was evidently his intention to attack
the tail.  This the chameleon dreaded; and was equally desirous not to
be "outflanked."  In whatever way the skink manoeuvred, his antagonist
met him with his scarlet front.

For several minutes the battle raged--these little creatures exhibiting
as much fury and fierceness as if they had been a pair of great
crocodiles.  The chameleon at length began to show symptoms of giving
out.  The throat grew paler--the green became less vivid--and it was
evident that he was getting the worst of it.  The scorpion now made a
rush, and threw the other upon his back.  Before the chameleon could
recover himself, his antagonist seized his tail, and bit it off close to
the body.  The poor little fellow, feeling that he had lost more than
half his length, scuttled away, and hid himself among the logs.

It was well for him, as it proved afterwards, that he got off, even thus
mutilated; and it would have been better for the skink had he remained
in his hole.  The battle between the two had carried them some distance
from the spot where it first commenced, and under the leafy, spreading
branches of a mulberry-tree.  While the fight was raging, a slight
movement in the leaves above had attracted the attention of the boys.
The next moment a red object was thrust downward, until a foot or so of
it appeared hanging clear of the branches.  It was about the thickness
of a walking-cane; but the glistening scales and the elegant curving
form told that this singular object was a serpent.

It did not remain stationary.  It was slowly and gradually letting
itself down--for more of its body was every moment becoming visible,
until a full yard of it hung out from the leaves.  The remainder was
hidden by the thick foliage where its tail no doubt was coiled around a
branch.  That part of the body that was seen was of a uniform blood-red
colour, though the belly or under side was much the lightest.

"_Voila_!" muttered Francois, "what a red snake!  I never saw such
before."

"Nor I either," added Basil.

"Nor I," said Lucien, "but I have heard of it.  I easily recognise it
from the description.  It is the `red snake' of the Rocky Mountains
(_Coluber testacea_)."

"Oh," said Basil, "I have heard trappers speak of it."

"Yes," added Lucien.  "It is a rare species, and only found in the Far
West.  See! the scorpion has whipped.  The chameleon is running off,
and, as I live, without its tail!"

The skink at this moment perceived the long, red body of the serpent
dangling above him; and knowing from experience a terrible enemy, ran
off, endeavouring to hide himself in the grass.  Instead of making for a
tree--where he might have escaped by his superior nimbleness--his
confusion and terror led him out into the open ground.  The snake
dropped from the mulberry and glided after, with his head raised high in
the air, and his jaws wide open.  In a second or two he overtook the
lizard; and striking forward and downward, killed it upon the spot.

Lucien was in raptures with the interesting lesson he was receiving; and
again restrained Francois from rushing forward.  They all, however,
crept a little nearer--so as the better to observe the further movements
of the serpent.  They kept as well as possible behind the screen of
leaves and bushes.

The snake, after having killed the lizard, remained out in the open
ground; and, stretching himself along the grass, commenced devouring it.
