unbroken by the slightest ripple. Black clouds had banked up from
the southwest, and extended in a heavy arch across the sky, but
little ahead of the brig. From its edge ragged, fragments seemed to
break off suddenly, and fly out ahead.

"It is going to blow, and no mistake," the captain said. "It is
lucky that we have had plenty of time to get her into fighting
trim.

"You had better get hold of something, lad, and clutch it tight. It
will begin with a heavy squall and, like enough, lay her pretty
well over on her beam ends, when it strikes her."

Higher and higher the threatening arch rose, till its edge stood
over the mainmast. Then the captain cried:

"Here it comes, lads. Hold on, every one!"

Looking ahead, Bob saw a white line. It approached with wonderful
rapidity, and with a confused, rushing sound. Then in a moment he
felt himself clinging, as if for life, to the stanchion of which he
had taken hold. The wind almost wrenched him from his feet while,
at the same moment, a perfect deluge of water came down upon him.

He felt the brig going further and further over, till the deck
beneath his feet seemed almost perpendicular. The captain and first
mate had both grasped the spokes of the wheel, and were aiding the
helmsman in jamming it down. Bob had no longer a hold for his feet,
and was hanging by his arms. Looking down, the sea seemed almost
beneath him but, with a desperate effort, he got hold of the rail
with one hand, and then hauled himself up under it, clinging tight
to the main shrouds. Then he saw the second mate loose the jib
halliards, while one of the sailors threw off the fore-staysail
sheet, and the spanker slowly brought the brig's head up into the
wind.

As it did so she righted, gradually, and Bob regained his place on
deck; which was still, however, lying over at a very considerable
angle. The captain raised his hand, and pointed to the main
topsail; and the second mate at once made his way aft with some of
the men and, laying out on the weather rigging, made his way aloft.
The danger seemed, to Bob, so frightful that he dared not look up.
He could hear, through the pauses of the blast, the mate shout to
the men above him and, in a few minutes, they again descended to
the deck.

Even Bob could feel how much the brig was relieved, when the
pressure of the topsail was taken off. The lower planks of the deck
rose from the water and, although this still rushed in and out
through the scupper holes, and rose at times to the level of the
bulwark rail, he felt that the worst was over.

One of the men was called to assist at the helm, and the captain
and mate came forward to the poop rail.

"That was touch and go, youngster!" the former shouted to Bob.

"It was," Bob said. "More go than touch, I should say; for I
thought she had gone, altogether."

"You had better go below, and change your things. Tell the steward
to bring me my oilskins, out of my cabin. You had better keep
below, until this rain has stopped."

Bob thought the advice was good; so he went down and got into dry
clothes, and then lay down on the cabin sofa, to leeward--he could
not have kept his place, on the other side. The rain was still
falling so heavily, on deck, that it sounded like a waggon passing
overhead; and mingled with this noise was the howl of the wind, and
the swashing of the water against the ship's side. Gradually the
motion of the vessel became more violent, and she quivered from bow
to stern, as the waves struck her.

Although it was early in the afternoon, it became almost as dark as
night in the cabin. The steward had brought him a glass of hot
grog, as soon as he had changed his clothes and, in spite of the
din, he presently fell off to sleep. When he woke the rain had
ceased; but the uproar caused by the howling of the wind, the
creaking of the spars, and the dashing of the waves was as loud as
before.

He soon made his way up on deck, and found that a tremendous sea
was running. The fore-topsail had been got off the ship, the
weather sheets of the jib and fore-staysail hauled across, and the
vessel was making comparatively little way through the water. She
was, in fact--although Bob did not know it--lying to, under these
sails and the spanker.

It all looked so terrible, to him, that he kept his place but a few
minutes; and was then glad to return to the sofa, below. In a short
time, the captain came down.

"How are you getting on, lad? All in the dark, eh?

"Steward, light the lamp, and bring me a tumbler of hot grog. Keep
the water boiling; the other officers will be down, directly.

"Well, what do you think of it, young gentleman?"

"I don't like it, at all," Bob said. "I thought I should like to
see a storm, but I never want to see one, again."

"I am not surprised at that," the captain said, with a laugh. "It
is all very well to read about storms, but it is a very different
thing to be caught in one."

"Is there any danger, sir?"

"There is always more or less danger, in a storm, lad; but I hope,
and think, the worst is over. We are in for a heavy gale but, now
that the brig has got through the first burst, there is not much
fear of her weathering it. She is a capital sea boat, well found
and in good trim; and we were fortunate enough in having sufficient
warning to get her snug, before the first burst came.

"That is always the most dangerous point. When a ship has way on
her, she can stand almost any gale; but when she is caught by a
heavy squall, when she is lying becalmed, you have to look out.
However, she got through that without losing anything; and she is
lying to, now, under the smallest possible canvas and, if all goes
well, there is no reason, whatever, for anxiety."

"What do you mean by 'if all goes well,' captain?"

"I mean as long as one of her masts isn't carried away, or anything
of that sort. I daresay you think it rough, now, but it is nothing
to what it will be by tomorrow morning. I should advise you to turn
in, at once. You could see nothing, if you went up; and would run
the risk of being washed overboard, or of getting a limb broken."

Bob's recollections of his position, as the ship heeled over when
the storm struck her, were still far too vivid for him to have any
desire for a repetition of it; and he accordingly took the
captain's advice, and turned in at once.

When he got up in the morning and, with some difficulty, made his
way on deck he found that, as the captain predicted, the sea was
far heavier than the night before. Great ridges of water bore down
upon the ship, each seeming as if it would overwhelm her; and for
the first few minutes Bob expected to see the brig go, head
foremost, and sink under his feet. It was not till he reflected
that she had lived through it for hours that he began to view the
scene with composure. Although the waves were much higher than when
he had left the deck on the previous afternoon, the scene was
really less terrifying.

The sky was covered with masses of gray cloud, ragged and torn,
hurrying along with great velocity, apparently but a short distance
above the masthead. When the vessel rose on a wave, it seemed to
him that the clouds, in places, almost touched the water, and
mingled with the masses of spray caught up by the waves. The scud,
borne along by the wind, struck his face with a force that caused
it to smart and, for a time, he was unable to face the gale even
for a minute.

The decks were streaming with water. The boats had disappeared from
the davits, and a clean sweep seemed to have been made of
everything movable. Forward was a big gap in the bulwark and, as
the brig met the great waves, masses of green water poured in
through this, and swept along the deck waist deep. The brig was
under the same sail as before, except that she now showed a
closely-reefed fore-topsail.

When he became a little accustomed to the sea, and to the motion,
he watched his time; and then made a rush across from the companion
to the weather bulwark, and got a firm hold of one of the shrouds.
The captain and the second mate were on the poop, near the wheel.
The former made his way to him.

"Good morning, Master Repton! Managed to get some sleep?"

"Yes, I have slept all night, captain. I say, isn't this
tremendous? I did not think anything could be like this. It is
splendid, you know, but it takes one's breath away.

"I don't think it is blowing quite so hard, is it?"

"Every bit as hard, but it is more regular, and you are accustomed
to it."

"But I see you have got up some more sail."

"Yes, that's to steady her. You see, when she gets into the trough
between these great waves, the lower sails are almost becalmed; and
we are obliged to show something above them, to keep a little way
on her. We are still lying to, you see, and meet the waves head on.
If her head was to fall off a few points, and one of these waves
took her on the beam, she would go down like a stone.

"Yes, the brig is doing very handsomely. She has a fine run, more
like a schooner than a brig; and she meets the waves easily, and
rises to them as lightly as a feather. She is a beauty!

"If you are going to stay here, lad, you had better lash yourself;
for it is not safe, standing as you are."



Chapter 5: A French Privateer.


As he became more accustomed to the scene around him, and found
that the waves were more terrible in appearance than reality, Bob
began to enjoy it, and to take in its grandeur and wildness. The
bareness of the deck had struck him, at once; and he now saw that
four of the cannon were gone--the two forward guns, on each
side--and he rightly supposed that these must have been run out,
and tumbled overboard, to lighten the ship forward, and enable her
to rise more easily to the waves.

An hour later, the second mate came along.

"You had better come down and get some breakfast," he said. "I am
going down first."

Bob threw off the rope, and followed the mate down into the cabin.
Mr. Probert had just turned out. He had been lying down for two or
three hours, having gone down as daylight broke.

"The captain says you had better take something before you go on
deck, Mr. Probert," the second mate said. "He will come down,
afterwards, and turn in for an hour or two."

"No change, I suppose?"

"No. She goes over it like a duck. The seas are more regular, now,
and she is making good weather of it."

Bob wondered, in his own mind, what she would do if she was making
bad weather.

The meal was an irregular one. The steward brought in three large
mugs, half filled with coffee; a basket of biscuits, and a ham.
From this he cut off some slices, which he laid on biscuits; and
each of them ate their breakfast, holding their mugs in one hand,
and their biscuits and ham in the other.

As soon as they had finished, the two officers went on deck and,
directly afterwards, the captain came down. Bob chatted with him
until he had finished his breakfast, and then went up on deck
again, for two or three hours. At the end of that time he felt so
completely exhausted, from the force of the wind and the constant
change of the angle at which he was standing, that he was glad to
go below and lie down again.

There was no regular dinner, the officers coming below by turns,
and taking a biscuit and a chunk of cold meat, standing. But at
teatime the captain and second mate came down together; and Bob,
who had again been up on deck for a bit, joined them in taking a
large bowl of coffee.

"I think the wind is blowing harder than ever," he said to the
captain.

"Yes, the glass has begun to rise a little, and that is generally a
sign you are getting to the worst of it. I expect it is a three
days' gale, and we shall have it at its worst, tonight. I hope by
this time, tomorrow, we shall be beginning to shake out our reefs.

"You had better not go up, any more. It will be dark in half an
hour, and your bunk is the best place for you."

Bob was not sorry to obey the order, for he felt that the scene
would be a very terrible one, after dark. The night, however,
seemed to him to be a miserably long one; for he was only able to
doze off occasionally, the motion being so violent that he had to
jam himself in his berth, to prevent himself from being thrown out.
The blows with which the waves struck the ship were tremendous; and
so deeply did she pitch that, more than once, he thought that she
would never come up again; but go down, head foremost. Once he
thought he heard a crash, and there were orders shouted, on the
deck above him; but he resisted the desire to go up and see what it
was, for he knew that he could do nothing; and that, in the
darkness, he could see but little of what was going on.

With the first gleam of daylight, however, he got out of the bunk.
He had not attempted to undress, having taken off his shoes, only,
when he lay down. Having put these on again, he went up. There was
but little change since the previous morning but, looking forward,
he saw that the bowsprit was gone, and the fore-topmast had been
carried away. The sea was as high as ever, but patches of blue sky
showed overhead between the clouds, and the wind was blowing
somewhat less violently.

"We have been in the wars, you see, youngster," the captain said,
when Bob made his way aft; "but we may thank God it was no worse.
We have had a pretty close squeak of it, but the worst is over,
now. The wind is going down, and the gale will have blown itself
out by this evening. It was touch-and-go several times during the
night and, if she had had a few more tons of cargo in her, she
would never have risen from some of those waves; but I think, now,
we shall see Oporto safely--which was more than I expected, about
midnight."

For some hours Bob, himself, had considerable doubts as to this, so
deeply did the brig bury herself in the waves; but after twelve
o'clock the wind fell rapidly and, although the waves showed no
signs of decreasing in height, their surface was smoother, and they
seemed to strike the vessel with less force and violence.

"Now, Mr. Probert," said the captain, "do you and Joe turn in, till
first watch. I will take charge of the deck. After that, you can
set regular watches again."

The main-topsail was already on her and, at six o'clock, the
captain had two of its reefs shaken out; and the other reef was
also loosed, when Mr. Probert came up and took charge of the first
watch, at eight bells. That night Bob lay on the floor, for the
motion was more violent than before--the vessel rolling, gunwale
under--for the wind no longer pressed upon her sails, and kept her
steady, and he would have found it impossible to maintain his
position in his berth.

In the morning, he went up. The sun was rising in an unclouded sky.
There was scarce a breath of wind. The waves came along in high,
glassy rollers--smooth mounds of water which extended, right and
left, in deep valleys and high ridges. The vessel was rolling
tremendously, the lower yards sometimes touching the water. Bob had
to wait some time before he could make a rush across to the bulwark
and, when he did so, found it almost impossible to keep his feet.
He could see that the men forward were no longer crouching for
shelter under the break of the fo'castle, but were holding on by
the shrouds or stays, smoking their pipes, and laughing and joking
together. Until the motion abated somewhat, it was clearly
impossible to commence the work of getting things in order.

"Did the bowsprit and mast both go, together?" Bob asked Joe
Lockett, who was holding on to the bulwark, near him.

"Yes, the bowsprit went with the strain when she rose, having
buried herself halfway up the waist; and the topmast snapped like a
carrot, a moment later. That was the worst dive we made. There is
no doubt that getting rid of the leverage of the bowsprit, right up
in her eyes, eased her a good bit; and as the topmast was a pretty
heavy spar, too, that also helped."

"How long will it be before the sea goes down?"

"If you mean goes down enough for us to get to work--a few hours.
If you mean goes down altogether, it will be five or six days
before this swell has quite flattened down, unless a wind springs
up from some other quarter."

"I meant till the mast can be got up again."

"Well, this afternoon the captain may set the men at work; but I
don't think they would do much good, and there would be a good
chance of getting a limb broken. As long as this calm holds there
is no hurry, one way or the other."

"You mean, because we couldn't be sailing, even if we had
everything set?"

"Well, yes, that is something, but I didn't mean that. I am not
thinking so much of our sailing, as of other people's. We are not
very fit, as we are now, either for fighting or running, and I
should be sorry to see a French privateer coming along; but as long
as the calm continues, there is no fear of that; and I expect there
have been few ships out, in this gale, who have not got repairs to
do as well as we have."

After dinner, an effort was made to begin the work; but the captain
soon ordered the men to desist.

"It is of no use, Mr. Probert. We shall only be getting some of the
men killed. It wouldn't be possible to get half done before dark
and, if the sea goes down a bit, tonight, they will get as much
done in an hour's work, in the morning, as they would if they were
to work from now to sunset.

"The carpenter might get some canvas, and nail it so as to hide
those gaps in the bulwark. That will be something done. The boys
can give it a coat of paint, in the morning. But as for the spar,
we must leave it."

All hands were at work, next morning, with the first gleam of
daylight. The rollers were still almost as high as the day before;
but there was now a slight breath of wind, which sufficed to give
the vessel steerage way. She was put head to the rollers, changing
the motion from the tremendous rolling, when she was lying
broadside to them, for a regular rise and fall that interfered but
little with the work. A spare spar was fitted in the place of the
bowsprit, the stump of the topmast was sent down, and the
topgallant mast fitted in its place and, by midday, the light spars
were all in their places again, and the brig was showing a fair
spread of canvas; and a casual observer would, at a distance, have
noticed but slight change in her appearance.

"That has been a good morning's work," the captain said, as they
sat down to dinner. "We are a little short of head-sail, but that
will make no great difference in our rate of sailing, especially if
the wind is aft. We are ready to meet with another storm again, if
it should come--which is not likely.

"We are ready for anything, in fact, except a heavily-armed
privateer. The loss of four of our guns has crippled us. But there
was no choice about the matter; it went against my heart to see
them go overboard, but it was better to lose four guns than to lose
the ship.

"I hope we shall meet with nothing till we get through the Straits.
I may be able to pick up some guns, at Gibraltar. Prizes are often
brought in there, and condemned, and there are sales of stores; so
I hope to be able to get her into regular fighting trim, again,
before I clear out from there.

"I should think you won't be sorry when we drop anchor off the
Mole, youngster?"

"I am in no hurry, now," Bob said. "I would have given a good
deal--if I had had it--two days ago, to have been on dry land but,
now that we are all right again, I don't care how long we are,
before we get there. It is very warm and pleasant, a wonderful
change after what it was when we sailed.

"Whereabouts are we, captain?"

"We are a good bit farther to the east than I like," the captain
replied. "We have been blown a long way into the bay. There is a
great set of current, in here. We have drifted nearly fifty miles
in, since noon yesterday. We are in 4 degrees 50 minutes west
longitude, and 45 degrees latitude."

"I don't think that means anything to me."

"No, I suppose not," the captain laughed. "Well, it means we are
nearly due west of Bordeaux, and about one hundred miles from the
French coast, and a little more than eighty north of Santander, on
the Spanish coast. As the wind is sou'-sou'west we can lay our
course for Cape Ortegal and, once round there, we shall feel more
comfortable."

"But don't you feel comfortable at present, captain?"

"Well, not altogether. We are a good deal too close in to the
French coast; and we are just on the track of any privateer that
may be making for Bordeaux, from the west or south, or going out in
those directions. So, although I can't say I am absolutely
uncomfortable, I shall be certainly glad when we are back again on
the regular track of our own line of traffic for the Straits or
Portugal. There are English cruisers on that line, and privateers
on the lookout for the French, so that the sound of guns might
bring something up to our assistance; but there is not much chance
of meeting with a friendly craft, here--unless it has, like
ourselves, been blown out of its course."

A lookout had already been placed aloft. Several sails were seen in
the distance, in the course of the afternoon, but nothing that
excited suspicion. The wind continued light and, although the brig
had every sail set, she was not making more than five and a half
knots an hour through the water. In the evening the wind dropped
still more and, by nine o'clock, the brig had scarcely steerage
way.

"It is enough to put a saint out of temper," the captain said, as
he came down into the cabin, and mixed himself a glass of grog
before turning in. "If the wind had held, we should have been
pretty nearly off Finisterre, by morning. As it is, we haven't made
more than forty knots since we took the observation, at noon."

Bob woke once in the night; and knew, by the rippling sound of
water, and by the slight inclination of his berth, that the breeze
had sprung up again. When he woke again the sun was shining
brightly, and he got up and dressed leisurely; but as he went into
the cabin he heard some orders given, in a sharp tone, by the
captain on deck, and quickened his pace up the companion, to see
what was going on.

"Good morning, Mr. Lockett!" he said to the second mate, who was
standing close by, looking up at the sails.

"Good morning, Master Repton!" he replied, somewhat more shortly
than usual.

"There is a nice breeze this morning," Bob went on. "We seem going
