matter so long as we can get 'im in.--Now, then, sir, mind the step.
All right?  I say, Slid--Robin, I mean--"

"Vell, Slog--Villum, I mean; why don't you say wot you mean, eh?"

"'Ow d'you like grey tights an' buttons?" said the Slogger, with a bland
smile.

"So--so," replied Robin, with a careless air; "the grey is sober
enough--quite suitable to my character--an' I confess I'm fond o' the
buttons."

"There's enough of 'em to form a goodish overcoat a'most," said the
Slogger with a critical grin, "but I should 'ave thought 'em not
sufficiently waterproof in wet weather."

"Vell, they ain't much use for that, Slog--eh, Villum; but you should
see the dazzling display they makes in sunshine.  W'y, you can see me
half a mile off w'en I chance to be walking in Regent Street or drivin'
in the Park.  But I value them chiefly because of the frequent and
pleasant talks they get me with the ladies."

"You don't mean for to say, Robin, that the ladies ever holds you by the
button-'oles?"

"No, I don't; but I holds _them_ wi' the buttons.  This is the way of
it.  W'en I chance to see a wery pretty lady--not one o' your beauties,
you know; I don't care a dump for them stuck-up creatures! but one o'
your sweet, amiable sort, with souls above buttons, an' faces one likes
to look at and to kiss w'en you've a right to; vell, w'en I sees one o'
these I brushes up again' 'er, an' 'ooks on with my buttons to some of
'er togs.

"If she takes it ill, looks cross, and 'alf inclined to use strong
language, I makes a 'umble apology, an' gets undone as fast as possible,
but if she larfs, and says, `Stoopid boy; w'y don't you look before
you?' or suthin o' that sort, I just 'ooks on another tag to another
button w'en we're a fumblin' at the first one, and so goes on till we
get to be quite sociable over it--I might almost say confidential.  Once
or twice I've been the victim of misjudgment, and got a heavy slap on
the face from angelic hands that ought to 'ave known better, but on the
'ole I'm willin' to take my chance."

"Not a bad notion," remarked the Slogger; "especially for a pretty
little chap like you, Robin."

"Right you are," replied the other, "but you needn't try on the dodge
yourself, for it would never pay with a big ugly grampus like you,
Villum."

Having thus run into a pleasant little chat, the two waifs proceeded to
compare notes, in the course of which comparison the Slogger gave an
outline of his recent history.  He had been engaged in several
successful burglaries, but had been caught in the act of pocket-picking,
for which offence he had spent some weeks in prison.  While there a
visitor had spoken to him very earnestly, and advised him to try an
honest life, as being, to say the least of it, easier work than
thieving.  He had made the attempt.  Through the influence of the same
prison-visitor he had obtained a situation, from which he had been
advanced to the responsible position which he then held.

"And, d'you know, Robin," said the Slogger, "I find that honesty pays
pretty well, and I means to stick to it."

"An' I suppose," said Robin, "if it didn't pay pretty well you'd cut
it?"

"Of course I would," returned the Slogger, with a look of surprise;
"wot's the use o' stickin' to a thing that don't pay?"

"Vell, if them's your principles you ain't got much to 'old on by, my
tulip," said Robin.

"An' wot principles may _you_ 'old on by, my turnip?" asked the Slogger.

"It would puzzle me, rather, to tell that," returned Robin, "'specially
talkin' down to the level of my own toes on the top of a 'bus; but I'll
tell you what, Villum, if you'll come to Number 6 Grovelly Street,
Shadwell Square, just back of Hoboy Crescent, w'ere my master lives, on
Sunday next at seven in the evenin', you'll hear an' see somethin' as'll
open your eyes."

"Ah! a meetin'-'ouse'?" said the Slogger, with a slight smile of
contempt.

"Music-'alls and publics is meetin'-'ouses, ain't they?"

"Ah, but they ain't prayer-meetin' 'ouses," rejoined the Slogger.

"Not so sure o' that Villum.  There's a deal o' prayer in such places
sometimes, an' it's well for the wisitors that their prayers ain't
always answered.  But _our_ meetin'-'ouse is for more than prayer--a
deal more; and there's my young missus--a _real_ angel--comes in, and
'olds forth there every Sunday evening to young fellers like you an' me.
You just come an' judge for yourself."

"No thankee," returned the Slogger.

As he spoke a lady with a lap-dog made powerful demonstrations with her
umbrella.  The 'bus stopped, and the conductor attended to his duties,
while Robin, who really felt a strong desire to bring his old comrade
under an influence which he knew was working a wonderful change in
himself, sat meditating sadly on the obstinacy of human nature.

"I say, Robin," said the Slogger, on resuming his perch, "d'you know
I've found traces o' that young gal as you took such a interest in, as
runned away from the old 'ooman, an' was robbed by Brassey an' me?"

"You don't mean that!" exclaimed Robin eagerly.

"Yes I do.  She's in London, I believe, but I can't exactly say where.
I heard of her through Sal--you know Sal, who 'angs out at the vest end
o' Potter's Lane.  I expect to see Sal in 'alf an hour, so if you're
comin' back this way, I'll be at the Black Bull by two o'clock, and tell
you all I can pump out of 'er."

"I'll be there sharp," said Robin promptly; "an now pull up, for I must
take to my legs here."

"But I say, Robin, if we do find that gal, you won't split on me, eh?
You won't tell 'er who I am or where I is?  You won't wictimise your old
friend?"

"D'you take me for a informer?" demanded Robin, with an offended look.

"Hall right," cried the Slogger, giving the signal to drive on.

Robin sped quickly away, executed his mission, and returned to the Black
Bull in a state of considerable excitement and strong hope.

Slidder was doomed to disappointment.  He reached the Black Bull at two
o'clock precisely.

"Vell, my fair one," he said, addressing a waiting-maid who met him in
the passage, "it's good for sore eyes to see the likes o' you in cloudy
weather.  D'you 'appen to know a young man of the name of Sl--I mean
Villum Bowls?"

"Yes I do, Mr Imp'rence," answered the girl.

"You couldn't introdooce me to him, could you, Miss Sunshine?"

"No, I couldn't, because he isn't here, and won't likely be back for two
hours."

This reply took all the humour out of Robin's tone and manner.  He
resolved, however, to wait for half an hour, and went out to saunter in
front of the hotel.

Half an hour passed, then another, then another, and the boy was fain to
leave the spot in despair.

Poor Slidder's temperament was sanguine.  Slight encouragement raised
his hopes very high.  Failure depressed him proportionally and woefully
low, but, to do him justice, he never sorrowed long.  In the present
instance, he left the Black Bull grinding his teeth.  Then he took to
clanking his heels as he walked along in a way that drew forth the
comments of several street-boys, to whom, in a spirit of liberality, he
returned considerably more than he received.  Then he began to mutter
between his teeth his private opinion as to faithless persons in
general, and faithless Villum, _alias_ the Slogger, in particular, whose
character he painted to himself in extremely sombre colours.  After
that, a heavy thunder-shower having fallen and drenched him, he walked
recklessly and violently through every puddle in his path.  This seemed
to relieve his spirit, for when he reached Hoboy Crescent he had
recovered much of his wonted equanimity.

The Slogger was not however, so faithless as his old friend imagined.
He had been at the Black Bull before two o'clock, but had been sent off
by his employer with a note to a house at a considerable distance in
such urgent haste that he had not time even to think of leaving a
message for his friend.

In these circumstances, he resolved to clear his character by paying a
visit on the following Sunday to Number 6 Grovelly Street, Shadwell
Square.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

BEGINS WITH LOVE, HOPE, AND JOY, AND ENDS PECULIARLY.

It may not perhaps surprise the reader to learn that after Lilly
Blythe's return to town, I did not prosecute my studies with as much
enthusiasm as before.  In fact I divided my attentions pretty equally
between Lilly and chemistry.

Now, I am not prone to become sentimentally talkative about my own
affairs, but as courtship, and love, and that sort of thing are
undoubted and important elements in the chemistry of human affairs, and
as they influenced me and those around me to some extent, I cannot avoid
making reference to them, but I promise the reader to do so only as far
as appears necessary for the elucidation of my story.

First, then, although I knew that my prospects of success as a partner
of Dr McTougall were most encouraging, I felt that it would be foolish
to think of marriage until my position was well established and my
income adequate.  I therefore strove with all my might to check the flow
of my thoughts towards Miss Blythe.  As well might I have striven to
restrain the flow of Niagara.  True love cannot be stemmed!  In my case,
however, the proverb was utterly falsified, for my true love _did_ "run
smooth."  More than that, it ran fast--very fast indeed, so much so that
I was carried, as it were, on the summit of a rushing flood-tide into
the placid harbour of Engagement.  The anchorage in that harbour is with
many people uncertain.  With Lilly and me it was not so.  The
ground-tackle was good; it had caught hold of a rock and held on.

It happened thus.  After many weeks of struggling on my part to keep out
of Miss Blythe's way, and to prevent the state of my feelings from being
observed by her--struggles which I afterwards found to my confusion had
been quite obvious to her--I found myself standing alone, one Sunday
afternoon, in the doctor's drawing-room, meditating on the joys of
childhood, as exemplified by thunderous blows on the floor above and
piercing shouts of laughter.  The children had been to church and were
working off the steam accumulated there.  Suddenly there was a dead
silence, which I knew to be the result of a meal.  The meal was, I may
add, the union of a late dinner with an early tea.  It was
characteristic of Sundays in the McTougall nursery.

The thought of this union turned my mind into another channel.  Just
then Miss Blythe entered.  She looked so radiant that I forgot myself,
forgot my former struggles, my good resolutions--everything except
herself--and proposed on the spot!

I was rejected--of course!  More than that, I was stunned!  Hope had
told me many flattering tales.  Indeed, I had felt so sure, from many
little symptoms, that Lilly had a strong regard for me--to say the
least--that I was overwhelmed, not only by my rejection, but by the
thought of my foolish self-assurance.

"I don't wonder that you look upon me as a presumptuous, vain,
contemptible fellow," said I, in the bitterness of my soul.

"But I do not regard you in that light," said Lilly, with a faint smile,
and then, hesitatingly, she looked down at the carpet.

"In what light do you regard me, Miss Blythe?" said I, recovering a
little hope, and speaking vehemently.

"Really, Dr Mellon, you take me by surprise; your manner--so abrupt--
so--"

"Oh! never mind manner, dear Miss Blythe," said I, seizing her hand, and
forcibly detaining it.  "You are the soul of truth; tell me, is there
any hope for me?--_can_ you care for me?"

"Dr Mellon," she said, drawing her hand firmly away, "I cannot, should
not reply.  You do not know all the--the circumstances of my life--my
poverty, my solitary condition in the world--my--my--"

"Miss Blythe," I exclaimed, in desperation, "if you were as poor as a--
a--church rat, as solitary as--as--Adam before the advent of Eve, I
would count it my chief joy, and--"

"Hallo!  Mellon, hi!  I say! where are you?" shouted the voice of the
doctor at that moment from below stairs.  "Here's Dumps been in the
laboratory, and capsized some of the chemicals!"

"Coming, sir!"  I shouted; then tenderly, though hurriedly, to Miss
Blythe, "You will let me resume this subject at--"

"Hallo! look sharp!" from below.

"Yes, yes, I'll be down directly!--Dear Miss Blythe, if you only knew--"

"Why, the dog's burning all over--help me!" roared the doctor.

Miss Blythe blushed and laughed.  How could she help it?  I hastily
kissed her hand, and fled from the room.

That was the whole affair.  There was not enough, strictly speaking, to
form a ground of hope; but somehow I knew that it was all right.  In the
laboratory I found Dumps smoking, and the doctor pouring water from the
tap on his dishevelled body.  He was not hurt, and little damage was
done; but as I sat in my room talking to him that evening, I could not
help reproaching him with having been the means of breaking off one of
the most important interviews of my life.

"However, Dumps," I continued, "your good services far outweigh your
wicked deeds, and whatever you may do in the future, I will never forget
that you were the means of introducing me to that angel, Lilly Blythe."

The angel in question went that Sunday evening at seven o'clock, as was
her wont, to a Bible class which she had started for the instruction of
some of the poor neglected boys and lads who idled about in the dreary
back streets of our aristocratic neighbourhood.  The boys had become so
fond of her that they were eager to attend, and usually assembled round
the door of the class-room before the hour.

My _protege_, Robin Slidder, was of course one of her warmest adherents.
He was standing that night apart from the other boys, contemplating the
proceedings of two combative sparrows which quarrelled over a crumb of
bread on the pavement, and had just come to the conclusion that men and
sparrows had some qualities in common, when he was attracted by a low
whistle, and, looking up, beheld the Slogger peeping round a
neighbouring corner.

"Hallo!  Slog--Villum I mean; how are you?  Come along.  Vell, I _am_
glad to see you, for, d'you know, arter you failed me that day at the
Black Bull, I have bin givin' you a pretty bad character, an' callin'
you no end o' bad names."

"Is that what your `angel' teaches you, Robin?"

"Vell, not exactly, but you'll hear wot she teaches for yourself
to-night, I 'ope.  Come, I'm right glad to see you, Villum.  What was it
that prevented you that day, eh?"

When the Slogger had explained and cleared his character, Robin asked
him eagerly if he had ascertained anything further about the girl whom
he and Brassey had robbed.

"Of course I have," said the Slogger, "and it's a curious suckumstance
that 'er place of abode--so Sally says--is in the Vest End, not wery far
from here.  She gave me the street and the name, but wasn't quite sure
of the number."

"Vell, come along, let's hear all about it," said Robin impatiently.

"Wy, wot's all your 'urry?" returned the Slogger slowly; "I ain't goin'
away till I've heerd wot your angel's got to say, you know.  Besides, I
must go arter your meeting's over an watch the 'ouse till I see the gal
an' make sure that it's her, for Sally may have bin mistook, you know."

"You don't know her name, do you?" asked Robin; "it wasn't Edie Willis,
now, was it?"

"'Ow should _I_ know 'er name?" answered the Slogger.  "D'you think I
stopped to inquire w'en I 'elped to relieve 'er of 'er propity?"

"Ah, I suppose not.  Vell, I suppose you've no objection to my goin' to
watch along wi' you."

"None wotsomever; on'y remember, if it do turn out to be 'er, you won't
betray me.  Honour bright!  She may be revengeful, you know, an' might
'ave me took up if she got 'old of me."

Robin Slidder faithfully and earnestly pledged himself.  While he was
speaking there was a general movement among the lads and boys towards
the class-room, for Miss Blythe was seen coming towards them.  The two
friends moved with the rest.  Just as he was about to enter the door,
Robin missed his companion, and, looking back, saw him bending down, and
holding his sides as if in pain.

"Wot's wrong now?" he inquired, returning to him.

"Oh!  I'm took so bad," said the Slogger, looking very red, and rubbing
himself; "a old complaint as I thought I was cured of.  Oh, dear! you'll
'ave to excuge me, Robin.  I'll go an' take a turn, an' come in if I
gits better.  If not, I'll meet you round the corner arter it's over."

So saying, the Slogger, turning round, walked quickly away, and his
little friend entered the class-room in a state of mind pendulating
between disgust and despair, for he had no expectation of seeing the
slippery Slogger again that night.

When the meeting was over, Miss Blythe returned home.  I saw her enter
the library.  No one else was there, I knew.  The gas had not yet been
lighted, and only a faint flicker from the fire illumined the room.
Unable to bear the state of uncertainty under which my mind still
laboured, I resolved to make assurance doubly sure, or quit the house--
and England--for ever!

I spare the reader the details.  Suffice it to say that after much
entreaty, I got her to admit that she loved me, but she refused to
accept me until she had told me her whole history.

"Then I'm sure of you now," said I, in triumph; "for, be your history
what it may, I'll never give you up, dearest Lilly--"

"Don't call me Lilly," she said in a low, quiet tone; "it is only a pet
name which the little ones here gave me on my first coming to them.
Call me Edith."

"I will," said I, with enthusiasm, "a far more beautiful name.  I'll--"

"Hallo! hi!  Mellon, are you there?"

For the second time that day Dr McTougall interrupted me, but I was
proof against annoyance now.

"Yes, I am here," I shouted, running downstairs.  "Surely Dumps is not
burning himself again--eh?"

"Oh no," returned my friend, with a laugh--"only a telegram.  However,
it's important enough to require prompt attention.  The Gordons in
Bingley Manor--you know them--telegraph me to run down immediately; old
lady ill.  Now, it unfortunately happens that I have an engagement this
evening which positively cannot be put off, so I must send you.
Besides, I know well enough what it is.  They're easily alarmed, and I'm
convinced it is just the old story.  However, the summons must be
obeyed.  You will go for me.  The train starts in half an hour.  You
will have plenty of time to catch it, if you make haste.  You'll have to
stay all night.  No return train till to-morrow, being an out-of-the-way
place.  There, off with you.  Put the telegram in your pocket for the
address."

So saying, the doctor put on his hat and left the house.

Summoning Robin Slidder, I bade him pack a few things into my
travelling-bag while I wrote a note.  When he had finished he told me of
his interview with the Slogger.  I was greatly interested, and asked if
he had gone to see his friend after the meeting.

"No, sir, I didn't.  I meant to, but Miss Blythe wanted me to walk 'ome
with 'er, it was so dark, an' w'en I went back he had gone."

"Pity, Robin--a great pity," said I, hastily strapping up my bag, "but
no doubt he'll come here again to see you.--Now, don't forget to take
over that parcel of tea and sugar, etcetera, to Mrs Willis.  Go as soon
as you can."  Saying this, I left the house.

The new residence of the old woman being now so near to Hoboy Crescent
the parcel was soon delivered, and Robin officiated at the opening of
it, also at the preparing and consuming of some of its contents.  Of
course he chatted vigorously, as was his wont, but was particularly
careful to make not the most distant allusion to the Slogger or his
reports, being anxious not to arouse her hopes until he should have some
evidence that they were on a true scent.  Indeed, he was so fearful of
letting slip some word or remark on the subject and thereby awakening
suspicion and giving needless pain, that he abstained from all reference
to the meeting of that evening, and launched out instead into wonderful
and puzzling theological speculations, of which he was very fond.

Meanwhile I was carried swiftly into the country.  The lamp in my
carriage was too dim to permit of reading; I therefore wrapped myself in
my rug and indulged in pleasant meditations.

It was past midnight when I arrived at the station for Bingley Manor,
where I found a gig awaiting me.  A sharp drive of half an hour and I
was at the mansion door.

Dr McTougall was right.  There was little the matter with old Mrs
Gordon, but the family were nervous, and rich--hence my visit.  I did
what was necessary for the patient, comforted the rest by my presence,
had a sound night's rest, an early breakfast, a pleasant drive in the
fresh frosty air, and a brief wait of five minutes, when the punctual
train came up.

There is something inexpressibly delightful in a ride, on a sharp frosty
morning, in an express train.  I have always felt a wild bounding
sensation of joy in rapid motion.  The pace at which we went that
morning was exceptionally charming.  Had I known that the engine-driver
was intoxicated perhaps it might not have been quite so exhilarating,
but I did not know that.  I sat comfortably in my corner thinking of
Edith, and gazing with placid benignity at the frosted trees and bushes
which sparkled in the red wintry sun.

Yes, it was a glorious ride!  I never had a better.  The part of the
country through which we passed was lovely.  One can always gaze
comfortably at the _distant_ landscape from a railway carriage, however
great the speed.  As for the immediate foreground, it reminded me of a
race--houses, trees, farms, towns, villages, hamlets, horses, sheep,
cattle, poultry, hayricks, brickfields, were among the competitors in
that race.  They rushed in mad confusion to the rear.  I exulted in the
pace.  Not so a stout elderly gentleman in the opposite corner, who
evidently disliked it--so true is it that "one man's meat is another's
poison."

"There is no reason to fear, sir," said I, with a smile, by way of
reassuring him.  "This is a most excellently managed line--one never
hears of accidents on it."

"Too fast just now, anyhow," returned the elderly gentleman testily.

Just then the whistle was heard sounding violently.

"That is a sign of safety," said I; "shows that they are on the alert."

A severe application of the brakes caused me to stop abruptly, and the
elderly man to seize the arms of his seat with a convulsive grasp.

Suddenly there was a mighty crash.  The sensations in my mind that
followed were suggestive of cannons, rockets, bombs, fireworks,
serpents, shooting-stars, and tumbling _debris_.  Then--all was dark and
silent as the grave!



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

A WONDERFUL DISCOVERY.

Slowly recovering consciousness, I found myself lying on the floor of a
waiting-room, with a gentleman bending over me.  Instantly recollecting
what had occurred, I endeavoured to start up, but was obliged to fall
back again.

"You must lie quiet sir," said the gentleman.  "You're not much hurt.
We will send you on, if you choose, by the train that is expected in a
few minutes."

"Is the elderly gentleman safe?"  I asked eagerly.

"Which elderly gentleman?  There were several in the train, but none are
injured, I believe, though some are much shaken.  Nobody has been
killed.  It has been quite a miraculous escape."

"Merciful--call it merciful, my dear sir," said I, looking upwards and
thanking God with all my heart for sparing my life.

Two days after that I lay on the drawing-room sofa in Hoboy Crescent.
Mr and Mrs McTougall had gone out.  So had the children, the forenoon
being fine.  Edith had remained at home, for reasons which she did not
see fit to divulge.  She sat beside me with one of her hands in mine.
It was all arranged between us by that time.

