It was a bright, calm, frosty morning when Jasper and his friend set out
on their short journey.  The sun shone brilliantly, and the hoar-frost
sparkled on the trees and bushes, causing them to appear as if they had
been covered with millions of diamonds.  The breath of the two men came
from their mouths like clouds of steam.  Arrowhead wore the round
snow-shoes which go by the name of bear's paws--he preferred these to
any others.  Jasper wore the snow-shoes peculiar to the Chipewyan
Indians.  They were nearly as long as himself, and turned up at the
point.  Both men were dressed alike, in the yellow leathern costume of
winter.  The only difference being that Jasper wore a fur cap, while
Arrowhead sported a cloth head-piece that covered his neck and
shoulders, and was ornamented with a pair of horns.

All day the two men plodded steadily over the country.  Sometimes they
were toiling through deep snow in wooded places, sinking six or eight
inches in spite of their snow-shoes.  At other times they were passing
swiftly over the surface of the open plains, where the snow was beaten
so hard by exposure to the sun and wind that the shoes only just broke
the crust and left their outlines behind.

Then they reached a bend of the river, where they had again to plod
heavily through the woods on its banks, until they came out upon its
frozen surface.  Here the snow was so hard, that they took off their
snow-shoes and ran briskly along without them for a long space.

Thus they travelled all day, without one halt, and made such good use of
their time, that they arrived at the log-hut of old Laroche early in the
evening.

"Well met, son-in-law, _that_ _is_ _to_ _be_," cried the stout old man
heartily, as the two hunters made their appearance before the low
door-way of his hut, which was surrounded by trees and almost buried in
snow.  "If you had been half an hour later, I would have met you in the
woods."

"How so, father-in-law, _that_ _is_ _to_ _be_," said Jasper, "were ye
goin' out to your traps so late as this?"

"Nay, man, but I was startin' for the fort.  It's a long way, as you
know, and my old limbs are not just so supple as yours.  I thought I
would travel to-night, and sleep in the woods, so as to be there in good
time to-morrow.  But come in, come in, and rest you.  I warrant me
you'll not feel inclined for more walkin' to-night."

"Now my name is not Jasper Derry if I enter your hut this night," said
the hunter stoutly.  "If I could not turn round and walk straight back
to the fort this night, I would not be worthy of your daughter, old man.
So come along with you.  What say you, Arrowhead; shall we go straight
back?"

"Good," answered the Indian.

"Well, well," cried Laroche, laughing, "lead the way, and I will follow
in your footsteps.  It becomes young men to beat the track, and old ones
to take it easy."

The three men turned their faces towards Fort Erie, and were soon far
away from the log-hut.  They walked steadily and silently along, without
once halting, until the night became so dark that it was difficult to
avoid stumps and bushes.  Then they prepared to encamp in the snow.

Now it may seem to many people a very disagreeable idea, that of
sleeping out in snow, but one who has tried it can assure them that it
is not so bad as it seems.  No doubt, when Jasper halted in the cold
dark woods, and said, "I think this will be a pretty good place to
sleep," any one unacquainted with the customs of that country would have
thought the man was jesting or mad; for, besides being very dismal, in
consequence of its being pitch dark, it was excessively cold, and snow
was falling steadily and softly on the ground.  But Jasper knew what he
was about, and so did the others.  Without saying a word, the three men
flung down their bundles of provisions, and each set to work to make the
encampment.  Of course they had to work in darkness so thick that even
the white snow could scarcely be seen.

First of all they selected a tree, the branches of which were so thick
and spreading as to form a good shelter from the falling snow.  Here
Jasper and Laroche used their snow-shoes as shovels, while Arrowhead
plied his axe and soon cut enough of firewood for the night.  He also
cut a large bundle of small branches for bedding.  A space of about
twelve feet long, by six broad, was cleared at the foot of the tree in
half an hour.  But the snow was so deep that they had to dig down four
feet before they reached the turf.  As the snow taken out of the hole
was thrown up all round it, the walls rose to nearly seven feet.

Arrowhead next lighted a roaring fire at one end of this cleared space,
the others strewed the branches over the space in front of it, and
spread their blankets on the top, after which the kettle was put on to
boil, buffalo steaks were stuck up before the fire to roast, and the men
then lay down to rest and smoke, while supper was preparing.  The
intense cold prevented the fire from melting the snowy walls of this
encampment, which shone and sparkled in the red blaze like pink marble
studded all over with diamonds, while the spreading branches formed a
ruddy-looking ceiling.  When they had finished supper, the heat of the
fire and the heat of their food made the travellers feel quite warm and
comfortable, in spite of John Frost; and when they at last wrapped their
blankets round them and laid their heads together on the branches, they
fell into a sleep more sound and refreshing than they would have enjoyed
had they gone to rest in a warm house upon the best bed in England.

But when the fire went out, about the middle of the night, the cold
became so intense that they were awakened by it, so Jasper rose and blew
up the fire, and the other two sat up and filled their pipes, while
their teeth chattered in their heads.  Soon the blaze and the smoke
warmed them, and again they lay down to sleep comfortably till morning.

Before daybreak, however, Arrowhead--who never slept so soundly but that
he could be wakened by the slightest unusual noise--slowly raised his
head and touched Jasper on the shoulder.  The hunter was too
well-trained to the dangers of the wilderness to start up or speak.  He
uttered no word, but took up his gun softly, and looked in the direction
in which the Indian's eyes gazed.  A small red spot in the ashes served
to reveal a pair of glaring eye-balls among the bushes.

"A wolf," whispered Jasper, cocking his gun.  "No; a man," said
Arrowhead.

At the sound of the click of the lock the object in the bushes moved.
Jasper leaped up in an instant, pointed his gun, and shouted sternly--

"Stand fast and speak, or I fire!"

At the same moment Arrowhead kicked the logs of the fire, and a bright
flame leapt up, showing that the owner of the pair of eyes was an
Indian.  Seeing that he was discovered, and that if he turned to run he
would certainly be shot, the savage came forward sulkily and sat down
beside the fire.  Jasper asked him why he came there in that stealthy
manner like a sly fox.  The Indian said he was merely travelling by
night, and had come on the camp unexpectedly.  Not knowing who was
there, he had come forward with caution.

Jasper was not satisfied with this reply.  He did not like the look of
the man, and he felt sure that he had seen him somewhere before, but his
face was disfigured with war paint, and he could not feel certain on
that point until he remembered the scene in the trading store at
Jasper's House.

"What--Darkeye!" cried he, "can it be you?"

"Darkeye!" shouted Laroche, suddenly rising from his reclining position
and staring the Indian in the face with a dark scowl.  "Why, Jasper,
this is the villain who insulted my daughter, and to whom I taught the
lesson that an old man could knock him down."

The surprise and indignation of Jasper on hearing this was great, but
remembering that the savage had already been punished for his offence,
and that it would be mean to take advantage of him when there were three
to one, he merely said--

"Well, well, I won't bear a grudge against a man who is coward enough to
insult a woman.  I would kick you out o' the camp, Darkeye, but as you
might use your gun when you got into the bushes, I won't give you that
chance.  At the same time, we can't afford to lose the rest of our nap
for you, so Arrowhead will keep you safe here and watch you, while
Laroche and I sleep.  We will let you go at daybreak."

Saying this Jasper lay down beside his father-in-law, and they were both
asleep in a few minutes, leaving the two Indians to sit and scowl at
each other beside the fire.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE WEDDING, AN ARRIVAL, A FEAST, AND A BALL.

New Year's Day came at last, and on the morning of that day Jasper Derry
and Marie Laroche were made man and wife.  They were married by the
Reverend Mr Wilson, a Wesleyan missionary, who had come to Fort Erie, a
few days before, on a visit to the tribes of Indians in that
neighbourhood.

The North American Indian has no religion worthy of the name; but he has
a conscience, like other men, which tells him that it is wrong to murder
and to steal.  Yet, although he knows this, he seldom hesitates to do
both when he is tempted thereto.  Mr Wilson was one of those earnest
missionaries who go to that wilderness and face its dangers, as well as
its hardships and sufferings, for the sake of teaching the savage that
the mere knowledge of right and wrong is not enough--that the love of
God, wrought in the heart of man by the Holy Spirit, alone can enable
him to resist evil and do good--that belief in the Lord Jesus Christ
alone can save the soul.

There are several missionaries of this stamp--men who love the name of
Jesus--in that region, and there are a number of stations where the good
seed of God's Word is being planted in the wilderness.  But I have not
space, and this is not the place, to enlarge on the great and
interesting subject of missionary work in Rupert's Land.  I must return
to my narrative.

It was, as I have said, New Year's day when Jasper and Marie were
married.  And a remarkably bright, beautiful morning it was.  The snow
appeared whiter than usual, and the countless gems of hoar-frost that
hung on shrub and tree seemed to sparkle more than usual; even the sun
appeared to shine more brightly than ever it did before--at least it
seemed so in the eyes of Jasper and Marie.

"Everything seems to smile on us to-day, Marie," said Jasper, as they
stood with some of their friends at the gate of the fort, just after the
ceremony was concluded.

"I trust that God may smile on you, and bless your union, my friends,"
said Mr Wilson, coming forward with a small Bible in his hand.  "Here
is a copy of God's Word, Jasper, which I wish you to accept of and keep
as a remembrance of me and of this day."

"I'll keep it, sir, and I thank you heartily," said Jasper, taking the
book and returning the grasp of the missionary's hand.

"And my chief object in giving it to you, Jasper, is, that you and Marie
may read it often, and find joy and peace to your souls."

As the missionary said this a faint sound, like the tinkling of distant
bells, was heard in the frosty air.

Looks of surprise and excitement showed that this was an unwonted sound.
And so it was; for only once or twice during the long winter did a
visitor gladden Fort Erie with his presence.  These sweet sounds were
the tinkling of sleigh-bells, and they told that a stranger was
approaching--that letters, perhaps, and news from far-distant homes,
might be near at band.

Only twice in the year did the Europeans at that lonely outpost receive
letters from home.  Little wonder that they longed for them, and that
they went almost wild with joy when they came.

Soon the sleigh appeared in sight, coming up the river at full speed,
and a loud "hurrah!" from the men at the gate, told the visitor that he
was a welcome guest.  It was a dog-sleigh--a sort of conveyance much
used by the fur-traders in winter travelling.  In form, it was as like
as possible to a tin slipper bath.  It might also be compared to a shoe.
If the reader will try to conceive of a shoe large enough to hold a
man, sitting with his legs out before him, that will give him a good
idea of the shape of a dog cariole.  There is sometimes an ornamental
curve in front.  It is made of two thin hardwood planks curled up in
front, with a light frame-work of wood, covered over with deer or
buffalo skin, and painted in a very gay manner.  Four dogs are usually
harnessed to it, and these are quite sufficient to drag a man on a
journey of many days, over every sort of country, where there is no road
whatever.  Dogs are much used for hauling little sledges in that country
in winter.  The traveller sits wrapped up so completely in furs, that
nothing but his head is visible.  He is attended by a driver on
snow-shoes, who is armed with a large whip.  No reins are used.  If the
snow is hard, as is usually the case on the surface of a lake or river,
the driver walks behind and holds on to a tail-line, to prevent the dogs
from running away.  If the traveller's way lies through the woods, the
snow is so soft and deep that the poor dogs are neither willing nor able
to run away.  It is as much as they can do to walk; so the driver goes
before them, in this case, and beats down the snow with his
snow-shoes--"beats the track," as it is called.  The harness of the dogs
is usually very gay, and covered with little bells which give forth a
cheerful tinkling sound.

"It's young Cameron," cried Mr Pemberton, hastening forward to welcome
the newcomer.

Cameron was the gentleman in charge of the nearest outpost--two hundred
and fifty miles down the river.

"Welcome, Cameron, my boy, welcome to Fort Erie.  You are the
pleasantest sight we have seen here for many a day," said Pemberton,
shaking the young man heartily by the hand as soon as he had jumped out
of his sleigh.

"Come, Pemberton, you forget Miss Marie Laroche when you talk of my
being the pleasantest sight," said Cameron, laughing.

"Ah! true.  Pardon me, Marie--"

"Excuse me, gentlemen," interrupted Jasper, with much gravity, "I know
of no such person as Miss Marie Laroche!"

"How? what do you mean?" said Cameron, with a puzzled look.

"Jasper is right," explained Pemberton, "Marie was _Miss_ _Laroche_
yesterday; she is _Mrs Derry_ to-day."

"Then I salute you, Mrs Derry, and congratulate you both," cried the
young man, kissing the bride's fair cheek, "and I rejoice to find that I
am still in time to dance at your wedding."

"Ay," said Pemberton, as they moved up to the hall, "that reminds me to
ask you why you are so late.  I expected you before Christmas Day."

"I had intended to be here by that day," replied Cameron, "but one of my
men cut his foot badly with an axe, and I could not leave him; then my
dogs broke down on the journey, and that detained me still longer.  But
you will forgive my being so late, I think, when I tell you that I have
got a packet of letters with me."

"Letters!" shouted every one.

"Ay, letters and newspapers from England."

A loud cheer greeted this announcement.  The packet was hauled out of
the sleigh, hurried up to the fort, torn open with eager haste, and the
fur-traders of Fort Erie were soon devouring the contents like hungry
men.

And they _were_ hungry men--they were starving!  Those who see their
kindred and friends daily, or hear from them weekly, cannot understand
the feelings of men who hear from them only twice in the year.  Great
improvements have taken place in this matter of late years; still, many
of the Hudson Bay Company's outposts are so distant from the civilised
world, that they cannot get news from "home" oftener than twice a year.

It was a sight to study and moralise over--the countenances of these
banished men.  The trembling anxiety lest there should be "bad news."
The gleam of joy, and the deep "thank God," on reading "all well."  Then
the smiles, the sighs, the laughs, the exclamations of surprise, perhaps
the tears that _would_ spring to their eyes as they read the brief but,
to them, thrilling private history of the past half year.

There was no bad news in that packet, and a feeling of deep joy was
poured into the hearts of the people of the fort by these "Good news
from a far country."  Even the half-breeds and Indians, who could not
share the feeling, felt the sweet influence of the general happiness
that was diffused among the fur-traders on that bright New Year's Day in
the wilderness.

What a dinner they had that day to be sure!  What juicy roasts of
buffalo beef; what enormous steaks of the same; what a magnificent
venison pasty; and what glorious marrow-bones--not to mention tongues,
