conversation, begged him also to go away and let him rest.

All very good, friend Jeff; but what if the sun should shine in spite of
you?

Just about that time, in the course of his eager and somewhat erratic
wanderings among solicitors and other men of business, Captain Millet
made a sudden pause, and, by way of taking breath, rushed down to
Folkestone, brought Rose up to Cranby, hired a dog-cart, and drove along
the sands at low tide, in the direction of his sister's cottage.

"I think it probable that you may see him today, Rosebud," he said,
"though I'm not quite sure, for the doctor is afraid of a relapse, and
friends are not yet allowed to visit him.  To be sure bein' only a
little girl, you probably wouldn't disturb him at all--'specially if you
didn't speak.  Anyhow, you'll see auntie, which will be more to the
purpose."

"Father," said Rose, whose name seemed remarkably appropriate at that
moment, "I should like to get down here, and walk the rest of the way.
By the time I arrive, you'll have had a little talk with poor Jeff and
auntie.  Besides, there is a pretty cave that I used to gather shells in
when I was last here.  I would like so much to pay it a visit in
passing."

Of course the captain had no objection, and thus it came to pass that
Jeff's fourth visitor on that unquiet morning was the Rosebud!

How feeble are written words to convey ideas at times!  If you could
have obtained one glance of Rose and Jeff at that moment, reader, words
would not be required.  No peony ever blushed like that Rose--to say
nothing of the blank amazement in those wide blue eyes.  Jeff, still
seated on the rock, became petrified.

Recovering first, as women always do, Rose hurried forward with--"I'm
_so_ glad, Mr ---," but there she stopped abruptly, for the unexpected
sight of that stalwart coastguardsman, reduced to a big skeleton with
pale face, hollow cheeks, cavernous eyes, and an old-man stoop, was too
much for her.  She covered her face with her hands and burst into tears.

What could Jeff do?  He forgot his prudent resolves.  He forgot his
weakness because his strength seemed to have suddenly returned.  He
sprang up, intending to comfort the poor girl in a brotherly sort of
way.  Somehow--he never could clearly remember how--he had her seated on
the rock beside him, with his arm round her waist and her head on his
shoulder.

A few moments later--he never could tell how many--the wickedness of his
conduct came down upon Jeff like a thunderbolt.  He removed his arm,
drew away from her about three inches, and looked in her surprised face
with a solemn, self-condemned expression.

"Forgive me, Rose," he said, in the deep, hollow voice which had become
natural to him since his illness began; "my love for you proved too
strong to be restrained just now: but believe me, I had fully made up my
mind never to open my lips to you on the subject; for what right have I,
a helpless, and, I fear, hopeless, invalid, to dare to aspire--"

There must have been something peculiar in the very slight, almost
pathetic, smile which overspread the tearful face of Rose at that
moment: for the arm was suddenly replaced, the three inches were reduced
to nothing, the fair head again rested on the once stalwart shoulder,
and thus they remained until the cavern was filled with the sounds:--

"Hi!  Ho!  Hallo!  Rose--Rosebud ahoy!  That girl would worry any man to
death!  Where are you?  Hi!  Ship ahoy!  Hallo-o-o!"

We need scarcely remark that Rose did not wait for the last stentorian
halloo!  Bounding from her lover's side, she ran to meet her father--red
at first and then pale--exclaiming, "Oh! father I've found him!"

"Found who, child?"

"Jeff--I mean Mister--"

"Not dead?" exclaimed the Captain, interrupting with awful solemnity.

He was answered by the invalid himself coming out of the cavern, and
wishing him good-morning with a confused and guilty air.

"Well now," said Captain Millet after a moment's pause, while he glanced
from the one to the other, "this beats the polar regions all to sticks
and stivers.  Rose, my dear, you go round the p'int, an' wait by the
dog-cart till I come to 'ee."

"So, young man," he said, turning sternly to Jeff, "you've bin cruisin'
after my little girl without leave."

"I am guilty, Captain Millet," said Jeff humbly, "but not intentionally
so.  Long ago, when I learned that there was no hope of recovering my
old strength, I had determined to give up all thoughts of dear Rose; but
I was taken by surprise this morning--was off my guard--and, I confess,
wickedly took advantage of my opportunity to tell her how dearly I loved
her.  Yet it was done under a sudden, irresistible impulse.  I do not
excuse myself.  I would give worlds to undo the evil I may have done.
But after all it _may_ be undone.  Rose may have mistaken her extreme
sympathy and pity for love.  If so, she will not suffer much, or long.
Indeed, now I think of it, she won't suffer at all, except regret at
having been led to raise false hopes in my breast."

The mere thought of this was so depressing, that Jeff, who was already
almost worn out with excitement, leaned heavily on his stick for
support.

"Jeff," returned the captain severely, "how could you do it?"

"I hardly know," rejoined Jeff, feeling something of the old Adam rising
in his breast; "but my intentions were honourable, whatever my conduct
may have been under impulse and strong temptation.  Perhaps I might
appeal to your own experience.  Have you never done that which you did
not mean to under the power of impulse?"

"You've hit me there, boy, below the water-line," said the captain,
relaxing a little: "for I not only put the question to my old woman
without leave, but carried her off with flyin' colours against orders;
but it came all right at last, though I didn't deserve it.  However,
Jeff, you've no need to look so blue.  My little girl has raised no
false hopes in your breast.  Moreover, let me tell you, for your
comfort, that I saw the doctor this morning, and he says that your
constitution is so strong that you're in a fair way to pull through in
spite of him, and that you'll be fit for good service yet--though not
exactly what you were before.  So, keep up your heart, Jeff!  Never say
die, and you shall wed my Rosebud yet, as sure as my name's Dick
Millet."

There was need for these words of comfort, for the poor youth was
obliged to sit down on the sand for a few minutes to recover strength.

"I've had a pretty stiff morning altogether, captain," he said
apologetically; "but I'm thankful--very thankful--for the succession of
events that have brought me to this happy hour."

"And yet, Jeff," said the captain, sitting down beside him, "you and I
thought these events--the wreck, and the loss of employment, and the
overturning o' the lifeboat, and the thump on the ribs, and the long
illness--nothing but misfortunes and full of evil _at first_.  There,--
I'm not goin' to draw no moral.  I never was good at that.  Come, now,
if you've rested enough, we'll up anchor and away.  I've got a dog-cart
beatin' off an' on round the p'int there, an' my Rosebud will be gettin'
impatient."

This was true--Rose was becoming not only impatient but anxious.  When,
however, she saw her father and lover approach, all her anxieties
vanished.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE MATTER.

The wonder-working power of Time is proverbial.  Behold Jeffrey Benson
once again, looking like his old self, at the hospitable board of Miss
Millet.  It is an occasion of importance.  Opposite to her sits her
brother.  Jeff is on her right hand.  On the left sits Rose--prettier,
brighter, and more womanly than ever.  A gold circlet on one of the
fingers of her left hand proclaims a great fact.  A happy smile on her
face proves that her confidence has not been misplaced.

Jeff is nearly as stout and strong as he ever was; of his severe illness
scarcely a trace remains.  The doctor does not know what it was, and it
is not to be expected that we should know.  Sufficient for us to state
the fact that it is gone.

But our hero is not now a coastguardsman.  Listen, and the captain will
explain why.

"Molly, my dear, another cup of your superb tea, to web my whistle
before I begin.  It ought to be good, for I know the man that grew it,
and the firm through which it came.  Well, now, both you and Rosebud
will nat'rally want to know about the situation which I've obtained for
Jeff.  You'll be surprised to hear that he is now Secretary of State to
King Richard Longpurse."

"In other words," interrupted Jeff, with a laugh, "your brother
thinks--"

"If _you_ think, sir," interrupted the captain in his turn, "that King
Richard cannot explain matters in his own words, you had better say so
at once, and I will abdicate in your favour."

"Go on, sire--I submit," said Jeff.

"Well then, Molly, I was about to say, when my secretary interrupted me,
that he and I have at last come to an agreement.  After much
explanation, I have got him to understand that a king cannot possibly
manage all his own affairs with his own hands, and that I am forced to
have a secretary, who can at least do the `three R's' pretty well.  You
see, although my edication has not been neglected, it still remains a
fact that I can't read without specs, that in cipherin' I am slow--slow,
though sure--and that in the matter of penmanship I am neither swift nor
legible.  Therefore, seein' that in such things I don't differ much from
other kings and great men, Jeff has generously consented to refuse the
lucrative sitooation under Goverment, with nothin' partik'lar to do,
which has been offered to him, and to accept the secretary of
state-ship, now at the disposal of King Richard, who will give him at
least as good a salary as Government, and at the same time keep his nose
closer to the grindstone."

"Oh!  Jeff," said Rosebud at this point, shaking her finger at her
husband, "I _knew_ there was something in the wind!"

"My child," remarked the captain, "there is always something in the
wind.  According to the best authorities, you may count on findin'
oxygen, nitrogen, and carbonic-acid gases in it--not to mention foreign
substances at times, such as dust leaves, bits of old newspaper and the
like, except at sea, where it is always pure and good."

"But with plenty of salt in it," interposed Miss Millet, "though not
enough to cure you of bad habits, brother.  Come now, tell us really
what you mean."

"Well, sister, what I really mean is this: that the fortune which has
been sent to me is far too big for one pair of hands and one brain to
manage: so my son-in-law has agreed to help me--and the labourer, you
know, is worthy of his hire!  Surely I don't need to explain the meaning
of that text to _you_!  Since we last conversed in this room on the
disposal of my surplus funds, Jeff and I have had many a long talk and
walk together.  Moreover, I have kept the young secretary's nose so
tight to the grindstone for some months past that he has produced
results which will, I think, interest--it may be even surprise--you."

"Before going further," continued the captain, pushing in his cup,
"let's have some more o' that brew to wet my whistle.  Well, you will be
pleased to hear that I have changed my mind about the carriage and four,
and the mansion in Belgravia, and the castle at Folkestone, and the
steam-yacht--given 'em all up, and decided to come here an' live quietly
beside you, sister."

"Are you in earnest brother?" asked Miss Millet, with sparkling eyes.

"Never more in earnest in my life; but get out your plans an' papers,
secretary, an' explain 'em."

Jeff rose, left the room, and returned with a business-like bundle of
papers, which he untied and arranged on the table before him.  Taking up
one, he said--

"This is a list of the poor people in Cranby, in whom Miss Millet has
been accustomed to take special interest.  The first on the list is old
Susan Jenkins."

"My dear old woman, who has been bedridden so long, and in such terrible
poverty?" asked Miss Millet.

"The same," answered Jeff.  "Captain Millet has succeeded in getting her
admission into the hospital for incurables.  We have only just received
intimation of the appointment; and as the old woman does not know of it
yet, we thought it best to let you be the bearer of the news."

"Oh, brother!" exclaimed Miss Millet, clasping her hands in delight.
She knew now that the captain was in earnest, for he would sooner have
cut off his own hand than trifle with her feelings.

"Go on, secretary," cried the captain, taking a considerable swig of
tea, "an' don't you interrupt, Molly, else we'll never get through."

"The next name is Martha Brand."

"What, ragged little Martha?" exclaimed Miss Millet.

"The same.  A new rig-out has been ordered for Martha, and she is to be
sent to school.  Joe Puncheon, better known as Vagabond Joe, has been
apprenticed to a carpenter--by his own special desire--and goes to work
