The nobles, or rather warriors--for ability to fight constituted
nobility in those days--were clothed in garments which, with sundry
modifications, resembled those of the king.  As for the women of the
court, their costumes were what may be styled flowing, and therefore
graceful, though difficult to describe.  Like their lords, they were
profusely ornamented with precious metals and bands and loops of
coloured cloth.  Hafrydda and her companion Branwen allowed their hair
to fall, after the manner of the times, in unrestrained freedom over
their shoulders--that of the former resembling a cataract of rippling
gold, while that of the latter was a wavy mass of auburn.  Both girls
wore wild flowers among their tresses.  Of course the queen had rolled
up her slightly grey hair in the simple knot at the back of the head,
which is more becoming to age, and she wore no ornament of any kind on
her head.

Public games are pretty much the same in all lands, and have probably
been similar in all times.  We shall not weary the reader by describing
minutely all that went on.  There was racing, of course, and jumping
both with and without a run, as well as over a willow-wand held high.
There was also throwing the heavy stone, but the method pursued in this
feat was not in accordance with modern practice, inasmuch as the
competitor turned his back to the direction in which the stone was to be
thrown, heeled instead of toed the line, seized the stone with both
hands and hurled it backwards over his head.

As the games proceeded it was evident that the concourse became much
excited and deeply interested in the efforts of the various
competitors--the king and his court not less so than the people.

After the conclusion of one of the races, Captain Arkal left the front
row, and pushing his way towards Bladud, whispered--

"It seems to me that you could easily beat the winner of that race,
smart though he be.  What say you?  Will you try?"

"I fear being discovered by my father if I go so prominently before him,
and I wish to announce myself in private."

"Pooh! discovery is impossible!  Have you not told me that you were a
smooth-chinned boy, and not grown to near your present height when you
left home?  How can they ever recognise one who returns a sunburnt
giant, with a beard that covers half his face?"

"Perhaps you are right," returned the prince, looking as if uncertain
how to act; but the advice of little Maikar corresponding with that of
the captain decided him.

In those primitive times the rules and ceremonies connected with games
were few and simple.  "Entries" were not arranged beforehand; men came
and went, and competed or refrained, as they pleased, though, of course,
there were a few well-known greyhound-like men and athletes who competed
more or less in all games of the various districts around, and whose
superlative powers prevented other ambitious men from becoming too
numerous.  These were, we may say, the "professionals" of the time.

No special costumes were worn.  Each man, as he stepped to the front,
divested himself of wolf-skin, deer-skin, boar-skin, or cat-skin mantle,
and, perchance, also of his upper coat, and stood forth in attire
sufficiently light and simple to leave his limbs unhampered.

A long race--ten times round the course--was about to come off, and the
men were being placed by the judges, when Bladud pushed through the
crowd and made his way to the starting-point.  There was a murmur of
admiration as his tall and graceful figure was seen to join the group of
competitors in front of the royal stand.  He gave the Greek letter
Omicron as his name, and no further questions were asked him.  Divesting
himself of the rug or mantle, which he wore thrown over one shoulder
after the manner of a plaid, he stood forth in the thin loose tunic
which formed his only garment, and tightened his belt as he toed the
line.

It was with a feeling of satisfaction that he observed several of the
king's warriors among the runners, and one of these was Gunrig.  Being
an agile as well as a stout man, he did not consider it beneath his
dignity to join in the sports.

The king himself gave the signal to start.  He descended from his stand
for the purpose, and Bladud was greatly pleased to find that though he
looked at him he evidently failed to recognise him.

At the signal, about twenty powerful fellows--mostly young, though some
were in the prime of life--started out at full speed for a short
distance, as if to test each other; then they began to slow, so as not
to break their wind by over-exertion at the beginning.  Bladud felt at
once that he was more than a match for the best of them, unless any one
should turn out to have been concealing his powers.  He therefore placed
himself alongside of Gunrig, and kept at his elbow about half a foot
behind him the first two rounds of the course.

At first Gunrig took no notice of this, but when he perceived that the
tall stranger continued to keep the same position, he held back a
little, intending to reverse the position for a time.  But Bladud also
held back and frustrated his intention.  Exasperated by this, Gunrig put
on what we in these times call a "spurt," and went ahead at a pace
which, in a few seconds, left most of the runners a good way behind.
This was received by the spectators with a cheer, in which surprise was
fully as prominent as satisfaction, for although they knew that the
chief was celebrated for his speed of foot, few of them had actually
seen him run before that day, and it at once became evident that if his
endurance was equal to his speed, it would go hard with his competitors.

Bladud was left behind a few yards, but, without making a spurt, he
lengthened his stride a little, and in a moment or two had resumed his
former position at his rival's elbow.

A wild cheer of delight ensued, for now it was recognised that in all
probability the race would lie between these two.  As, however, all this
occurred in the third round of the course, and all the other runners
seemed to be doing their work with steady resolution, there was still
the possibility of one or more of them proving themselves, by endurance
perhaps, more than a match for the swift-footed.  The excitement,
therefore, became intense, and, as round after round of the course was
completed the relative position of the various men changed considerably.

At the seventh round some, who had been husbanding their strength, let
out, and, passing others with great ease, came close upon the heels of
Gunrig and Bladud.  This was, of course, a signal for enthusiastic
cheering.  Others of the runners, feeling that their chance of taking a
respectable place was hopeless, dropped out of the race altogether and
were cheered vociferously as they retired.

At last, in the eighth round, it became practically, as had been
anticipated, a race between the leading two, for they were far ahead of
all the others by that time, but occupied exactly the same relative
position as before.  Gunrig became so exasperated at this, that on
commencing the ninth round, he made a sudden effort which carried him
five or six yards ahead of his rival.

The spectators could not avoid cheering him at this, but the cheer was
feeble.

"The tall man is losing wind," cried one in a disappointed tone.

"I feared his legs were too long," observed another.  Most of the
people, however, looked on in anxious silence.

"I did not think he would give in so easily," murmured little Maikar
regretfully.

"He has not given in yet," returned the captain, with a satisfied nod.
"See--he pulls up!"

This was true.  To the unbounded surprise of the spectators, Bladud had
actually stopped a moment to tighten his belt at the beginning of the
tenth round.  Then, to their still greater amazement, he put on what we
may call an Olympic spurt, so that he overtook his rival in less than a
quarter of a minute; passed him easily, ran over the rest of the course
at a rate which had not been equalled since Old Albion was created, and
passed the winning-post full five hundred yards in advance of Gunrig,
amid yells of delight and roars of laughter, which continued for some
time--bursting forth again and again as the novelty and surprise of the
thing became more and more forced home to the spectators' minds.

"You have met more than your match to-day, Gunrig," remarked the king,
with a laugh, as the defeated man strode angrily up to the platform.

"I have met foul play," replied the chief angrily.  "He pretended that
he could not run, else would I have put on more force.  But it matters
not.  I will have another opportunity of trying him.  Meanwhile, there
is yet the heavy stone to throw.  How now, wench?" he added, turning
fiercely on Branwen, who had nearly hidden her face in her shawl, "do
you try to hide that you are laughing at me?"

Poor Branwen was in anything but a laughing mood.  She was too much
afraid of the fiery chief for that, and had merely covered her face, as
a modern beauty might drop her veil, to avoid his gaze.

The fair-haired Hafrydda, however, was not so timid, her smile was
evidently one of amusement at his defeat, which angered him all the
more.

"Gunrig," said the king, drawing himself up, and speaking impressively,
"remember that you are my guest, and that it ill becomes you to insult
my women before my face."

"Pardon me," replied the chief, with an effort to recover himself.  "You
must remember that I am not accustomed to defeat."

"True," returned the king blandly, "so now you had better take to the
heavy stone and come off the victor."

Gunrig at once went down into the arena and sent a challenge to Bladud.

The latter had returned to his place among the spectators, but his
height rendered him easy to find.  He accepted the challenge at once,
and, as no other competitor for the heavy stone offered, the two had it
all to themselves.  This was no matter of wonder, for the heaviest stone
among those laid out for trial was of a weight that many of the young
men or warriors could barely lift, while the stoutest of them could not
have thrown it more than a few feet.

Boiling over as he was with indignation, Gunrig felt as if he was endued
with more than usual strength.  He lifted the stone with ease, faced the
platform, heeled the line, and hurled the stone violently over his head,
so that it fell with a heavy thud far behind him.  Then Bladud took it
up.

"Oh! what a stout man he is!" whispered Branwen to Hafrydda, "and what a
handsome face!"

"That is true; and I hope he will win," replied the princess.

"Hush! child, the king will be displeased if he hears you," said her
mother earnestly.  "What ever you think, keep silence."

The queen spoke with such unwonted energy that Hafrydda was surprised,
but her thoughts were instantly diverted to Bladud, who made a
magnificent cast and sent the stone a yard further than his opponent.
But Gunrig seized it again and hurled it a foot beyond that.

"Well done," said the king.  "Go on.  It is the best in three heaves
that wins."

Bladud grasped the stone and hurled it back over his head with all his
force.  Up and up it went as if it had resolved to become an aerolite
and visit the moon!  Then down it came with a mighty thud ten yards
beyond Gunrig's mark.

Once more the air rang with the enthusiastic plaudits of the multitude,
while the king ordered the victor to approach the stand.

Bladud did so with some trepidation, for now he knew that he would have
to speak, and feared that though his appearance had not betrayed him,
his voice would probably do so.

CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A NOTABLE DUEL FOLLOWED BY CHANGES AND PLOTS.

Every eye was riveted with admiration and curiosity on the young
stranger as he approached.

"You have acquitted yourself well, young man," said the king, "and it
becomes us to invite you to our palace and to ask if we can serve you in
any way."

Bladud had a deep voice, and, by way of increasing his chances of
concealing his identity, he pitched it a note or two lower than usual as
he replied.

"I thank you, sir, for your hospitality and gladly accept it.  As to
your offer to serve me, I would count it a favour if you will permit me
to enter into combat with one of your friends."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the king, in great surprise, "that is a strange
request, but I may not deny you.  Which of my warriors may it be?"

"It is none of your warriors, sir," answered Bladud, "but one of your
guests who has, I am told, challenged whoever will to fight him for the
hand of your fair daughter.  I am here now to accept that challenge and
to fight with Gunrig if he will."

"Assuredly, young man, your ambition or presumption seems equal to your
prowess," returned the king with an offended look; "know ye not that
this challenge was delivered to chiefs of this country, not to unknown
strangers, and although I admit that your tongue seems well accustomed
to our language, it has a foreign smack about it which does not belong
to those who are home-bred."

"I am a chief," answered Bladud, proudly, "and this is my native land."

"What is your name, then, and where come ye from?" demanded the king.

"That I may not answer just now, but I am here, in your power, if what I
say be not found true, you may do what you will with me.  Meanwhile I
ask permission to accept the challenge."

At this point Gunrig, unable to restrain himself longer, sprang forward.

"Grant him permission, king," he cried.  "If I were not ready to abide
by my word I were not worth my salt.  Nay, indeed, whether you grant him
permission or not I will fight him, for he has twice beaten me this day,
and now insults me, therefore there is a deadly feud between us."

"You were always a hot-head, Gunrig," replied the king, with a grim
smile.  "But have your way.  Only it does not follow that if you lose
the day I will give my child to the conqueror."

"Be that as you choose," said Gunrig, "I am now ready."

As he spoke the fiery chief grasped his shield, leaped down into the
arena and drew his sword.

Bladud was not slow to follow.  In those days action usually followed
close on the heels of purpose, and as the laws of chivalry had not yet
been formulated there was no braying of trumpets or tedious ceremonial
to delay the combat.

"Oh!  I do hope he will conquer," whispered the Princess Hafrydda to her
dark-eyed companion, "and save me from that horrid man."

"I hope so too," returned Branwen, in a subdued voice, "but--"

She stopped abruptly, and a blush deepened the rich colour of her cheek,
which she sought to conceal by drawing her shawl still closer over it.
This was needless, for the clash of swords at the moment, as the
combatants met in deadly conflict, claimed the exclusive attention of
the damsels, and caused the entire concourse to press close around the
barricades with eager interest.

"A strange way to mark his home-coming," muttered Captain Arkal,
thrusting himself as near to the scene of action as possible, closely
followed by Maikar, who, being little, kept easily in his wake.

"He knows well what he's about," returned the little man, whose
admiration for Bladud was great, and his belief in him unbounded.

Maikar was one of those men--of whom there are no doubt thousands--who
powerfully appreciate, almost venerate, and always recognise, the spirit
of justice when displayed by their fellows, although they may not always
be aware of the fact that they do recognise it--hence his belief in the
prince.

"A good day for the land if that long-legged fellow slays him," remarked
one of the crowd.

"That's true," said another.

Indeed, this seemed to be the opinion of most of the spectators; there
was also a general expression of confidence that the stranger was sure
to be victorious, but some objectors--of whom there are, and necessarily
must be a considerable number in the world--held that Gunrig was a stout
man to tackle, and it was not always length of limb that gained the day.

Such comments, however, were not numerous, for the concourse soon became
too deeply absorbed to indulge in speech.

The fight that now ensued gave some weight to the objectors' views.

At first the combatants rushed at each other with the ferocity of men
who mean to settle a dispute by instant and mutual destruction, and
there was a sort of gasp of excited surprise among the people as the two
swords fell at the same moment with something like a thunderclap on the
respective shields.  Feeling that neither could overcome the other by
the might of a resistless blow, each, after one or two rapid cuts,
thrusts, and guards, ascertained that his adversary was so nearly his
match as to render great care needful.  They retired a few paces, and
then advancing, settled down to their work, point to point and foot to
foot.

Gunrig, although inferior in stature to the prince, was about equal to
him in strength and weight, and, being a trained warrior in the prime of
life, was possessed of a sturdy endurance which, to some extent, made up
for the other's superior agility.  In other respects they seemed well
matched, for each was highly trained and expert in the use of his
weapons.

After a second onset, somewhat similar to the first, and with much the
same result, the two went at each other with cut and thrust so rapidly
