"Not so bad as a break," sighed the hopeful spirits.

"It is bad enough," said the chief electrician, "for we have found dead
earth."

By this the chief meant to say that insulation had been completely
destroyed, and that the whole current of electricity was escaping into
the sea.

About 716 miles had been payed out at the time, and as signals had till
then been regularly received from the shore, it was naturally concluded
that the fault lay near to the ship.

"Now then, get along," said an engineer to one of the cable-men; "you'll
have to cut, and splice, and test, while we are getting ready the tackle
to pick up."

"I don't like that cuttin' o' the cable, Bill," said one of the sailors,
as he went forward, "it seems dangerous, it do."

"No more do I, Dick," replied his mate; "I feel as if it never could be
rightly spliced again."

"Why, bless you, boys," said a cable-man near them, "cables is used to
that now, like eels to bein' skinned; and so are we, for that matter.
We think nothin' of it."

Clearly the cable-man was right, for, while the picking-up apparatus was
being got ready, the cable was cut in no fewer than three places, in
order to test the coils that lay in the tanks.  These being found all
right, the picking-up was begun with anxious care.  The moment of
greatest danger was when the big ship was swinging round.  For a few,
but apparently endless, moments the cable had to bear the strain, and
became rigid like a bar of steel.  Then it was got in over the bows,
where all was bustle, and noise, and smoke, as the picking-up machinery
panted and rattled.

All day the work went on.  Night descended, but still the cable was
coming in slowly, unwillingly,--now jerkily, as if half inclined to
yield, anon painfully, as if changing its mind, until the strain was
equal to two and a half tons.  A row of lanterns lighted it, and the men
employed watched and handled it carefully to detect the "fault," while
the clattering wheels played harsh music.

"We'll never find it," growled an impatient young electrician.

As if to rebuke him for his want of faith, the "fault" came in then and
there--at 9:50 p.m., ship's time.

"Ah!" said Mr Field, whose chief characteristic was an unwavering faith
in ultimate success, "I knew we should find it are long.  I have often
known cables to stop working for two hours, no one knew why, and then
begin again."

"Well now, Mr Wright, it floors me altogether, does this here talkin'
by electricity."

The man who made this remark to our hero was one who could not have been
easily "floored" by any other means than electricity.  He was a huge
blacksmith--a stalwart fellow who had just been heaving the
sledge-hammer with the seeming powers of Vulcan himself, and who chanced
to be near Robin when he paused to rest and mop the streaming
perspiration from his brow, while a well-matched brother took his place
at the anvil.

"You see," he continued, "I can't make out nohow what the electricity
does when it gits through the cable from Ireland to Noofun'land.  Of
course it don't actooally speak, you know--no more does it whistle, I
suppose; an' even if it did I don't see as we'd be much the wiser.  What
_do_ it do, Mr Wright?  You seem to be well up in these matters, an'
not above explainin' of 'em to the likes o' us as ha'n't got much
edication."

Few things pleased Robin more than being asked to impart what knowledge
he possessed, or to make plain subjects that were slightly complex.  He
was not always successful in his attempts at elucidation, partly because
some subjects were too complex to simplify, and partly because some
intellects were obtuse, but he never failed to try.

"You must know," he replied, with that earnest look which was apt to
overspread his face when about to explain a difficulty, "that a piece of
common iron can be converted into a magnet by electrifying it, and it
can be unconverted just as fast by removing the electricity.  Well,
suppose I have a bit of iron in America, with an electric battery in
Ireland, or _vice versa_--"

"W'ot's wicey wersa, Mr Wright?"

"Oh, it means the terms being changed--turned the other way, you know--
back to the front, as it were--in short, I mean the battery being in
America and the bit of iron in Ireland."

"Well, well, who'd a thought there was so much in wicey wersa; but go
on, Mr Wright."

"Now, you must suppose," continued Robin, "that a needle, like the
mariner's compass needle, hangs beside my bit of iron, close to it, and
that a wire, or conductor of electricity, connects the iron with my
electric battery in Ireland.  Well, that makes a magnet of it, and the
suspended needle, being attracted, sticks to it.  Then I disconnect the
wire from my battery by touching a handle, the bit of iron ceases to be
a magnet, and the needle was free.  Again I connect the battery, and the
needle flies to the remagnetised bit of iron.  Thus, as fast as I
choose, I can make the needle wag, and by a simple arrangement we can
make it wag right or left, so many beats right or left, or alternately,
representing letters.  By varying the beats we vary the letters, and
thus spell out our messages.  Now, do you understand it?"

"I ain't quite sure that I does," replied Vulcan; "I've got a hazy
notion that by touchin' and removin' the touch from a conductor,
connecting and disconnecting wires and batteries, you can make
electricity flow just as you let on or stop water by turnin' a
stopcock--"

"Not exactly," interrupted Robin, "because, you see, electricity does
not really flow, not being a substance."

"Not a substance, sir! w'y, w'ot is it then?"

"Like light and sound, it is merely an effect, an influence, a result,"
answered Robin.  "We only use the word _flow_, and talk of electricity
as a fluid, for convenience' sake."

"Well, w'otever it is or isn't," continued the puzzled Vulcan, gazing at
vacancy for a few seconds, "when you've set it agoin'--or set agoin' the
things as sets it agoin'--you make a suspended needle wag, and when you
stop it you make the needle stop waggin', and by the way in which that
there needle wags you can spell out the letters o' the alphabit--so many
wags to the right bein' one letter, so many wags to the left bein'
another letter, an' so on,--so that, what between the number o' wags an'
the direction o' the waggin's, you--you come for to--there, I'm lost
again, an' I must go in for another spell wi' the sledge, so we'll have
to tackle the subject another time, Mr Wright."

Thus speaking, Vulcan seized the ponderous hammer in his powerful grasp
and proceeded to beat form into a mass of glowing metal with much
greater ease than he had been able to thump telegraphy into his own
brain.

In the discovery of the "fault" and the cutting out of the injured part
of the cable, twenty-six hours were lost.  During all the time Captain
Anderson was obliged to remain on deck, while the minds and bodies of
the engineers and electricians were subjected to a severe strain for the
same period.  They had scarcely begun to breathe freely again, and to
congratulate each other on being able to continue the voyage, when they
received another shock of alarm by the cable suddenly flying off the
drum, while it was being transferred from the picking-up machinery in
the bow to the paying-out arrangements in the stern.  Before the
machinery could be stopped, some fathoms of cable had become entangled
among the wheels and destroyed.  This part having been cut out, however,
and new splices made, the paying-out process was resumed.

"I'll turn in now and have a snooze, Robin," said Ebenezer Smith, "and
you had better do the same; you look tired."

This was indeed true, for not a man or boy in the ship took a more
anxious interest in the cable than did our little hero; he had begun to
regard it as a living creature, and to watch over it, and dream about
it, as if it were a dear friend in extreme danger.  The enthusiastic boy
was actually becoming careworn and thin, for he not only performed all
the duties required of him with zealous application, but spent his
leisure, and much of the time that should have been devoted to rest, in
the careful study of his idol--intensely watching it, and all that was
in the remotest way connected with it.

"You're a goose," said Stumps, in passing, when he heard Robin decline
to retire as Smith had advised him.

"It may be so, and if so, Stumps, I shall continue to cackle a little
longer on deck while they are examining the fault."

That examination, when finished, produced a considerable sensation.  The
process was conducted in private.  The condemned portion was cut in
junks and tested, until the faulty junk was discovered.  This was
untwisted until the core was laid bare, and when about a foot of it had
been so treated, the cause of evil was discovered, drawing from the
onlookers an exclamation of horror rather than surprise, as they stood
aghast, for _treachery_ seemed to have been at work!

"An enemy in the ship!" murmured one.

"What ship without an enemy?" thought another.

That mischief had been intended was obvious, for a piece of iron wire,
bright as if cut with nippers at one end and broken off short at the
other, had been driven right through the centre of the cable, so as to
touch the inner wires--thus forming a leak, or conductor, into the sea.
There could be no doubt that it had not got there by accident; neither
had it been driven there during the making or shipping of the cable, for
in that case the testings for continuity would have betrayed its
presence before the starting of the expedition.  The piece of wire, too,
was the same size as that which formed the protecting cover, and it was
of the exact diameter of the cable.  There was also the mark of a cut on
the Manilla hemp, where the wire had entered.  It could have been done
only by one of the men who were at work in the tank at the time the
portion went over, and, strange to say, this was the same gang which had
been at work there when the previous "fault" occurred.

"Call all the men aft," was the order that quickly followed this
discovery.

The piece of cable was handed to them, and they were allowed to examine
it in silence.  They did so in great surprise, mingled with indignation.

"It's bin done a'purpose, an' driven in by a skilful hand," said one.

"You're right, Joe," said another.

"I knows," whispered a third, "that _one_ of the men expressed
satisfaction when the last fault occurred, an' I've heard say that we've
got enemies to the makers o' the cable aboard."

The man thus darkly referred to, whoever he was, of course looked as
innocent and as indignant as the most virtuous among them; the guilt,
therefore, could not be brought home to him.  Woe betide him if it had
been, for there was a serious talk of lynching some one among the
wrathful men, each of whom was now subject to suspicion.

In these trying circumstances, the chief engineer accepted an offer made
by the gentlemen in the ship, to take turn about in superintending the
men at work in the tank paying-out the cable.

"It's not pleasant, of course," replied one of the men, speaking for the
rest, "but we feel it to be justifiable, as well as necessary, and are
very glad the plan has been adopted."

Once more the big ship went merrily on her way, and the great cable went
down to its ocean-bed so smoothly and regularly, that men began to talk
of speedy arrival at Heart's Content--their destination in
Newfoundland--which was now only about 600 miles distant; but their
greatest troubles still lay before them.  About eight o'clock in the
morning of 2nd August another bad fault was reported, and they had once
again to resort to the wearisome process of picking-up.

At first all seemed about to go well.  A gale was indeed blowing at the
time, but that did not much affect the colossal ship.  The cable was
cut, fastened to its iron rope, passed to the bow, and got in over the
pulleys.  Then, and very slowly, it was drawn on board.  When a mile or
so had been recovered, the gearing of one of the engines got a little
out of order, and the process had to be temporarily stopped; then
something went wrong with the boilers, but soon these difficulties were
removed.  Immediately after, the Great Eastern drifted, so that it was
impossible to prevent the cable from chafing against her bows.  Equally
impossible was it to go astern, lest the strain should be too great.
Then the wind suddenly shifted, making matters worse.  Suddenly the
chain shackle and wire-rope attached to the cable came in over the wheel
at the bows with considerable violence.  Another moment and the cable
parted, flew through the stoppers, and, with one bound, flashed into the
sea and disappeared!

Now, at last, the fatal climax so much dreaded had arrived.  The days
and nights of anxious labour had been spent in vain.  The cable was
lost, and with it went not only hundreds of thousands of pounds, but the
hopes of hundreds of thousands of people, whose sanguine expectations of
success were thus rudely dispelled.

Need it be said that something very like despair reigned for the moment
on board the Great Eastern?

Most of the gentlemen on board--never dreaming of catastrophe--were at
luncheon, when Mr Canning entered the saloon with a look that caused
every one to start.

"It is all over!--it is gone!" he said, and hastened to his cabin.

Mr Field, with the composure of faith and courage, though very pale,
entered the saloon immediately after, and confirmed the chief engineer's
statement.

"The cable has parted," he said, "and has gone overboard."

From the chiefs down even to Stumps and his fraternity all was blank
dismay!  As for our hero Robin Wright, he retired to his cabin, flung
himself on his bed, and sobbed as though his heart would break.

But such a state of things could not last.  Men's spirits may be stunned
and crushed, but they are seldom utterly overwhelmed so long as life
endures.

Recovering from the shock, Mr Canning set about the process of
grappling for the lost cable with persistent energy.  But fishing in
water two and a half miles deep is no easy matter.  Nevertheless, it was
done.  Again and again, and over again, were two monster hooks in the
shape of grapnels let down to the bottom of the sea, with an iron rope
for a line, and the Great Eastern for a float!

The plan, of course, was to go back a few miles on their course and then
drag across the known position of the lost treasure.

We say known, because good observations had fortunately been obtained by
Captain Anderson just before the accident.

Two hours did the grapnels descend before they reached the bottom of the
sea!  All night did the cable-layers fish, with the characteristic
patience of fishermen, but did not get a nibble.  Towards morning,
however, there was a decided bite, and the line became taut.

"Got him!" exclaimed an enthusiast eagerly.

"Don't be too sure," replied a philosopher cautiously.

"It may be a bit of wreck," suggested Ebenezer Smith, who was a natural
doubter.

"Or a whale, or the great sea-serpent," said the sporting electrician,
who was everything by turns and nothing long.

"We shall very soon know," remarked a matter-of-fact engineer.  "If it
is a loose object the strain will decrease as it nears the surface, but
if it be the cable the strain will certainly increase, because its
weight will be greater the more of it we lift off the bottom."

Earnestly did every one regard the dynamometer which told the exact
amount of strain on the iron fishing-line, and to their joy the strain
_increased_ until the object caught had been raised three-quarters of a
mile from the bottom.  Then a swivel gave way, and the cable went back
to its ocean-bed.

But those plucky engineers were not to be overcome by a first failure.
Having started with five miles of fishing-line, they proceed at once to
make a second attempt.

"Oh, I _do_ hope they will hook it again!" said Robin Wright.

"And so they will," said Ebenezer Smith.

And so they did.  Late in the afternoon of the Monday following, their
fish was again hooked and raised a full mile from the bottom, when
another swivel gave way, and down it went a second time!

The fishing-line was now getting short.  It behoved them to act with
more caution.  New bolts were put in each shackle and swivel, and the
capstan was increased in diameter, being belted with thick plates of
iron.  To effect these alterations the forges had to be erected on deck,
and at night these cast a lurid glare on the busy workers, bringing out
every near object in vivid relief against the ebony background of space
behind, while they made preparations for a third cast of the
fishing-line.  The cast was made successfully, it was thought, but one
of the grapnels had caught the line with one of its flukes, so that it
could not catch anything else, and the result was--nothing.

A fourth attempt was then made.  It was to be the last.  The
fishing-line seemed too weak, and its frequent breakings had reduced it
so much that other chains had to be attached to it.  With this thing of
shreds and patches the cable was once more hooked and brought up nearly
eight hundred fathoms, when the line gave way once more, and the cable
went down for the last time.

Nothing more could be done.  The Great Eastern turned her large bows to
the east and steered grandly though sadly, away for old England.

But don't imagine, good reader, that these cable-layers were beaten.
They were baffled, indeed, for that year (1865), but not conquered.
Cyrus Field had resolved that the thing should be done--and done it was
the following year; for the laying of the cable had been so nearly a
success, that great capitalists, such as Brassey, Gooch, Barclay,
