already referred to, and most of them were men of the lower ranks, but
there were one or two who, like Ned Sinton, had left a more polished
class of mortals to mingle in the promiscuous crowd.  These, in some
cases, carried their manners with them, and exerted a modifying
influence on all around.  One young American, in particular, named
Maxton, soon attracted general attention by the immense fund of
information he possessed, and the urbane, gentlemanly manner in which he
conveyed it to those around him.  He possessed in an eminent degree
those qualities which attract men at once, and irresistibly good nature,
frankness, manliness, considerable knowledge of almost every subject
that can be broached in general conversation, united with genuine
modesty.  When he sat down to table he did not grasp everything within
his reach; he began by offering to carve and help others, and when at
length he did begin to eat, he did not gobble.  He "guessed" a little,
it is true, and "calculated" occasionally, but when he did so, it was in
a tone that fell almost as pleasantly on the ear as the brogue of old
Ireland.

Ned happened to be seated beside Maxton, and held a good deal of
conversation with him.

"Forgive me, if I appear inquisitive," said the former, helping himself
to a handful of broken biscuit, "but I cannot help expressing a hope
that our routes may lie in the same direction--are you travelling
towards Sacramento city or the mines?"

"Towards the mines; and, as I observed that your party came from the
southward, I suppose you are going in the same direction.  If so, I
shall be delighted to join you."

"That's capital," replied Ned, "we shall be the better of having our
party strengthened, and I am quite certain we could not have a more
agreeable addition to it."

"Thank you for the compliment.  As to the advantage of a strong party, I
feel it a safeguard as well as a privilege to join yours, for, to say
truth, the roads are not safe just now.  Several lawless scoundrels have
been roving about in this part of the country committing robberies and
even murder.  The Indians, too, are not so friendly as one could wish.
They have been treated badly by some of the unprincipled miners; and
their custom is to kill two whites for every red-man that falls.  They
are not particular as to whom they kill, consequently the innocent are
frequently punished for the guilty."

"This is sad," replied Ned.  "Are, then, all the Indian tribes at enmity
with the white men?"

"By no means.  Many tribes are friendly, but some have been so severely
handled, that they have vowed revenge, and take it whenever they can
with safety.  Their only weapons, however, are bows and arrows, so that
a few resolute white men, with rifles, can stand against a hundred of
them, and they know this well.  I spent the whole of last winter on the
Yuba River; and, although large bands were in my neighbourhood, they
never ventured to attack us openly, but they succeeded in murdering one
or two miners who strayed into the woods alone."

"And are these murders passed over without any attempt to bring the
murderers to justice?"

"I guess they are not," replied Maxton, smiling; "but justice is
strangely administered in these parts.  Judge Lynch usually presides,
and he is a stern fellow to deal with.  If you listen to what the
hunter, there, is saying just now, you will hear a case in point, if I
mistake not."

As Maxton spoke, a loud laugh burst from the men at the other end of the
table.

"How did it happen?" cried several.

"Out wi' the yarn, old boy."

"Ay, an' don't spin it too tight, or, faix, ye'll burst the strands,"
cried Larry O'Neil, who, during the last half-hour, had been listening,
open-mouthed, to the marvellous anecdotes of grizzlies and red-skins,
with which the hunter entertained his audience.

"Wall, boys, it happened this ways," began the man, tossing off a
gin-sling, and setting down the glass with a violence that nearly
smashed it.  "Ye see I wos up in the mountains, near the head waters o'
the Sacramento, lookin' out for deer, and gittin' a bit o' gold now an'
again, when, one day, as I was a-comin' down a gully in the hills, I
comes all of a suddint on two men.  One wos an Injun, as ugly a sinner
as iver I seed; t'other wos a Yankee lad, in a hole diggin' gold.
Before my two eyes were well on them, the red villain lets fly an arrow,
and the man fell down with a loud yell into the hole.  Up goes my rifle
like wink, and the red-skin would ha' gone onder in another second, but
my piece snapped--cause why? the primin' had got damp; an' afore I could
prime agin, he was gone.

"I went up to the poor critter, and sure enough it wos all up with him.
The arrow went in at the back o' his neck.  He niver spoke again.  So I
laid him in the grave he had dug for himself, and sot off to tell the
camp.  An' a most tremendous row the news made.  They got fifty
volunteers in no time, and went off, hot-fut, to scalp the whole nation.
As I had other business to look after, and there seemed more than
enough o' fightin' men, I left them, and went my way.  Two days after, I
had occasion to go back to the same place, an' when I comed in sight o'
the camp, I guess there was a mighty stir.

"`Wot's to do?' says I to a miner in a hole, who wos diggin' away for
gold, and carin' nothin' about it.

"`Only scraggin' an Injun,' he said, lookin' up.

"`Oh,' says I, `I'll go and see.'

"So off I sot, and there wos a crowd o' about two hundred miners round a
tree; and, jest as I come up, they wos puttin' the rope round the neck
of a poor wretch of an old grey-haired red-skin, whose limbs trembled so
that they wos scarce able to hold him up.

"`Heave away now, Bill,' cried the man as tied the noose.

"But somethin' was wrong with the hitch o' the rope round the branch o'
the tree, an' it wouldn't draw, and some time wos spent in puttin' it
right.  I felt sorter sorry for the old man, for his grave face was bold
enough, and age more than fear had to do with the tremblin' o' his legs.
Before they got it right again, my eye fell on a small band o'
red-skins, who were lookin' quietly on; and foremost among them the very
blackguard as shot the man in the galley.  I knew him at once by his
ugly face.  Without sayin' a word, I steps for'ard to the old Injun, and
takes the noose off his neck.

"`Halloo!' cried a dozen men, jumpin' at me.  `Wot's that for?'  `Scrag
the hunter,' cries one.  `Howld yer long tongues, an' hear what he's got
to say,' shouts an Irishman.

"`Keep your minds easy,' says I, mountin' a stump, `an' seize that
Injun, or I'll have to put a ball into him before he gits off'--for, ye
see, I obsarved the black villain took fright, and was sneakin' away
through the crowd.  They had no doubt who I meant, for I pinted straight
at him; and, before ye could wink, he was gripped, and led under the
tree, with a face paler than ever I saw the face o' a red-skin before.

"`Now,' says I, `wot for are ye scraggin' this old man?'  So they told
me how the party that went off to git the murderer met a band o' injuns
comin' to deliver him up to be killed, they said, for murderin' the
white man.  An' they gave up this old Injun, sayin' he wos the murderer.
The diggers believed it, and returned with the old boy and two or three
others that came to see him fixed off.

"`Very good,' says I, `ye don't seem to remimber that I'm the man what
saw the murder, and told ye of it.  By good luck, I've come in time to
point him out--an' _this is him_.'  An' with that I put the noose round
the villain's neck and drawed it tight.  At that he made a great start
to shake it off, and clear away; but before you could wink, he was
swingin' at the branch o' the tree, twinty feet in the air.

"Sarved him right," cried several of the men, emphatically, as the
hunter concluded his anecdote.

"Ay," he continued, "an' they strung up his six friends beside him."

"Sarved 'em right too," remarked the tall man, whose partiality for the
tin wash-hand basin and the tooth-brush we have already noticed.  "If I
had my way, I'd shoot 'em all off the face o' the 'arth, I would, right
away."

"I'm sorry to hear they did that," remarked Larry O'Neil looking
pointedly at the last speaker, "for it only shewed they was greater
mortherers nor the Injuns--the red-skins morthered wan man, but the
diggers morthered six.

"An' who are _you_ that finds fault wi' the diggers?" inquired the tall
man, turning full round upon the Irishman, with a tremendous oath.

"Be the mortial," cried the Irishman, starting up like a
Jack-in-the-box, and throwing off his coat, "I'm Larry O'Neil, at yer
sarvice.  Hooroo! come on, av' ye want to be purtily worked off."

Instantly the man's hand was on the hilt of his revolver; but, before he
could draw it, the rest of the company started up and overpowered the
belligerents.

"Come, gentlemen," said the host of the ranche, stepping forward, "it's
not worth while quarrelling about a miserable red-skin."

"Put on your coat, Larry, and come, let's get ready for a start," said
Ned; "you can't afford to fight till you've made your fortune at the
diggings.  How far is it to the next ranche, landlord?"

This cool attempt to turn the conversation was happily successful.  The
next ranche, he was told, was about ten miles distant, and the road
comparatively easy; so, as it was a fine moonlight night, and he was
desirous of reaching the first diggings on the following day as early as
possible, the horses and mules were saddled, and the bill called for.

When the said bill was presented, or rather, announced to them, our
travellers opened their eyes pretty wide; they had to open their purses
pretty wide too, and empty them to such an extent that there was not
more than a dollar left among them all!

The supper, which we have described, cost them two and a half dollars--
about ten shillings and sixpence a head, including a glass of bad
brandy; but not including a bottle of stout which Larry, in the
ignorance and innocence of his heart, had asked for, and which cost him
_three dollars_ extra!  An egg, also, which Ned had obtained, cost him a
shilling.

"Oh, morther!" exclaimed Larry, "why didn't ye tell us the price before
we tuck them?"

"Why didn't ye ax?" retorted the landlord.

"It's all right," remarked Maxton.  "Prices vary at the diggings, as you
shall find ere long.  When provisions run short, the prices become
exorbitant; when plentiful, they are more moderate, but they are never
_low_.  However, men don't mind much, for most diggers have plenty of
gold."

Captain Bunting and Bill Jones were unable to do more than sigh out
their amazement and shake their heads, as they left the ranche and
mounted their steeds; in doing which the captain accidentally, as usual,
drove both spurs into the sides of his mule, which caused it to execute
a series of manoeuvres and pirouettes that entertained the company for a
quarter of an hour, after which they rode away over the plain.

It was a beautiful country through which they now ambled pleasantly.
Undulating and partially wooded, with fine stretches of meadow land
between, from which the scent of myriads of wild-flowers rose on the
cool night air.  The moon sailed low in a perfectly cloudless sky,
casting the shadows of the horsemen far before them as they rode, and
clothing hill and dale, bush and tree, with a soft light, as if a cloud
of silver gauze had settled down upon the scene.  The incident in the
ranche was quickly banished, and each traveller committed himself
silently to the full enjoyment of the beauties around him--beauties
which appeared less like reality than a vision of the night.



CHAPTER NINE.

A NIGHT RIDE IN THE WOODS--THE ENCAMPMENT--LARRY'S FIRST ATTEMPT TO DIG
FOR GOLD--AN ALARM--A SUSPICIOUS STRANGER--QUEER CREATURES.

In less than two hours the travellers reached the second ranche, which
was little better, in appearance or accommodation, than the one they had
left.  Having no funds, they merely halted to water their cattle, and
then pushed forward.

The country became more and more undulating and broken as they advanced,
and beyond the second ranche assumed the appearance of a hill country.
The valleys were free from trees, though here and there occurred dense
thickets of underwood, in which Maxton told them that grizzly-bears
loved to dwell--a piece of information that induced most of the party to
carry their rifles in a handy position, and glance suspiciously at every
shadow.  Large oaks and bay-trees covered the lower slopes of the hills,
while higher up the white oak and fir predominated.

About an hour after midnight the moon began to descend towards the
horizon, and Ned Sinton, who had been unanimously elected commander of
the little band, called a halt in the neighbourhood of a rivulet, which
flowed round the base of an abrupt cliff whose sides were partially
clothed with scrubby bushes.

"We shall encamp here for the night, comrades," said he, dismounting;
"here is water and food for our nags, a fine piece of greensward to
spread our blankets on, and a thick-leaved oak to keep the dew off us.
Now, Maxton, you are an old campaigner, let us see how soon you'll have
a fire blazing."

"I'll have it ready before you get the camp kettles and pans out,"
answered Maxton, fastening his horse to a tree, seizing an axe, and
springing into the woods on the margin of the stream.

"And, Captain Bunting," continued Ned, "do you water the horses and
mules: our vaquero will help you.  Jones will unpack the provender.  Tom
Collins and I will see to getting supper ready."

"An', may I ax, commodore," said Larry O'Neil, touching his hat, "wot
_I'm_ to do?"

"Keep out of everybody's way, and do what you pleases, Larry."

"Which manes, I'm to make myself ginerally useful; so here goes."  And
Larry, springing through the bushes, proceeded to fulfil his duties, by
seizing a massive log, which Maxton had just cut, and, heaving it on his
powerful shoulder, carried it to the camp.

Each was immediately busied with his respective duties.  Bustling
activity prevailed for the space of a quarter of an hour, the result of
which was that, before the moon left them in total darkness, the ruddy
glare of a magnificent fire lighted up the scene brilliantly, glanced
across the sun-burnt faces and vivid red shirts of our adventurers, as
they clustered round it, and threw clouds of sparks in among the leaves
of the stout old oak that overspread the camp.

"Now, this is what I call uncommon jolly," said Captain Bunting, sitting
down on his saddle before the cheerful blaze, rubbing his hands, and
gazing round, with a smile of the utmost benignity on his broad, hairy
countenance.

"It is," replied Maxton, with an approving nod.  "Do you know, I have
often thought, captain, that an Indian life must be a very pleasant
one--"

"Av coorse it must," interrupted Larry, who at that moment was
luxuriating in the first rich, voluminous puffs of a newly-filled
pipe--"av coorse it must, _if_ it's always like this."

"Ay," continued Maxton, "but that's what I was just going to remark
upon--it's _not_ always like this.  As a general rule, I have observed,
men who are new to backwoods life, live _at first_ in a species of
terrestrial paradise.  The novelty and the excitement cause them to
revel in all that is enjoyable, and to endure with indifference all that
is disagreeable; sometimes, even, to take pleasure in shewing how
stoically they can put up with discomfort.  But after a time the novelty
and excitement wear away, and then it is usual to hear the praises of
Indian life spoken of immediately before and immediately after supper.
Towards midnight--particularly if it should rain, or mosquitoes be
numerous--men change their minds, and begin to dream of home, if they
can sleep, or to wish they were there, if they can't."

"Get out! you horrid philosopher," cried Tom Collin as he gazed
wistfully into the iron pot, whose savoury contents, (i.e. pork, flour,
and beans), he was engaged in stirring.  "Don't try to dash the cup of
romance from our lips ere we have tasted it.  Believe me, comrades, our
friend Maxton is a humbug.  I am an old stager myself; have lived the
life of an Indian for months and months together, and I declare to you,
I'm as jolly and enthusiastic _now_ as ever I was."

"That may be quite true," observed Maxton, "seeing that it is possible
you may have never been jolly or enthusiastic at all; but even taking
your words as you mean them to be understood, they only tend to enforce
what I have said, for, you know, the exception proves the rule."

"Bah! you sophisticator," ejaculated Tom, again inspecting the contents
of the pot.

"Och, let him spake, an' be aisy," remarked Larry, with a look of
extreme satisfaction on his countenance; "we're in the navelty an'
excitement stage o' life just now, an faix we'll kape it up as long as
we can.  Hand me a cinder, Bill Jones, an' don't look as if ye wos
meditatin' wot to say, for ye know that ye can't say nothin'."

Bill took no further notice of this remark than to lift a glowing piece
of charcoal from the fire with his fingers, as deliberately as if they
were made of iron, and hand it to O'Neil, who received it in the same
cool manner, and relighted his pipe therewith.

"It strikes me we shall require all our jollity and enthusiasm to keep
up our spirits, if we don't reach the diggings to-morrow," said Ned
Sinton, as he busied himself in polishing the blade of a superb
hunting-knife, which had been presented to him by a few college friends
at parting; "you all know that our funds are exhausted, and it's awkward
to arrive at a ranche without a dollar to pay for a meal--still more
awkward to be compelled to encamp beside a ranche and unpack our own
provisions, especially if it should chance to be a wet night.  Do you
think we shall manage to reach the diggings to-morrow, Maxton?"

"I am certain of it.  Twelve miles will bring us to Little Creek, as it
is called, where we can begin to take initiative lessons in
gold-washing.  In fact, the ground we stand on, I have not a doubt, has
much gold in it.  But we have not the means of washing it yet."

Larry O'Neil caught his breath on hearing this statement.  "D'ye mane to
tell me," he said, slowly and with emphasis, "that I'm maybe sittin' at
this minute on the top o' rale goold?"

"You may be," answered Maxton, laughing.

"W'en ye don't know," remarked Bill Jones, sententiously, removing the
pipe from his lips, and looking fixedly at his messmate, "W'en ye don't
know _wot's_ under ye, nor the coorse o' nature, w'ich is always more or
less a-doin' things oncommon an' out o' the way, ye shouldn't ought to
speckilate on wot ye know nothin' about, until ye find out how's her
head, an' w'ich way the land lies.  Them's my sentiments."

"Halloo!  Larry," cried the captain and Tom Collins simultaneously,
"look out for the kettle.  It'll boil over."

Larry's feelings had been deeply stirred at that moment, so that the
union of the sudden shout, with the profundity of Bill's remark, had the
effect of causing him to clutch at the tea-kettle with such haste that
he upset it into the fire.

