another spot of ground, a lot of young onions were planted with the
roots upwards!

"You see, Miss Gertie," said John Skyd, when commenting modestly on
these mistakes at dinnertime, "my brothers and I have all our lives had
more to do with the planting of `houses' and the growth of commercial
enterprise than with agricultural products, but we are sanguine that,
with experience and perseverance, we shall overcome all our
difficulties.  Have _you_ found many difficulties to overcome!"

Gertie was not sure; she thought she had found a few, but none worth
mentioning.  Being somewhat put out by the question, she picked up a
pebble--for the dinner was a species of picnic, served on the turf in
front of Mr Brook's tent--and examined it with almost geological care.

"My daughter does not like to admit the existence of difficulties," said
Mrs Brook, coming to the rescue, "and to say truth is seldom overcome
by anything."

"Oh, ma, how can you?" said Gertie, blushing deeply.

"That's not true," cried Mr Brook; "excuse me, my dear, for so flat a
contradiction, but I have seen Gertie frequently overcome by things,--by
Junkie's obstinacy for instance, which I verily believe to be an
insurmountable difficulty, and I've seen her thoroughly overcome, night
after night, by sleep.--Isn't that true, lass?"

"I suppose it is, father, since you say so, but of course I cannot
tell."

"Sleep!" continued Brook, with a laugh, "why, would you believe it, Mr
Skyd, I went into what we call the nursery-tent one morning last week,
to try to stop the howling of my little boy, and I found him lying with
his open mouth close to Gertie's cheek, pouring the flood of his wrath
straight into her ear, and she sound asleep all the time!  My nurse,
Mrs Scholtz, told me she had been as sound as that all night, despite
several heavy squalls, and notwithstanding a chorus of hyenas and
jackals outside that might almost have awakened the dead.--By the way,
that reminds me: just as I was talking with nurse that morning we heard
a most unearthly shriek at some distance off.  It was not the least like
the cry of any wild animal I have yet heard, and for the first time
since our arrival the idea of Kafirs flashed into my mind.  Did any of
you gentlemen happen to hear it?"

The brothers looked at each other, and at their friend Dobson, and then
unitedly turned their eyes on George Dally, who--performing the combined
duties of cook and waiter, at a fire on the ground, not fifteen feet to
leeward of the dinner-party--could hear every word of the conversation.

"Why, yes," said John Skyd, "we did hear it, and so did your man Dally.
We had thought--"

"The truth is, sir," said George, advancing with a miniature pitchfork
or "tormentor" in his hand; "pardon my interrupting you, sir,--I did
hear the screech, but as I couldn't say exactly for certain, you know,
that it was a Kafir, not havin' seen one, I thought it best not to alarm
you, sir, an' so said nothing about it."

"You looked as if you had seen one," observed Frank Dobson, drawing down
the corners of his mouth with his peculiar smile.

"Did I, sir!" said George, with a simple look; "very likely I did, for
I'm timersome by nature an' easily frightened."

"You did not act with your wonted wisdom, George, in concealing this,"
said Edwin Brook gravely.

"I'm afraid I didn't sir," returned George meekly.

"In future, be sure to let me know every symptom of danger you may
discover, no matter how trifling," said Brook.

"Yes, sir."

"It was a very tremendous yell, wasn't it, Dally?" asked John Skyd
slily, as the waiter-cook was turning to resume his duties at the fire.

"Wery, sir."

"And alarmed us all dreadfully, didn't it?"

"Oh! dreadfully, sir--'specially me; though I must in dooty say that you
four gentleman was as bold as brass.  It quite relieved me when I saw
your tall figurs standin' at the mouth o' your cavern, an' the muzzles
o' your four double-guns--that's eight shots--with your glaring eyes an'
pale cheeks behind them!"

"Ha!" exclaimed John Skyd, with a grim smile--"but after all it might
only have been the shriek of a baboon."

"I think not, sir," replied George, with a smile of intelligence.

"Perhaps then it was the cry of a zebra or quagga," returned John Skyd,
"or a South African ass of some sort."

"Wery likely, sir," retorted George.  "I shouldn't wonder if it was--
which is wery consolin' to my feelin's, for I'd sooner be terrified out
o' my wits by asses of any kind than fall in with these long-legged
savages that dwell in caves."

With an appearance of great humility George returned to his work at the
fire.

It was either owing to a sort of righteous retribution, or a touch of
that fortune which favours the brave, that George Dally was in reality
the first, of this particular party of settlers, to encounter the black
and naked inhabitant of South Africa in his native jungle.  It was on
this wise.

George was fond of sport, when not detained at home by the claims of
duty.  But these claims were so constant that he found it impossible to
indulge his taste, save, as he was wont to say, "in the early morn and
late at eve."

One morning about daybreak, shouldering his gun and buckling on his
hunting-knife, he marched into the jungle in quest of an antelope.
Experience had taught him that the best plan was to seat himself at a
certain opening or pass which lay on the route to a pool of water, and
there bide his time.

Seating himself on a moss-covered stone, he put his gun in position on
his knee, with the forefinger on the trigger, and remained for some time
so motionless that a North American Indian might have envied his powers
of self-restraint.  Suddenly a twig was heard to snap in the thicket
before him.  Next moment the striped black and yellow skin of a leopard,
or Cape tiger, appeared in the opening where he had expected to behold a
deer.  Dally's gun flew to his shoulder.  At the same instant the
leopard skin was thrown back, and the right arm of a tall athletic Kafir
was bared.  The hand grasped a light assagai, or darting spear.  Both
men were taken by surprise, and for one instant they glared at each
other.  The instance between them was so short that death to each seemed
imminent, for the white man's weapon was a deadly one, and the cast of
the lithe savage would doubtless have been swift and sure.

In that instant of uncertainty the white man's innate spirit of
forbearance acted almost involuntarily.  Dally had hitherto been a man
of peace.  The thought of shedding human blood was intensely repulsive
to him.  He lowered the butt of his gun, and held up his right hand in
token of amity.

The savage possessed apparently some of the good qualities of the white
man, for he also at once let the butt of his assegai drop to the ground,
although he knew, what Dally was not aware of, that considering the
nature of their weapons, he placed himself at a tremendous disadvantage
in doing so--the act of throwing forward and discharging the deadly
fire-arm being much quicker than that of poising and hurling an assagai.

Without a moment's hesitation George Dally advanced and held out his
right hand with a bland smile.

Although unfamiliar with Kafir customs, he had heard enough from the
Dutch farmers who drove the ox-teams to know that only chiefs were
entitled to wear the leopard skin as a robe.  The tall form and
dignified bearing of the savage also convinced him that he had
encountered no ordinary savage.  He also knew that the exhibition of a
trustful spirit goes a long way to create good-will.  That his judgment
was correct appeared from the fact of the Kafir holding out his hand and
allowing George to grasp and shake it.

But what to do next was a question that puzzled the white man sorely,
although he maintained on his good-natured countenance an expression of
easy nonchalance.

Of course he made a vain attempt at conversation in English, to which
the Kafir chief replied, with dignified condescension, by a brief
sentence in his own tongue.

As George Dally looked in his black face, thoughts flashed through his
brain with the speed of light.  Should he kill him outright?  That would
be simple murder, in the circumstances, and George objected to murder,
on principle.  Should he suddenly seize and throw him down?  He felt
quite strong enough to do so, but after such a display of friendship it
would be mean.  Should he quietly bid him good morning and walk away?
This, he felt, would be ridiculous.  At that moment tobacco occurred to
his mind.  He quietly rested his gun against a tree, and drew forth a
small roll of tobacco, from which he cut at least a foot and handed it
to the chief.  The dignity of the savage at once gave way before the
beloved weed.  He smiled--that is, he grinned in a ghastly way, for his
face, besides being black, was streaked with lines of red ochre--and
graciously accepted the gift.  Then George made an elaborate speech in
dumb-show with hands, fingers, arms, and eyes, to the effect that he
desired the Kafir to accompany him to his location, but the chief
gravely shook his head, pointed in another direction and to the sun, as
though to say that time was on the wing; then, throwing his leopard-skin
robe over his right shoulder with the air of a Spanish grandee, he
turned aside and strode into the jungle.

George, glad to be thus easily rid of him, also turned and hurried home.

This time he was not slow to let his employer know that he had met with
a native.

"It behoves us to keep a sharp look-out, George," said Brook.  "I heard
yesterday from young Merton that some of the settlers not far from his
place have had a visit from the black fellows, who came in the night,
and while they slept carried off some of the sheep they had recently
purchased from an up-country county Dutchman.  We will watch for a few
nights while rumours of this kind are afloat.  When all seems quiet we
can take it easy.  Let Scholtz take the first watch.  You will succeed
him, and I will mount guard from the small hours onward."

For some days this precaution was continued, but as nothing more was
heard of black marauders the Brook family gradually ceased to feel
anxious, and the nightly watch was given up.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

SHOWS THE PLEASURES, PAINS, AND PENALTIES OF HOUSEKEEPING IN THE BUSH.

"Don't you think this a charming life?" asked Mrs Brook of Mrs Merton,
who had been her guest for a week.

Mrs Merton was about thirty years of age, and opinionated, if not
strong-minded, also rather pretty.  She had married young, and her
eldest son, a lad of twelve, had brought her from her husband's farm,
some three miles distant from that of Edwin Brook.

"No, Mrs Brook, I don't like it at all," was Mrs Merton's emphatic
reply.

"Indeed!" said Mrs Brook, in some surprise.

She said nothing more after this for some time, but continued to ply her
needle busily, while Mrs Scholtz, who by some piece of unusual good
fortune had got Junkie to sleep, plied her scissors in cutting out and
shaping raw material.

The two dames, with the nurse and Gertie, had agreed to unite their
powers that day in a resolute effort to overtake the household repairs.
They were in a cottage now, of the style familiarly known as "wattle and
dab," which was rather picturesque than permanent, and suggestive of
simplicity.  They sat on rude chairs, made by Scholtz, round a rough
table by the same artist.  Mrs Brook was busy with the rends in a blue
pilot-cloth jacket, a dilapidated remnant of the "old England" wardrobe.
The nurse was forming a sheep skin into a pair of those unmentionables
which were known among the Cape-colonists of that period by the name of
"crackers."  Mrs Merton was busy with a pair of the same, the knees of
which had passed into a state of nonentity, while other parts were
approaching the same condition.  Gertie was engaged on a pair of socks,
whose original formation was overlaid by and nearly lost in subsequent
deposits.

"Why do you like this sort of life, Mrs Brook?" asked Mrs Merton
suddenly.

"Because it is so new, so busy, so healthy, so thoroughly practical.
Such a constant necessity for doing something useful, and a constant
supply of something useful to do, and then such a pleasant feeling of
rest when at last you do get your head on a pillow."

"Oh! it's delightful!" interpolated Gertie in a low voice.

"Well, now, that is strange.  Everything depends on how one looks at
things.--What do _you_ think, Mrs Scholtz?" asked Mrs Merton.

"I've got no time to think, ma'am," replied the nurse, giving the embryo
crackers a slice that bespoke the bold fearless touch of a thorough
artist.  "When Junkie's not asleep he keeps body and brain fully
employed, and when he is asleep I'm glad to let body and brain alone."

"What is your objection to this life, Mrs Merton?" asked Mrs Brook,
with a smile.

"Oh!  I've no special objection, only I hate it altogether.  How is it
possible to like living in a wilderness, with no conveniences around
one, no society to chat with, no books to read, and, above all, no shops
to go to, where one is obliged to drudge at menial work from morning
till night, and one's boys and girls get into rags and tatters, and
one's husband becomes little better than a navvy, to say nothing of
snakes and scorpions in one's bed and boots, and the howling of wild
beasts all night?  I declare, one might as well live in a menagerie."

"But you must remember that things are in a transition state just now,"
rejoined Mrs Brook.  "As we spread and multiply over the land, things
will fall more into shape.  We shall have tailors and dressmakers to
take the heavy part of our work in this way, and the wild beasts will
retire before the rifle and the plough of civilised man; no doubt, also,
shops will come in due course."

"And what of the Kafirs?" cried Mrs Merton sternly.  "Do you flatter
yourself that either the plough or the rifle will stop their thievish
propensities?  Have we not learned, when too late--for here we are, and
here we must bide,--that the black wretches have been at loggerheads
with the white men ever since this was a colony, and is it not clear
that gentle treatment and harsh have alike failed to improve them?"

"Wise treatment has yet to be tried," said Mrs Brook.

"Fiddlesticks!" returned Mrs Merton impatiently.  "What do you call
wise treatment?"

"Gospel treatment," replied Mrs Brook.

"Oh! come now, you know that _that_ has also been tried, and has
signally failed.  Have we not heard how many hundreds of so-called black
converts in this and in other colonies are arrant hypocrites, or at all
events give way before the simplest temptations?"

"I have also heard," returned Mrs Brook, "of many hundreds of so-called
white Christians, whose lives prove them to be the enemies of our
Saviour, and who do not even condescend to hypocrisy, for they will
plainly tell you that they `make no pretence to be religious,' though
they call themselves Christians.  But that does not prove gospel
treatment among the English to have been a failure.  You have heard, I
daresay, of the Hottentot robber Africaner, who was long the terror and
scourge of the district where he lived, but who, under the teaching of
our missionary Mr Moffat, or rather, I should say, under the influence
of God's Holy Spirit, has led a righteous, peaceful, Christian life for
many years.  He is alive still to prove the truth of what I say."

"I'll believe it when I see it," returned Mrs Merton, with a decisive
compression of her lips.

"Well, many people have testified to the truth of this, and some of
these people have seen Africaner and have believed."

"Humph!" returned Mrs Merton.

This being an unanswerable argument, Mrs Brook smiled by way of reply,
and turned a sleeve inside out, the better to get at its dilapidations.
Changing the subject, she desired Gertie to go and prepare dinner, as it
was approaching noon.

"What shall I prepare, mother?" asked Gertie, laying down her work.

"You'd better make a hash of the remains of yesterday's leg of mutton,
dear; it will be more quickly done than the roasting of another leg, and
we can't spare time on cookery to-day.  I daresay Mrs Merton will
excuse--"

"Mrs Brook," interrupted Mrs Merton, with that Spartan-like
self-denial to which she frequently laid claim, without, however, the
slightest shadow of a title, "I can eat anything on a emergency.  Have
the hash by all means."

"And I'm afraid, Mrs Merton," continued Mrs Brook, in an apologetic
tone, "that we shall have to dine without bread to-day--we have run
short of flour.  My husband having heard that the Thomases have recently
got a large supply, has gone to their farm to procure some, but their
place is twelve miles off, so he can't be back till night.  You won't
mind, I trust?"

Mrs Merton vowed that she didn't mind, became more and more Spartanic
in her expression and sentiments, and plied her needle with increased
decision.

Just then Gertie re-entered the cottage with a face expressive of
