"I can't help it, daddy, I can't help it," said the little girl, with a
sob.

"Well, I s'pose not; but you needn't be afraid now, you know. I've done
with the bottle now; and it wasn't me you was afraid of, mother said,
but the whisky."

Tiny nodded. "Yes, that's it," she said; "and I shan't be afraid long if
I know you don't have it now;" and from that time the little girl set
herself strenuously to overcome the terror and dread that nightly crept
over her; but still it was some time before she could endure Coomber's
presence after dusk.

Meanwhile pinching want was again making itself felt in the household.
For some reason known only to themselves, the teal and widgeon did not
come within range of the fisherman's gun just now; and sometimes, after
a whole day spent in the punt, or among the salt marshes along the
coast, only a few unsaleable old gulls would reward Coomber's toil. They
were not actually uneatable by those who were on the verge of
starvation; but they were utterly unfit for a child like Tiny, in her
present weak, delicate condition; and again the question of sending her
to the poorhouse until the spring was mooted by Mrs. Coomber. Her
husband did not refuse to discuss it this time when it was mentioned,
and it was evident that he himself had thought of it already, for he
said, with a groan--

"It seems as though God wasn't going to let me keep the little 'un,
though she's getting on a bit, for never have I had such a bad shooting
season as this since I knocked the little 'un down. It seems hard,
mother; what do you think?"

But Mrs. Coomber did not know what to think; she only knew that poor
little Tiny was often hungry, although she never complained. They had
eaten up all the store of biscuits by this time; and although Dick and
Tom often spent hours wandering along the shore, in the hope of finding
another wonderful treasure-trove, nothing had come of their wanderings
beyond the usual harvest of drift wood that enabled them to keep a good
fire in the kitchen all day.

At length it was decided that Coomber should take Tiny to the poorhouse,
and ask the authorities to keep her until this bitter winter was over;
and then, when the spring came, and the boat could go out once more, he
would fetch her home again.

But it was not without many tears that this proposal was confided to
Tiny, the fisherman insisting--though he shrank from the task
himself--that she should be told what they thought of doing. "She is a
sailor's lass, and it's only fair to her," he said, as he left his wife
to break the news to Tiny.

She was overwhelmed at the thought of being separated from those who had
been so kind to her, and whom she had learned to love so tenderly, but
with a mighty effort she choked back her tears, for she saw how grieved
Mrs. Coomber was; though she could not help exclaiming: "Oh! if God
would only let me stay with you, and daddy, and Dick!"

Her last words to Dick before she started were in a whispered
conference, in which she told him to pray to God every day to let her
come back soon. "I will, I will!" said Dick through his tears; "I'll say
what you told me last night--I'll say it every day." And then Coomber
and Tiny set out on their dreary walk to Fellness, reaching it about the
middle of the afternoon.

Bob and Tom had let their old friends know that their father had given
up the whisky, and now he, foolish man, felt half afraid and half
ashamed to meet them; but he was obliged to go, for he wanted Peters to
go with him, and tell the workhouse people about the rescue of the
little girl, for fear they should refuse to take her in unless his story
was confirmed.

Coomber explained this to his friend in a rather roundabout fashion, for
he had not found Peters on the shore, as he had expected, and where he
could have stated his errand in a few words. He had found instead that
all the village was astir with the news of a tea-meeting, that was to
take place that afternoon in the chapel, and that Peters, who was
"something of a Methody," as Coomber expressed it, had gone to help in
the preparations.

He was astonished to see Coomber when he presented himself, and still
more to hear the errand he had come upon. He scratched his head, and
looked pityingly at the little girl, who held fast to Coomber's hand.
"Well now, mate, I'm in a fix," he said, slowly, and pointing round the
room; "I've got all these forms to move, and to fix up the tables for
'em by four o'clock; but if you'll stay and lend a hand, why, you and
the little 'un 'll be welcome to stay to tea, I know; it's free to all
the village to-day," he added, "and the more that come, the better we
shall like it."

Coomber looked at Tiny, and saw how wistfully her eyes rested on a pile
of cakes that stood near; and that look decided him. "Would you like to
have some of it?" he said, with a faint smile. The little girl's face
flushed with joy at the prospect of such a treat. "Oh, daddy! if I could
only take Dick some, too," she said.

Both the men laughed, but Peters said, "Well, well, we'll see what we
can do; come in here while daddy helps me with the forms;" and he led
the way into a small room, where several of the fishermen's wives were
cutting bread and butter. Peters whispered a word to one of them, and
she seated Tiny by the fire, and gave her some bread and butter at once.
When the tea was all ready, and the company began to arrive, Coomber
fetched Tiny to sit with him, and the two had a bountiful tea, and such
cake as the little girl had not tasted for a long time. But she would
not eat much. She took what was given to her, but slipped most of it
into Coomber's pocket, that he might take it home to Dick, for the
little girl thought they would go on to the poorhouse as soon as tea was
over.

But while the tea-things were being cleared away, and they were
preparing for the meeting that was to follow, the fisherman drew her
aside, and whispered: "I do believe God has heard what you've been
a-praying for, deary, for Peters has heard of a job of work for me since
I've been here."

"Oh, daddy! and we shall go home together again," exclaimed Tiny,
looking round for her bonnet at once.

"Yes, but not jest yet. There's to be some preaching or somethin',
and--and--little 'un, I've been a bad man, and I dunno as God'll have
anything to do wi' helping such a tough customer to be any better; but
if He would--"

And here Coomber drew his sleeve across his eyes, and turned his head
aside to hide his emotion.

The little girl threw her arms round his neck, and drew his face close
to hers. "Oh, daddy, He will! He will!" she whispered, earnestly; "He
loves you, and He's been waiting all this long time for you to love Him;
and you will, won't you, now, you know?"

But there was no time for Coomber to reply, for the people were taking
their seats again, and Peters touched him on the shoulder, motioning him
to do the same. The two sat down, feeling too eager for shyness, or to
notice that others were looking at them. A hymn was sung, and a prayer
followed, and then Coomber began to feel disappointed, for he was
hungering to hear something that might set his doubts at rest. At length
he heard the words that have brought help and gladness to so many souls:
"God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life." Then followed a simple address, enlarging upon the text, and an
exhortation to accept God's offer of salvation. "The Lord Jesus Christ
Himself said: 'Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest,'" continued the speaker, "and in His name I beg
each one of you to become reconciled to God. He is waiting: He is
willing to receive each one of you."

These were his closing words, and Coomber, who had listened with eager,
rapt attention, stayed only for the people to move towards the door, and
then followed the speaker into the little vestry. "Beg pardon, sir," he
said, pausing at the door, "but 'tain't often as I gets the chance of
hearing such words as I've heard from you to-night, and so I hopes
you'll forgive me if I asks for a bit more. I'm a bad man. I begins to
see it all now; but--but----"

"My friend, if you feel that you are a sinner, then you are just one of
those whom the Lord Jesus died to redeem. He came to seek and to save
those who are lost--to redeem them from sin. He gave His life--dying
upon the cross, a shameful, painful death--not, mark me, that they may
continue in sin. To say we believe in God, and to live in sin, makes our
belief of no effect. We must learn of Christ, or He will have died in
vain for us. We must learn of Him, and He will help us to overcome our
love of drink, our selfishness, and sullenness, and ill-temper;" for the
gentleman knew something of Coomber, and so particularised the sins he
knew to be his easily besetting ones.

"And you think He'd help me? You see, sir, He's done a deal for me
lately, bad as I am," said Coomber, twisting his hat in his hand.

"Help you! ah, that He will. If He gave His only Son, what do you think
He will withhold? 'What man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread,
will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a
serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good
things to them that ask Him.'"

"And what are the good things that I'm to ask for," said Coomber. "I
know what the asking means; this little 'un here has taught me that
praying is asking God; and though I ain't never done it afore, I'll
begin now."

"Do, my man. Ask that the Holy Spirit may be given you, to lead you, and
teach you, and guide you into all truth. Without His help you can do
nothing; but, seeking His help, trusting in his guidance, you will be
enabled to overcome every difficulty and obstacle, however hard it may
be."

"And you think God will forgive me all the past?"

"My brother, Christ died--He shed His precious blood, to wash away our
sin, to set our conscience free from guilt, and to assure us beyond a
doubt of the perfect love of God towards us."

The words spoken fell into prepared soil, for Coomber had been hungering
and thirsting after righteousness, and he went home that night feeling
that he had been fed.

What a happy walk home that was for Tiny and the fisherman! As he left
the little chapel at Fellness, a basket, well filled with the odds and
ends left from the tea-meeting, had been handed to Coomber to take home,
and Peters whispered, as he went out: "I've heard of another job for
yer, so be along in good time in the morning, mate." To describe Mrs.
Coomber's joy, when her husband walked in with Tiny asleep in his arms,
and also with the basket of bread and butter, would be impossible.

"God has given us the little 'un back, mother," he said, placing the
child in his wife's arms. "He's been good to me, better than I deserved,
only the Lord Jesus Christ has died for me, and that explains it all."

His heart was full of joy and gratitude to-night, and he forgot his
usual shyness, and told his wife of the good news he had heard at
Fellness, both for body and soul. "Now, mother," he said, as he
concluded, "you and I must both begin a new life. We must ask God to
help us like this little 'un, and we must teach our boys to do the same.
We owe it all to her," he added, as he kissed Tiny, "for if she hadn't
come among us, we might never have heard about God down here at Bermuda
Point."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII.

BRIGHTER DAYS.


The dreary winter came to an end at last, and with the first spring days
there was a general bustle of preparation in the fisherman's family, for
boat and nets alike required overhauling, and there would be a good deal
of repairing to do before the old boat would be fit for further use.

Bob's face was fast losing its sullen, defiant, angry look, and he was
whistling as merrily as a lark one morning, when he and Coomber went to
remove the tarpaulin that had been covered over the boat during the
winter; but the whistling suddenly ceased when the boat was uncovered,
for, with all their care, the winter's storms had worked sad havoc with
the little craft. Seams were starting, ribs were bulging, and there were
gaping holes, that made Coomber lift his hat and scratch his head in
consternation.

"This'll be a tough job, Bob," he said.

"Aye, aye, dad, it will that," said the lad, carefully passing his
finger down where one rib seemed to be almost rotten.

A few months before Coomber would have raved and blustered, and sworn it
was all Bob's fault, but since that tea-meeting at Fellness he had been
a changed man--old things had passed away, and all things had become
new; and none felt this more than Bob. It was a blessed change for him,
and he had given up all thoughts of running away now, if the old boat
could only be patched up and made serviceable. But it was a problem
whether this could ever be done effectually enough to make it seaworthy.

"If I'd only found out ten years ago that I could do better without the
whisky than with it, we might ha' got a new boat afore this, Bob," said
the fisherman, with a sigh.

"Aye, aye, and had Jack with us, too, dad," Bob ventured to remark. He
had not dared to mention his brother's name for years, but he had
thought a good deal of him lately, wishing he could come home, and see
the blessed change that had been wrought in his father.

The old fisherman lifted his head, and there was a look of bitter
anguish in his face, as he said: "Hark ye, lad, I'd give all the days of
my life to bring Jack back. The thought of him is making yer mother an
old woman afore her time, and I can't help it now; it's too late, too
late;" and the old fisherman covered his face and groaned.

"There now, father, ain't I heard you say it was never too late to
repent?"

"Aye, lad, that you have, and the precious blood of Christ can take away
the guilt of our sin; but, mark me, not even God Himself can do away
with the consequences of sin. Hard as they may be, and truly and
bitterly as we may repent, the past can't be undone; and as we sow we
must reap. Poor Jack! Poor Jack! If I could only know where he was. Why,
it's nigh on ten years since he went away, and never a storm comes but
I'm thinking my boy may be in it, and wanting help."

Bob recalled what had passed on Fellness Sands the night they rescued
Tiny, and which had helped him often since to bear with his father's
gruff, sullen ways and fierce outbursts of temper; but he would not say
any more just now, only he thought that but for that tea-meeting his
father would now be mourning the loss of two sons; for he had made up
his mind to leave home when it was decided to take Tiny to the
poorhouse.

They were working at the boat a few days after this, caulking, and
plugging, and tarring, when Tiny, who had been playing on the sandhills
a little way off, came running up breathless with some news.

[Illustration: TINY AND THE OLD MAN. (_See page 130._)]

"Oh, daddy! there's a little ugly, old man over there, and he says my
name is Coomber. Is it, daddy?"
