"Walk, of course," said Hicks.  "The ground is much too rough for
horses."

"And I trust, Tom," said Wilkins, "that you will permit me to follow
you.  I am the worst shot, you know, and the worst and best should go
together on the acknowledged principle that extremes meet."

This being arranged, the sportsmen dismounted, fastened their horses to
trees, and separated.

The circle of men gradually closed in and ascended the hill pretty near
to each other.  Presently Tom Brown observed one of the lions get upon a
piece of rock.  The major also saw him, and being anxious to secure the
first shot, fired somewhat hastily and hit the rock on which the
magnificent brute was standing, as if it had got up there to take a cool
survey of the field.  He bit at the spot struck, as a dog bites at a
stick or stone thrown at him.  Next moment Tom Brown sent a bullet
straight into his heart, and his tail made a splendid flourish as he
fell off his pedestal!

Almost immediately after two of the other lions broke cover, dashed
towards the circle of men, went right through them and escaped.  The
courage of the natives proved unequal to the danger of facing such a
charge.  A great shout--partly, no doubt, of disappointment--was given
when the lions escaped.  This had the effect of causing the fourth lion
to break cover and leap upon a rock as the first had done.  The hunter
nearest to him was Pearson, who was not farther off than shout thirty
yards.  He took good aim, fired both barrels at him, and tumbled him off
the rock into a small bush beside it.

"He is wounded," cried Hicks, "but not killed.  Have a care!"

Pearson was loading his gun as fast as possible, when he heard a loud
shout, and cries of "Look out!"  "Take care!"  Starting, and turning
half round, he saw the animal in the act of springing on him.  Before he
could move he was struck on the head, and next moment the lion and he
went down together.  Growling horribly, the enraged brute seized poor
Pearson and shook him as a terrier dog shakes a rat.  Although stunned,
he was able to turn a little to relieve himself of its weight, for the
lion had placed one paw on the back of his head.  Instantly the major,
Tom Brown, and Hicks ran up and fired six shots into him almost
simultaneously, and at a few yards' distance.  With a terrific roar he
left Pearson, and, springing on Hicks, caught him by the leg.  Mafuta
immediately rushed at him with a spear, but was caught by the lion on
the shoulder, and dragged down.  Seeing this, Tom Brown caught up the
spear and plunged it deep into the chest of the brute, which seized it
savagely in his teeth and snapped it in two like a twig, throwing Tom
down in the act; but another bullet from Wilkins, and the effects of the
previous shots, caused him to drop down suddenly quite dead.

It was found on examination that the injuries received by poor Pearson
were mortal.  As could just speak, but could not move.  A litter was
therefore hastily prepared for him, and one also for Hicks, whose leg
was severely injured, though fortunately not broken.  Mafuta's hurts
were trifling, and Tom Brown had only received one or two scratches in
his fall.  In a short time the litters were ready, and the party
returned to their encampment.

That night Pearson expressed a strong desire to have the Bible read to
him, and Tom Brown, who had done all that professional skill could
accomplish to relieve his comrade's suffering body, sought out from the
bottom of his box that precious book which the missionary had told him
contained medicine for the soul.  The dying man was very anxious.  As
gave Tom no rest, but questioned him eagerly and continuously during the
whole night about the things which concerned his soul.  His doctor could
not assist him much, and keenly did he feel, at that time, how awful it
is to postpone thoughts of eternity to a dying hour.  As did his best,
however, to comfort his friend, by reading passage after passage from
the sacred book, dwelling particularly on, and repeating, this
text--"The blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth from all sin."
Towards morning Pearson fell into a lethargic sleep, out of which he
never awoke.  Next day they buried him under the shade of a spreading
tree, and left him there--alone in the wilderness.



CHAPTER NINE.

THE LAST.

From this period everything like good fortune seemed to forsake the
hunters.  The trader's wound became so painful that he resolved to
return to the settlements, and accordingly their faces were turned
southward.

But the way was toilsome, the heat intense, and the water scarce--more
so than it had been on the outward journey.  To add to their troubles,
fever and ague attacked most of the white men, and one of them (Ogilvie)
died on the journey.

At last Tom Brown, who had up to that time been one of the strongest of
the party, broke down, and it was found to be necessary to leave him
behind at a native village, for it would have been certain death to the
others to have remained with him, and their doing so could have done him
no good.

"I cannot tell you, Tom," said the major, as he sat beside his friend's
couch the night before they parted, "how deeply it grieves me to leave
you in this way, but you see, my dear fellow, that the case is
desperate.  You are incapable of moving.  If we remain here the most of
us will die, for I find that it is all I can do to drag one leg after
the other, and I have grave doubts as to whether I shall ever get out of
this rascally country alive.  As to poor Bob Wilkins, he is in a worse
condition than myself.  Now, our intention is to leave you all the
physic, push on as fast as possible to the nearest settlement, where we
shall get more for ourselves, and send out a party of natives under some
trustworthy trader to fetch you out of the country."

"You are very kind, major," said Tom languidly, "but I cannot allow you
to leave me all the physic.  Your own life may depend on having some of
it, and--"

"There, don't exhaust yourself, Tom, with objections, for Bob and I have
made up our minds to do it.  The very fact that every day we are getting
nearer the habitable parts of the world will keep our spirits up and
give us strength, and you may depend upon it, my poor fellow, that we
won't waste time in sending help to you."

The major's voice trembled a little, for he had become very weak, and
had secret misgivings that he would never see his friend again.

"We are going to leave Mafuta with you," he added quickly.

"That's right," exclaimed Tom, with an expression of satisfaction.  "If
any one is able to pull me through this bout, Mafuta is the man.  By the
way, major, will you do me the favour to open my portmanteau and fetch
me the Bible you will find there.  I mean to read it.  Do you know I
have been thinking that we are great fools to keep calling ourselves
Christians when we have scarcely any of the signs of Christianity about
us, and particularly in putting off the consideration of our souls'
interests to a time like this?"

"Upon my word, Tom, I agree with you," said the major.

"Well, then," said Tom, "like a good fellow, get the Bible for me, and
let me advise you as a friend to make use of the one the missionary gave
you.  I mean to turn over a new leaf.  My only fear is that if I get
well I shall become as indifferent as I was before."

"No fear of that, Tom, you are much too honest-hearted to be so
changeable."

"H'm, I don't know," said Tom, with an attempt at a smile; "I should not
be easy if my salvation depended on the honesty of my heart.  I rather
fear, major, that your method of comforting me is not what the
missionary would call orthodox.  But good night, old fellow; I feel
tired, and find it wonderfully difficult not only to speak but to think,
so I'll try to sleep."

Saying this our hero turned on his side and soon fell into a quiet
slumber, out of which he did not awake until late the following morning.

The major, meanwhile, sought for and found the Bible in his portmanteau,
and laid it on his pillow, so that he might find it there on awaking.
For a long time he and Wilkins sat by the sick man's side next morning,
in the hope of his awaking, that they might bid him good-bye; but Tom
did not rouse up, so, being unwilling to disturb him, they left without
having the sad satisfaction of saying farewell.

When Tom Brown awoke, late in the day, he found Mafuta sitting at his
feet with a broad grin on his dusky countenance.

"What are you laughing at, you rascal?" demanded Tom, somewhat sternly.

"Me laffin' at you's face!"

"Indeed, is it then so ridiculous?"

"Yis, oh yis, you's bery ri'clous.  Jist no thicker dan de edge ob
hatchet."

Tom smiled.  "Well, I'm not fat, that's certain; but I feel refreshed.
D'you know, Mafuta, I think I shall get well after all."

"Ho, yis," said Mafuta, with a grin, nodding his woolly head violently,
and displaying a magnificent double row of teeth; "you's git well; you
had slep an' swet mos' bootiful.  Me wish de major see you now."

"The major; is he gone?"

"Yis, hoed off dis morrownin."

"And Mr Wilkins?"

"Hoed off too."

Tom Brown opened his eyes and stared silently for a few minutes at his
companion.

"Then we are all alone, you and I," he said suddenly.

"Yis, all alone, sept de two tousand Caffres ob de kraal; but dey is
nobody--only black beasts."

Tom laughed to hear his attendant talk so scornfully of his countrymen,
and Mafuta laughed to see his master in such good spirits; after which
the former became grave, and, feeling a slight twinge of hunger, made a
sudden demand for food.  Mafuta rose and left the tent, and Tom, turning
on his side, observed the Bible lying on the pillow.  He opened it, but
forgot to read, in consequence of his attention being arrested by the
extreme thinness of his hands.  Recovering himself, he turned to the
twenty-first psalm, but had only read the first verse when the book
dropt from his fingers, and he again fell sound asleep.

This was the turning-point in his illness.  He began to mend a little,
but so slowly, that he almost lost heart once or twice; and felt
convinced that if he did not make an attempt to get out of the unhealthy
region, he should never regain strength.

Acting on this belief, he left the native village on foot, carrying
nothing but his rifle, which seemed to him, in his weak condition, to be
as heavy as a small cannon.  Mafuta went on in advance, heavily laden
with the blankets, a small tent, provisions, ammunition, etcetera,
necessary for the journey.

At first Tom could scarcely walk a mile without sitting down several
times to rest, on which occasions Mafuta endeavoured to cheer him up by
threatening to leave him to his fate!  This was a somewhat singular mode
of stimulating, but he deemed it the wisest course, and acted on it.
When Tom lay down under the shade of a tree, thoroughly knocked up, the
Caffre would bid him farewell and go away; but in a short time he would
return and urge him to make another attempt!

Thus Tom Brown travelled, day after day, under the broiling sun.  During
that period--which he afterwards described as the most dreadful of his
life--fever and ague reduced him to a state of excessive weakness.  In
fact it was a battle between the dire disease and that powerful
constitution for which the Brown family is celebrated.  For a
considerable time it appeared very doubtful how the battle would end.

One morning Tom was awakened by his faithful attendant to resume his
weary journey.  He got up with a heavy sigh, and almost fell down again
from weakness.

"I think, Mafuta," said Tom gravely, "that I'm pretty nearly used up.
You'll have to leave me, I fear, and make the best of your way out of
this wretched country alone."

"Dis a fuss-rate kontry," said the Caffre quietly.

"Ah, true, Mafuta, I forgot for a moment that it is your native land.
However, I am bound to admit that it is a first-rate country for sport--
also for killing Englishmen.  I don't feel able to move a step."

Tom sat down as he said this, and, uttering a sort of groan, leaned his
back against a tree.

"W'at, yous no' go fadder?"

"No," said Tom, with some asperity, for he felt too much exhausted to
speak.

"Berry good, me say good-bye."

Mafuta nodded his head as he spoke, and, gravely shouldering his load,
marched away.

Tom looked after him with a melancholy smile; for he quite understood
the _ruse_ by this time, and knew that he would return, although the
simple native sincerely believed that his motives and intentions had
been concealed with deep wisdom.  Tom was not sorry to get a respite,
and threw himself flat down, in order to make the most of it, but Mafuta
was more anxious than usual about his companion that morning.  He
returned in ten minutes or so, having sat for that period behind a
neighbouring tree to brood over his circumstances.

"Yous come on _now_, eh?" he said gently, regarding Tom with an anxious
expression of countenance.

"Well, well," replied our hero, getting up with a sort of desperate
energy, "let's push on; I can at all events walk till my legs refuse to
carry me, and then it will not be I who shall have given in, but the
legs!--eh, Mafuta?"

Smiling languidly at this conceit, Tom walked on, almost mechanically,
for nearly twenty miles that day, with scarcely any shelter from the
sun.

At night he reached a native village, the chief of which considerately
let him rest in an old hut.  When Tom flung himself down in a corner of
this, he felt so ill that he called his servant and bade him fetch the
package which contained his slender stock of medicine.

"Open it, Mafuta, and let's see what we have left.  I'm resolved to make
some change in myself for better or worse, if I should have to eat up
the whole affair.  Better be poisoned at once than die by inches in this
way."

"No more kineen," said the Caffre, as he kneeled by his master's side,
turning over the papers and bottles.

"No more quinine," repeated Tom sadly; "no more life, that means."

"Not'ing more bot tree imuttics, an' small drop ludnum," said Mafuta.

"Three emetics," said Tom, "and some laudanum; come, I'll try these.
Mix the whole of 'em in a can, and be quick, like a good fellow; I'll
have one good jorum whatever happens."

"Bot yous vil bost," said Mafuta remonstratively.
