"I have not come here to make friends with the stupid Leaves," she said
to herself. "I have come here to talk to Miss Carter, and talk to her I
will. The week is coming to a close, and I have to give my decision. How
that decision will turn out depends as much on 'Cartery love' as on
anybody else."

Tea, good as it was, came to an end at last, and the children went out
into the grounds, some to play tennis, some croquet, and some to wander
away, two and two, each talking, as girls will, of their hopes and fears
and ambitions.

Rosamund, to whom Maud devoted herself, turned suddenly to that young
person.

"I will confide in you," she said. "You are longing to play tennis, are
you not?"

"Oh no, thank you, not at all," said Maud, who was one of the champion
players of the neighborhood, and could never bear to be out of any game
that was in progress.

"But I know you are. I can read through people pretty well," said
Rosamund, speaking in a low tone. "Now, I want to have a little talk
with Miss Carter. Won't you go and play, and forget all about me, and
let me have a chat with Miss Carter?"

"With our darling Cartery? Why, certainly, you shall if you like. I see
you want to get her to tell you about Irene. I doubt if she will. Do,
please, be merciful. She is very nervous. When she came to us she was
almost ill, and we had to take great, great care of her. Would you like,
first of all, to know how she came to us?"

"I should very much."

Rosamund forgot at this juncture all about Maud's passionate love for
tennis.

"Well, it was in this way. We had no governess; we used to go to a sort
of school--not the Merrimans', for they had not started one at the
time--and I used to teach the little children, and things were rather at
sixes and sevens. Not that father ever minded, for he is the sort of man
who just lets you do what you like, and I think that is why we have
grown up nicer than most girls."

"Indeed, I didn't know it would have that effect," said Rosamund, trying
to suppress the sarcastic note in her voice.

"Don't speak in that tone, please. I think we really are quite nice
girls--I mean we never quarrel, and we are always chummy and
affectionate, and we try to do our best. We are not a bit self-righteous
or conceited, or anything of that sort; for, you see, when our dear
mother was alive she taught us so beautifully. Her rule was such a very
simple one. She never punished us; all she ever said was, 'Do it because
it is right. You cannot quite understand why it is right while you are
very young; but, nevertheless, do it because it is right and because
you love me.' And when God took her, and we thought our hearts would
break, we all sat in a conclave together, and we determined to follow
our mother's rule, and to do the right because it was right and because
we loved her. I cannot tell you what a terrible time we had; but we
stuck to that resolve. Nevertheless, our education was a poor affair,
although father never noticed it.

"One day I was out driving with father, and we saw a poor lady sitting
by the roadside. She looked so forlorn, and her eyes were red with
crying. We did not know her; but she knew us, for she stood up at once,
and said to father, 'You are Mr. Singleton?'

"Then, of course, father remembered her, only I did not. She was one of
the many governesses who had come to try to tame Irene Ashleigh. So
father and I both got down from the gig, and she told us that she had
left The Follies and was going back to London to try to get another
situation. She said that she had sent on her trunks by a porter to the
station, and she meant to walk, for Lady Jane was very, very angry with
her. She could not go on. She broke down, poor dear! and very nearly
fainted. She said she did feel very faint and bad, so we just got her
into the gig--as, of course, any people who had any feelings would
do--and we brought her straight back to the Rectory, and she has stayed
with us ever since.

"For the first month she was not our governess at all; she was our sort
of child, to be petted and loved and fussed over. We put her in the
sunniest room, and when we found that her nerves were so terribly shaken
that she could scarcely sleep alone, one of my sisters had a little bed
made up in the room and slept with her at night. We fed her up, didn't
we just? and petted her; and when we found she liked it we took to
calling her 'Cartery love,' and she did not mind it a bit. Then she got
better, and said she must seek another situation, and father said she
should stay and teach us and look after things in the house a bit. So
she stayed. She knows such a lot, and does teach us so beautifully, and
she isn't half nor quarter as shy as she was; we all love her, and she
loves us. I think if Irene were not so near she would be perfectly
happy."

"Thank you for telling me so much," said Rosamund when Maud ceased
speaking.

"I had to tell you, for I want you, if you talk to her, to be very
careful, for she is still exceedingly nervous. And no wonder. What she
lived through at The Follies was enough to destroy the nerves of any
woman, even the stoutest-hearted in the world."

"Well, I should like to speak to her, and I will certainly not harm
her," said Rosamund.

Maud left her for a little while, and in a few minutes Miss Carter was
seen coming down the path with Maud hanging on her arm.

"Now, Cartery dear," she said, "you talk to Rosamund Cunliffe, who is a
friend of mine, and I will go and have a good, romping game of tennis.
Oh, I see they are just breaking up the present set, so I am just in
time."

Off ran Maud. Miss Carter's light-blue eyes followed her with an
expression of the deepest affection.

"You seem very fond of her," said Rosamund suddenly.

"I don't know what I should have done without her. She saved my life and
my reason."

"I don't want to talk about what has evidently given you very great
distress," said Rosamund after a time; "but I should like to tell you
that I know."

"You know?" said Miss Carter, beginning to tremble, and turning very
pale.

"Yes, for Irene told me."

"My dear, dear Miss Cunliffe, how had you the courage to go with her in
that terrible boat? She actually took you into the current--that
appalling current where one is so powerless--and you escaped!"

"Oh, yes," said Rosamund lightly. "It was a mere nothing. You see, I am
stronger than she is. All she wants is management."

"I could never manage her," said Miss Carter. "I could tell you of other
things she did."

"No, I don't want to hear unless you are going to tell me something nice
about her. Every one seems to speak against that poor girl; but I am
determined to be her friend."

"Are you really?" said Miss Carter, suddenly changing her tone and
looking fixedly at Rosamund. "Then you must be about the noblest girl in
the world."

These words were very gratifying to Rosamund, who did think herself
rather good in taking up Irene's cause; although, of course, she was
fascinated by the exceedingly naughty young person.

"Yes, indeed, you are splendid," said Miss Carter; "and I know there
must be good in the child. Such courage, such animal spirits, such
daring cannot be meant for nothing. The fact is, her mother cannot
manage her. Her mother is too gentle, too like me."

"Dear Lady Jane! Miss Carter, when my mother was young she was her great
friend, and she said that Lady Jane was rather naughty."

"Ah!" said Miss Carter, with a sigh, "she has left all that behind her a
long time ago. The only time I found her hard and unsympathetic was when
I told her that I could not stay any longer at The Follies. She begged
and implored of me to stay; but, of course, you know the story. I was
under a promise to go, and I could not let out that Irene had wrung it
from me at the risk of my life. So I went, and she took no notice of
me, although it seemed to me that a sort of despair filled her face.
Anyhow, off I went, and I am a happy woman here. I don't know what is to
be done with Irene."

How long were you with her?

"A month altogether; but that month seems like years. I was very glad to
get the post, for I must tell you, Miss Cunliffe, that I am poor and
dependent altogether on what I earn for my daily bread. I have an old
mother at home; I help her to keep alive with some of my earnings; and
Lady Jane offered a very big salary--over a hundred a year--and there
was only one child to teach, and I thought it would be so delightful.
She mentioned the charms of the country-house, and that she did not
require a great deal of education; and she even spoke of the lake and
the boat. Oh, I was so glad to come! for I am not certificated, you
know, and cannot get the posts that other women can. Well, anyhow, I
arrived, and for a month it was really a reign of terror."

Miss Carter began to tremble.

"You must not do that, really," said Rosamund. "You are not suited to
it. But do tell me what you think a very strong-minded person would have
made of Irene."

"Well, you see, the first and principal thing was not to fear her, and
it was impossible not to fear her, for she was up to so many tricks; she
was worse than the most mischievous school-boy who ever walked. She
would suddenly come into the drawing-room in her gymnasium clothes, and
turn somersaults up and down the room in the presence of Lady Jane's
distinguished guests. Oh! I cannot tell you half she did--I dare not
tell you. There was no trick she was not up to; but you will know for
yourself if you really mean to have more to do with her."

"I certainly mean to have a great deal more to do with her, although at
the present moment I am forbidden by Professor Merriman even to speak to
her."

"I know the Merrimans have a very bad opinion of her," said Miss Carter.

"Yes, that is just it; but she is the daughter of my mother's dearest
friend, and I am not going to give her up."

"Yet you are at school at Mr. Merriman's!"

"That is true."

Miss Carter looked in a puzzled way at Rosamund.

"I cannot reveal any more of my plans," said Rosamund, speaking in a
rather lofty tone; "but now I want to know a few things about her. Is
she stingy or generous?"

"Oh! absolutely and perfectly generous, and in her own way forgiving
too; and I do not think she could tell a lie, for she has no fear in
her, and I suppose it is fear that makes us tell lies. She has never
feared any mortal. She has no respect for authority, not even her
mother; and although she rushes at her sometimes and smothers her with
kisses, she seems to have no real affection for her. If I could be sure
that she was absolutely affectionate I think something could be done for
her. Now, that is all I can tell you. You can scarcely believe how this
subject distresses me and causes that terrible trembling to come on. I
don't think, Miss Cunliffe, young as you are, and brave as you doubtless
are, you ought to undertake the reform of that wild girl at your age.
Allow me to say that you are sent to school by your parents for a
definite purpose, and not to undertake the reform of Irene Ashleigh."

A frown came over Rosamund's face, and Miss Carter, glancing at her, saw
that her words had caused displeasure.

"Forgive me," she said gently; "I don't really mean to be unkind.
Indeed, I admire you, and admire your bravery beyond words. To be as
brave as you are would be a noble gift, and if it were only my own
heritage, how happy I should be!"

"I tell you what it is, Miss Carter," said Rosamund suddenly; "if ever I
want your help, and if I can assure you that you can give it without
personal danger to yourself, will you give it to me?"

"If I think it right I will truly do so."

"Then the day may come," said Rosamund; "there is no saying."

Just then Ivy's pretty voice was heard calling Miss Carter.

"She is my second youngest pupil, and such a darling child!" said Miss
Carter, her eyes brightening. "Yes, dear," she continued as Ivy danced
up to her; "what is it?"

"We want a game of Puss-in-the-corner, and the silliest and youngest
among us are going to play."

Jumping up as she spoke, Miss Carter said she belonged to that group,
and Rosamund turned somewhat disdainfully away.




CHAPTER IX.

AN UNEXPECTED ROOM-MATE.


It was on that very same day that Jane Denton, Rosamund's special
friend, complained of sudden chill and headache. She was a little sick,
too, and could not touch her supper. Mrs. Merriman always kept a
clinical thermometer handy, and on discovering that the young girl's
temperature was considerably over one hundred degrees, she took fright
and had her removed to a room in a distant part of the house.

"If she is not better in the morning we will send for the doctor," was
her verdict. "Now, girls, one thing: I do not wish the Professor to be
annoyed. I undertook this school in order to save him anxiety, and if he
knows of every trifling indisposition he may be terribly vexed and put
out. I therefore take charge of Jane to-night, sleeping in her room and
looking after her, and administering to her simple remedies. If in the
morning she is no better I will send for the doctor, and then we will
know how to act. Meanwhile you, Rosamund, have your room to yourself."

Rosamund was distressed for her friend, and boldly announced at once
that she would act as nurse.

"I ought to," she said. "She is my friend, and I have always been fond
of her. Besides, it seems exceedingly hard that you, Mrs. Merriman, who
work so much for us all day long, should have to work at night as well.
Do let me undertake this."

Mrs. Merriman could scarcely keep the tears back from her eyes when
Rosamund spoke. She could not help liking the girl, notwithstanding her
eccentricities and her very bold act of disobedience on the previous
Sunday. But she was firm in her resolve.

"No, dear," she said; "I am obliged to you for making the offer."

"Hypocrite!" said Lucy angrily to herself. "She knows it cannot be
accepted."

Mrs. Merriman was not looking at Lucy; on the contrary, she was looking
full into Rosamund's face.

"I am obliged to you for making the offer," she continued; "but it is
impossible for me to accept it, for the simple reason that there is just
the possibility that Jane may be going to have some infectious disease,
in which case I could not hear of any other girl in my establishment
running any risk. Therefore you see for yourself that I cannot accept
your offer. I should be unfaithful to your mother if I did."

"Oh, come, Rosamund!" said Laura Everett; "do let us go out and have a
chat together. Of course, Mrs. Merriman is right. We will help you all
we can, Mrs. Merriman, by being extra good girls. Isn't that the best
way?"

Mrs. Merriman admitted that it was, and the two girls, their arms
entwined, went out into the soft summer night. Laura Everett, with her
merry face, blue eyes, and fair hair, was a great contrast to Rosamund
Cunliffe. She was exceedingly clever and fond of books. Most of her
tastes lay, however, in a scientific direction. She was devoted to
chemistry and mathematics, and could already work well in these two
branches of science. She was intensely matter-of-fact, and in reality
had nothing whatever in common with Rosamund.

Lucy Merriman had a great admiration for Laura Everett: in the first
place, because her mother, Lady Everett, was Mrs. Merriman's old friend;
and in the next place, because she possessed, as Lucy expressed it, the
invaluable gift of common-sense. She had rather taken Laura under her
own wing, had intended to make her her special friend, had meant to trot
her round and to show her to other friends; in short, as much as
possible to divide her from Rosamund, whom she considered a most
dangerous and pernicious influence.

But Laura had character of her own, and admired Rosamund; and now that
she saw the girl looking rather pale, with an almost pathetic expression
in her brown eyes, her heart smote her with a sense of pity, and she
went up to her eagerly.

"I want you to tell me just what you think about the Singletons," she
said. "Let us walk about under the trees. Isn't it nice and home-like
here? Don't you think so, Rosamund?"

"Perhaps," said Rosamund in a dubious voice. Then she added impulsively,
"You see, Laura, it is somewhat difficult for me to talk to you, for
Lucy is your friend and she is not mine."

"I know you do not like her--I mean I know she is in every way your
opposite; but if you only would take no notice of her little
peculiarities, and accept her as she really is, you would soon find good
points in her. She is devoted to her parents, and is very true. I know,
of course, she is a little matter-of-fact."

"Yes, that is it," said Rosamund. "For goodness' sake, Laura, don't
waste time talking about her. We can say as much as ever we like about
the Singletons. I must say I am rather charmed with them."

"And so am I," said Laura, "particularly with Maud. She is so bright and
unselfish."

"The person I like best of the entire group is Miss Carter," said
Rosamund stoutly.

"What!" exclaimed Laura, with a laugh. "That poor, thin,
frightened-looking governess--'Cartery love,' as they call her?"

"Yes, 'Cartery love,' or anything else you like to name her. I took a
fancy to her, and thought her awfully nice. I may see more of her;
there's no saying."

"You are so odd, Rosamund--so different from the other girls!"

