wing, and he fell screaming down to the water. His cries brought other
terns to the rescue, and with pitiful screams they flew to the spot
where the naturalist stood, while the tide drifted their wounded brother
toward the shore. But before Mr. Edward could secure his prize, he
observed, to his astonishment, that two of the terns had flown down to
the water, and were gently lifting up their suffering companion, one
taking hold of either wing. But their burden was rather heavy; so, after
carrying it seaward about six or seven yards, they let it down, and two
more came, picked it up, and carried it a little farther. By means of
thus relieving each other they managed to reach a rock where they
concluded they would be safe.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: AN EXCITING TAIL.]




[Illustration]

Y--THE YAK.


_In Central Asia, far away,
  'Mid Thibet's pastures green,
With shaggy hide and bushy tail,
  The valued Yak is seen._


[Illustration]


Z--THE ZEBRA.

_As strong and swift as any horse,
  The Zebra skims the plain;
With glossy bands of deepest black,
  Long ears, and upright mane._




SHEEP AND LAMBS.


_The sheep were in the fold at night;
  And now a new-born lamb
Totters and trembles in the light,
  Or bleats beside its dam.

How anxiously the mother tries,
  With every tender care,
To screen it from inclement skies,
  And the cold morning air!

The hail-storm of the east is fled,
  She seems with joy to swell;
While ever, as she bends her head,
  I hear the tinkling bell.

So while for me a mother's prayer
  Ascends to Heaven above,
May I repay her tender care
  With gratitude and love._

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE WATER-RAT.

THE WILD CAT.

THE WEASEL.

THE SYRIAN DOG.]

[Illustration: THE GLOW-WORM.

THE LOCUST.

THE HERCULES BEETLE.

THE CHAMELEON.]




[Illustration]

THE CAPTIVE SQUIRREL


"Squirrel--squirrel lithe and wee!
Thy fur's as soft as down can be,
Thy teeth as ivory are white,
Yet hard enough through nuts to bite.

"Squirrel--squirrel lithe and wee!
How gladly would I purchase thee--
But mother says: 'Twill never do,
Thou nibblest table, book and shoe.'"

Squirrel--squirrel hung his head;
"Oh! speak not thus," he sadly said,
"Heav'n gave me once a woodland home
Where I the livelong day might roam,
And gaily leap from branch to twig
As blithe and merry as a grig;
Then came a wicked man who laid
The snare by which I'm captive made,
And now 'twill be my mournful doom
  Instead of in the forest free,
To live pent in a narrow room
  By way of bush or stately tree!
What wonder if, thus sad and lorn,
From all my dearest habits torn,
A-foraging I sometimes go
And get a snubbing or a blow?
Child, should you on some summer's day,
Within the greenwood chance to stray,
I pray you that from me you greet
The happy creatures that you meet,
The fawns, ants, sparrows and the hares
And tell them how with me it fares,
That while they leap, creep, sing and fly.
In chains and prison I must lie."




[Illustration]

A STROLL IN THE COUNTRY


Put on your hat and let us take
A stroll amidst the rural scene--
  The boat is gliding o'er the lake,

[Illustration]

  The cows are browsing pastures green,
The herdsman's horns the echoes wake,
And holiday like Nature's self we'll make!

[Illustration]

Into the garden next let's come
To pluck a pear or downy plum,
  And hear the bird's sweet trilling--

[Illustration: ]

  While all around, on fragrant beds,
The flowerets lift their little heads,
The air with perfume filling.

[Illustration: ]

The merry kid is leaping gaily,
And soberer Nanny gives us daily
  Sweet milk to make us cheese;

  While all our tastes to please,
His nets the busy fisher flings,
And eels and carp for dinner brings.




THE OTTER.


The Otter belongs to a class of animals which we may call the Weasel
tribe. Their bodies are long and lithe, and their legs short. This
family includes the weasel (its smallest member), the stoat, the ferret,
the pole-cat, the marten, and the otter (its largest member). You may
then think of the Otter as a water-ferret, or water-weasel. He can swim
most elegantly, and he is a beautiful diver. Let a fish glide underneath
him, and he is after it in a moment; and as the fish darts here and
there to escape, the Otter follows each rapid movement with unerring
precision. When the fish is caught, the Otter carries it to the bank and
makes a meal. But the Otter is like naughty Jack who leaves a saucy
plate--he spoils much more fish than he eats. The trout and other fish
are so much alarmed at the appearance of an Otter, that they will
sometimes fling themselves on the bank to get out of his way.

[Illustration]




THE MASTIFF.


The mastiff is a large, grave, sullen-looking dog, with a wide chest,
noble head, long switch tail, bright eyes, and a loud, deep voice. Of
all dogs this is the most vigilant watcher over the property of his
master, and nothing can tempt him to betray the confidence reposed in
him. Notwithstanding his commanding appearance, and the strictness with
which he guards the property of his master, the mastiff is possessed of
great mildness of character, and is very grateful for any favors
bestowed upon him. I once went into the barn of a friend where there was
a mastiff chained; I went up to the dog and patted him on the head, when
out rushed the groom from the stable exclaiming, "Come away, sir! He's
dangerous with strangers." But I did not remove my hand nor show any
fear. The consequence was, that the dog and I were the best of friends;
but had I shown any fear, and hastily removed my hand, I might have
fared rather badly, for this dog always couples fear with guilt.

[Illustration]




THE CUNNING WOOD-PIGEONS.


One who loves our feathered friends has described a curious instance of
their instinct. On the back lawn at a gentleman's house, they have a
feeding-box for the pheasants, which opens on their perching upon it,
but remains shut if any lesser bird than a hen pheasant perches there,
which saves the contents from the thefts of these, and of rats, mice,
and other vermin. But the gentleman discovered that the contents of the
box was being more rapidly emptied than the wants of the pheasants
warranted. So he kept a watch on the box, and soon discovered a
wood-pigeon perch on the box, but his weight not being sufficient to
open the lid, he beckoned to another pigeon, and their combined weight
made the lid fly open, and after each had taken what they required, they
flew away, and the box closed with a "click."

[Illustration]




SEA REPTILES.


There were in the sea in very ancient times--long before the flood--two
very large and wonderful reptiles. Of them we present striking
illustrations. One of them has been named the Ichthyosaurus, which means
Fish Reptile. Its head somewhat resembled that of the crocodile, except
that the orbit was much larger, and had the nostril placed close to it,
as in the whale, and not near the end of the snout. It had four paddles
and a powerful tail, and was very active in its movements and a rapid
swimmer.

The other huge reptile was the Plesiosaurus, the meaning of which is
"Near to a Reptile." Its structure was very singular and its character
very strange. In the words of Buckland: "To the head of a lizard, it
united the teeth of the crocodile, a neck of enormous length, resembling
the body of a serpent, a trunk and a tail of the size of an ordinary
quadruped, the ribs of a chameleon, and the paddles of a whale."

[Illustration]




SWISS MOUNTAIN SCENERY.


In Switzerland, one of the chief employments of the people is that of
herdsmen and shepherds, and nearly the half of the surface of the
country is occupied as mountain pastures and meadows. Here you see the
woman tending the sheep and goats, and spinning industriously, while her
husband is busy with some other part of the duties of tending the sheep.
It is often painful to see how much the poor sheep and oxen suffer while
being driven through the streets. It is pitiful to see them looking in
vain for some place of rest and shelter. Little boys in towns sometimes
like to HELP--as they call it--to drive cattle, but they generally
increase the terror and confusion of the poor beasts, and little think
of the pain they are causing. Sheep and goats are very useful to us;
besides serving us for food, they supply our cloth and flannel clothes,
