give her to me to be my wife?"

"No," answered the chief.

The next day the maiden herself went to the chief and said, "Father, I
love the wind. Will you let me go with him to his lodge and be his
wife?"

"No," declared the chief, "I will not. When the wind was a child, he
often came into my wigwam through some tiny hole, and try as I would to
make my fire, he always put it out. He knows neither how to fight nor
how to hunt, and you shall not be his wife."

Then the chief hid his daughter in a thick grove of dark spruces. "The
wind might see her in a pine," he thought, "but he will never catch
sight of her in a grove of spruces."

Now the wind could make himself invisible if he chose, and all the time
that the chief was talking, the wind was close beside him listening to
every word. When the next night came, the wind ran round and round the
grove of spruces until he discovered a tiny place where he could get in.
When he came out, the maiden was with him. He did not dare to go near
the Indians to live, for he was afraid that the chief would come and
take her away from him; so he built a new lodge far to the north-ward.
To that lodge he carried the maiden, and she became his wife.

Neither the wind nor his young wife had thought that the chief could
ever find them, but he searched and searched, and at last he came to
their lodge. The wind hid his wife and made himself invisible, but the
father struck all about with his great war-club, and a hard blow fell
upon the head of the wind. He knew no more of what the chief was doing.

When he came to himself, he discovered that his wife was gone, and he
set out in search of her. He roamed about wildly in the forest, and at
last he saw her in a canoe with her father on the Big-Sea-Water. "Come
with me," he called. She became as white as snow, but she could not see
the wind, because after the blow upon his head he had forgotten how to
make himself visible.

He was so angry with the chief that he blew with all his might upon the
tiny canoe. "Let it tip over," he thought. "I can carry my wife safely
to land." The canoe did tip over, and both the chief and his daughter
fell into the water. "Come, dear wife," cried the wind. "Here is my
hand." He did not remember that he was invisible, and that she could not
see his hand. That is why she fell down, down, through the deep water to
the bottom of the lake. The chief, too, lost his life, for the wind did
not try to help him.

When the wind discovered that his wife was gone from him, he became
almost wild with sorrow. "The wind never blew so sadly before," said the
people in the wigwams.

[Illustration: "HERE IS MY HAND"]

The Great Spirit was sorry that the chief's daughter had fallen into the
water and lost her life, and the next night he bore her up to the stars
and gave her a home in the moon. There she lives again, but her face is
white, as it was when she fell from the canoe. On moonlight nights she
always looks down upon the earth, searching for the wind, for she does
not know that he is invisible. The wind does not know that far away in
the moon is the white face of his lost wife, and so he roams through the
forest and wanders about the rocks and the mountains, but never thinks
of looking up to the moon.




WHY ALL MEN LOVE THE MOON.


Thunder and Lightning were going to give a feast. It was to be a most
delightful banquet, for all the good things that could be imagined were
to be brought from every corner of the world.

For many days before the feast these good things were coming. The birds
flew up with what they could find in the cold air of the north and the
warm air of the south. The fishes came from the east and from the west
with what they could find in the cold water or in the warm water. As for
what grew on the earth, there was no end to the luxuries that came every
morning and every evening. Squirrels brought nuts, crows brought corn,
the ants brought sweet things of many kinds. Food that was rich and rare
came from India and Japan. The butterflies and the humming-birds were to
arrange the flowers, the peacocks and the orioles promised to help make
the place beautiful, and the waves and the brooks agreed to make their
most charming music.

Thunder and Lightning were talking about whom to invite, and they
questioned whether to ask the sun, the moon, and the wind. These three
were children of the star mother.

"The star mother has been so kind to us that I suppose we ought to
invite her children," said Thunder.

"The moon is charming, but the sun and the wind are rough and wild. If I
were the star mother, I would keep them in a corner all day, and they
should stay there all night, too, if they did not promise to be gentle,"
said Lightning.

"We must invite them," replied Thunder, with what sounded much like a
little growl, "but it would be delightful if they would agree to stay
away, all but the moon."

That is why the sun and wind were invited as well as the moon. When the
invitation came, the two brothers said to their little sister, "You are
too small to go to a feast, but perhaps they asked you because they were
going to ask us."

"Star mother, I think I will stay at home," said the moon tearfully.

"No, little moon," replied the star mother; "go to the feast with the
other children."

So the three children went to the feast, and the star mother waited for
them to come home.

When they came, she asked, "What did you bring for me?" The hands of the
sun were full of good things, but he said, "I brought only what I am
going to eat myself," and he sat down in a corner with his back to the
others, and went on eating.

"Did you bring anything for me?" she asked the wind.

"I brought some good things halfway home, and then I was weary of
carrying them," answered the wind, "so I have eaten them."

"I should never have imagined that you would be so selfish," said the
star mother sadly, and she asked the little moon, "My daughter, did you
bring anything for me?"

"Yes, star mother," answered the little moon, and she gave her mother
more good things than any one had ever seen in their home before. There
were rare luxuries that the fishes and the birds had brought. There were
rich colors that the peacocks and orioles had promised, and there was
even some of the charming music that the waves and brooks had agreed to
make.

The star mother praised the little maiden. Then she looked at her two
boys. She was sad, for she knew that they must be punished for their
selfishness. "Sun," said she, "you wish to turn your back on all, and
your punishment shall be that when the warm days of summer have come,
all men will turn their backs on you." To the wind she said, "Wind, you
thought of no one but yourself. When the storm is coming and you are
afraid and fly before it, no one shall think of you. All men shall close
their doors against you and fasten them." Then to her little daughter
she said, "My little moon, you were unselfish and thoughtful. You shall
always be bright and beautiful, and men shall love you and praise you
whenever they look upon your gentle, kindly face."

This is why men hide from the sun and the wind, but never from the moon.




WHY THERE IS A HARE IN THE MOON.


Many strange things happened long ago, and one of them was that a hare,
a monkey, and a fox agreed to live together. They talked about their
plan a long time. Then the hare said, "I promise to help the monkey and
the fox." The monkey declared, "I promise to help the fox and the hare."
The fox said, "I promise to help the hare and the monkey." They shook
hands, or rather shook paws. There was something else to which they
agreed, and that was that they would kill no living creature.

The manito was much pleased when he heard of this plan, but he said to
himself, "I should like to make sure that what I have heard is true, and
that they are really gentle and kind to others as well as to themselves.
I will go to the forest and see how they behave toward strangers."

The manito appeared before the three animals, but they thought he was a
hunter. "May I come into your lodge and rest?" he asked. "I am very
weary."

All three came toward him and gave him a welcome. "Come into our lodge,"
they said. "We have agreed to help one another, so we will help one
another to help you."

"I have been hungry all day," said the manito, "but I should rather have
such a welcome than food."

"But if you are hungry, you must have food," declared the three animals.
"If there were anything in our lodge that you would care to eat, you
might have part of it or all of it, but there is nothing here that you
would like."

Then said the monkey, "I have a plan. I will go out into the forest and
find you some food."

When the monkey came back, he said, "I found a tree with some fruit on
it. I climbed it and shook it, and here is the fruit. There was only a
little of it, for fruit was scarce."

"Will you not eat part of it yourself?" asked the manito.

"No," answered the monkey. "I had rather see you eat it, for I think you
are more hungry than I."

The manito wished to know whether the fox and the hare would behave as
unselfishly toward him, and he said, "My good friends, the fruit was
indeed welcome, but I am still hungry."

Then the fox said, "I will go out into the forest and see what I can
find for you."

When the fox came back, he said, "I shook the trees, but no more fruit
fell. I could not climb the trees, for my paws are not made for
climbing, but I searched on the ground, and at last I found some hominy
that a traveler had left, and I have brought you that."

The manito had soon eaten the hominy. He wished to know whether the hare
would behave as kindly as the others, and before long he said, "My good
friends, the hominy was indeed welcome, but I am still hungry."

Then the hare said, "I will gladly go out into the forest and search for
food." He was gone a long time, but when he came back, he brought no
food.

"I am very hungry," said the manito.

"Stranger," said the hare, "if you will build a fire beside the rock, I
can give you some food."

The manito built a fire, and the hare said, "Now I will spring from the
top of the rock upon the fire. I have heard that men eat flesh, that is
taken from the fire, and I will give you my own."

The hare sprang from the rock, but the manito caught him in his hands
before the flame could touch him, and said, "Dear, unselfish little
hare, the monkey and the fox have welcomed me and searched the forest
through to find me food, but you have done more, for you have given me
yourself. I will take the gift, little hare, and I will carry you in my
arms up to the moon, so that every one on the earth may see you and hear
the tale of your kindness and unselfishness."

[Illustration]

The Indians can see a hare in the moon, and this is the story that they
tell their children about it.




THE CHILDREN IN THE MOON.


They had no idea where they came from. All they knew was that they lived
on the hill, and that the old man of the hill called them Jack and Jill.
They had plenty of berries to eat, and when night came, they had soft
beds of fir to sleep on. There were all kinds of animals on the hill,
and they were friendly to the two children. They could have had a most
delightful time playing all day long if it had not been for having to
carry water.

Every morning, just as soon as the first rays of the sun could be seen
from their home, they heard the voice of the old man of the hill
calling, "Jack! Jill! Take your pail and get some water." Whenever they
were having an especially pleasant game with some of the animals, they
heard the same call, "Take your pail and get some water." It is no
wonder that Jack awoke one night when no one called and said, "Jill, did
he say we must get some water?" "I suppose so," answered Jill sleepily,
and they went out with the pail.

The moon was shining down through the trees, and they imagined that she
was nearer than ever before. The forest was not half so lonely with her
gentle face looking down upon them. Soon they felt happier than at
first, and they played little games together, running from tree to tree.

"We have spilled half the water," said Jill.

"There's plenty left," said Jack, "if half _is_ spilled."

"Do you suppose there are any children who play games whenever they like
and do not have to carry water?"

"Plenty of them," declared Jack.

    "Jack and Jill
    Went up the hill
    To get a pail of water,"

sang a voice so clear that it seemed close at hand, and so soft that it
seemed far away.

Jack started, fell, and rolled down the hillside, and Jill came tumbling
after. As for the water, what was left was spilled before Jack had
rolled over once; and before he had rolled over twice, the same voice
sang,--

    "Jack fell down
    And broke his crown,
    And Jill came tumbling after."

"It is about us," cried Jill.

"I have not broken any crown," said Jack.

"It is the crown of your head," declared Jill.

"Oh!" said Jack; "but where's the water?"

"It has gone tumbling down the hill," answered the same voice.

"How can water go tumbling?" cried Jill. "_We_ tumbled."

"Water tumbles too," replied the voice, "especially when it is frozen."

"Oh!" said Jack.

"Oh!" said Jill.

"The stream is frozen," called the voice.

"What stream?" asked the children together.

"The stream that goes down the hill," answered the voice. "Did you not
know that you were bringing water to keep the stream full?"

"No, indeed," said the children.

"The old man of the hill is only a rock, and what you thought his voice
was only the water flowing around it."

[Illustration]

"Oh!" cried Jack.

"Oh!" cried Jill.

"The stream is frozen," said the voice, "and the earth has a cloak of
snow and ice."

"Who are you?" asked Jill shyly.

"Do you really not know? What a strange child you are! I am the moon, of
course. Very pleasant people live with me, and I have come to invite you
both to go home with me. Will you come?"

The children looked up through the trees, and there was the gentle face
of the moon, looking more gentle and kind than ever. "Come," said she,
and they went very willingly. They have lived in the moon many years,
but they never again carried a pail of water for a stream. "That is the
work of the clouds and the sun," says the moon.




WHY THERE IS A MAN IN THE MOON.


"Goodman," said the goodwife, "you must go out into the forest and
gather sticks for the fire. To-morrow will be Sunday, and we have no
wood to burn."

"Yes, goodwife," answered the goodman, "I will go to the forest."

He did go to the forest, but he sat on a mossy rock and fished till it
was dark, and so he brought home no wood. "The goodwife shall not know
it," he thought. "I will go to the forest to-morrow morning and gather
sticks."

When morning came, he crept softly out of the house when it was hardly
light, and went to the forest. Soon he had as many sticks as he could
carry, and he was starting for home when a voice called sternly, "Put
those sticks down." He looked to the right, to the left, before him,
behind him, and over his head. There was no one to be seen.

"Put those sticks down," said the voice again.

"Please, I do not dare to put them down," replied the goodman, trembling
with fear. "They are to burn, and my wife cannot cook the dinner without
them."

"You will have no dinner to-day," said the voice.

"The goodwife will not know that I did not gather them last night, and
she will let me have some dinner. I am almost sure she will," the
goodman replied.

"You must not gather sticks to-day," said the voice more sternly than
ever. "It is Sunday. Put them down."

"Indeed, Mr. Voice, I dare not," whispered the goodman; and afar off he
thought he heard his wife calling, "Goodman, where are you? There is no
wood to burn."

"Will you put them down, or will you carry them forever?" cried the
voice angrily.

"Truly, I cannot put them down, for I dare not go home without them,"
answered the goodman, shaking with fear from head to foot. "The goodwife
would not like it."

"Then carry them forever," said the voice. "You care not for Sunday, and
you shall never have another Sunday."

The goodman could not tell how it came about, but he felt himself being
lifted, up, up, up, sticks and all, till he was in the moon.

"Here you shall stay," said the voice sternly. "You will not keep
Sunday, and here you need not. This is the moon, and so it is always the
moon's day, or Monday, and Monday it shall be with you always. Whenever
any one looks up at the moon, he will say, 'See the man with the sticks
on his back. He was taken to the moon because he gathered wood on
Sunday.'"

"Oh dear, oh dear," cried the goodman, "what will the goodwife say?"




THE TWIN STARS.


In front of the little house was a pine-tree, and every night at the
time when the children went to bed, a bright star appeared over the top
of the tree and looked in at the window. The children were brother and
sister. They were twins, and so they always had each other to play with.

"Now go to sleep," the mother would say when she had kissed them
good-night, but it was hard to go to sleep when such a beautiful,
radiant thing was shining in at the window of the little house.

"What do you suppose is in the star?" asked the sister.

"I think there are daisies and honey and violets and butterflies and
bluebirds," answered the brother.

"And I think there are roses and robins and berries and humming-birds,"
said the sister.

"There must be trees and grass too, and I am sure there are pearls and
diamonds."

"I can almost see them now," declared the sister. "I wish we could
really see them. To-morrow let us go and find the star."

When morning came, the star was gone, but they said, "It was just behind
the pine-tree, and so it must be on the blue mountain." The blue
mountain was a long way off, but it looked near, and the twins thought
they could walk to it in an hour. All day long they walked. They went
through the lonely woods, they crossed brooks, they climbed hills, and
still they could not find the radiant star that had looked in at their
window. The hour had come when their mother always put them to bed and
kissed them and said good-night, but now they had no mother, no
good-night kiss, and no bed. They were tired and sleepy. They heard
strange sounds in the forest, and they were frightened. "I am so tired,"
the sister whispered. "I am afraid a bear will come. I wish we could see
the star."

The sky had grown dark, and a star could be seen here and there, but it
was not their star. They went on till they could go no farther. "We will
lie down on the grass," said the brother, "and cover ourselves up with
leaves, and go to sleep."

Tired as they were, they did not have time to go to sleep before they
heard a bear calling "Ugh! Ugh!" in the woods. They sprang up and ran
out of the woods, and just before they came to the bottom of the hill,
they saw right in front of them a beautiful little lake. They were not
frightened any more, for there in the water was something radiant and
shining. "It is our own star," said they, "and it has come down to us."
They never thought of looking up into the sky over their heads. It was
enough for them that the star was in the water and so near them. But was
it calling them? They thought so. "Come," cried the brother, "take my
hand, and we will go to the star." Then the spirit of the skies lifted
them up gently and carried them away on a beautiful cloud.

The father and mother sat alone in the little house one evening, looking
sadly out of the window through which the twins had looked. "There is
the star that they loved," the mother said. "I have often listened to
them while they talked of it. It is rising over the pine-tree in front
of the house." They sat and watched the star. It was brighter and more
radiant than ever, and in it the father and mother saw the faces of
their lost children. "Oh, take us too, good spirit of the skies!" they
cried. The spirit heard them, and when the next evening came, close
beside the star there was another star. In that were the father and
mother, and at last they and the children were all very happy to be
together again.




THE LANTERN AND THE FAN.


In a Japanese village there once lived a man who had two sons. When the
sons were grown up, each brought home a wife from another village a long
distance away. The father was greatly pleased with his two
daughters-in-law, and for many months they all lived very happily
together.

At last the two young wives asked to go home to visit their friends.
Among the Japanese the sons and the sons' wives must always obey the
father, so the two wives said, "Father-in-law, it is a long, long time
since we have seen our friends. May we go to our old home and visit
them?" The father-in-law answered, "No." After many months they asked
again, and again he answered, "No." Once more they asked. The
father-in-law thought, "They care nothing for me, or they would not wish
to leave me, but I have a plan, and I can soon know whether they love
their father-in-law or not." Then he said to the older of the two wives,
"You may go if you wish, but you must never come back unless you bring
me fire wrapped in paper." To the younger he said, "You may go if you
wish, but you must never come back unless you bring me wind wrapped in
paper." The father-in-law thought, "Now I shall find out. If they care
for me, they will search the country through till they find paper that
will hold fire and wind."

The two young wives were so glad to visit their old friends that for
almost a month they forgot all about the gifts that they were to carry
to their father-in-law. At last, when it was time to go home, they were
greatly troubled about what they must carry with them, and they asked a
wise man where to find the strange things. "Paper that will hold fire
and wind!" he cried. "There is no such paper in Japan." The two women
asked one wise man after another, and every one declared, "There is no
such paper in Japan." What should they do? They feared they would never
see their home again. They were so sad that they left their friends and
wandered a long distance into the forest. Great tears fell from their
eyes.

"I do not let people cry in my woods," said a voice. "My trees do not
grow well in salt water."

The poor wives were so sorrowful that they forgot to be afraid, and the
older one said, "Can we help crying? Unless I can carry to my
father-in-law fire wrapped in paper, I can never go home." "And I,"
wailed the younger, "unless I can carry wind wrapped in paper, I can
