shoulders. Each Lapp was followed by his dog.

About one hour after breakfast the night watch returned with their dogs.
Immediately the wife gave to each a cup of coffee; then they took their
breakfast. They gave their dogs some of the powdered blood mixed with
flour and warm water. The dogs relished this greatly. Then they were
given the bones, which they had been watching with glaring eyes. They
went out with them and gnawed them until there was nothing left of them.
Such is generally the meal given to the dogs every day. Once in a while
they get a small piece of meat, which they swallow voraciously in a
single mouthful.

When the night watch had done eating they went to sleep; so did their
dogs. These Lapp dogs are thickset. They resemble the Pomeranian breed,
but are larger; their hair is long, very thick, and bushy. Their ears
stand upright; they seem to have some wolf blood in them. The tail is
curly. Pehr Wasara said to me: "Lapps could not do without their dogs.
They are faithful animals; they are our helpmates; they keep our
reindeer together when we are on the march, watch them when they are
pasturing; they look out constantly for wolves, and warn us when they
are in the neighborhood, and of their approach beforehand, and attack
them without fear. Neither are they afraid of bears. They are very
brave.

"Every man, woman, manservant or maidservant and grown-up child, has his
or her dog which obeys and listens to his master alone. They are never
allowed to stay behind; wherever their master goes they go, and watch
with him night and day if necessary. Occasionally, for some reason
unknown to us, or because the deer scent the wolves afar off, a panic
seizes the herd of reindeer, and instinctively they move away. That is
the time when our dogs prove most useful and of the greatest service to
us. They go around in every direction and bring the reindeer together.
They seem to know that there is some unseen danger. When the wolves come
into the herd, the dogs attack them fiercely and act with great cunning,
taking care not to be bitten by them and waiting for the opportunity to
spring on the wolves."

While Pehr was talking I wished I could see a pack of wolves attacking
reindeer, to see how the dogs fight them.

"Do not think," added Pehr, "that it is our inclination to be harsh
towards our dogs. We never overfeed them; it is the only way to keep
them hardy, strong, and healthy. They are not allowed to rest until
their master or mistress has returned to the tent. Then we want them to
stay out doors."

"I should like very much," I said to Pehr, "to see how you break in
reindeer and accustom them to harness."

"Well," he replied, "you will see how we train our reindeer to draw
sledges. You came just in time, for we are now training some, as we have
several that are getting too old. The males are used as draught animals,
as they are stronger than the females. When the snow is in good
condition they can draw as much as four hundred pounds, or two or three
logs of pine or fir."

So he sent two men after the reindeer. They took their lassos with them,
and in less than an hour they returned with two reindeer.

"The process of teaching a reindeer to draw a sleigh or carry a pack on
his back," observed Pehr, "is very tedious and very hard work. Some of
the reindeer are more difficult to teach than others, and in spite of
the best training the wild nature and restlessness of the animal shows
itself not infrequently."

I thought so. I remembered my first lessons.

[Illustration: "I went outside the tent with my host."]

"We begin to train the reindeer," he continued, "when he is about three
years old, and he does not become a well trained animal before he is
five. When they are under training a daily lesson is given them to let
them know their masters, and also a lesson to accustom them to be
lassoed, of which they are very much afraid at first. We give them salt
and angelica, of which they are very fond, every day, to make them
come when they are needed, and in that case the lasso is not necessary.
They are never subjected to ill-treatment at any time; if they were we
could do nothing with them."

The work of teaching the reindeer to draw a sleigh began. Salt was first
given to one of the deer, which he seemed to enjoy very much. Then
without trouble a very strong leather cord with a loop was put carefully
over his horns, and the loop was drawn tight at the base. The collar was
carefully put on his neck and more salt given to him. The trace attached
to the sleigh was much longer than those used when driving; it was
several yards in length, so that the sleigh could not be touched when
the animal kicked; then it was tied to the collar of the reindeer. As
soon as the animal was urged to move, and felt the weight of the sleigh,
he plunged wildly forward and kicked, then plunged first in one
direction and then in another. It was a great sight. I thought they
would never be able to break the animal in. It required all the strength
of the Lapp not to be dragged by the animal. The other man, with a cord,
held the sleigh. After a few trials both man and beast were exhausted.

A short rest was then taken and another trial was made. With repeated
rests for the trainer and the animal, the day's lesson proceeded. The
trainer was in profuse perspiration, though it was 38 degrees below
zero. My host said to me: "This exercise is repeated day after day until
the animal submits to it. They are in their prime at seven or eight
years and can work till the age of fifteen or seventeen years. The
reason we have to wander so much with our reindeer is that we have to go
where the snow is not so deep as in other parts, for the reindeer has to
dig into the snow to find his food, the lichen, and he cannot go deeper
than three or four feet. We generally know where these places are, for
the wind, which blows every year more or less in the same direction,
blows away a part of the snow. When we come to such a place we pitch our
tent."

"When the reindeer is left to himself can he find such a place?" I
inquired. "How can the animals know that the snow is only three or four
feet deep?"

"I do not know," he replied, "but the wild reindeer can find it,
otherwise they would starve."

"How can they dig through the snow?" I asked with a smile. "They have no
shovels."

Pehr laughed at my remark. "Their fore feet are their shovels," he
replied. "You will see for yourself how they dig the snow."

I asked Pehr also about the speed of the reindeer.

"The speed of the reindeer," he replied, "varies very much according to
the time of the year and the state of the snow, October, November and
December being the months when they are the fleetest, as they are fresh
from the summer pastures. January and February are also very good months
for them. The cold weather strengthens them, and they are not yet
exhausted from digging through the snow, as they are at the end of the
season. The rapidity of their gait depends very much also on the state
of the surface of the snow. If it is well packed and crisp, they go very
fast. Much depends, too, upon the distance and whether the country is
hilly or not, or with a long range of slopes. On the rivers, over well
packed snow, and a good track that has been furrowed by previous
reindeer, they can average twelve or fifteen miles an hour when in good
condition, sometimes twenty for the first hour; down a mountain slope
twenty and twenty-five. They can travel five or six hours without
stopping; the first hour very rapidly, the second more slowly, and
towards the fifth and sixth hours still more slowly, perhaps not more
than eight or ten miles an hour, for by that time they require rest and
food, and we unharness them in places where the snow is not deep, and
let them get their food. Early in the winter, when they are in good
condition, one can travel with a swift bull reindeer one hundred and
fifty miles in a day, and even two hundred miles if the condition of the
snow is favorable and the cold is 30 or 40 degrees below zero. The
colder the weather is the greater is the speed. Seventy or eighty miles
a day is a good average for a reindeer."

When this talk was ended, Pehr Wasara said to me, "Let us take our skees
and go to one of my herds near by." After a run of about two miles we
came into the midst of a herd of about three thousand reindeer. "There
are more," he said with pride. "Are they not fine animals?"

"Yes, indeed, they are," I replied.

While I was looking at the magnificent horns of some of the beasts, Pehr
remarked: "The horns of the males, which often weigh forty pounds,
attain the full size at the age of six or seven years, those of the cow
at about four years. The time the reindeer drops his horns is from March
until May. In the adult animals they attain their full size in September
or at the beginning of October. After the age of eight years the
branches gradually drop off. They are the easiest animals that man can
keep. They require no barns. They are never housed. They like cold
weather and snow. Food has not to be stored for them. They will not
touch the moss that has been gathered unless brought up to do so by
farmers. They get their food themselves. We do not give them water. When
thirsty they eat the snow. When our people go among them they will often
not even raise their heads, and remain quiet when we pitch our tents.
Once in a while there is so much snow in some districts that it is
impossible for reindeer to get at the moss; then the only way is to go
to the lowlands, or into the forest, where the reindeer can feed on the
moss hanging from the firs or pines.

"Some of the reindeer," he went on, "though trained to eat kept moss,
hay, and even bread, thrive only when they are free to roam about; they
cannot be kept all the time in their stables. They must wander over the
snow and eat it. Otherwise they are sure to degenerate and become
useless as draught animals."

"How many reindeer," I asked, "does a family require for its support?"

He replied, "A thousand at least. A herd of two thousand to two thousand
five hundred gives from two hundred to two hundred and seventy-five,
perhaps three hundred, calves a year. Sometimes we have bad years with
our reindeer. Some years prove unfavorable to their increase. Some years
the snow is very deep, which prevents them from digging for food; the
herd then become emaciated from their exertions and want of sufficient
food, and many die.

"Some Lapps," he added, "own five or six thousand reindeer, one or two
among us, eight or ten thousand. The spring is a bad time for them; the
snow melts during the day from the sun's heat, and a thick crust forms
at night from the frost, so that their feet break through, causing
lameness and disease. At that time we move them as much as we can only
during the day, but it is hard work for them to go through the soft
snow.

"Without the reindeer we could not exist in this northern land of snow.
The reindeer is our horse, our beast of burden. On him we feed. He gives
us our clothing, our shoes, our gloves; his skin is our blanket and our
bed; his sinews our thread. On the march a herd of reindeer is easily
managed. We keep them together without much trouble, and in winter they
remain where we leave them to get the moss; but if the wolves are after
them, then they flee in every direction, and many herds then become
mixed together."

"When your reindeer get mixed with those of other herds, how can you
tell which are yours?" I inquired.

Pehr answered, "Every owner has his own mark branded on the ears of all
his reindeer, and no other person has the right to use the same, as this
is legal proof of ownership; otherwise, when several herds were mingled
together the separation would be impossible. The name of the owner of a
herd, and each mark, have to be recorded in court like those of any
owner of property."




CHAPTER XIV

 MOVING CAMP.--ANOTHER GREAT BLIZZARD.--A REMARKABLE SIGHT.--DEER
     GETTING THEIR FOOD BY DIGGING THE SNOW.--HOW REINDEER ARE
     BUTCHERED.


The next day after our conversation about reindeer Pehr Wasara said to
me: "We are going to move away our camp and take our reindeer to a new
pasture," an expression that struck me as somewhat singular, as the
country lay under snow to the depth of five or six feet. "Some of us are
going to fetch the draught animals, and I will be back in a short time."
With these words he left with some of his people.

They returned with a fine lot of trained reindeer.

In the mean time there had been a great commotion in the camp; everybody
was busy; the tent had been packed in two bundles; its frame made three
packages; the frozen reindeer milk, all the provisions, meat, garments,
robes, skins,--in a word, everything they had was loaded on different
sleighs and secured.

The babies were carefully fixed in their queer-looking cradles, and made
quite safe against blustering winds.

Everything being ready, the reindeer were harnessed and we started. Soon
after, we came to the herd which had been bunched by the Lapps, the
dogs keeping them together. Then we began our march.

The herd moved in advance, in a body. Men, women and children on their
skees moved after them with great rapidity, with their dogs to help them
in the work of keeping the herd together. They all shouted and urged the
dogs to look out, but this required, I thought, no urging, for the dogs
were on the alert and knew what to do. In the rear were three Lapps with
their dogs driving the reindeer forward; the dogs barked behind the
heels of the animals, and once in a while would bite the legs of those
that did not move fast enough.

The women worked just as hard as the men, and those who had babies
carried them in their cradles, slung on their backs, and went as fast on
their skees as if they had been free from burdens. The babies were
evidently very comfortable, for they were very quiet.

It was a fine sight to see the herd of over three thousand reindeer on
the move over the vast plain of snow. After two hours we arrived at the
place of our encampment.

The Lapps hurried the putting up of the tent. The snow had been
shovelled from the place where it was to stand. They were laying the
birch twigs for a floor, and skins were put on the top of these;
alongside of the tent inside boxes and firewood were placed, and outside
snow was piled along the sides, also. This was to prevent the wind
coming in. In the mean time the reindeer had been unharnessed and some
of the sleighs unloaded.

Just then Pehr Wasara exclaimed: "Paulus, we are going to have a great
windstorm very soon. That is the reason we are in so much of a hurry."

He was right. Soon after the wind began to rise and blew stronger and
stronger, hissing and striking against the tent. In another moment we
were in the midst of a hurricane. I thought every instant that our tent
would be blown away and the woollen canvas torn to pieces.

The snow was flying thickly in the air. I said to myself: "If our tent
is blown away I will get into my reindeer bags." I was astonished to see
that the tent could withstand the storm, but the frame was well knit
together, and the woollen vadmal being porous allowed the wind to pass
through and did not give the resistance that canvas would have done. If
the tent had been made of canvas I am sure the frame could not have
withstood the pressure and fury of the blast. The door was protected
from the violence of the wind, which struck against the tent on the
other side.

The reindeer had huddled close together and stood still, except that now
and then those which were outside wanted to go inside and let some of
the other animals bear the brunt of the storm. I noticed that many of
the bulls formed the outer ring, thus protecting the female reindeer.
The poor fellows on the outside had a hard time of it. All the herd
faced the wind.

Inside the tent, when everybody was in, we were packed close together,
including the dogs. In spite of all the drawbacks the tent was
comfortable compared with the weather outside. A blazing fire, over
which hung a kettle full of reindeer meat, sent the smoke into our
faces; but we were thinking of the warm broth and of the good meal we
were going to have, and we laughed merrily and did not care for the
storm. The Lapps knew that the tent would stand the hurricane. The dogs
were in the way of everybody; the Lapps continually drove them out, but
soon after they were in again.

How nice the broth was when we drank it! How good the meat tasted! This
was a splendid meal.

When it was time to go to sleep I took off my shoes and stockings, and
carefully put the Lapp grass with the stockings on my breast to dry the
moisture, for the fine snow came through the smoke hole. Then I got into
my two bags and said good-night to the family.

I was bothered by the dogs during the night. They were no sooner driven
out than they would come in to huddle with the people. One tried to come
into my bag and awoke me. I did not blame the poor dogs, for it was far
more comfortable inside than outside. When I awoke in the morning the
weather was fine, there was no wind, and some of the Lapps took the
reindeer to their new pasture.

After breakfast, my host and I drove to see some of his friends who had
pitched their tent some forty or fifty miles from us. On our way we
entered a large forest of fir trees, and soon after found ourselves in
the midst of a number of deep holes dug by reindeer in order to reach
the moss. We also saw furrows made by Lapp sleighs and tracks of skees.
The holes increased in number as we got deeper into the forest, and
driving instead of being a pleasure became a hard task. There was no
mistake about that. Our little sleighs pitched forward, then side-wise,
and rolled on one side or the other. I had the hardest work to keep
inside. At last I was pitched into one of the holes with my sleigh
almost on top of me. This was no joke. Fortunately I had undone the
twist of my rein round my wrist, for I did not wish to be dragged
against a tree in case I did upset. I was soon in my sleigh again,
however, and before long Pehr Wasara said: "We shall come to the tent of
my friend very soon." He had hardly uttered these words when we heard
the fierce barking of dogs announcing our arrival. Soon after we found
ourselves before a tent.

These dogs were strange looking, a breed I had never seen; they had the
dark color of the brown bear, and were without tails. A man came out to
silence them. He was the owner of the tent, the friend of Pehr Wasara.
He bade us in, we were made welcome, and the snuffbox was passed around.
Coffee was made and served to us with true Lapp hospitality, but to my
taste it was seasoned with a little too much salt.

We had a grand time. A big kettle filled with reindeer meat was cooked,
and Pehr Wasara told his friend all the news, and how his son had come
with me to see him. The place of honor was given to us in the tent; we
slept well, under a lot of skins, and the next morning after breakfast
we bade our host and his family good-bye.

We had not been gone long when I saw something very strange ahead. An
exclamation escaped from me. I stopped. I thought I saw the ground
covered with hares. I could see them moving. "What are such great
numbers of hares doing here?" I said to myself. They moved in such a
strange manner; they seemed to jump, or rather leap. Suddenly I saw my
mistake. "These are not hares," I exclaimed; "but the tails of reindeer
just above the snow. That is all I see of their bodies. The rest is
hidden. They have dug the snow and are eating the moss, and their tails
are in motion." I had never seen such a sight before. It was a queer
landscape; over two thousand tails shaking above the snow at about the
same time. This herd also belonged to Pehr Wasara, who was smiling all
over when he saw how amazed I was at this sight.

[Illustration: "They were really working hard for their living."]

Then we continued our journey, and soon found ourselves in the midst of
hundreds and hundreds of reindeer of all sizes. They were just beginning
to dig the snow with their fore legs. How strange was the sight! As we
passed among them they were not in the least afraid of us. They were
left to themselves. There were no dogs with them, and no people to
watch.

Every reindeer was working as hard as he could, busily digging in the
snow. They were evidently hungry. I said to Pehr Wasara: "Let us stay
here a while; I want to watch the reindeer working." Pehr, who had been
accustomed to see reindeer all his life, wondered at my curiosity, which
seemed rather to amuse him. They dug with the right fore foot, then with
the left, rested at times, then worked again. It was hard work indeed,
but the holes got larger and larger. The bodies gradually disappeared in
the holes they made, and were partly hidden by the little mounds of snow
coming from these holes, until only the tails of many could be seen.
They had reached the moss of which they were so fond. They were really
working hard for their living.

Some of the female reindeer were working with a will, while the young
