
  Par. 2. What two phrases suggest the central idea of
  this paragraph?

  How does the voice indicate that the parenthetical
  clause is subordinate in thought? (Introduction, pp. 24
  and 33.)

  Par. 3. SIMPLICITY, IMPUNITY, STUDIOUS. (Appendix A 8
  and 2.)

  DID CHANCE. What is the emphatic word? Why?

  Read the last two sentences with a view to Perspective.
  (Introduction, p. 33.)

  NO EYES MET HIS ... How does the Inflection on HIS
  indicate the exact meaning? (Introduction, p. 16.)

  Par. 4. Give examples of Grouping in the last sentence
  and show how Grouping affects the Pause. (Introduction,
  p. 11.)

  Par. 5. WHOSE SEAT--GRASS. What is the Shading? Indicate
  the pauses in this group of words giving your reason in
  each case.

  What Inflection is placed on the question in the last
  sentence? Account for it. (Introduction, p. 19.)

  Par. 6. WRITER'S SHOULDER, BOYS SEEMED, ABSOLUTELY.
  (Appendix A, 6, 2.)

  Give examples of Grouping in the second sentence.

  BID HIM TAKE IT FOR HIS MODEL. Which is the emphatic
  word? Why?

  Par. 7. How is I THINK, BOYS connected with the rest of
  the speech? Apply this principle to other examples of
  direct speech interrupted by narrative. (Introduction,
  p. 24.)

  Par. 9. IF YOU ARE ... BE SO. Select the two emphatic
  Words and give your reason for emphasizing them,
  (Introduction, p. 30.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE KNIGHTS' CHORUS

From "Idylls of the King"


    Blow trumpet, for the world is white with May;
  Blow trumpet, the long night hath roll'd away!
  Blow thro' the living world--Let the King reign.

    Shall Rome or Heathen rule in Arthur's realm?
  Flash brand and lance, fall battleaxe upon helm,                     5
  Fall battleaxe, and flash brand! Let the King reign.

    Strike for the King and live! his knights have heard
  That God hath told the King a secret word.
  Fall battleaxe, and flash brand! Let the King reign.

    Blow trumpet! he will lift us from the dust!                      10
  Blow trumpet! live the strength, and die the lust!
  Clang battleaxe, and clash brand! Let the King reign.

    Strike for the King and die! and if thou diest,
  The King is King, and ever wills the highest.
  Clang battleaxe, and clash brand! Let the king reign.               15

    Blow, for our Sun is mighty in his May!
  Blow, for our Sun is mightier day by day!
  Clang battleaxe, and clash brand! Let the King reign.

    The King will follow Christ, and we the King
  In whom high God hath breathed a secret thing.                      20
  Fall battleaxe, and flash brand! Let the King reign.

      --_Alfred Tennyson_


  How do you describe this poem from the standpoint of;
  (1) the amount of energy, (2) excitement or nervous
  tension? With what Force and in what Pitch should it be
  read? (Introduction, pp. 22 and 25.)

  Account for the Time in which it is read. (Introduction,
  p. 13.)

  What is the purpose of the question in stanza ii? How is
  this purpose indicated by the Inflection? (Introduction,
  p. 19.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NORTHERN STAR

A Tynemouth Ship


      The Northern Star
      Sail'd over the bar
  Bound to the Baltic Sea;
      In the morning gray
      She stretched away:--                                            5
  'Twas a weary day to me!

      For many an hour
      In sleet and shower
  By the lighthouse rock I stray;
      And watch till dark                                             10
      For the winged bark
  Of him that is far away.

      The castle's bound
      I wander round
  Amidst the grassy graves:                                           15
      But all I hear
      Is the north-wind drear,
  And all I see are the waves.

      The Northern Star
      Is set afar!                                                    20
  Set in the Baltic Sea:
      And the waves have spread
      The sandy bed
  That holds my Love from me.

      --_Unknown_


  PREPARATORY.--Tell the story of the poem, making as
  vivid as possible the scenes depicted. Compare
  Kingsley's _Three Fishers_, and Lucy Larcom's _Hannah
  binding Shoes_.

  Compare this poem with _The Knights' Chorus_ from the
  standpoint of the amount of energy. How is the
  difference between the two indicated vocally by the
  Force? (Introduction, p. 26.)

  What is the difference in nervous tension between the
  last stanza and the preceding ones? What difference in
  Pitch? (Introduction, p. 23.)

  Account for the Time in which it is read. (Introduction,
  p. 14.)

  11. WINGED, with sails

  15. TYNEMOUTH CASTLE used as a graveyard.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIGO BIRD


                    When I see,
  High on the tip-top twig of a tree,
  Something blue by the breezes stirred,
  But so far up that the blue is blurred,
  So far up no green leaf flies.                                       5
  Twixt its blue and the blue of the skies,
  Then I know, ere a note be heard,
  That is naught but the Indigo bird.

      Blue on the branch and blue in the sky,
      And naught between but the breezes high,                        10
      And naught so blue by the breezes stirred
      As the deep, deep blue of the Indigo bird.

                    When I hear
  A song like a bird laugh, blithe and clear,
  As though of some airy jest he had heard                            15
  The last and the most delightful word,
  A laugh as fresh in the August haze
  As it was in the full-voiced April days,
  Then I know that my heart is stirred
  By the laugh-like song of the Indigo bird.                          20

      Joy in the branch and joy in the sky,
      And naught between but the breezes high;
      And naught so glad on the breezes heard
      As the gay, gay note of the Indigo bird.

      --_Ethelwyn Wetherald_ (_By permission_)


  PREPARATORY.--Suggest a picture which would serve as an
  illustration for this poem.

  How does the Imaging affect the Pitch in the first two
  stanzas?

  What feelings does the poem arouse? Where do these
  feelings reach a Climax? What is the effect on the
  Pitch?

  What other Climax is found in the poem besides the
  Climax of feeling?

  FAR, LAUGH, BRANCH, GLAD. (Appendix A, 1.)

  BREEZES STIRRED. (Appendix A, 6.)

  What is the Inflection on ll. 1-6 of stanza i and iii?
  (Introduction, p. 17.) How does the Pitch of these lines
  differ from that of ll. 7 and 8 of these stanzas?
  Account for the change. (Introduction, p. 23.)

  What are the contrasting words in l. 6, stanza i?

  Note the Grouping and Pause in ll. 3 and 4, stanza iii.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE PASTURE FIELD


  When spring has burned
    The ragged robe of winter, stitch by stitch,
  And deftly turned
    To moving melody the wayside ditch,
  The pale-green pasture field behind the bars                         5
  Is goldened o'er with dandelion stars.

  When summer keeps
    Quick pace with sinewy white-shirted arms,
  And daily steeps
    In sunny splendour all her spreading farms,                       10
  The pasture field is flooded foamy white
  With daisy faces looking at the light.

  When autumn lays
    Her golden wealth upon the forest floor,
  And all the days                                                    15
    Look backward at the days that went before,
  A pensive company, the asters, stand,
  Their blue eyes brightening the pasture land.

  When winter lifts
    A sounding trumpet to his strenuous lips,                         20
  And shapes the drifts
    To curves of transient loveliness, he slips
  Upon the pasture's ineffectual brown
  A swan-soft vestment delicate as down.

      --_Ethelwyn Wetherald_ (_By permission_)


  PREPARATORY.--Select the phrases which call into play
  the Imaging process.

  Describe four typical Canadian scenes suggested by this
  poem.

  Distinguish the sound of _a_ in PASTURE, RAGGED, BARS,
  etc. (Appendix A, 1.)

  What words express the central ideas in each stanza, and
  at the same time form a contrast with one another?

  What Inflection is used in the first four lines of each
  stanza? (Introduction, p. 16.)

  How does the Shading of these lines compare with that of
  the last two of each stanza? (Introduction, p. 33.)

       *       *       *       *       *


SHIPWRECKED

From "Kidnapped"


1. The time I spent upon the island is still so horrible a thought to
me that I must pass it lightly over. In all the books I have read of
people cast away, either they had their pockets full of tools, or a
chest of things would be thrown upon the beach along with them, as if
on purpose. My case was very much different. I had nothing in my
pockets but money and Alan's silver button; and being inland bred, I
was as much short of knowledge as of means.

2. I knew indeed that shellfish were counted good to eat; and among
the rocks of the isle I found a great plenty of limpets, which at
first I could scarcely strike from their places, not knowing quickness
to be needful. There were, besides, some of the little shells that we
call buckies; I think periwinkle is the English name. Of these two I
made my whole diet, devouring them cold and raw as I found them; and
so hungry was I that at first they seemed to me delicious.

3. Perhaps they were out of season, or perhaps there was something
wrong in the sea about my island. But at least I had no sooner eaten
my first meal than I was seized with giddiness and retching, and lay
for a long time no better than dead. A second trial of the same food
(indeed, I had no other) did better with me and revived my strength.

4. But as long as I was on the island, I never knew what to expect
when I had eaten; sometimes all was well, and sometimes I was thrown
into a miserable sickness; nor could I ever distinguish what
particular fish it was that hurt me. All day it streamed rain; there
was no dry spot to be found; and when I lay down that night, between
two boulders that made a kind of roof, my feet were in a bog.

5. From a little up the hillside over the bay I could catch a sight of
the great ancient church and the roofs of the people's houses in Iona.
And on the other hand, over the low country of the Ross, I saw smoke
go up, morning and evening, as if from a homestead in a hollow of the
land.

6. I used to watch this smoke, when I was wet and cold and had my head
half-turned with loneliness, and think of the fireside and of the
company till my heart burned. Altogether, this sight I had of men's
homes and comfortable lives, although it put a point on my own
sufferings, yet it kept hope alive, and helped me to eat my raw
shellfish (which had soon grown to be a disgust), and saved me from
the sense of horror I had whenever I was quite alone with dead rocks,
and fowls, and the rain, and the cold sea.

7. Charles the Second declared a man could stay outdoors more days in
the year in the climate of England than in any other. That was very
like a king with a palace at his back and changes of dry clothes. But
he must have had better luck on his flight from Worcester than I had
on that miserable isle. It was the height of summer; yet it rained for
more than twenty-four hours, and did not clear until the afternoon of
the third day.

8. There is a pretty high rock on the north-west of Earraid, which
(because it had a flat top and overlooked the Sound) I was much in the
habit of frequenting; not that I ever stayed in one place, save when
asleep, my misery giving me no rest. Indeed, I wore myself down with
continual and aimless goings and comings in the rain.

9. As soon, however, as the sun came out, I lay down on the top of
that rock to dry myself. The comfort of the sunshine is a thing I
cannot tell. It set me thinking hopefully of my deliverance, of which
I had begun to despair; and I scanned the sea and the Ross with a
fresh interest. On the south of my rock a part of the island jutted
out and hid the open ocean so that a boat could thus come quite near
me upon that side and I be none the wiser.

10. Well, all of a sudden, a coble, with a brown sail and a pair of
fishers aboard of it, came flying round that corner of the isle, bound
for Iona. I shouted out, and then fell on my knees on the rock and
prayed to them. They were near enough to hear--I could even see the
colour of their hair--and there was no doubt but they observed me, for
they cried out in the Gaelic tongue, and laughed. But the boat never
turned aside, and flew right on, before my eyes, for Iona.

11. I could not believe such wickedness, and ran along the shore from
rock to rock, crying on them piteously; even after they were out of
reach of my voice I still cried and waved to them; and when they were
quite gone I thought my heart would burst.

12. The next day (which was the fourth of this horrible life of mine)
I found my bodily strength run very low. But the sun shone, the air
was sweet, and what I managed to eat of the shellfish agreed well with
me and revived my courage.

13. I was scarce back on my rock (where I went always the first thing
after I had eaten) before I observed a boat coming down the Sound, and
with her head, as I thought, in my direction.

14. I began at once to hope and fear exceedingly; for I thought these
men might have thought better of their cruelty and be coming back to
my assistance. But another disappointment, such as yesterday's, was
more than I could bear. I turned my back accordingly upon the sea, and
did not look again till I had counted many hundreds.

15. The boat was still heading for the island. The next time I counted
the full thousand, as slowly as I could, my heart beating so as to
hurt me. And then it was out of all question. She was coming straight
to Earraid. I could no longer hold myself back, but ran to the seaside
and out, from one rock to another, as far as I could go. It is a
marvel I was not drowned; for when I was brought to a stand at last my
legs shook under me, and my mouth was so dry I must wet it with the
sea water before I was able to shout.

16. All this time the boat was coming on; and now I was able to
perceive it was the same boat and the same two men as yesterday. This
I knew by their hair, which the one had of bright yellow and the other
black. But now there was a third man along with them, who looked to be
of a better class.

17. As soon as they were come within easy speech, they let down their
sail and lay quiet. In spite of my supplications, they drew no nearer
in, and what frightened me most of all, the new man tee-heed with
laughter as he talked and looked at me.

18. Then he stood up in the boat and addressed me a long while,
speaking fast and with many wavings of his hand. I told him I had no
Gaelic; and at this he became very angry, and I began to suspect he
thought he was talking English. Listening very close, I caught the
word "whateffer" several times; but all the rest was Gaelic, and might
have been Greek and Hebrew for me.

