preparing for a rich harvest of trade, which will greatly redound to the
advantage of this colony.

10.  I have further to communicate for your information that the
proclamation issued by me, asserting the rights of the Crown to all gold
in its natural place of deposit, and forbidding all persons to dig for
gold without a licence, has been published in the newspapers of Oregon
and Washington territories, and that, notwithstanding, some seventy or
eighty adventurers from the American side have gone by the way of Fraser
River to the Couteau mines without taking out licences.

11.  I did not, as I might have done, attempt to enforce those rights by
means of a detachment of seamen and marines, from the "Satellite,"
without being assured that such a proceeding would meet with the
approval of Her Majesty's Government; but the moment your instructions
on the subject are received, I will take measures to carry them into
effect.

I have, etcetera, (Signed) James Douglas, Governor.

The Right Hon. Henry Labouchere, M.P., etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

NO.  X.

_Governor Douglas to the Right Hon. Henry Labouchere, M.P._

Victoria, Vancouver's Island, May 8, 1858.

Since I had the honour of addressing you on the 6th of April last on the
subject of the "Couteau" gold mines, they have become more than ever a
source of attraction to the people of Washington and Oregon territories,
and it is evident from the accounts published in the latest San
Francisco papers, that intense excitement prevails among the inhabitants
of that stirring city on the same subject.

The "Couteau" country is there represented and supposed to be in point
of mineral wealth a second California or Australia, and those
impressions are sustained by the false and exaggerated statements of
steamboat owners and other interested parties, who benefit by the
current of emigration which is now setting strongly towards this
quarter.

Boats, canoes, and every species of small craft, are continually
employed in pouring their cargoes of human beings into Fraser River, and
it is supposed that not less than one thousand whites are already at
work and on the way to the gold districts.  Many accidents have happened
in the dangerous rapids of that river; a great number of canoes have
been dashed to pieces, and their cargoes swept away by the impetuous
stream, while of the ill-fated adventurers who accompanied them many
have been swept into eternity.

The others, nothing daunted by the spectacle of ruin and buoyed up by
the hope of amassing wealth, still keep pressing onward towards the
coveted goal of their most ardent wishes.

On the 25th of last month, the American steamer "Commodore" arrived in
this port direct from San Francisco, with 450 passengers on board, the
chief part of whom are gold miners for the "Couteau" country.

Nearly 400 of those men were landed at this place, and have since left
in boats and canoes for Fraser River.

I ascertained from inquiries on the subject that those men are all well
provided with mining tools, and that there was no dearth of capital or
intelligence among them.  About sixty British subjects, with an equal
number of native born Americans, the rest being chiefly Germans, with a
smaller proportion of Frenchmen and Italians, composed this body of
adventurers.

They are represented as being, with some exceptions, a specimen of the
worst of the population of San Francisco; the very dregs, in fact, of
society.  Their conduct while here would have led me to form a very
different conclusion; as our little town, though crowded to excess with
this sudden influx of people, and though there was a temporary scarcity
of food, and dearth of house accommodation, the police few in number,
and many temptations to excess in the way of drink, yet quiet and order
prevailed, and there was not a single committal for rioting,
drunkenness, or other offences during their stay here.

The merchants and other business classes of Victoria are rejoicing in
the advent of so large a body of the people in the colony, and are
strongly in favour of making this port a stopping point between San
Francisco and the gold mines, converting the latter, as it were, into a
feeder and dependency of this colony.

Victoria would thus become a depot and centre of trade for the gold
districts, and the natural consequence would be an immediate increase in
the wealth and population of the colony.

To effect that object it will be requisite to facilitate by every
possible means the transport of passengers and goods to the furthest
navigable point on Fraser River; and the obvious means of accomplishing
that end is to employ light steamers in plying between, and connecting
this port (Victoria) with the Falls of Fraser River, distant 130 miles
from the discharge of that river, into the Gulf of Georgia; those falls
being generally believed to be at the commencement of the remunerative
gold diggings, and from thence the miners would readily make their, way
on foot, or, after the summer freshets, by the river into the interior
of the country.

By that means also the whole trade of the gold regions would pass
through Fraser River and be retained within the British territory,
forming a valuable outlet for British manufactured goods, and at once
creating a lucrative trade between the mother country and Vancouver's
Island.

Taking a view of the subject, simply in its relations to trade and
commerce, apart from considerations of national policy, such perhaps
would be the course most likely to promote the interests of this colony;
but, on the contrary, if the country be thrown open, to indiscriminate
immigration, the interests of the empire may suffer from the
introduction of a foreign population, whose sympathies may be decidedly
anti-British.

Taking this view of the question, it assumes an alarming aspect, and
suggests a doubt as to the policy of permitting the free entrance of
foreigners into the British territory for residence, without in the
first place requiring them to take the oath of allegiance, and otherwise
to give such security for their conduct as the Government of the country
may deem it proper and necessary to require at their hands.

The opinion which I have formed on the subject leads me to think that,
in the event of the diggings proving remunerative, it will now be found
impossible to check the course of immigration, even by closing Fraser
River, as the miners would then force a passage into the gold district
by way of the Columbia River, and the valuable trade of the country in
that case be driven from its natural course into a foreign channel, and
entirely lost to this country.

On the contrary, should the diggings prove to be unremunerative, a
question which as yet remains undecided, the existing excitement, we may
suppose, will die away of itself; and the miners, having no longer the
prospect of large gains, will naturally abandon a country which no
longer holds out any inducement for them to remain.

Until the value of the country as a gold-producing region be established
on clearer evidence than can now be adduced in its favour--and the point
will no doubt be decided before the close of the present year--I would
simply recommend that a small naval or military force should be placed
at the disposal of this Government, to enable us to maintain the peace,
and to enforce obedience to the laws.

The system of granting licences for digging gold has not yet come into
operation.

Perhaps a similar method of raising a revenue would be to impose a
customs' duty on imports, to be levied on all supplies brought into the
country, whether by Fraser or the Columbia River.

The export of gold from the country is still inconsiderable, not
exceeding 600 ounces since I last addressed you.  The principal diggings
are reported to be at present, and will probably continue, flooded for
several months to come, so that unless other diggings apart from the
river beds are discovered, the production of gold will not increase
until the summer freshets are over, which will probably happen about the
middle of August next.  In the meantime the ill-provided adventurers who
have gone hither and thither will consume their stock of provisions, and
probably have to retire from the country until a more favourable season.

I shall be most happy to receive your instructions on the subject in
this letter.

NO.  XII.

_Copy of a better from the Secretary of the Admiralty to Herman
Merivale, Esquire_.

Admiralty, June 26, 1858.

Sir,--I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to send
you herewith, for the information of Secretary Sir E. Bulwer Lytton, a
copy of a letter from Captain Prevost, of H.M. Ship "Satellite," dated
at Vancouver's Island, 7th May 1858, respecting the discovery of gold on
Fraser and Thompson Rivers, near to the 51st parallel of north latitude,
in North America.

The newspaper and specimen of gold dust referred to in Captain Prevost's
letter are also enclosed.

I am, etcetera, (Signed) H. Corby.

Herman Merivale, Esquire, Colonial Office.

_Enclosures Number 12_.

H.M.S. "Satellite," Esquimault, Vancouver's Island, May 7, 1858.

I have the honour to report to you that considerable excitement has been
occasioned recently in this neighbourhood by the discovery of gold on
Fraser and Thompson Rivers, at about the position of the juncture of the
latter with the former river, near to 51st parallel of north latitude.

The reports concerning these new gold diggings are so contradictory that
I am unable to furnish you with any information upon which I can depend.
That gold exists is certain, and that it will be found in abundance
seems to be the opinion of all those who are capable of forming a
judgment upon the subject; but it is so obviously to the advantage of
the surrounding community to circulate exaggerated, if not altogether
false reports, for the purpose of stimulating trade, or creating
monopolies, that it is most difficult to arrive at any correct
conclusion, or to, obtain any reliable information.  I have every reason
to believe that the Indians have traded some quantity of gold with the
officers of the Hudson's Bay Company, and I am satisfied that
individuals from this immediate neighbourhood who started off to the
diggings upon the first intelligence of their existence, have come back
with gold dust in their possession, and which they assert was washed by
themselves; but whether such be really the case, or whether it was
traded from the Indians, I am unable to determine.  These persons all
declare that at the present moment, although the yield is good, yet
there is too much water in the rivers to admit of digging and washing to
be carried on with facility; but that when the water falls somewhat, as
the summer advances, that the yield will be abundant.  I am inclined to
think that this information is not far from the truth, for these
persons, after obtaining a fresh stock of provision, have all returned
to the diggings.

The excitement in Vancouver's Island itself is quite insignificant
compared to that in Washington and Oregon territories, and in
California, and which, of course, is increased by every possible means
by interested parties.  The result has been that several hundred persons
from American territory have already flocked to the newly reported
auriferous regions, and by the last accounts fresh steamers, and even
sailing vessels, were being chartered to convey passengers to Puget
Sound, or to Vancouver's Island, whence they have to find their way to
the diggings principally by canoes.

I have heard that all the crews of the ships in Puget Sound have
deserted, and have gone to the diggings; I am happy to say that as yet I
have not lost a single man from the "Satellite" since the information
was received, and I have every reason to hope that I may not be
unfortunate in this respect, although, doubtless, soon the temptations
to desert will be of no ordinary character.

NO.  XIII.

_Secretary Sir E. Bulwer Lytton to Governor Douglas_.

Downing Street, July 1, 1858.

Sir,--I have to acknowledge your despatch of the 8th ult, in
continuation of former despatches, informing the Secretary of State from
time to time of the progress of the gold discoveries on Fraser River,
and the measures which you had taken in consequence.  I am anxious not
to let the opportunity of the present mail pass without informing you
that Her Majesty's Government have under their consideration the
pressing necessity for taking some steps to establish public order and
government in that locality, and that I hope very soon to be able to
communicate to you the result.

In the meantime, Her Majesty's Government approve of the course which
you have adopted in asserting both the dominion of the Crown over this
region, and the right of the Crown over the precious metals.  They
think, however, that you acted judiciously in waiting for further
instructions before you endeavoured to compel the taking out of
licences, by causing any force to be despatched for that purpose from
Vancouver's Island.

They wish you to continue your vigilance, and to apply for instructions
on any point on which you may require them.  They are, however, in
addition, particularly anxious to impress on you, that while Her
Majesty's Government are determined on preserving the rights, both of
government and of commerce, which belong to this country, and while they
have it in contemplation to furnish you with such a force as they may be
able to detach for your assistance and support in the preservation of
law and order, it is no part of their policy to exclude Americans and
other foreigners from the gold fields.  On the contrary, you are
distinctly instructed to oppose no obstacle whatever to their resort
thither for the purpose of digging in those fields, so long as they
submit themselves, in common with the subjects of Her Majesty, to the
recognition of her authority, and conform to such rules of police as you
may have thought proper to establish.  The national right to navigate
Fraser River is, of course, a separate question, and one which Her
Majesty's Government must reserve.

Under the circumstance of so large an immigration of Americans into
English territory, I need hardly impress upon you the importance of
caution and delicacy in dealing with those manifold cases of
international relationship and feeling which are certain to arise; and
which, but for the exercise of temper and discretion, might easily lead
to serious complications between two neighbouring and powerful states.

It is impossible by this mail to furnish you with any instructions of a
more definite character.  Her Majesty's Government must leave much to
your discretion on this most important subject; and they rely upon your
exercising whatever influence and powers you may possess in the manner
which from local knowledge and experience you conceive to be best
calculated to give development to the new country, and to advance
imperial interests.  I have, etcetera, (Signed) E. Bulwer Lytton.

Governor Douglas, etcetera, etcetera.

CHARTER INCORPORATING THE HUDSON'S BAY COMPANY.

In 1670, a royal charter was granted by Charles the Second, for
incorporating the Hudson's Bay Company.  The grant to the company was of
"the sole trade and commerce of all those seas, straits, bays, rivers,
lakes, creeks, and sounds, in whatsoever latitude they shall be, that
lie within the entrance of the straits, commonly called Hudson's
Straits, together with all the lands and territories upon the countries,
coasts, and confines of the seas, bays, lakes, rivers, creeks and sounds
aforesaid, that are not already actually possessed by or granted to any
of our subjects, or possessed by the subjects of any other Christian
prince or State, with the fishing of all sorts of fish, whales,
sturgeons, and all other royal fishes in the seas, bays, inlets, and
rivers within the premises; and the fish therein taken, together with
the royalty of the sea upon the coasts within the limits aforesaid, and
all mines royal, as well discovered as not discovered, of gold, silver,
gems, and precious stones to be found or discovered within the
territories, limits, and places aforesaid;" and the charter declares
that "the said land be from henceforth reckoned as one of our
plantations or colonies in America, called Rupert's Land."

COMPARISON BETWEEN PRICE OF LABOUR IN AUSTRALIA AND CALIFORNIA OR
BRITISH COLUMBIA.

_From the Times' Correspondent_.

I take the wages in Australia from a Melbourne paper of 16th March,
which gives the wages current at that time!  I received it direct a few
days ago.  I reduce our American currency into sterling at 48 pence to
the dollar, that being about its current value here.

_Melbourne Wages_.

Married couples (servants), 60 pounds to 70 pounds per annum; female
servants, 25 pounds to 30 pounds per annum; gardeners, 55 pounds to 60
pounds per annum; grooms, 40 pounds to 50 pounds a-year; carpenters, 12
shillings to 14 shillings per day; ditto, rough, 25 shillings to 30
shillings per week; masons and bricklayers, 10 shillings to 15 shillings
per day; waiters, 20 shillings to 25 shillings per week; compositors, 1
shilling 4 pence per 1000; blacksmiths, 40 shillings per week; farm
labourers, 15 shillings to 20 shillings per week; shepherds, 20 pounds
to 25 pounds a-year.

_California Wages_.

Married couples (servants), 192 pounds per annum, and found; female
servants, 80 pounds to 96 pounds, and kept; gardeners, 120 pounds
a-year, and found; by the day, 3 dollars, now 4 dollars; young men in
stables as grooms, 120 pounds a-year, and found, 16 pounds a month and
find themselves; carpenters, with us till lately 1 pound a-day, now 28
shillings a-day; "rough" and smooth, I never knew any difference--and
all bad; masons and bricklayers at lowest time, 25 shillings a-day, here
at present 35 shillings a-day; waiters, 6 pounds to 8 pounds a-month in
San Francisco; compositors, 2 shillings 10 and a half pence per 1000
type, our types double size; blacksmiths, 3 pounds 12 shillings to 6
pounds a-week; general rate, 5 dollars a day; farm labourers, 6 pounds
a-month, and found, and only work from 7 o'clock to 6 o'clock, with two
hours for meals; shepherds, 144 pounds, 10 shillings a-year, and found;
a competent shepherd worth 240 pounds a-year, and found; or, to serve on
shares of increase of stock, on very liberal terms.

All provisions except animal food, are cheaper in San Francisco than in
Melbourne.

TREATY MADE BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND GREAT BRITAIN IN REGARD TO THE
LIMITS WESTWARD OF THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS, JUNE 15, 1846.

Article 1.  From the point on the forty-ninth parallel of north
latitude, where the boundary laid down in existing treaties and
conventions between the United States and Great Britain, terminates, the
line of boundary between the territories of the United States and those
of her Britannic Majesty shall be continued westward along the said
forty-ninth parallel of north, latitude to the middle of the channel
which separates the continent from Vancouver's Island, and thence
southerly through the middle of the said channel, and of Fuca's Straits,
to the Pacific ocean: Provided, however, that the navigation of the
whole of the said channel and straits, south of the forty-ninth parallel
of north latitude, remain free and open to both parties.

Article 2.  From the point at which the forty-ninth parallel of north
latitude shall be found to intersect the great northern branch of the
Columbia River, the navigation of the said branch shall be free and open
to the Hudson's Bay Company, and to all British subjects trading with
