
"I say you have not; don't contradict me, if you want to take that head
of yours home with you. Nobody will ask whether you have seen me or not;
so that if a lie is likely to choke you, keep still with your tongue."

"I am not to say that I have seen you on the island?" queried Donald.

"You are not," replied the captain, with an echoing expletive.

"Why not, sir?"

"None of your business! Do as you are told, and spend the money I gave
you for gingerbread and fast horses."

"But when my mother sees this money she will want to know where I got
it."

"If you tell her or anybody else, I'll hammer your head till it isn't
thicker than a piece of sheet-iron. Don't let her see the money. Hire a
fast horse, and go to ride next Sunday."

"I don't go to ride on Sunday."

"I suppose not. Give it to the missionaries to buy red flannel shirts
for little niggers in the West Indies, if you like. I don't care what
you do with it."

"You don't wish anybody to know you have been on the island this
morning--is that the idea, Captain Shivernock?" asked Donald, not a
little alarmed at the position in which his companion was placing him.

"That's the idea, Don John."

"I don't see why--"

"You are not to see why," interrupted the captain, fiercely. "That's my
business, not yours. Will you do as I tell you?"

"If there is any trouble--"

"There isn't any trouble. Do you think I've killed somebody?--No. Do you
think I've robbed somebody?--No. Do you think I've set somebody's house
on fire?--No. Do you think I've stolen somebody's chickens?--No. Nothing
of the sort. I want to know whether you can keep your tongue still. Let
us see. There's the Juno."

"Somebody will see your boat, and know that you have been here--"

"That's my business, not yours. Don't bother your head with what don't
concern you," growled the passenger.

The Juno was afloat, but she could not have been so many minutes, when
Donald came alongside of her. It was now about half tide on the flood,
and she must have grounded at about half tide on the ebb. This fact
indicated that Captain Shivernock had left her at four o'clock in the
morning. The owner of the Juno stepped into her, and Donald hoisted the
sail for him. The boat was cat-rigged, and about twenty-four feet long.
She was a fine craft, with a small cabin forward, furnished with every
convenience the limited space would permit. The captain seated himself
in the standing-room, and began to heap maledictions upon the boat.

"I never will sail in her again," said he. "I will burn her, and get a
centre-board boat."

"What will you take for her, sir?" asked Donald.

"Do you want her, Don John?" demanded the captain.

"I couldn't afford to keep her; but I will sell her for you."

"Sell--" it is no matter what; but Captain Shivernock suddenly leaped
back into Donald's boat, and her skipper wondered what he intended to do
next. "She is yours, Don John!" he exclaimed.

"To sell for you?"

"No! Sell her, if you like, but put the money in your own pocket. I will
sail up in your boat, and you may go to Jerusalem in the Juno, if you
like. I will never get into her again," added the captain, spitefully.

"But, Captain Shivernock, you surely don't mean to _give_ me this boat."

"Do you think I don't know what I mean?" roared the strange man, after a
long string of expletives. "She is yours, now; not mine. I'll give you a
bill of sale as soon as I go ashore. Not another word, or I'll pound
your head. Don't tell anybody I gave her to you, or that you have seen
me. If you do there will be a job for a coffin-maker."

The captain shoved off the boat, and laid her course across the bay,
evidently to avoid Laud Cavendish, whose craft was a mile distant; for
he had probably put in at Searsport. Donald weighed the anchor of the
Juno, and sailed for Turtle Head, hardly knowing whether he was himself
or somebody else, so amazed was he at the strange conduct of his late
passenger. He could not begin to comprehend it, and he did not have to
strain his logic very much in coming to the conclusion that the captain
was insane.




CHAPTER VI.

DONALD GETS THE JOB.


Whether Captain Shivernock was sane or insane, Donald Ramsay was in
possession of the Juno. Of course he did not consider himself the
proprietor of the craft, if he did of the sixty dollars he had in his
pocket. She had the wind over her port quarter, and the boat tore
through the water as if she intended to show her new skipper what she
could do. But Donald paid little attention to the speed of the Juno, for
his attention was wholly absorbed by the remarkable events of the
morning. Captain Shivernock had given him sixty dollars in payment
nominally for the slight service rendered him. But then, the strange man
had given a poor laborer a hundred dollars for stopping his horse, when
the animal leisurely walked towards home from the store where the owner
had left him. Again, he had given a negro sailor a fifty-dollar bill
for sculling him across the river. He had rewarded a small boy with a
ten-dollar bill for bringing him a despatch from the telegraph office.
When the woman who went to his house to do the washing was taken sick,
and was not able to work for three months, he regularly called at her
rooms every Monday morning and gave her ten dollars, which was three
times as much as she ever earned in the same time.

Remembering these instances of the captain's bounty, Donald had no doubt
about the ownership of the sixty dollars in his pocket. The money was
his own; but how had he earned it? Was he paid to keep his tongue still,
or simply for the service performed? If for his silence, what had the
captain done which made him desire to conceal the fact that he had been
to the island? The strange man had explicitly denied having killed,
robbed, or stolen from anybody. All the skipper could make of it was,
that his desire for silence was only a whim of the captain, and he was
entirely willing to accommodate him. If there had been any mischief done
on the island, he should hear of it; and in that event he would take
counsel of some one older and wiser than himself. Then he tried to
satisfy himself as to why the captain had walked at least three miles to
Turtle Head, instead of waiting till the tide floated the Juno. This
appeared to be also a whim of the strange man. People in the city used
to say it was no use to ask the reason for anything that Captain
Shivernock did. His motive in giving Donald sixty dollars and his boat,
which would sell readily for three hundred dollars, and had cost over
five hundred, was utterly unaccountable.

Donald was determined not to do anything wrong, and if the captain had
committed any evil deed, he fully intended to expose him; but he meant
to keep still until he learned that the evil deed had been done. The
money in his pocket, and that for which the Juno could be sold, would be
capital enough to enable him to carry on the business of boat-building.
But he was determined to see Captain Shivernock that very day in regard
to the boat. Perhaps the strange man would give him a job to build a
centre-board yacht, for he wanted one.

"Hallo! Juno, ahoy!" shouted Laud Cavendish.

Donald threw the boat up into the wind, under the stern of Laud's craft.

"I thought you were going down to Camden," said he. "You won't get there
to-day at this rate."

"I forgot some things I wanted, and ran up to Searsport after them. But
what are you doing in the Juno, Don John?"

"She's going to be sold, Laud," replied Donald, dodging the direct
question. "Didn't you say you wanted to buy a boat?"

"I said so; and I want to buy one badly. I'm going to spend my summer on
the water. What does the captain ask for her?"

"I don't know what the price is, but I'll let you know on Monday," added
Donald, as he filled away again, for the yacht fleet was now in sight.

"Hold on a minute, Don John; I want to talk with you about her."

"I can't stop now. I have to go up to the Head and measure the yachts."

"Don't say a word to anybody about my buying her," added Laud.

He was soon out of hearing of Laud's voice. He wondered if the swell
really wished to buy such a boat as the Juno, and could pay three
hundred dollars for her. His father was not a rich man, and he was out
of business himself. And he wanted Donald to keep still too. What motive
had he for wishing his proposition to be kept in the dark? His object
was not apparent, and Donald was obliged to give up the conundrum,
though he had some painful doubts on the subject. As he thought of the
matter, he turned to observe the position of the two boats to the
southward of him. Directly ahead of Laud's craft was an island which he
could not weather, and he was obliged to tack. He could not lay his
course, and he had to take a short and then a long stretch, and he was
now standing across the bay on the short leg. Captain Shivernock had run
over towards the Northport shore, and Donald thought they could not well
avoid coming within hailing distance of each other. But the Juno passed
beyond the north-west point of the island, and he could no longer see
them. He concluded, however, that the captain would not let Laud, or any
one else, see him afloat that day. He was a very strange man.

Donald ran the Juno around the point, and anchored her under the lee of
Turtle Head. The fleet was still a couple of miles distant, and after he
had lowered and secured the mainsail, he had nothing to do but examine
the fine craft which had so strangely come into his possession. He went
into the cuddy forward, and overhauled everything there, till he was
fully qualified to set forth the merits of her accommodations to a
purchaser. The survey was calculated to kindle his own enthusiasm, for
Donald was as fond of boating as any young man in the club. The idea of
keeping the Juno for his own use occurred to him, but he resisted the
temptation, and determined not even to think of such an extravagant
plan.

The yacht fleet was now approaching, the Skylark gallantly leading the
way, and the Christabel, with a reef in her mainsail, bringing up the
rear. The Sea Foam did not seem to hold her own with the Skylark, as she
had done before, but she was the second to drop her anchor under the lee
of Turtle Head.

"I cam glad to see you, Don John," said Commodore Montague, as he
discovered Donald in the Juno. "I was afraid you were not coming, and I
went up to the shop to look for you. But how came you in that boat?"

"She is for sale," replied Donald, as the tender of the Skylark came
alongside the Juno, and he stepped into it. "Do you know of anybody that
wants to buy her?"

"I know three or four who want boats, but I am not sure the Juno would
suit either of them," replied the commodore.

The boat pulled to the shore, and no one asked any more questions about
the Juno, or her late owner. The members of the club on board of the
several yachts landed, and Donald was soon in earnest conversation with
Samuel Rodman.

"What does your father say?" he asked.

"He wants to see you," replied Samuel.

"Does he think I can't do the job?"

"He did not think so at first, but when I told him you would employ one
or two regular ship carpenters, he was satisfied, and I think he will
give you the job."

"I hope he will, and I am sure I can give him as good work as he can get
anywhere."

"I haven't any doubt of it, Don John. But the Sea Foam isn't doing so
well as she did the first day you had her out. The Skylark beats her
every time they sail."

"Ned Patterdale hasn't got the hang of her yet."

"Perhaps not."

"I should like to have Bob Montague sail her, and Ned the Skylark; I
think it would make a difference," added Donald. "Ned does very well,
but a skipper must get used to his boat; and he hasn't had much
experience in yachts as large as the Sea Foam. I spoke to you of a
change in the model for the Maud; and if I'm not greatly mistaken, she
will beat both the Sea Foam and the Skylark."

"I would give all my spending-money for a year, over and above the cost,
if she would do that," replied Rodman, with a snap of the eye.

"Of course I can't promise that she will do it, but I expect she will,"
said Donald.

The club assembled under the trees, and the members were called to order
by the commodore. The first business was to hear the report of the
Regatta Committee, which proved to be a very interesting document to the
yachtmen. The race was to take place the next Saturday, and was open to
all yachts exceeding twenty feet in length, duly entered before the
time. All were to sail in the same class; the first prize was a silver
vase, and the second a marine glass. The course was to be from the
judge's boat, in Belfast harbor, by Turtle Head, around the buoy on
Stubb's Point Ledge, leaving it on the port hand, and back to the
starting-point. The sailing regulations already adopted by the club were
to be in full force. The report was accepted, and the members looked
forward with eager anticipation to what they regarded as the greatest
event of the season. Other business was transacted, and Donald, who had
brought with him a measuring tape and plummet, measured all the yachts
of the club. Dinner was served on board of each craft, and the commodore
extended the hospitalities of the Skylark to Donald.

In the afternoon, the fleet made an excursion around Long Island,
returning to Belfast about six o'clock, Donald sailing the Juno, and
catching a mess of fish off Haddock Ledge. He moored her off the shop,
and was rather surprised to find that his own boat had not yet been
returned. After supper he hastened to the house of Mr. Rodman, with
whom he had a long talk in regard to the building of the Maud. The
gentleman had some doubts about the ability of the young boat-builder to
do so large a job, though he desired to encourage him.

"I am willing to give you the work, and to pay you the same price your
father had for the Sea Foam; but I don't like to pay out money till I
know that you are to succeed," said he.

"I don't ask you to do so, sir," replied Donald, warmly. "You need not
pay me a cent till you are perfectly satisfied."

"But I supposed you would want money to buy stock and pay your men, even
before you had set up your frame."

"No, sir; we have capital enough to make a beginning."

"I am satisfied then, and you shall have the job," added Mr. Rodman.

"Thank you, sir," replied Donald, delighted at his success.

