
A short time before the appointed hour the bride-elect adorned herself
in simple yet tasteful costume, which, being peculiar to no particular
nation or time, we prefer to leave to the reader's imagination, merely
remarking that as Loo was simple and pretty her garb corresponded to her
appearance and character.

But the appointed hour passed, and the Reverend William Tucker did not
appear.  Hunters of the Rocky Mountains, however, are not an impatient
race.  Reuben quietly waited as he would have done for a good shot at
game.  Not so The MacFearsome.  His Celtic blood fired, and he muttered
a few uncomplimentary remarks about the reverend absentee, which it is
well not to repeat.

As time passed, however, the dwellers in Mac's Fort became anxious, then
alarmed, and finally the wedding was postponed, while a search for the
lost one was organised; but they searched in vain, because tracks which
might easily be traced in the wilderness get inextricably mixed up in
the vicinity of a fort.

Next day Kenneth MacFearsome, coming rather hastily and angrily to the
conclusion that Mr Tucker had given them the slip and gone off to his
conference, determined himself to perform the marriage ceremony as
directed in the Church of England Prayer-Book.

"You see, Reuben," he said, "I have a great respect for the Church, and
would fain have had this matter knocked off by one of its parsons, but
as this parson appears to be little better than a wolf in sheep's
clothing--if as good--I'll just do it myself, for I'll not have my
daughter's wedding delayed another day for any man, woman, or beast
alive."

"Wouldn't it be as well, sir," suggested the hunter modestly, "to have a
hunt after the parson by daylight first?"

"No, it wouldn't," said the old trader, with the air and decision of--we
were going to say the great Mogul, but perhaps it would be more emphatic
and appropriate to say--The MacFearsome.

Knowing that appeal from that decision would be in vain, Reuben once
more arrayed himself in the wedding dress, (which he had changed when
the search for Mr Tucker was undertaken), and once again presented
himself before his admiring friends in the decorated hall of Mac's Fort.
The cook warmed up his gigantic pie, old Fiddlestrings re-tuned his
home-made violin, and pretty little Loo at last appeared on the scene
with two half-breed young women as bridesmaids, and two Indian females
as backers-up.

"My friends," said Kenneth MacFearsome, taking up the prayer-book, and
commencing a speech which he had spent the entire forenoon in preparing,
"I have a few words to say to you on this interesting occasion."

The old gentleman's usually stern and handsome countenance had relaxed,
and assumed a bland, sweet expression, which was more consonant with the
circumstances in which they were assembled.  Before he could utter
another word, however, he was interrupted, to his great surprise, by
Reuben.

"Excuse me, Mr MacFearsome," said that bold though bashful hunter, "but
my friend and comrade, Jacob Strang, has not yet arrived, and it would
grieve me to the heart if he was absent at such a time as this.
Couldn't we wait a bit?  I wouldn't ask you to do so for any other man
alive, but I've hunted wi' him since we were slips of boys, and--and I
can't help thinkin' that somethin's gone wrong wi' him, for Jacob's good
and true, and trusty as steel, an' wasn't used to fail in his
engagements."

While the hunter was speaking the bland expression faded from the
Highlander's countenance, and a fierce look flashed from his blue eyes
as he replied in stern, decided tones:--

"Reuben Dale, if your friend Jacob was the great Israel of Bible story,
or even Moses himself, I would not wait for him.  Don't interrupt me
again, lad."

He turned to the assembled company with a wave of his hand, as if to
dismiss the interruption from memory, and attempted to reassume the
benignant expression, with only partial success.

"My friends," he said, but said no more, for at that moment he was a
second time interrupted.  A shout was heard outside, the door of the
hall burst open, and Jacob Strang himself strode in, bearing the
Reverend William Tucker on his shoulders.

Depositing his burden on the floor, he said hurriedly, "He's not dead,
only stunned.  The reptiles did their best to kill him.  They're not far
off, MacFearsome.  We'd better go after them."

The MacFearsome usually gave vent to his feelings in Gaelic when
labouring under strong excitement.  On this occasion his utterances were
terrible in tone whatever their meaning might be.

"Go after them?" he cried, in a blaze of wrath, "yes, we'll go after
them.  Saddle my horse and fetch my gun.  Arm yourself, boys!  Some of
you will remain to guard the Fort, and see that you keep the gates shut.
Can you guide us to the villains, Jacob?"

"I can at least follow up the trail."

"Stay, _I_ can guide you," said a voice behind them.

It was the Reverend William Tucker himself, who had recovered, and was
sitting up on the floor looking rather confused.

"No, sir; you will remain at the Fort and take care of the women," said
MacFearsome gruffly.

In a few minutes the Chief of the Fort was galloping over the prairie at
the back of his establishment, followed by six of his best men, with
Reuben Dale, and led by Jacob Strang.

In thus giving chase to the red men the Highlander did not act with his
wonted caution.  His wrath was too much for him.

Jacob the hunter, while out after deer, had come on the trail of the
war-party of Blackfeet.  Suspecting them of mischief, he had followed
them up and found them just at the time when they made prisoner of Mr
Tucker.  He saw them bind the unlucky pastor and carry him off, mounted
behind a savage chief.  Jacob chanced fortunately to be concealed in a
rugged piece of ground where horses could not act.  As the Indians were
riding away he shot the horse that bore the pastor, and at the same time
uttered a series of yells and extempore war-whoops so appalling that the
savages gave him credit for being at least a dozen foes, and fled over a
ridge before turning to see what had happened.  The fall of the horse
had stunned the pastor, but the Indian leaped up and drew his knife.
Fortunately Jacob's rifle was a double-barrelled one.  Uttering another
ferocious yell he fired, and by good fortune hit the right arm of the
Indian chief, who, dropping his knife, followed his companions like a
hunted stag.  Jacob immediately dashed out of his ambush, lifted the
reverend gentleman on his own horse, which he had left in a hollow close
at hand, and brought him, as we have seen, safe back to the Fort.

Now, if the white men had been satisfied with this, all would have been
well, but The MacFearsome had been roused, as we have said, and set off
needlessly in pursuit of the savages.  It chanced that the Blackfeet had
arranged to attack the Fort in two bands that night--advancing on it
from opposite directions.  The consequence was that while MacFearsome
and his men were away after one band, the other--a much larger band--
ignorant of what had occurred to their comrades, advanced after dusk on
the Fort, and gave the signal for attack.  They were surprised at
receiving no reply from their comrades, but did not delay the assault on
that account.

The men who had been left in charge of the Fort were quite worthy of the
trust.  Stationing themselves a few yards apart all round the palisades
inside, they kept guard.  Mr Tucker, armed with an axe-handle as a
bludgeon--for he objected to taking life if he could avoid it--mounted
guard at the gate.  Pretty little Loo kept him company.  The other women
were stationed so as to carry ammunition to the men, or convey orders
from the blacksmith who had been left in command.

"This is a sad interruption to your wedding," remarked the pastor, as he
leaned against the Fort gate, and examined his weapon.

"It is," assented Loo meekly, "but you will marry us to-morrow.  My
father will return too late to have it done to-night, I fear."

"However late he comes we must get the ceremony over to-night, Loo, for
I positively cannot delay my journey another day.  Indeed, even as it
is, I shall be late for the conference of my brethren.  Hark!  What
sound was that?"

"I heard nothing but the hoot of an owl," said Loo.

As she spoke an arrow, entering between the palisades, whizzed past her.
At the same moment a volley was fired from the other side of the Fort.

"Keep closer to the gate, Loo," said Mr Tucker, grasping his club with
a feeling that the girl's safety depended on the use he made of that
unclerical weapon.

"Come round to the east angle, all of you," shouted the blacksmith.

All the men in the Fort obeyed the summons in time to repel a vigorous
assault made on that point by what seemed to be the whole band of the
enemy, but the bride and one of her maids remained at the front gate to
keep watch there.  Just as the victory was gained and the enemy were
driven off at the east angle, a loud scream was given by the women.  Mr
Tucker heard it and was first to run to the rescue.  He found that three
of the Blackfeet, during the assault on the other side, had crept round
to the front gate.  One of these had placed his head against the
stockade, a second had mounted on his shoulders, and a third had thus
gained the top of the pickets.

Seeing at a glance how matters stood, Mr Tucker ran forward and thrust
his bludgeon with a straight point between the posts, right into the
painted face of the lower savage, who fell back at once, carrying the
second savage along with him: but the third had already laid his hands
on the top, and, vaulting over with monkey-like agility, came down on
the pastor's shoulders with such violence that both rolled together on
the ground.  But the savage was no match for the athletic pastor, who
compressed his throat with a grip that soon caused him to relax his
hold.

"Here, give me your kerchief, Loo," gasped the pastor; "I'll tie his
hands."

"Why don't you stick him?" asked one of Loo's bridesmaids with great
simplicity.

"Because I won't take life if I can help it," replied Mr Tucker as he
bound the Indian's wrists.

At that moment there arose a wild war-whoop from another part of the
Fort, and a volume of smoke and flame burst from the back of the chief
dwelling-house which stood in the centre of the square.  The Blackfeet
had gained an entrance at another point, and set fire to the western
wing of the building unperceived.

With a shout of rage the blacksmith and his men rushed to the scene of
disaster.

"There's father!" said Loo, with a cry of joy.

"Where?" exclaimed Mr Tucker, looking round with a bewildered air.

"Help to open the gate," cried Loo.

The pastor did so at once, and, as he heaved at the bar which held it,
he could hear the clatter of hoofs and the shouts of men outside.

The heavy gate swung back just as the cavalcade came up, and they dashed
in at full gallop.

"Open the back gate wide, Loo, and leave this one open, too," shouted
MacFearsome, as he flew past like an enraged thunderbolt.

Our bride possessed that most valuable quality, a tendency to prompt,
unquestioning obedience.  Running lightly to the other side of the Fort
she undid the fastenings and forced the back gate wide open.  Meanwhile
her father and our bridegroom, with his friend Jacob and the six men,
charged down on the savages with wild yells of fury.  The sight of them
was sufficient!  The Blackfeet turned and fled through the open gates in
consternation.  As they coursed towards the woods like hares the
blacksmith managed to turn on them a small ship's-cannon loaded with
buckshot, which awoke the echoes of the wilderness with a deafening
roar.  The horsemen also pursued and scattered them right and left.
Then the gates were reclosed, while the bright flame of the burning
buildings lit up the scene as at noon-day.

"Hold your hands now, boys," shouted MacFearsome, drawing rein.

Those nearest to the chief obeyed, and the others, soon perceiving what
was being done, rejoined their comrades.

"Where is Reuben?" asked MacFearsome, as they were turning towards the
Fort.

Each looked at the other, but none could answer.

"I saw him down in the hollow, charging the Indians," said one.

"And I saw him coming back by the stable-fence," said another.

"Off with you to both places and look for him," cried the chief, "and
the rest of you follow me."

They searched swiftly to and fro for some minutes, and soon found his
riderless horse.  Then a cry from one of their number was heard from the
hollow.  Galloping thither they found Reuben lying on his back,
apparently dead, with an arrow in his chest.

In a moment Jacob was on his knees at his friend's side, and soon the
arrow was extracted, but it was found that blood gushed freely from the
wound.  Stanching this as best they could they bore the wounded man
carefully to the Fort.

"Oh, father!  I hope the fight is over now," exclaimed Loo, as her sire
rode through the gateway.

"Yes, the fight is over," replied the Highlander, sternly, "but it has
cost us much.  Our house is on fire and Reuben is--"

He did not finish the sentence.  Indeed, there was no occasion to do so,
for, while he spoke, the men advanced who bore Reuben's all but lifeless
body.

Loo did not scream or utter a word, but her white face and compressed
lips told their own tale as she walked by her bridegroom's side into the
hall which had been so gaily fitted up, but was now a blackened and
partially burned room.

While the hunter's wound was being examined every one, save the pastor
and the women, was sent from the hall to aid in extinguishing the fire,
which had been nearly subdued.  MacFearsome was somewhat expert as an
amateur doctor, and so was the Reverend William Tucker.  Their united
