their labours.  He reminded them that having already doubled the Cape of
Storms, they were in that region in which India was to be discovered.
"Trust in God, He will deliver us," he added.

Notwithstanding the brave words of their leader, the seamen continued to
clamour; but even though the sea began to go down and the wind to abate,
and the ships were able to get nearer each other, the crews with loud
cries insisted that they should seek for some harbour where they might
be repaired.

On this Vasco da Gama again swore by the life of the King, that from
that spot he would not turn back a span's breadth until they had
obtained the information they had come to seek.  The sailors shouted
that they were many, and that they feared death, though their captain
took no account of it.  Vasco da Gama replied that he took the same
account of death as any of them, but that they had heard his resolution,
and he intended to keep to it.

At this juncture a furious blast struck the ships, the sea again getting
up in such a way that they were frequently hidden from the sight of each
other, and could only be perceived as they rose to the top of a sea
before again falling into the trough.

Lights were hung out so that they might keep together, for the
Captain-Major had been warned before sailing of the danger of
separating, and his friends and relatives on board the other ships were
ever on the watch to prevent such a catastrophe.

Mutiny was nearly breaking out on board the ship of Nicholas Coelho; but
he was warned by a young boy who had overheard the discussions of the
malcontents, and he therefore took all the means in his power to defeat
their objects.  Passing near the Captain's ship, the brave Coelho warned
him in language which the mutineers could not understand of their
intentions, and at the same time told him that it would be as well to
put about, since they had determined on doing so.

Vasco da Gama immediately comprehended the meaning of Coelho's words,
and replied, so that those on board his own ship might hear, that he
could not withstand the tears and lamentations of his people, nor did he
wish to have to give an account to God of their lives, and that he had
begged them to labour on for their own safety; observing that should the
weather again become bad, he would put back, but that to exculpate
himself with the King, he should draw up a document explaining his
reasons for returning, and should require them to put their signatures
to it.

On going to his cabin he desired his secretary to draw up the paper, and
then ordered three of the seamen who were the most clamourous to come in
and sign it.  Immediately they did so they were seized and put in irons,
and the master and pilots were treated in the same manner.  He then
returned on deck, and addressing his crew, told them that they had no
longer a master or pilot, that he himself would take charge of the ship
and direct her course aright.

Still further to convince his crew that he did not depend on the master
or pilots, he ordered their nautical instruments to be brought to him,
when, taking them in his hands, he threw them one by one into the sea,
exclaiming as he did so, "I need no other pilot save God, and will from
henceforth direct the course of our ships."

On hearing this the crew were still more afraid, and entreated him not
to put the prisoners to death.

To this Vasco da Gama consented, saying that he did so in consequence of
their entreaties; and to prove that he did not require the services of
those officers, he ordered them to remain in their cabins, still in
irons, and forbade them to give any instructions for the navigation of
the ship, except for the trimming of the sails.  He then, running
alongside the other ships, told their crews that he had put his master
and pilots in irons, and promised that he would conduct them back in
safety.

Nicholas Coelho, on hearing this, was rejoiced, but feigning sorrow,
told his ship's company that he regretted what had happened, and that he
would entreat the Captain-Major, when the ships next met, to liberate
the prisoners.

Paulo da Gama spoke in the same way, and with much urbanity, to his
people, also promising to intercede for the prisoners.  Thus, the crews
being tranquillised, they promised to obey the orders of their
superiors.



CHAPTER TEN.

VOYAGE OF VASCO DA GAMA, CONTINUED--A.D. 1498.

The squadron sails along the coast on Christmas Day--That part is named
Natal--Reaches the "River of Mercy"--Careen ships--The _Saint Miguel_
broken up--Coelho ascends the river--Meets natives, who come on board--A
column erected--A native vessel sighted--Chase another--Davane, a
Moorish broker, captured--Offers to conduct them to Cambay--A zambuk
taken--Davane engaged in the service of the Portuguese--Squadron enters
harbour of Mozambique--The sheikh visits the _Saint Raphael_--Promises
to send pilots--His intended treachery--Machado left on shore--Voyage
along coast continued--The pilots plot to wreck the ships--Anchor off
Mombas--Two convicts sent on shore--Narrow escape of the _Saint
Raphael_--A zambuk taken, with her owner and his wife--Melonda reached--
Friendly reception by the King of Nicholas--Coelho visits him--The
captains pay him a visit in great state--The King comes on board the
_Saint Raphael_--Pleasant intercourse with the people.

At length, the wind moderating and there being a great want of water, in
consequence of the casks having broken or become leaky, Vasco da Gama
stood close in for the land, to look for some harbour into which he
might run to repair the ships, as well as to obtain a supply of that
great necessary of life.

The end of the year 1497 was approaching, and at Christmas, called by
the Portuguese Natal, the squadron passed that part of the coast, to
which they in consequence gave the name it has since retained.  At
length, at early dawn, they came off the mouth of a large river, into
which the Captain-Major led the ships, and dropping their anchors, the
crews exclaimed "The mercy of the Lord!" for which reason the name of
the "River of Mercy" was bestowed on it.

Paulo, coming on board his brother's ship, entreated that the prisoners
might be set at liberty.  The Captain-Major consented on condition that
if God should bring them back to Lisbon, they would agree again to be
put in chains, and be thus presented to the King to receive his pardon.

The crews then proceeded to careen their ships, but on examining the
_Saint Miguel_, commanded by Nicholas Coelho, she was found to be so
severely damaged, many of her ribs and knees being broken, that she
could not be repaired.  It was therefore decided to break her up, and to
make use of her masts, timbers, and planks in repairing the others.

They now set to work on the Captain-Major's ship, first discharging all
the lighter stores into that of Paulo, when everything heavy below decks
was placed on one side, which caused her to heel over, and with the aid
of a tackle fixed to the mainmast, they canted her so much that her keel
was laid bare.  Stages being formed, the crew got on them, some cleaning
the planks from the growth of seaweed, some extracting the caulking
which was rotten, when the caulkers put in fresh oakum, and pitched it
over.  The officers took upon themselves the task of supplying the men
with food and drink while they were at work, and so much dispatch was
used that in one day and night they had finished one side.  They then
turned her over, and performed the same work on the other.

The _Saint Raphael_ being once more loaded, Paulo's ship was next
repaired and strengthened with additional knees and ribs and inner
planking.  The stores of the _Saint Miguel_ being divided between the
two ships, the Captain-Major received Coelho on board his own.  They
then, having taken all the planking and timber they required from the
_Saint Miguel_, set her on fire, that the nails might be secured.  This
important work being accomplished, Nicholas Coelho was sent with twenty
men up the river.  After ascending it for two leagues he found the banks
covered with woods, and discovered some canoes fishing.  The men on
board them were dark, but not very black, being almost naked, with the
exception of a kilt of leaves round their middles.  Without the
slightest hesitation they entered the boat, and several canoes followed
her as she returned to the ship, while some of the natives ran back to
take the news to their villages.

The people came on board without showing the slightest fear, and on
biscuits, with slices of bread and marmalade, being given them, they did
not seem to understand that the food was to be eaten until they saw the
Portuguese eat, when they devoured it eagerly.  Meantime, a number of
other canoes came alongside.  The people were so numerous that the
Captain-Major would not allow more than a dozen or so to come on board
at a time.  The first who had been entertained went down the side very
unwillingly.  They brought some birds resembling hens, and a yellow
fruit, which had the appearance of walnuts.  The latter the Portuguese
would not touch until they saw the natives eat them, when, following
their example, they were much pleased with the taste.  Biscuits and wine
were then offered to the savages, but they would not touch the latter
until they saw the Portuguese drink.

The Captain-Major then gave them a looking-glass.  When they saw it they
were much amused, and as they gazed into the mirror, they laughed
heartily and made jokes, telling their companions in the canoes.  On
being allowed to carry it away, they were highly delighted, and left six
of the birds and much of the fruit.

In the afternoon they returned, bringing a quantity of the birds, which
they willingly exchanged for pieces of shirts, which the seamen cut up
to give them, or for any trifles.

The birds, when killed and dried in the sun, kept well.  A mass of stone
being found at the entrance of the river, a hole was made in it, into
which a marble pillar was fixed, six of which having been brought out
for the purpose of being thus erected.  On the base of each pillar were
two escutcheons, one the arms of Portugal, and on the opposite side a
representation of the globe, together with an inscription, "Of the
Lordship of Portugal, Kingdom of Christians."

Vasco da Gama, pleased with the diligence shown by his officers and men,
called them together, entreating them to be of good courage, and not to
allow the thoughts of treason--so hateful to God--to enter their hearts;
and, being aware that it was from faint-heartedness that they had given
way before, he forgave them.  He pictured to them the joy they would
feel when, on their return to Portugal, he would present them to the
King, and describe their dangers and labours.

With tears of joy they exclaimed, "May the Lord, in His great mercy, so
will it!"  Returning to their ships, the anchors were weighed, and, with
a fair breeze, on the 24th of February, 1498, they sailed out of the
river.

After running along the coast for some distance, they sighted a sail,
which, on observing, they stood out to sea; but it was lost sight of
during the night.  Proceeding on, when close to land they arrived off a
large creek, near the mouth of which they saw a zambuk at anchor.  On
this Vasco da Gama ordered the ships to heave to, and sent a boat in
chase of a canoe which was seen leaving the zambuk, carrying her crew,
who were trying to escape, on shore.  She was soon overtaken, when the
six blacks who were on board her threw themselves into the sea.  One
Moor alone remained on board, he being unable to swim.  He wore on his
head a round skull-cap, made of silk of various colours, sewn with gold
thread, and small rings in his ears.  His shirt was of white stuff, and
a girdle of coloured cloth was fastened round his waist.

The Portuguese, taking him into their boat, went to the zambuk; but she
was empty, the Moor having been about to freight her with a cargo for a
certain merchant, for whom he acted as agent.

Returning with their captain to the ship, the Portuguese were delighted
at finding a man from whom they could obtain information about the
country.  They then set sail, and continued their course.  The Moor was
well entertained, and seemed perfectly contented with his lot.  Great
difficulty was, however, found in carrying on a conversation with him,
as the only interpreter on board was an African slave, who spoke Arabic,
of which the Moor understood but a few words.  He made his captors
comprehend, however, by signs, that farther on there were people who
understood that language.  Vasco da Gama offered him cakes of sugar,
olives, and wine.  He freely ate of everything, but would not touch the
wine.  The Captain-Major then presented him with a long robe, with which
he appeared highly pleased, and examined with curiosity everything he
saw.  On showing him spices, he gave the Portuguese to understand that
he could fill their ships with such things.  He was, as it turned out, a
broker, and being an intelligent man, with a keen eye to business, he at
once determined to become the broker of the Portuguese, hoping to make a
good profit by loading their ships.  He offered to conduct them to
Cambay, of which he was a native, and showed much satisfaction when they
agreed to go there with him.

Sailing on, the ships came off the banks and shoals of Sofala, when the
Moor, by signs, warned them to keep a look-out for danger ahead.
Standing out to sea, the shoals were passed during the night.  Shortly
afterwards they sighted another sail ahead, when the _Saint Raphael_,
edging out to sea to prevent her escape, quickly got up with her.  The
boat being sent alongside, two blacks--cafres, as the Portuguese called
them--were brought on board the _Saint Raphael_.  Immediately a boat was
dispatched to Paulo da Gama's ship to bring a black, a native of Guinea,
who sailed with him, that he might interpret.  The blacks, though from
opposite sides of the coast, perfectly understood each other, showing
that at that period the language of Congo extended from the Atlantic to
the Indian Ocean.

The zambuk was laden with pigeons' dung, and was bound for Cambay, where
it is used in dyeing stuffs.  The Captain-Major gave the blacks biscuit,
salt fish, and wine, which they ate and drank with evident satisfaction,
not refusing the wine as the Moor had done.

The vessel called a zambuk was probably the style of craft similar to
the dhow of the present day, with a high stern, the bow sharp and low,
and either perfectly open or partially decked over with light planking.

The Moor, Davane--which he said was his name--now informed the
Captain-Major that farther on they should come to a place of large size,
thickly peopled and with much trade, and that from thence he would
conduct them to Cambay, where he would load the ships with full cargoes
of drugs and spices, as it was a rich country, and the greatest kingdom
in the world.

The Captain-Major replied that he considered himself fortunate in having
met him, and swore that he would reward him richly for the work he
performed.  Davane then advised him to follow the zambuk, the crew of
which, being acquainted with the navigation, would pilot the ships clear
of all dangers.  Six Portuguese sailors were therefore sent on board
her, that no treacherous trick might be played, and the same number of
blacks brought to the _Saint Raphael_.

Although the zambuk's sails were of matting, she made better way than
either of the ships.  After steering on for twenty days, they arrived
towards the end of March, 1498, off Mozambique, and, piloted by the
zambuk, entered the harbour, where they dropped anchor in a spot
sheltered from the sea winds.

On the shore a large number of houses covered with thatch and many
people were seen.  The Portuguese sailors were now brought from the
zambuk, and the blacks, rewarded with pieces of white stuff, were sent
to their own vessel.  The blacks having gone on shore and reported how
well they had been treated, canoes came off from the beach with
cocoa-nuts and hens.  The Moor Davane, having received a present of a
scarlet cap and a string of coral beads, was carried on shore by Nicolas
Coelho, with directions to obtain fresh provisions and to learn where
the ships could water.

Davane informed the Sheikh, who acted as governor for the King of the
country, that the Portuguese were making a voyage to Cambay to obtain
cargoes of pepper and drugs, and that they were, he understood,
Christians.  Not crediting the account, the Sheikh told the Moor that he
intended to visit the ships himself.  It was found that many Moors were
settled in the country as merchants, carrying on an extensive commerce
in silver, gold, ivory, and wax; indeed, that most of the kings and
rulers of these countries were Moors and Mohammedans.

After some delay, the Sheikh came off to the _Saint Raphael_ in a vessel
composed of two canoes lashed together, upon which rested poles and
blankets, forming a deck, which was canopied by mats affording shade.

The Sheikh was seated on a low round stool, covered with a silk cloth,
with a cushion for his feet, while his attendant Moors were squatted
round him.  He was a well made, dark man, dressed in a jacket of velvet,
and a blue cloth trimmed with braid and gold thread wrapped round him,
his drawers being of white stuff, reaching down to the ankles.  Round
his waist he wore a silk sash, in which was stuck a silver-mounted
dagger; and in his hand he carried a sword, also mounted with silver.
He wore on his head a turban of many colours, with braid and fringes of
gold thread wrapped round a dark-coloured skull-cap.  His attendants
were dressed in the same fashion.  Some were fair, and others very dark,
being the sons of black women and white Moorish merchants who had for a
long time been established in the country.  A couch covered with a
carpet for the Moors to sit upon, and chairs being placed on the
quarter-deck, the Captains in their richest costumes stood ready to
receive the Sheikh as he arrived alongside.  The trumpets then sounded,
and the sailors assisted him to ascend on board.

The Sheikh, taking the right hand of Paulo de Gama, pressed it between
both of his, and raised it to his breast.  He then took his seat on one
of the chairs in the middle, while his attendants occupied the bench.
The Captains sat on either side of him.  The Moor Davane, as
interpreter, remained standing and ready to explain what was said.

The Sheikh looked round with astonishment at all he saw, and expressed
his pleasure at the arrival of the strangers, inquiring of what country
they were, and what they came for.

Vasco da Gama explained that they were from a far-off country, and
servants of the greatest king of the Christians that existed in the
world, who had sent out a vast fleet to seek for merchandise, but that
they had been separated from their companions in a storm, and that they
were unacquainted with the land to which they were going for cargoes.

The Sheikh inquired what they would do if they could not find the
country.  Vasco da Gama replied that they would sail about the sea until
they died, because, should they return without bringing the merchandise
they were in search of, their king would cut off their heads.

The Sheikh requested to be shown the sort of merchandise of which they
were in search.  The Captain-Major then exhibited some pepper, cinnamon,
and ginger.  The Sheikh, laughing to his own people, replied that he
would send pilots who would conduct them to where they could fill their
ships with as much as they required, and then asked what merchandise
they had brought to purchase the articles they wanted.  The
Captain-Major replied that it was on board the other ships, but that
they had gold and silver to pay for what they bought.  The Sheikh
observed that with gold and silver they could obtain all over the world
whatever they required, and he then requested the Captain-Major to order
the trumpets to sound, as he and his people much liked to hear them.

On taking his leave, he promised to send pilots who would faithfully
serve his visitors.  A handsome present was then offered to him,
consisting of five ells of fine scarlet cloth, five of satin, two
scarlet caps, four highly ornamented Flemish sheath-knives, and a
mirror.

Davane was now sent on shore to bring off the pilots, who each received
payment in advance, and he then went back to obtain provisions.  The
Sheikh took this opportunity of cross-questioning him, and learning the
force and means of defence possessed by the two ships.

Believing that they were richly-laden, and that he could capture them,
he forthwith laid a plan to effect his object.

Davane did not know the whole plan at the time, but suspecting that
treachery of some sort was intended, on his return on board immediately
warned Vasco da Gama, and advised him to be on his guard.  The Sheikh
soon after sent off requesting the Captain-Major and his officers to
visit him, and offering to take charge of their sick.  His plan was, as
soon as the boats should go to the watering-place, to seize the crews,
and then, having secured them and the chief officers, to sail out, with
four Moorish vessels in the harbour, and attack the Portuguese ships.

When, therefore, a boat was sent on shore, by Davane's advice, two guns
were placed in her, and a screen fitted which could be raised to shelter
the crew from arrows.  Nicolas Coelho went in command of her, with ten
seamen and twelve men-at-arms with crossbows.

One of the Moorish pilots, who was taken in the boat to conduct her to
the watering-place, instead of steering for it, during the whole night
led her through numerous creeks, intending to run her ashore, as the
tide was falling, when, had he succeeded, she and all on board would
have become an easy prey to his treacherous countrymen.

Coelho, on discovering the design of the pilot, was on the point of
killing him, when, just as the boat got into the bay at early morning,
the traitor threw himself into the sea, and coming up again at a
distance from the boat, swam rapidly for the shore.  The Portuguese
rowed after him, but he kept ahead, and as the boat approached the
beach, a concourse of people came down, discharging flights of arrows
and stones from slings at her.  This being seen from the ships, Vasco da
Gama declared that he would go at once and burn the Moorish vessels; but
he was overruled by his brother, who represented that their men might
thus be exposed to danger, and that though it would be easy to send the
vessels to the bottom with their artillery, should they do so in a new
country, they would be looked upon as pirates, and the help they
required denied them.

In consequence it was resolved to send on shore a complaint to the
Sheikh of the outrage; but Davane declined going, on the plea that he
should very likely, if he did so, be killed.  It was deemed prudent,
therefore, to leave the place.

Soon after the anchors were got up, and the ships were under sail, a
boat came off with a white flag, bearing a message from the Sheikh, who
complained of the attempt made to kill his pilot, and of his visitors
going away without any sufficient cause for their departure.  He
promised, should anyone have done them injury, to inflict summary
justice on the offender.

On this the Captain-Major ordered one Joao Machado, a convict, who
understood a little Arabic, to go on shore in the canoe, and explain to
the Sheikh that they had been deceived by the pilot, and that when the
Portuguese tried to catch him, his people had come out with arms in
their hands to fight, and that it was on account of the want of
sincerity in the Sheikh and his countrymen that the Portuguese were
going away.  It was intended that Joao Machado should remain in the
country in older that on their return he should be able, should he live,
to give them full information about the people.

While the _Saint Raphael_ was hove to, she struck upon a shoal, and was
with difficulty got off, in consequence of which it was afterwards named
the Banks of Saint Raphael.

Vasco da Gama, irritated at being unable to punish the chief, put the
pilot in irons to prevent his escape.  The wind being contrary, the
ships brought up off an island about a league from Mozambique, where the
Admiral awaited the return of his messenger.  Machado, however, did not
come back,--the Sheikh, being highly pleased at having it in his power
to do so, kept him as a captive.  He was also afraid that the people in
the canoe would be seized and detained as hostages until the Portuguese
prisoner had been returned.

It may be as well here to relate that Joao Machado, the first of his
countrymen who ever resided in that part of the world, exchanged his
condition much for the better.  He quickly learned the language, and
being honourably treated, ultimately was enabled to travel through many
countries until he reached Cambay.  From this place he went to others,
the languages of which he acquired; and being a man of great
intelligence and fine appearance, he gained the good-will of the Sheikh
and his followers, and so raised himself that he was ultimately able
greatly to benefit his fellow-countrymen.

There being no inhabitants on the islands, the crews landed, and Mass
was performed by the two priests, the only survivors of six who had
embarked.  The crews also confessed and received the Sacrament, and a
Mass was offered in praise of Vasco da Gama's patron Saint George.

The Captain-Major, who was a hot-tempered man, angry that the Sheikh had
not further communicated with him, then took it into his head to send
Nicolas Coelho back to Mozambique in a boat with cannon and well-armed
men, to ask him for a pilot; and should he refuse to supply one, to fire
at the Moorish vessels, and send them to the bottom.

In this, however, he was overruled by his brother Paulo.  The wind
becoming favourable, they proceeded on their voyage along the coast.
The remaining pilot told them that he would conduct the ships to a great
city named Quiloa, abounding in wealth, where he stated that numerous
Christian traders resided.  This he said with a treacherous design,
intending, in revenge for having been put in irons, to deliver them into
the hands of the people, hoping that they would all be killed.

Again Davane, who by this time could express himself very clearly in
Portuguese, warned the Captain-Major of the pilot's treacherous plan.

The pilots and masters were therefore charged to be on the watch, Vasco
da Gama threatening to put out the eyes of the pilot should the ship
strike upon a shoal.  Notwithstanding this, the pilot, even though he
should die on the spot, had resolved to wreck the ships.

Sailing on, they came off Quiloa, where it was the intention of the
pilot to carry out his design; but a contrary wind springing up, the
ships were driven out to sea, and so, avoiding the danger, continued on
along the coast until they reached Bombaza (Mombas), a large commercial
city.  Unable to enter the river, the ships came to an anchor outside
the bar.  The King of Mombas had already received a message from the
Sheikh of Mozambique, saying that the Portuguese were Christians and
robbers, and came as spies to the countries they visited.  The King
consequently, though resolved to destroy them, to throw them off their
guard, treacherously sent a large boat laden with fowls, sheep,
sugarcanes, citrons, and large sweet oranges, with an envoy inviting
them to enter the harbour, and sending also two pilots to conduct them.

Excusing himself, Vasco da Gama sent two convicts, intelligent men, to
see the city, and ascertain if there were any Christians residing there.
The men were courteously received by the King, and conducted about the
city by an old Moor, who took them to the house of two merchants,
Abyssinian Christians, by whom they were courteously received.  One of
them was the next morning sent back by the King to give a favourable
report of their treatment on shore, and to request the Captain-Major to
enter without further delay.

On this, not believing any harm was intended, he ordered the anchor to
be weighed; but on the sails being set, the ships missed stays and were
being driven by a current towards a bank, when the anchors were let fall
and the sails furled.

The holloaing and shouting raised by the Portuguese while performing
these manoeuvres so frightened the pilots, that believing their
treachery was discovered, they slipped overboard and swam to the shore.

One, however, was detained, and in order to make him confess, according
to the cruel custom of the times, he was tortured by having boiling
grease dropped on his body until he acknowledged that he and his
companions had been commanded by the King to let the ships drift on the
banks.

Returning thanks to Heaven for their miraculous preservation as it was
considered, as soon as the tide turned, it being moonlight, the
Captain-Major ordered the anchors to be weighed and the ships to stand
out to sea.  In weighing, however, one of the cables broke, and the
anchor remained behind.  One of the convicts afterwards reported that
the King punished the pilots for running away.

Having left Mombas, they steered northward, along the coast as before,
until they sighted two zambuks, one of which was captured.  She had on
board eighty men, and was laden with ivory.  The captain had his wife on
board, a very pretty woman, richly dressed, with four women to attend on
her; he had besides a chest full of jewels and money.

The old Moorish captain, to whom the name of Dias was given, with his
wife and her attendants, were brought on board the _Saint Raphael_,
where they were treated so courteously by da Gama, that he completely
won their hearts.

The crew of the zambuk were divided among the two ships, and ten
Portuguese were put into her, with directions to touch nothing, and not
to lose sight of the squadron.

In less than three days the squadron reached Melinda, situated on a
plain close to the sea, and consisting of numerous fine buildings
surrounded by walls.  The ships dropped anchor among a number of
vessels, all dressed out in flags, while flags were also exhibited on
the walls, to show the pleasure the King of Melinda felt at their
arrival.

Next morning a canoe came off, bringing a well-dressed personage, who
said that the King desired to know what they wanted in his country, that
he might send whatever they had need of from the city.

The Captain-Major replied that he required a good many things, but
without the King's leave he would not enter the port.

The old Moor, Captain Dias, who had been taken out of the zambuk, now
requested that he might be sent on shore, promising to bring back a
report of whatever the King had to say.  This being approved of, he was
put into a skiff which was passing and conveyed on shore.

Captain Dias, on his arrival at the palace, informed the King that the
Portuguese had escaped the snares laid for them at other places, that
they had injured no one, and that he was directed to say that if leave
was not given them to enter the port, they would sail away at once.

The King, evidently pleased with this, immediately dispatched a boat
laden with refreshments of all sorts to the Captain-Major, requesting
him to enter, sending a pilot at the same time to conduct in the ships.
Vasco da Gama, however, thought it prudent before weighing anchor to
dispatch Davane to ascertain the real temper of the King.

Davane accordingly went on shore in the boat which had brought the
provisions, dressed in a red robe, so as to look as dignified as
possible, and presented himself at the palace.  After some conversation
with the King, satisfied that his intentions were honest, he thanked his
Majesty for the refreshments he had sent, and said the Captain-Major,
accepting his invitation, would enter when the pilots thought fit.

Several persons of distinction came on board, among them the principal
priest of the mosque, who was honourably received: preserves in a silver
vase, and water with a napkin, being presented to him.  The pilots
having taken in the ships and anchored them in a secure place, they were
decked out with flags.  The crews then fired a salute with all their
artillery, so that the very city shook.  Several of the larger guns
being discharged to seaward, the shots went skimming and ricochetting
over the water, causing great amusement to the people collected on the
beach, while the trumpets sounded and the men cheered.

When the priest was about to be sent on shore he informed the
Captain-Major that he had been directed to remain there as a hostage
until all arrangements were completed.  On this the Captain-Major
assured him that he required no hostages, as he was convinced of the
good intentions of the King.

Soon after this the old Moor Dias, who had been captured in the zambuk,
presented himself to the King, and entreated that he would make interest
to have himself, his wife, and crew restored to liberty, observing that
none of his property had been touched, nor had any harm been done them.
The King accordingly sent a message to Vasco da Gama, who immediately
directed Davane to take a boat and tow the zambuk, with the old Moor and
all his property, to the city, and present them to the King.

