unload. Add to this a fracas with the engine and you'll readily
understand why I had only scant time for letter writing. I never was
any too good at it, at best, you know."

"Men never are," returned Mrs. McGregor cheerily over her shoulder as
she hustled out of the pantry with a clean tablecloth. "But it matters
not now; the ship is safe in port and you are here in time for
Christmas--a miracle that's never happened before in all my memory."

"But----," began her brother doubtfully.

"But what? Surely you're not going to say you are putting straight off
to-morrow for India or some other heathen spot! No shipowners would be
so heartless as to ask you to do that. Besides, very like the
_Charlotte_ must need repairing after such a stiff trip. Oughtn't her
seams to be caulked or something?"

Captain Dillingham's eyes twinkled and the corners of his mouth curved
upward.

"You're quite knowing in nautical matters, Nellie," observed he with
amusement. "Aye, the _Charlotte_ will have to lay to and be
overhauled some. She had a tough voyage. Still, she don't mind it much.
She's a thoroughbred that takes what comes without whimpering. That's
the lady of her. I never have to offer excuses or apologies for
her--no, siree! Tell her what you want done and you can count on her
doing it every time."

"I'm sorry you didn't have a better voyage home," ventured his sister.

"Oh, the voyage was all right enough. You can't expect a marble floor
to sail on in December. Indeed a trip such as that would be almost too
tame for me. I like the kick of the sea. Still, heavy winds that hold
you back all the way over as these held us, are trying. You make but
slow progress against them. Nevertheless the _Charlotte_ put up a
stiff fight and don't you forget it."

"Had you any storms this trip?"

"Storms? Oh, I believe we did strike a gale or two, now I come to think
of it. I recall there was a nasty typhoon in the Indian Ocean that kept
us busy for a while. But such happenings are all in the day's work and
after they are over are forgotten."

Carl, busy at his task of slicing the bread, gasped. Gales and
typhoons! And the Indian Ocean to boot! And his uncle mentioned them
all as if they were no more than flies on the wall. He had seen the
Indian Ocean on the map--an area of blue edged about with patches of
pink, green, and yellow; but he certainly had never expected to meet in
the flesh anybody who had sailed its waters.

Uncle Frederick Dillingham suddenly began to take on in his eyes an
aspect quite new; an aspect so alluring that when contrasted with the
myth of purple and ermine the latter tradition shriveled into something
very minor in importance. Was not the master of a ship a far more
intriguing character than a dull old king who did nothing but sit on a
crimson velvet throne and wave a scepter?

"You'll have much to tell us, Frederick," declared Mrs. McGregor,
putting the potatoes into the oven. "The children know little of
foreign lands. Nor do I know as much of them as I would. 'Twill be
grand to hear where you've been and what you've seen."

"Did you go to China, Uncle Frederick?" Carl inquired timidly.

"Aye! And to India and Japan, laddie."

The boy's eyes glowed with excitement.

"Oh, wouldn't I like to sail on a big ship to some place that was
different from Mulberry Court!" cried he.

"The places I've been in lately were certainly different from Mulberry
Court!" sighed Captain Dillingham. "And perhaps had you seen them you
would be as glad as I am to be at Mulberry Court."

"Maybe! I'd like a peep at something else, though."

"Maybe some day you'll be having it," returned the sea captain
jocosely. "Who knows! I may be taking you to India with me when you're
older."

"_Frederick!_" came from Mrs. McGregor in a horrified tone.

"You wouldn't like to see the shaver starting off for India, Nellie?
And why not?" laughed her brother. "India is a fine country. Besides,
traveling the world is a great way to study its geography. I'll be
willing to wager, now, that not one of these older children, though
they have been to school since they were knee high, could tell me
offhand where the Suez Canal is."

Consternation greeted the assertion and there was dead silence.

"There! What did I tell you?" returned Captain Dillingham triumphantly.
"And should I try them on the Bay of Biscay or the Ganges it would be
no better."

The stillness was oppressive.

"Aren't there--didn't I read somewhere that there are crocodiles in the
Ganges?" Carl managed to stammer.

His uncle chuckled.

"There's hope for you, son," he answered. "To know there are crocodiles
in the Ganges is something. Perhaps I shall make a tourist of you yet.
But you will have to know a little more about this globe of ours before
I can do it, I'm afraid."

"I hate geography," announced Tim, who had been listening and now with
disconcerting frankness proclaimed his aversion in no uncertain terms.
"All it is is little squares of color."

Captain Dillingham glanced toward his sister and met her wry smile.

"That's what books do for you," acclaimed he. "They make the romance of
the Orient nothing but patchwork." Then to Tim he continued, "I can
teach you better geography than that, laddie. Countries aren't just
little pieces of pink, yellow, or blue paper laid together. They are
people, rivers, mountains; tea, sugar, and cotton; ivory, elephants,
and carved temples."

The children had drawn closer around his knee.

"Tell us about the elephants," pleaded Tim, with shining eyes.

"There, you see! You are begging already for a lesson in
geography--much as you dislike it!" teased his uncle.

"There can be no geography lessons now," objected Mrs. McGregor. "The
steak is done and mustn't be spoiled with waiting. Show your uncle
where to sit, Mary. And, Timmie, bring the salt. It's been forgotten.
You'll have to bring a chair from my room, Martin. Remember James
Frederick and go on your toes."

"Now, Frederick," smiled his sister mischievously, "admit that even in
India you've seen nothing better than this beefsteak."

"'Twill take no coaxing to make me admit that, my dear," returned
Captain Dillingham. "Not all the sultans of the east could produce a
dish as royal as this one."




CHAPTER VIII

THE ROMANCE OF COTTON


From the moment of Uncle James Frederick Dillingham's arrival there
began for the McGregor children an era of delight. The newly found
relative, they soon discovered, was not only all they had pictured, but
more--far more!

He did not, it is true, actually live at Mulberry Court, for because of
the crowded conditions of the McGregor home he took a room near-by;
nevertheless he might as well have lived there for he only used his own
room to sleep in and stow away his luggage. Each morning just before
breakfast his step would be heard on the stairs and off would race the
children in merry rivalry to see who would reach the door first and
have the honor of admitting him. Once inside the cosy kitchen he made
it his headquarters and it did not take long to find out that he was a
valuable asset there.

For example who could fry fish so deliciously as he? And who could make
such chowder? And as for washing dishes and wiping them he was quicker
than any of the young folks. To behold an officer in gold braid
presiding at the dishpan at first caused a protest from Mrs. McGregor;
but when the little old man asserted that it was a treat to be inside a
home and handle a mop and soap-shaker what could one say? So he mixed
the foaming suds and dabbled in them up to his elbows, and when his
sister witnessed the general frolic into which his leadership suddenly
transformed the dishwashing she no longer objected. The center of an
admiring group of youngsters Uncle Frederick scrubbed pots and pans
until they shone like mirrors, and all to a chain of the most wonderful
stories.

What marvel that there were quarrels as to who should help him and
actual bribes offered for the coveted pleasure? The children's chatter
never tired him. On the contrary he was in his element when they
swarmed about his chair and perched on his knee. As for his namesake,
James Frederick, there was not another such baby to be found in all the
world, he declared. Often he would sit with the little fellow in his
arms, crooning to him fragments of old sea chanties whose refrains were
haunting to hear. Or he wheeled the baby out with as much pride as if
he were treading the decks of the _Charlotte_.

To see him one would have imagined that he had always lived at Mulberry
Court. How naturally, for example, he wandered into the market,
bringing back with him mysterious bundles which on being opened
disclosed lamb chops, sweet potatoes, and oranges. And what a feast big
and little McGregors had when such parcels made their advent in the
kitchen! Or he would venture into the shopping district and appear with
his pockets bulging with rubbers, mittens, and caps. Oh, there never
was such an uncle! His purse seemed lined with gold; or if it were not
lined with this precious metal at least the supply of pennies it
contained was unending.

And not only was there one of these shiny pennies for each child in the
family but before long the train of benefactions lengthened until there
was scarce a boy or girl to be found in all Mulberry Court who did not
have tucked away in his mitten a golden disc with the shining face of
Abraham Lincoln upon it. So it was that he became uncle not alone to
the wee McGregors but to the community as well.

Now of course it followed that such a visitor could not be more than a
short cycle of hours in the neighborhood without making the
acquaintance of the Harlings, and running in to amuse the shut-ins with
his tales of foreign lands. For he was a rare story-teller, was Uncle
Frederick. Never was there a better. And with running here and running
there was it to be wondered at that he found himself as busy if not
busier than he had been when aboard the _Charlotte_--a very lucky thing
too, for he confided that he always got fidgety for his ship if he was
idle when on shore.

Now he had no chance to become nervous or fretful. Much travel had
rendered it easy for him to establish contacts with persons. In
consequence all types of human beings interested him and with a charm
quite his own he swept aside the preliminaries and by simple and direct
methods made straight for the hearts of those he met. He reached them,
too--there was no doubt about that. Had he chosen he could have
astounded Mulberry Court with all he knew about Julie O'Dowd, the
Murphys, and the Sullivans. Why, he even knew all about Davis and
Coulter's mills before he had been in Baileyville twenty-four hours!

Now this delightful relative could not but increase in the community
the prestige of the McGregor family. To have a connection so popular,
traveled, and prosperous--a man of rank, and adorned with brass
buttons, what a luster all this shed over the inhabitants of the fifth
floor of Mulberry Court! Carl, Mary, Tim, Martin, were no longer rated
as little street Arabs; suddenly they became the nieces, nephews
(probably the heirs) of Captain James Frederick Dillingham who
commanded the _Charlotte_ and had sailed to every port under the sun.
How the neighbors gossiped, congratulating themselves that they had
discovered Mrs. McGregor's virtues in time to be included in her circle
of acquaintances! Oh, they had always known she was a lady! Wasn't her
ancestry stamped upon her very face?

As for the Captain himself, his career, when contrasted with the
humdrum life of Mulberry Court, was like that of a returned Columbus.
How could he fail to be enveloped in a halo of fascination? For
Mulberry Court was dingy and dull. Probably not one of its toiling
throng was destined ever to see much beyond the city's muddy streets,
crowded sidewalks, cheap shops, and seething tenements. But at least,
even right here in Baileyville, it was possible to glimpse through
other eyes the wonders denied them.

Therefore when Captain Dillingham came to call one did the next best
thing to really going to India--one went there by proxy and saw in
imagination white-turbaned natives, resplendent temples, sun-flooded
tropics arched by turquoise skies. Even the Murphys could do that, and
without it costing them a cent, either. The Captain told Julie O'Dowd
stories of China while she ironed Joey's dresses, and the tediousness
of the task was forgotten in the enchantment of the tale. As for
Grandfather Harling, after the stranger's first visit he strained his
ears for a second, and when with a cheery "Ahoy!" the knob turned and
the small gray man entered, it seemed as if the very sunlight came with
him. And Mrs. Harling welcomed his coming too for even the men's talk
of cargoes, commerce, shipping, and stevedores had its lure for her.

In fact, all the neighborhood agreed that the dapper little captain
"had a way with him."

"Why, he could actually talk about dried codfish, I do believe, and
make you think there was nothing on earth like it!" exclaimed Julie
O'Dowd to Mrs. Murphy. "I never saw such a man! And so kind withal.
Simple as a child, too. You don't catch him prating about his doings.
Why, Mike Sullivan who went once to New York talked more about it than
does this critter all his circlings of the globe."

Aye, the Captain was modest. Everybody agreed to that. Nevertheless he
certainly had at his tongue's end an astonishing amount of information
which came hither when occasion arose for him to use it.

Carl had an illustration of that one day when he chanced to drop a
remark about the Tartary lamb.

"Tartary lamb, eh!" commented his uncle, catching up the phrase
quickly. "And how, pray, did you hear of the Tartary lamb?"

"Mother told us."

"A funny idea, wasn't it?" Uncle Frederick spoke as if Tartary lambs
were topics of everyday conversation. "And yet no stranger than some of
the notions we hold now, I imagine. We do not know all there is to be
known ourselves--not by a good sight--even though we do think ourselves
very up-to-date. With all the learning the ages have rolled up handed
to us in a bundle we should blush were we not better informed than poor
Sir John Mandeville, who had no books to speak of. Had he been able to
read Herodotus, for example, he would then have learned from that Greek
writer who lived so many centuries ago that there was in India a wild
tree having for its fruit fleeces finer than those of sheep; and that
the natives spun cloth out of them and made clothing for themselves.
Herodotus tells many other interesting facts about cotton and its uses,
too. A present, he remarks, sent to the king of Egypt, was packed in
cotton so that it would not get broken. That sounds natural, doesn't
it? He even makes our clever inventor, Eli Whitney, appear unoriginal
by describing a Greek machine that separated cotton seeds from the
fiber."

"Then the cotton gin wasn't new, after all," frowned Carl.

"The idea of it was not new, no; but the device Whitney and his friend
Mr. Miller produced was a fresh method for getting this age-old result.
Up to 1760 the same primitive ginning machine was used in England as
had been used in India for many, many years. Think of that! But as
civilization grew and people not only wove more cloth but made an
increasing variety of kinds the demand for material to make it
increased. And old Herodotus is by no means the only early historian to
mention cotton. Other writers went into even more details than he,
describing the plant, its leaves and blossoms, and telling how it was
set out in rows. Apparently as long ago as 519 B.C. the Persians were
spinning and weaving cloth and dyeing it all sorts of colors, using for
the purpose the leaves and roots of tropical plants. It therefore
followed that when the officers of Emperor Alexander's army returned
from the East they brought back to Greece tales of the cotton plant,
and Greeks and Romans alike began to use the material for awnings much
as we do now."

"How funny!" smiled Carl. "I'll bet they were glad to have something to
shade them from the sun. I shouldn't relish spending the summer in
Greece or Italy."

"I guess you wouldn't. Baileyville may be hot in July but it is nothing
to what Rome must have been. The stone seats of the Forum were like
stove covers; and because the rich old Romans enjoyed comfort quite as
much as anybody else, lengths of cotton cloth were stretched across
certain parts of the structure to shade it. Even your friend Julius
Caesar was not so toughened by battle that he fancied having the hot sun
beat down on his head; he therefore ordered a screening of cloth to be
extended from the top of his house to that of the Capitoline Hill so
when he rode hither he could be cool and sheltered. Oh, the Romans knew
a good thing when they saw it--never fear! In the meantime Greeks and
Romans alike were using the newly discovered material for tents, sails,
and gay-colored coverlets."

"Didn't cotton grow in any other country beside India, Uncle
Frederick?" interrogated Mary.

"We do not really know about that," was her uncle's reply. "Certainly
it was found in other places--Egypt, Africa, Mexico, and America; but
whether it was native to these lands or had been transplanted to them
it is impossible to say. We do know, however, that the ancient
Egyptians depended chiefly on flax for their cloth and imported cotton
from other countries, so although the plant did grow there they could
not have had much of it. The little they had was cultivated, I believe,
almost entirely as a shrub and used merely for decoration."

"But loads of cotton come from Egypt now," declared Carl. "The teacher
told us so."

"Indeed it does," nodded Captain Dillingham. "I have brought many a
bale of it back in my ship, so I know."

"Really!" ejaculated his listeners.

"Yes; Egypt, India, and the United States are the great
cotton-producing countries of the world. India comes first on the list;
then we ourselves, with our vast southern crops; then Egypt. And it is
because India raises such great quantities of cotton and is obliged to
ship it to England for manufacture afterward buying it back again--that
Gandhi and his followers who are eager for India to be independent of
England are raising little patches of cotton, weaving their own cloth
on hand looms, and refusing to purchase that of English make. It
certainly seems fair enough that the wealth derived from this crop
should remain in India and not be spent for things the people of India
do not like. However, all that is too big a question for you and me."

"Did you ever see cotton growing, Uncle Frederick?" asked Tim, who had
drawn near.

"Oh, often, sonny. As a general thing the plant is like a Christmas
tree in shape. The perennial plants, or those that come up every year,
frequently grow to be six or eight feet tall; but the annual ones
remain little three or four-foot bushes. Still each grows into pyramid
form, having the wider branches at the bottom. The leaves are not
unlike the lilac; and there is a deep, cup-shaped pod having points
that turn up like fingers and hold the cotton in tightly. But no matter
whether perennial or annual, the cotton plant must have a hot, humid
climate to thrive, and if the land is not naturally moist it must be
irrigated as it is in Egypt."

"I thought things like cotton just grew wild, Uncle Frederick," said
Tim.

"No, indeed," laughed his uncle. "You cannot gather big crops of
anything unless you are willing to work for them. The Lord does not
mean to make life too easy for us. He gives us all these things and
then He has done His part; we must do the rest. The world is a place of
opportunities, that is all. If we are too lazy to take them, or too
stupid, it is our own fault. Many a man gets nowhere because he fails
to grasp this idea. So, sonny, you do not get your cotton all grown for
you, and with the seeds picked out. You are given the root and if you
wish a big cotton crop you must plant seeds, or better yet set out
cuttings, cultivate and care for the plants. Every minute your mind
must be on the thing you are trying to raise. You must watch, for
instance, for pests of insects; diseases that will spoil your plants;
blights caused by fungi; and above all for sudden changes in the
weather. Should it turn scorching hot just when your cotton shoots are
up and beginning to spread their roots the result will be fatal. Or an
early frost will work ruin. Sometimes, you know, we have a spell of hot
weather in the late winter that fools the growing things into thinking
spring has come, and the poor misguided plants begin to put out their
leaves. Then, like a mischievous joker, old Winter comes back and nips
