
"I tell you what we'd better do," said Hiram, who had evidently been
doing considerable deep thinking meanwhile.

"As what?" questioned his brother.

"Let the boys come on in when they get here; they won't find anybody
besides you and Sarah home," the returned wanderer declared, smiling
broadly.

"Where will you be, Uncle Hiram; asleep in the hay out in the barn?"
asked the girl.

"Me? Not much," returned the other. "Because I'm of a mind to go home
with Fred here, and have the whole thing over with this same night."

"Oh! I wish you would; but it's a pretty long walk for you, to
Riverport," declared the boy, with considerable enthusiasm.

"Oh! as to that, I reckon brother Arnold here knows of a farmer not a
great ways off, he could send a note to by you and me," Hiram went on to
say; "I've got plenty of hard cash in my jeans, and we'll hire the rig
to take us to Riverport. Perhaps we might let him think, you see, that
Fred got hurt running, and ought to be taken back home in a buggy. How
about it, Arnold?"

"A pretty good scheme, I must say," replied the other. "Did you have
enough supper, Hiram; and are you ready to take the bull by the horns
right now?"

"Strike while the iron is hot; that's always been my motto," replied the
returned miner, as he reached for his slouch hat; and took up the
overcoat he had worn, which had a high collar that could be used to
muffle his face if necessary.

"And as the night air is sharp and frosty, I'll lend Fred some clothes
to keep him warm," said the farmer.

In ten minutes all this was done, and Fred led the way along the road in
the direction he supposed Buck and his little brother would come. He was
listening all the while, even while conversing with Hiram in low tones.
Presently, when they had gone about half a mile, he heard the growling
voice of Buck Lemington not far away.

"Keep a-goin' Billy; we're not far away from there now; and I guess they
won't refuse to let us in, and give us some grub. Here, take hold of my
hand, and I'll help you along all I can. It was mighty nice for you to
come with me, Billy, and I won't forget it; because I never saw the
governor so mad before, never!"

So while Fred and Hiram hid in the bushes, the two figures passed by.
Fred realized that if there was one spark of good left in the bully of
Riverport, it consisted in his affection for that smaller brother.

Soon afterward they came to the farm where the horse and buggy were to
be secured. There was no trouble whatever.

"This is something like," remarked Hiram, gleefully, as they sped over
the road in the direction of the town, the lights of which could be seen
glimmering in the distance, whenever the travelers happened to be
crossing a rise.

No doubt Fred was the happiest fellow in all Riverport when he finally
drove up in front of his humble home, and, with Hiram, jumped out.

As he looked in through the window he could see his father and mother,
and his three small sisters, Josie, Rebecca and Ruth, all seated at the
supper table, with one chair vacant.

Fred opened the door and walked in. All of them looked up, to smile at
seeing how strange the boy appeared in the odd garments loaned by the
farmer.

"Father, and mother," said Fred, trying to control his shaky voice;
"I've brought you company." Then he closed the door, walked over, and
pulled down the shades, and turning again went on to say: "Here's
somebody who's come from the other side of the world to see you all.
Yes, mother, it's Hiram, and he's bound that this very night will see
his sworn testimony taken by Judge Colon in the presence of reliable
witnesses, so that the great Alaska claim will be settled for good.
Hurrah!"




CHAPTER XXI

THE ATHLETIC MEET


"This beats any crowd ever seen along the Mohunk!"

That seemed to be the opinion of almost everybody, as they looked at the
densely packed grandstand, at the throng in the extra tiers of seats
raised to accommodate those who would pay a bonus in order to insure
comfort; and finally the thousands who crowded the spaces back of the
protecting ropes, all along the oval running track that, twice around,
made exactly a quarter of a mile.

It was a glorious October day; in fact many declared that "the clerk of
the weather had given Riverport the glad hand this time, for sure,"
since not a cloud broke the blue dome overhead, and the sun was just
pleasantly warm.

In the grandstand a group of girls and boys belonging to Riverport had
gathered early, having seats adjacent. And how merrily the tongues did
clatter as Cissy Anderson called attention to the clever way in which
Sid Wells carried himself, which remark would of course reach the boy's
ears in good time, as his sister, Mame, who felt almost like crying
because she could not be in line with these bold athletes, was present,
and heard everything.

Flo Temple cast admiring eyes toward the spot where Fred, clad in his
running trunks and sleeveless white shirt, talked with the track
captain, Brad Morton. For deep down in her girlish heart, Flo felt
certain that ere the day had come to a close Fred was sure to win new
glory for Riverport school.

The arrangements for the athletic meet had been carefully worked out. In
the first place there was a Director of the games, in whose hands every
important question was placed for disposal. A gentleman residing in
Paulding of late, who had gained considerable fame himself as an athlete
in college, had been chosen director. His name was De Camp, and he was
said to be a member of the wonderful family who have figured so
prominently in college athletics in the past.

Then there was a referee, really the most important of all officers,
whose decision was to settle every close match. The starter was to have
charge of each competition, measuring distances accurately, so that
there should be no reason for dissatisfaction. A number of gentlemen had
been asked to serve as inspectors, to assist the referee, especially in
the running matches, and the five mile road competition in particular,
being stationed at certain points along the course to observe how the
numerous contestants behaved, and penalize those who broke the rules.

Of course there were the usual official scorers, timers, three judges
for finishes, and an equal number for the field events. These judges
were to measure each performance, and give to the scorer the exact
distance covered. According to the rules they had no power to disqualify
or penalize a contestant; but they could make alterations in the
program, so as to excuse a contestant from his field event in order to
appear in his track contest, and allow him to take his missing turn
after he had had a reasonable rest.

The hour had now come for the first event on the long program to be
carried out, and the field was cleared of all persons, whether
contestants or their admiring clusters of friends, who had gathered to
give a last good word.

When the master of ceremonies stepped out, the waves of sound gradually
died away.

"Silence! silence! let Mr. De Camp talk!" was heard here and there; and
even the most gossipy girls dared not exchange words after that.

The director, in a few happily chosen remarks, told of the great
benefit to be derived from school athletics, when properly conducted. He
also declared that the right sort of friendly competition or rivalry
between neighboring schools, bent upon excelling in various channels of
athletics, was calculated to inspire a proper ambition to win. And above
all, he observed that in such friendly contests the best of good will
should prevail, so that the vanquished might feel the sting of defeat as
little as possible.

"Be true sportsmen, boys," he finished by saying; "remember in the flush
of your victory that there is another fellow who was just as eager to
win as you were, who is feeding on the husks of defeat. Give him a
hearty cheer for his pluck. It can only add to your own glory, and
speaks well for your heart. That is all I want to say. The announcer
will now tell you the character of the first competition."

Mechanicsburg showed up in a formidable way early in the program.
Bristles Carpenter for Riverport, and Ogden for Paulding, brought out a
round of applause when they cleared the bar in the high jump; but after
it had been raised several notches above their best record, Angus Smith,
who used to play such a clever game out in left for Mechanicsburg,
easily crossed over, amid deafening cheers.

So the first event fell to the town up the river.

"Oh! that's only a taste!" boasted a Mechanicsburg boy, close to the
bevy of now rather subdued Riverport girls; "we've got plenty of that
kind. Just wait, and you'll be greatly surprised, girls. Mechanicsburg
has been keeping quiet; but oh! you Riverport! this is a day you'll
never, never forget! It spells Waterloo for yours!"

"We've heard that sort of talk before, Tody Guffey," remarked Mame
Wells, defiantly; "and when the end came where was Mechanicsburg? Why,
in the gravy, of course. We never yet started out well. Riverport needs
something to stir her blood, in order to make her boys do their best.
Now watch, and see what happens."

However, Mame, splendid "rooter" for the home squad that she was, could
not claim much glory as a prophet; for the next event was also captured
by the hustling school team from the up-river town.

It was a standing jump, and again did the long-legged Smith show his
wonderful superiority as an athlete, by beating the best the other boys
could put up.

Of course the cheers that rose were at first mostly those of the
visitors. Visions of a grand victory that would wipe out the string of
many a previous defeat, began to float before the minds of those who
shouted, and waved hats, flags and scarfs. The whole assemblage seemed
to be for Mechanicsburg, in fact; but then the same thing would be apt
to show when either of the other schools made a win. At such times
enthusiasm goes wild, and those who are enjoying the contests are ready
to cheer anything, so long as they can make a noise.

"Now we'll see a change, I guess," laughingly remarked Mame, when it was
announced that the next event would be a quarter mile sprint, with just
three entries, one from each school.

"Oh! you Colon!" shouted scores of Riverport boys as the tall athlete
came forward with his customary slouching gait, that seemed a part of
his nature; though he could straighten up when he wanted, well enough.

They were off like rabbits as the pistol sounded, and the greatest
racket broke forth as they went flying around the track. Colon kept just
behind the other two. He was craftily watching their work, and coolly
calculating just when it would be necessary for him to "put his best
foot forward."

Once they went around, with Paulding leading slightly, but Mechanicsburg
going strong, and Riverport just "loafing in the rear," as one of the
boys expressed it. But those who were experienced could see that the
wonderful Colon was just toying with his rivals.

"Right now he could dig circles around them both!" yelled little
Semi-Colon, who had the utmost faith in his cousin's ability to
accomplish every task set for him.

"Now they're three quarters done, and at the other end of the track;"
said Flo Temple; "Oh! please, please, don't delay too long, Colon!"

"Let out a link, Colon!" shrieked a megaphone holder.

"Look at him, would you; he heard you shout, all right, Sandy!" cried
one boy.

"He's got wings! He's sure flying!" whooped another.

"Say jumping like a big kangaroo! Call that running? They'll disqualify
him, you mark me, Riverport!" shrieked a disappointed Mechanicsburg
rooter, as he saw the local sprinter shoot past both the others as
though they were standing still; and come toward the finish.

"Riverport wins!" was the shout that arose on all sides.

"Wait!" answered the backers of the up-river school; "we didn't have our
best man, Wagner, in that sprint; we're saving him for the next, when
your wonder will be winded more or less. And the third sprint will be a
walkover. Oh! shout while you have the chance, Riverport; but all the
same your cake is going to be dough. We've taken your number, and the
count is two against one, so far. Mechanicsburg! All together now; three
more cheers, boys!"




CHAPTER XXII

FRED ON THE TRACK


Fred Fenton was in the throng that welcomed the victorious Colon. He had
heard that remark of a Mechanicsburg lad about the plan arranged to wear
Colon down by putting a fresh man in against him with the second sprint,
this time for half a mile. And it set Fred thinking.

He had himself been entered for the second and third sprint; but because
the five mile road race was of such vast importance, the track captain
had prevailed upon Fred not to make either of the others, leaving them
to the marvelous Colon to take care of.

Several more events were pulled off in rapid succession, showing how
well organized the tournament seemed to be, in the hands of competent
men. One of these happenings was a sack race, which afforded great
amusement to the crowd, and gave Paulding her first score, to the
uproarious delight of everybody.

"Paulding can _crawl_ to victory, anyhow!" shouted the megaphone boy,
derisively.

"That's better than crawling after getting licked!" answered a resolute
backer of the town down the river, "that never gave up until the last
man was down."

When the basket ball game of the girls, between Paulding and
Mechanicsburg first, and then Riverport against the victor of the first
round, was called, everybody sat up and took notice.

It was a spirited game, and Paulding girls proved themselves superior to
those of the rival town, for they finally won. Then their team was
patched up with a couple to replace those who were tired out; after
which they started to show Riverport what they knew about basketball.

And sure enough, in the end they did carry the Paulding colors to
victory; though it was a close decision; and if the balance of the home
team could have shown the same class that little Mame Wells put into her
playing, it would have been a walkover for Riverport.

Colon came to the scratch, smiling and confident, when the half mile run
over the track was called. So did that fellow up the river, who had
always been such a hard player to down, when Riverport tackled her rival
in baseball, or on the gridiron--Felix Wagner, the best all-round
athlete of which Mechanicsburg boasted.

It was seen that Colon did not mean to follow the same tactics in this
sprint of the half mile. He knew that he was up against a different sort
of man now, than in the first event of his class. And when the three
competitors passed for the third time the grandstand, they were pretty
evenly bunched, each jealously watching lest one of the others get an
advantage.

Amid a din of cheering they reached the other end of the track, all
going strong.

"Now watch Colon hump himself!" shouted the megaphone boy.

"There he goes! Ain't he the kangaroo though?" bawled another.

"But keep your eye on Wagner, will you? He's flying like the wind.
Better believe your wonder will have to do his prettiest right now, with
that hurricane at his heels. Go it, Felix; you can win it! Wagner!
Wagner! He's going to do it! Hoop-la! Me-chan-icsburg forever!"

Wagner was coming like a bird, and his flying feet seemed hardly to
touch the ground. The Paulding contestant appeared to be so far
outclassed that some people imagined he must be almost standing still;
but he was doing his best, poor fellow.

Apparently Colon heard the sound of Wagner close at his shoulder as the
other made a last spurt, meaning to pass him. Colon had just one more
"kink" to let loose, and as he did so he bounded ahead, passing the
string some five feet in front of the second entry.

The roar of cheers that arose suddenly died out.

"Look at Colon! Something happened to him! That last spurt must have
ruptured a blood vessel! That settles the third race, because Wagner
will have it easy!"

The marshal and his many assistants had some difficulty in keeping order
while a crowd of athletes gathered around Colon, who had fallen headlong
after breasting the tape, and lay there on the ground.

Presently the director appeared, and waved his hand for silence,
remarking:

"I regret to say that the winner of the last half mile sprint sprained
his ankle just as he clinched his victory, and will be utterly unable to
take part in any other contest to-day. We are glad it is no more serious
injury; and one and all extend to him our sympathy, as well as our
admiration for the game fight he has put up!"

Brad Morton helped Colon to a seat, where he could have his swollen
ankle properly attended to, and at the same time watch the progress of
the tournament; for Colon stubbornly refused to let them take him home.

The face of the track captain was marked with uneasiness. Mechanicsburg
was evidently in this thing to win, and meant to make every point
count. Right then the two schools seemed to be moving along, neck and
neck, each having seven points in their favor, with several events
coming that were altogether uncertain.

Hence, that third half mile run over the track might eventually prove to
be the turning point, upon which final victory or defeat would hinge.

With Colon, the unbeaten sprinter, down, who was there to take his place
against that fleet-footed Wagner, who would be fairly recovered by the
time the last sprint was called?

Rapidly did Brad run over in his mind his available entries, and putting
each in competition with Wagner, he shook his head. Sid Wells could not
be depended on to keep his head in a final pinch. He usually did well in
the beginning of a hot race, but when there was a call for held-back
energies, Sid could not "deliver the goods," as Brad knew.

Besides, there was Corney Shays, a speedy runner for short distances,
but with poor wind. Half a mile was too much for Corney; had it been a
quarter, now, Brad would have felt tempted to try him against Wagner.

He looked anxiously toward Fred, and the other smiled. An odd
three-legged race was taking place at the time, each school having an
entry; and amid uproarious shouts the contestants were falling down,
getting mixed in their partners, and exciting all sorts of comments.

"I'm willing to make the try if you say so, Brad," Fred remarked, for he
could easily read what was in the mind of the anxious Brad.

"If only I was sure that it wouldn't interfere with your work in the
five mile run, I'd be tempted to let you go into it," the track captain
declared; "but you know that short Marathon has been thought so
important that it was given three points, to one for all other events.
We've just _got_ to win that, or we're gone. Do you really and truly
think you could stand both, Fred?"

"I sure do," replied the other, confidently; "and besides, you can get
the field judges to put the five mile off until the very last, so as to
give me time to recover. Nobody can object to that."

"How about having the third sprint moved up in line; that would widen
the gap between your two entries, Fred?" remarked Brad, the gloom
beginning to leave his face, as he saw a way out of the trouble.

"Never do in the wide world," replied Fred; "because that would shorten
Wagner's time for recovery after his last race. And lots of fellows
would say it was done purposely to give us a winning chance. No, my plan
is the better, Brad."

Other events were being run off in succession. The shot-put came to
Riverport, Dave Hanshaw proving himself superior at this sort of game to
any of those entered in competition. Jumping the hurdles went to the
steady-pulling up-river town. And when the third sprint was called, once
again were Mechanicsburg and Riverport tied for points.

When Fred toed the scratch alongside Felix Wagner and the new Paulding
sprinter, he did not underestimate either of his antagonists. And after
they were off like greyhounds let free from the leash, he adopted the
tactics that had won so handily for Colon in the first race, lagging
just behind the others, and observing how they ran, while making the
circuit of the track three times.

Thus he knew to a fraction just what resources Wagner had left when the
critical stage was reached for the final spurt. Felix was already
beginning to feel his previous race. That heart-breaking finish against
Colon had told on him more than he had expected it would. And Fred
believed he would have no great difficulty in displacing him, when the
time came.

On the way to the finish all of them increased their already fast pace,
until they were fairly skimming along the level track as though they had
wings. But Fred proved to have considerably more reserve powers than
either of his competitors. Well had he gauged the distance; and when
just about one hundred yards from the finish he was seen to pass both
Wagner and the Paulding runner, coming in an easy winner, amid the
terrific cheers of the excited throng, everybody being upon his or her
feet, waving flags, hats, handkerchiefs, and shouting themselves fairly
hoarse to indicate what they thought of the clever tactics of the
Riverport boy.

And when the pleased Brad clapped Fred on the back he remarked:

"Elegantly done, my boy; only I do hope it won't tell on you in the
biggest event of the meet; the five mile run. For they're pressing us
hard, and we'll need every one of those three points, Fred; remember
that!"




CHAPTER XXIII

A CLOSE COUNT


"You're doing yourself proud to-day, Fred," remarked Bristles Carpenter,
as he dropped down beside the other, who had donned his sweater-jacket,
so that he might not take cold, and thus stiffen his muscles before
being called upon to toe the mark again, toward the end of the meet, for
the road race.

"Well, I feel just like a bird, and that's a fact, Bristles," replied
Fred, as he turned smilingly upon his chum. "Everything seems to be
coming my way, outside of this athletic meet, you know."

"I heard Colon tell how you and your father came over to his uncle's
last night, bringing a stranger along with you; and that he turned out
to be the witness you've been looking for so long--Hiram Masterson. Say,
that was the name of that farmer and his girl we helped that time;
wasn't it, Fred?"

"Sure," answered the other, for he felt that so faithful a friend as
Bristles ought to be taken into his confidence, now that all danger was
over. "He and Hiram are brothers, and both of 'em are nephews of Squire
Lemington."

"And by the way, I don't see Buck's face around; what d'ye reckon
happened to him to keep him away, when he's so set on athletics?"

So Fred, seeing his chance, explained in a few sentences all that had
happened on the preceding afternoon. Great was the astonishment of
Bristles.

"Talk to me about luck, there never was anything to equal yours, Fred!"
he declared, as he shook hands warmly. "And so Hiram gave all his
evidence under oath, and in the presence of witnesses, so there's no
chance of his being kidnapped again, I guess. That'll knock the old
syndicate silly; eh?"

"It has already, they tell me," Fred went on, composedly. "Word must
have been sent to Squire Lemington, for early this morning he was down
at the telegraph office wiring his chief, and getting an answer. My
father has received a message from the Squire saying that he and the
president of the big company would be glad to make an appointment with
him, for the purpose of talking over business matters. And he also said
that he felt sure they could come to some agreement that would be
satisfactory to both sides, and so avoid the expense and delay of a
lawsuit."

"Bully! bully, all around; that must mean a hundred thousand or two for
your folks. But I hope you keep your eye out for that tricky Squire,
Fred. If there's any loop-hole for treachery he'll find it, mark me."

"Oh! we're in the hands of Judge Colon now; and you can catch a weasel
asleep sooner than he could be found napping. Rest easy, Bristles, the
game's already won, and the fun over, all but the shouting."

"Isn't it great, though? And all these months you've been going around
with a cheery smile on your face, Fred, when you carried a heavy load of
worry. You don't care if I mention these things to my folks; do you?"

"Not a bit of it," answered the other, briskly. "We've had to keep
things quiet long enough; and now that the tide's turned our way we want
everybody to know the facts. Tell it as often as you please; only don't
be too personal about the share Squire Lemington had in the carrying off
of Hiram. We've got no actual proof, you know, about that."

"There goes our Dave at it again, throwing the discus," remarked
Bristles; "it's a dead sure thing we win this event. And if I hadn't
fallen down in my turn, Riverport would be just two points more ahead
of her closest rivals. But I'm going to take up training next time. I've
learned my weak point, and I hope to cure it."

"There's a happy boy, if there's one here," said Fred, nodding his head
in the direction of a rather sturdily-set young chap, who stood watching
the throwing of the weight; and whose presence in running trunks and
sleeveless shirt announced that he expected to make one of the races.

"Why, it's Gabe Larkins, for a fact; I didn't know he was in this thing
at all," Bristles ventured.

"Yes, you may remember that he used to say he was fond of all outdoor
sports; but never had time to take part in them," Fred went on to
remark. "Well, Brad found that he was a clever runner, and he coaxed him
to practice a little on the sly. He used to be a Riverport schoolboy,
you see, before he was taken out to go to work; so he was eligible for
entry. And I really believe he's going to prove a valuable find yet."

"Talking about training, I heard Mr. De Camp say he didn't believe in
too much of that sort of thing for boys," Bristles volunteered.

"Yes, I heard him say that, and he explained it too," Fred went on with.
"You see, a boy is in the process of the making. He can stand just so
much, and if he exceeds his powers he may work irreparable ruin to his
system. He said that a boy ought never to be trained as grown athletes
are. His training ought to be just play. He must be shown how to do
things properly, and then allowed to go about it in his own way. Give
him an example of how the thing should be done, and then let him play
his own game."

A wild burst of cheering stopped their conference, and Bristles jumped
up to ascertain what caused it.

"Of course Dave just beat his own high water mark," he called out; "and
neither of the others is in the same class, just what I said would
happen. Another point for us. But the next lot look dangerous, I'm
afraid."

They proved to be more than that, for two points went to the up-river
town as the wrestling match, and the three-standing jump contest were
decided in their favor by the impartial judges. As yet there had not
been heard the least criticism of the way these gentlemen conducted
their part of the affair. While in several close decisions there may
have been many disappointed lads, still it was fully believed that the
judges were working squarely to give each contestant a fair deal, and
favor no one at the expense of others.

A comical potato race next sent the crowds into convulsions of laughter.
And of course Paulding had to win that. How the others did rub it into
the advocates of the down-river school; but they only grinned, and
accepted the gibes with becoming modesty.

"Oh! we're strong on all the games that go to make up the real thing,"
one of the baseball squad remarked, grinning amiably at the chaff of his
friends. "You see, potatoes go to make up life for a big part of the
human race; and we're after 'em, good and hard. And our girls are
helping us out handsomely. We take off our hats to the fair sex.
Paulding is all right, if a little slow sometimes."

In that spirit the various contests were being carried out. Small danger
of any serious trouble arising between the three schools when their
young people showed such true sportsmanlike qualities in their
competitions, keen-set though they were to win a victory.

The afternoon was wearing on, and the enthusiasm did not seem to wane in
the slightest degree. True, a lot of the boys were getting quite hoarse
from constant shouting; but others took up the refrain, while they
