but when it was time to go to bed, he was very lonely, even his little
lark was silent and as for his traveling cloak, either he never thought
about it, or else it had been spirited away--for he made no use of it,
nor attempted to do so.

On the sixth day, Prince Dolor had a strange contented look in his face.
Get out of the tower he could not; the ladder the deaf mute used was
always carried away again and his food was nearly gone. So he made up
his mind to die. Not that he wished to die; on the contrary, there was a
great deal that he wished to live to do. Dying did not seem so very
dreadful; not even to lie quietly like his uncle, whom he had entirely
forgiven now.

"Suppose I had grown to be a man, and had had work to do, and people to
care for, and was so useful and busy that they liked me, and perhaps
even forgot that I was lame. Then, it would have been nice to have
lived, I think," and tears came into the little fellow's eyes. Then he
heard a trumpet, one of the great silver trumpets so admired in
Nomansland. Not pleasant music, but very bold and grand.

The poor condemned woman had not been such a wicked woman after all. As
soon as she heard of the death of the King, she persuaded the deaf-mute
to take her away with him, and they galloped like the wind from city to
city, spreading everywhere the news that Prince Dolor's death and burial
had been an invention concocted by his wicked uncle--that he was alive
and well, and the noblest young Prince that ever was born.

It was a bold stroke, but it succeeded. People jumped at the idea of
this Prince, who was the son of their late good King and Queen.

"Hurrah for Prince Dolor! Let him be our king!" rang from end to end of
the kingdom. They were determined to have him reign over them.
Accordingly no sooner was the late king laid in his grave than they
pronounced him a usurper; turned all his family out of the palace, and
left it empty for the reception of the new sovereign, whom they went to
fetch with great rejoicing.

They hailed him with delight, as prince and king and went down on their
knees before him, offering the crown to him.

"Yes," he said, "if you desire it, I will be your king. And I will do my
best to make my people happy."

"Oh!" said he, "if before I go, I could only see my dear godmother." He
gazed sadly up to the skylight, whence there came pouring a stream of
sunrays like a bridge between heaven and earth. Sliding down it, came
the little woman in grey.

He held out his arms in eager delight.

"Oh, godmother, you have not forsaken me!"

"Not at all my son. You may not have seen me, but I have seen you many
a time."

"How?"

"Oh, never mind. I can turn into anything I please you know."

"A lark, for instance," cried Prince Dolor.

"Or a Magpie," answered she with a capital imitation of Mag's croaky
voice.

"You will not leave me now that I am king? Otherwise I had rather not be
a king at all," said he.

The little old woman laughed gaily. "Forsake you? That is impossible.
But now I must go. Good-bye! Open the window and out I fly."

Prince Dolor tried to hold his godmother fast, but in vain. A knocking
was heard at the door, and the little woman vanished.

His godmother helped him out of many difficulties for there was never
such a wise old woman.

He was very happy and contented; first, because he took his affliction
patiently; second, because being a brave man, he bore it bravely.
Therefore other people grew to love him so well, that I think hundreds
of his subjects might have been found who were almost ready to die for
their poor lame king.

He did a good many things, however, which a little astonished his
subjects. First, he pardoned the condemned woman, who had been his nurse
and ordered that there should be no such thing as the death punishment
in Nomansland.

Then he chose the eldest son of his eldest cousin, a quiet, unobtrusive
boy, to be educated as heir to the throne.

In course of time, when the little prince had grown into a tall young
man, King Dolor fixed a day when the people should assemble in the great
square of the capital to see the young prince installed solemnly in his
new duties.

The king lifted up his thin slender hand and there came a silence over
the vast crowd immediately as he pronounced the vows which made the
young prince king.

My people he said, I am tired; I want to rest; it is time for me to go
and I do not think I shall come back any more. He drew a little bundle
out of his breast pocket. Then, so suddenly that even those nearest to
his Majesty could not tell how, the king was away--floating right up in
the air--upon something they knew not what. Whither he went or who went
with him it is impossible to say, but I myself believe that his
godmother took him on his traveling cloak to the Beautiful Mountains.


       *       *       *       *       *




CHARACTER BOOK

    Arranged by
    JOSEPHINE L. ADAMS


This book is prepared for and dedicated to "the girls." It is for their
girl friends to write in, being left with many inviting blank spaces for
the answer to interesting questions about their favorite people, songs,
amusements, plays, books and other things one naturally wants to know
about. The sum total of all these queries not only furnishes lots of fun
at the time of writing, but also gives a good character study of the
writer and a souvenir of one's friends, which every girl will be glad to
treasure.

It is said that life is made up of little things. Certainly, as we look
back, these trifles often seem of most interest and value to us. And it
is in order to preserve some of these stray bits of gold dust that this
CHARACTER BOOK has been prepared--at the suggestion of one clever girl.

        Cloth, 12mo, 75c.
    Persian ooze, boxed, $1.25.




HOLIDAY AND SOCIAL HAPPENINGS

    Arranged by
    MINNIE E. SALISBURY

    Illustrated by
    HORACE KINNEY CRANMER


This unique volume is an exceedingly attractive and practical gift book
in which one may keep a record of social and holiday happenings and
incidents of interest to one's self. Under the various headings, such as
"Christmas," "New Year's Day," "Parties and Entertainments," etc.,
descriptions may be written which will assist one to avoid or repeat the
details of a similar event in the future. Under the headings, "Special
Occasions," "Miscellaneous," "Trips," etc., many happy and interesting
events may be recorded, and as time goes on this chronicle of happenings
may prove a pleasure and solace, dispelling the shadow of age with the
sunshine of youth. Handsomely illustrated throughout and printed in
three colors on a superior grade of paper having a good writing surface.

    Cloth, size 6-1/2 x 8-3/4 inches, boxed, $1.25.
                Paste grain, boxed, $2.50.
                Velvet ooze, boxed, $2.50.




CARD CLUB RECORD


Every person who attends card parties wants to refer at some time or
another to what happened at or who attended a certain gathering and here
is a book specially designed for that purpose. Blank spaces are provided
in which to record: The Date, Hostess, Game Played, Scores, Prizes,
Winners, Refreshments, Guests, and General Remarks. The book is printed
in two colors with handsome border designs, and includes concise card
rules of latest revision. Both bindings put in a handsome box.

    Cloth binding, cover stamped in gold, boxed,  $1.00
    Full leather binding, full gilt edges, boxed, $2.00

    NOTE  THIS BOOK MAKES THE VERY BEST
          KIND OF A =CARD PARTY PRIZE=




Everybody should save their

    T H E A T R E   P R O G R A M S


In after years many of them become historic and increase wonderfully in
value as souvenirs of the great plays and actors you have seen. Nearly
every one takes home their theatre program, and =is at a loss afterwards
what to do with it=, or where to put it so it can be found when wanted
in the future. Here is a book that solves the problem:

    PLAYS AND PLAYERS
    A Theatre-Goer's Record

in which one may keep a record of the plays seen, the date, play,
theatre, in whose company, coupon of seats, comment on the play and
players, synopsis of scenes, cast of characters, pictures, scenes and
clippings pertaining to the play.

The paper (India Tint) is of fine quality; the printing is in colors;
the binding is cloth with an appropriate cover design in colors; the
whole making a very attractive book for gift purposes, or for one's
own use, and is put up in a handsome box.

    8-3/4 x 6-3/4 inches, cloth binding (boxed) =$1.50=
    Full limp leather, gilt edges (boxed)        =3.00=




DINNERS AND LUNCHEONS

Compiled by PAUL PIERCE


