for over twenty years, but I see now that I was wrong altogether. Of
course I knew they were beggars to talk, but I always thought that there
was something in it, and that if it came to fighting they would show up
pretty well; but to hear them going on now as to what France will do and
doing nothing themselves, gives one a sickener. Then the way as they
blackguard the Emperor, who wasn't by any means a bad chap, puts my
monkey up I can tell you. Why there is not one in fifty of them as is
fit to black his boots. He had a good taste in horses too, he had; and
when I hear them going on, it is as much as I can do not to slip in to
them.

"That is one reason why I am stopping. A week ago I had pretty well made
up my mind that I would go, but they made me so mad that I says to
myself, I will stop and see it out, if it is only for the pleasure of
seeing these fellows get the licking they deserve. I was out yesterday
evening. There was every cafe crowded; there was the singing-places
fuller than I ever saw them; there were drunken soldiers, who ought to
have been with their regiments outside the walls, reeling about the
streets. Any one as seed the place would have put it down that it was a
great fete-day. As to the Prussians outside no one seemed to give them a
thought. If you went from table to table you heard everyone saying that
the Germans would be destroyed, and that every one who talked of peace
now was a traitor."

"I quite agree with you," Cuthbert said, "they are most extraordinary
people. Still I do think they will fight."

"Well, sir, I don't know whether you have heard the news that they have
been licked this morning somewhere out near Clamart. I heard just now
that a lot of the linesmen bolted and never stopped running till they
got into Paris, but they say the Breton mobiles fought well, though they
had to fall back at last."

"The troops are disorganized at present," Cuthbert said; "but when you
see what a tremendous thrashing they have had it is hardly to be
expected that they should fight with any confidence, but when discipline
is restored and they have had a few skirmishes they will be different
men altogether. As to the mobiles, they are mere peasants at present,
but a month of hard work will turn them into soldiers, and I should say
better soldiers than the linesmen; but I am afraid they will never make
anything out of the National Guard. The only way to do so will be to
establish big camps outside the walls and send them all out there and
put strict army men in command, with a regiment of regulars in each camp
to carry out their orders. It would be necessary, no doubt, to shoot a
few hundred of them before anything like discipline could be
established; and once a week the whole should be sent out to attack the
Germans so as to teach them to be steady under fire. In that way they
might be turned into decent soldiers."

"Lord bless you, sir, Government would never try that. There would be
barricades in the streets in no time, and as the soldiers are all
outside the walls the mob would upset the Government in a week."

"I am not at all saying it would do, but it is the only thing to make
soldiers of them."

"Well, sir, you will know where to come when things get bad. I don't
expect there will be any beer to be had, but I have been down with my
son Bob into the cellar for the last four nights. I could not trust the
French waiters, and we dug holes and have buried a couple of dozen kegs
of my best spirits, so if they make a clear sweep of the rest I reckon
we shall be able to keep that door open a goodish while."

"I shan't forget, and I hope that your spirits may escape the searchers,
but you know just at present we are not popular in Paris. They have got
an idea in their heads that we ought to have declared war against the
Germans on their behalf; why, Heaven knows, but you may be sure that all
the English places will be very strictly searched."

"Yes, I reckon on that, and we have got them twelve feet deep. It will
be a job to get them out as we want them, but there won't be anything
else to do and it will keep us in health."

Cuthbert had asked all the students to come in and smoke a pipe that
evening in his room, and had ordered supper to be sent in.

"I am going to have it there instead of one of the usual places," he
said, "because I don't think it is decent to be feasting in a public at
a time like this. I expect it is about the last time we shall have
anything like a supper. Things will be altogether beyond the reach of
our purses in another week. Besides, I hope we shall be outside before
long."

Arnold Dampierre was the first to come in.

"I am disgusted with the Parisians," he said, moodily.

"Well, yes, I am not surprised. It is not quite the spirit in which your
people entered on their struggle, Dampierre."

"No, we meant it; the struggle with us was to get to the front. Why, do
you know, I heard two or three of the National Guard grumbling in the
highest state of indignation, and why, do you think? Because they had to
sleep in the open air last night. Are these the men to defend a city?
There will be trouble before long, Cuthbert. The workmen will not stand
it; they have no faith in the Government nor in Trochu, nor in any one."

"Including themselves, I hope," Cuthbert smiled.

"They are in earnest. I have been up at----" and he hesitated,
"Montmartre this afternoon, and they are furious there."

"They are fools," Cuthbert said, scornfully, "and no small proportion
are knaves besides. They read those foul pamphlets and gloat over the
abuse of every decently dressed person. They rave against the Prussians,
but it is the Bourgeois they hate. They talk of fighting, while what
they want is to sack and plunder."

"Nothing of the kind," the American said, hotly. "They want honesty and
purity, and public spirit. They see vice more rampant than it was in the
days of the Empire. They see the Bourgeois shirking their duty. They see
license and extravagance everywhere."

"It is a pity they don't look at home," Cuthbert laughed
good-temperedly. "I have not yet learnt that either purity or honesty,
or a sense of duty are conspicuous at Montmartre or Belleville. There is
just as much empty vaporing there as there is down the Boulevards. As to
courage, they may have a chance presently of showing whether they have
more of it than the better class. Personally, I should doubt it." Then
he added more seriously, "My dear Dampierre, I can of course guess where
you have learnt all this. I know that Minette's father is one of the
firebrands of his quarter, and that since she has been earning an income
here he has never done a stroke of work, but has taken up the profession
of politician. I am not doubting his sincerity. He may be for aught I
know perfectly in earnest, but it is his capacity I doubt. These
uneducated men are able to see but one side of the question, and that is
their own.

"I am not at all blind to the danger. I believe it is possible that we
are going to have another red revolution. Your men at Belleville and
Montmartre are capable of repeating the worst and most terrible features
of that most awful time, but you know what came of it and how it ended.
Even now some of these blackguard prints are clamoring for one man to
take the supreme control of everything. So far there are no signs of
that coming man, but doubtless, in time, another Bonaparte may come to
the front and crush down disorder with an iron heel; but that will not
be until the need for a saviour of society is evident to all. I hope, my
dear fellow, you will not be carried away with these visionary ideas. I
can, of course, understand your predilections for a Republic, but
between your Republic and the Commune, for which the organs of the mob
are already clamoring, there is no shadow of resemblance. They are both
founded, it is true, on the will of the majority, but in the States it
is the majority of an educated and distinctly law-abiding people--here
it is the majority of men who would set the law at defiance, who desire
power simply for the purposes of spoliation."

Dampierre would have replied angrily, but at this moment the door opened
and two or three of the other students entered.

"Have you heard about that affair at Clamart," they demanded eagerly.
"They say the line behaved shamefully, and that Trochu declares they
shall be decimated."

"You may be quite sure that if he said so he will not carry it out,"
Cuthbert said. "The army has to be kept in a good humor, and at any rate
until discipline is fully restored it would be too dangerous a task to
venture on punishing cowardice. It is unfortunate certainly, but things
will get better in time. You can hardly expect to make the fugitives of
a beaten army into heroes all at once. I have not the least doubt that
if the Germans made an attack in full force they would meet with very
slight resistance; but they won't do that. They will go to work in a
regular and steady way. They will erect batteries, commanding every road
out of the town, and will then sit down and starve us out, hastening the
process, perhaps, by a bombardment. But all that will take time. There
will be frequent fighting at the outposts, and if Trochu and the rest of
them make the most of the material they have at hand, poor as much of it
is, they will be able to turn out an army that should be strong enough
to throw itself upon any point in the German line and break its way
out; but it must be an army of soldiers, not a force composed of
disheartened fugitives and half-drilled citizens."

"The National Guard are drilling earnestly," Rene Caillard said. "I have
been watching them this afternoon, they really made a very good show."

"The father of a family with a comfortable home and a prosperous
business can drill as well as the most careless vaurien, Rene; better,
perhaps, for he will take much greater pains; but when it comes to
fighting, half a dozen reckless daredevils are worth a hundred of him. I
think if I had been Trochu I would have issued an order that every
unmarried man in Paris between the ages of sixteen and forty-five should
be organized into, you might call it, the active National Guard for
continual service outside the walls, while the married men should be
reserved for defending the _enceinte_ at the last extremity. The outside
force might be but a third of the whole, but they would be worth as much
as the whole force together. That is why I think that our corps may
distinguish itself. We have none of us wives or families and nothing
much to lose, consequently we shall fight well. We shan't mind hardships
for we have not been accustomed to luxuries. We are fighting as
volunteers and not because the law calls us under arms.

"We are educated and have got too much self-respect to bolt like
rabbits. I don't say we may not retire. One can't do impossibilities,
and if others don't stand, we can't oppose a Prussian Army Corps. There
is one thing you must do, and that is preserve good discipline. There is
no discipline at all in the National Guard. I saw a party of them
yesterday drilling, and two or three of them quietly marched out of the
ranks and remonstrated on terms of the most perfect equality, with their
colonel as to an order he had given. The maxim of the Republic may do
for civil life, though I have not a shadow of belief either in equality
or fraternity; nor have I in liberty when liberty means license; whether
that be so or not equality is not consistent with military discipline.
An army in which the idea of equality reigns is not an army but a mob,
and is no more use for fighting purposes than so many armed peasants.
The Shibboleth is always absurd and in a case like the present ruinous.
The first duty of a soldier is obedience, absolute and implicit, and a
complete surrender of the right of private judgment."

"And you would obey an officer if you were sure that he were wrong,
Cuthbert?"

"Certainly I would. I might, if the mistake did not cost me my life,
argue the matter out with him afterwards, if, as might happen among us,
we were personal acquaintances; but I should at the same time carry out
the order, whatever it might be, to the best of my power. And now I
propose that for this evening we avoid the subject of the siege
altogether. In future, engaged as we are likely to be, we shall hardly
be able to avoid it, and moreover the bareness of the table and the
emptiness of the wine-cups will be a forcible reminder that it will be
impossible to escape it. Did you show Goude your sketch for your picture
for the Salon, Rene?"

"I did, after you had all gone, and I have not got over the interview
yet. His remarks on the design, conception, and the drawing were equally
clear and decisive. He more than hinted that I was a hopeless idiot,
that the time he had given me was altogether wasted, that I had mistaken
my avocation, and that if the Germans knocked me on the head it would be
no loss either to myself or to society in general. It is true that after
he had finished he cooled down a bit and made a number of suggestions
from which I gathered that if the whole thing were altered, my idea of
the background altogether changed, the figures differently posed, the
effect of light and shade diametrically reversed, and a few other
trifling alterations made, the thing might possibly be hung on the top
line. Ma foi, I feel altogether crushed, for I had really flattered
myself that the sketch was not altogether without merit."

When the laugh had subsided Cuthbert said--

"Courage, Rene, Goude's bark is always worse than his bite, and I have
no doubt he will take a much more favorable view of it as you get on."

"It is all very well for you to say so," Rene said, ruefully. "You are a
spoiled child, Goude has never a word of reproof for you."

"Probably because he knows very well that I shall not break my heart
over it. We must hold a committee of inspection on your work to-morrow;
none of us have seen your design yet, and we may be able between us to
make some useful suggestion."

"No, no," Rene exclaimed. "Heaven protect me from that. Do you come,
Cuthbert; none of us mind what you say about our pictures. Your
criticisms do not hurt. One would no more think of being angry with you
for using your knife than with a surgeon for performing an operation."

"Very well, Rene, I will come round early. I have no doubt your sketch
is a very good one on the whole, and after a few little changes it will
satisfy even Goude. By the way, have you heard we are to elect our
company officers to-morrow?"

"Will you stand? I am sure you would have all our votes--that is
twenty-five to start with, and as we know most of the fellows in the
company we certainly could secure all those who have not any candidate
they want to run; besides, there are, of course, to be three officers,
so we should be able to traffic votes."

"No officering for me," Cuthbert laughed. "In the first place I have no
greater qualifications for the post than anyone else, and in the second
place, I am English, and though I might be elected--thanks to your
votes--I should never be liked or trusted; besides, I have not a shadow
of ambition that way. I am going to fight if necessary. I shall have my
note-book in my pocket, and I have no doubt that when we are lying
waiting for our turn to come, I shall have lots of opportunities for
jotting down little bits that will work into the great battle picture
which is to have the place of honor some day in the Salon. I think it
will certainly be pleasant to have one of our own number among the
officers, and I propose that each of us puts down on a slip of paper the
name of the man he thinks will make the best leader and throw it into a
hat; then, whoever gets the most votes, we will all support, and, as
you say, by a little traffic in the votes, we ought to be able to get
him in among the three."

"Are you absolutely determined not to stand?"

"Absolutely and positively. So please do not any of you put my name
down, two or three votes thrown away like that might alter the
decision."

He tore up a sheet of paper into small slips and passed them round.

"Before we begin to write," he said, "let it be understood that no one
is to vote for himself. I don't mind telling you who I am going to vote
for. It is Henri Vancour. This is a matter in which it should be no
question of personal liking. We should choose the man who appears to us
best fitted for the post."

The name came as a surprise upon the others, for Henri was one of the
last whom it would have occurred to them to choose. Pencils were already
in their hands and they were on the point of writing when he spoke, and
almost all would have given their votes either for Rene Caillard or
Pierre Leroux, who were the two most popular men among the party. There
was a pause for some little time before the pencils went to work.

They had not thought of Henri, but now they did think of him they
acknowledged to themselves that there was a good deal to be said in his
favor. He was a Norman--quiet, hard-working, and even-tempered. His
voice was seldom heard in the chorus of jokes and laughter, but when
asked for an opinion he gave it at once concisely and decidedly. He was
of medium height and squarely built. His face was cast in a rough mould
and an expression of resolution and earnestness was predominant. He had
never joined either in the invective against the Emperor, or in the
confident anticipations of glorious successes over the Germans.

He listened but said nothing, and when questioned would reply, "Let us
see some one do better than the Emperor before we condemn him. We will
hope for the best, but so far predictions have been so wrong that it
would be better to wait and see before we blow our trumpets." He had
but little genius, this young Norman, but he had perseverance and power.

M. Goude scolded him less than others with far greater talent, and had
once said, "you will never be a great painter, Henri. I doubt if you
will ever be in the first line, but you will take a good place in the
second. You will turn out your pictures regularly and the work will
always be good and solid. You may not win any great prizes, but your
work will be esteemed, and in the end you will score as heavily as some
of those who possess real genius."

Yes, Henri was, they all felt, now they thought it over, one they could
rely upon. He would not lose his head, he would be calm in danger, as he
was calm at all other times, and he certainly would show no lack of
courage. Accordingly when the papers were opened he was found to have
received a considerable majority of the votes.

"Thank you for choosing me, comrades," he said, quietly. "I can only say
that if elected I will do my best. A man can't say more than that. Why
you should have fixed upon me I cannot think, but that is your business.
I think I can promise at any rate that I won't run away."

When the Franc-tireurs des Ecoles assembled the next morning, half an
hour was given for consultation; then the vote was taken, and Henri
Vancour was declared elected first Lieutenant of the company composed
entirely of the art students, the Captain being Francois des Valles, who
belonged to an old provincial family, a tall, dark, handsome young man,
extremely popular among his comrades.

"I think he will do very well," Cuthbert said, as the company fell in.
"There is no fear of his leaving us when under fire; his failing, if he
has one, will be that he may want to keep us there too long. It is quite
as necessary when you are fighting by the side of fellows who are not to
be relied on, to know when to retreat as it is to know when to advance."

This was their first parade in uniform. This had been decided upon at
the first meeting held to settle the constitution of the corps, and a
quiet gray had been chosen which looked neat and workmanlike by the
side of many of the picturesque but inappropriate costumes, selected by
the majority of the Franc-tireurs. They had already had three days'
drill and had learned to form from line into column and from column into
line, to advance as skirmishers and to rally on the centres of the
companies. They now marched out through the gates and were first taught
to load the chassepots which had been bought by a general subscription
in the schools, and then spent the morning in practising, and
skirmishing, and advancing and retreating in alternate files.

When they were formed up again the old colonel said, "You are getting on
well, men. Two more mornings' work and we will go out and complete our
lessons in the face of the enemy."

When dismissed at the end of the third day, they were told to bring next
morning, the gray greatcoats and blankets that formed part of their
uniform. "Let each man bring with him three days' provisions in his
bag," the colonel said, "ammunition will be served out to you and you
will soon learn how to use it to advantage."




CHAPTER VIII.


M. Goude grumbled much when he heard that his whole class were going to
be absent for three days.

"A nice interruption to study," he said, "however, you were none of you
doing yourselves any good, and you may as well be out in the fields as
hanging about the streets gossiping. We can always talk, but during the
past six weeks Paris has done nothing but talk. Don't come back with any
of your number short. You have all got something in you and are too good
for food for Prussian powder."

Cuthbert went that evening to the Michauds, in his uniform, not for the
purpose of showing it off, but because men in plain clothes, especially
if of fair complexions, were constantly stopped and accused of being
German spies, were often ill-treated, and not unfrequently had to pass a
night in the cells before they could prove their identity. Mary gave an
exclamation of surprise at seeing him so attired, but made no remark
until after chatting for half an hour with the Michauds. The husband
presently made the excuse that he had to attend a meeting and went off,
while madame took up some knitting, settled herself in an easy chair,
and prepared for a quiet doze, then Mary said in English--

"I have no patience with you, Cuthbert, taking part with these foolish
people. The more I see of them the more I get tired of their bombast and
their empty talk. Every man expects everyone else to do something and no
one does anything."

"They have had nothing to stir them into action yet," he said, "only the
regulars and the moblots go outside the wall, and the National Guard are
practically useless until the Germans make an assault. Besides, three
parts of them are married men with families, and nothing short of their
homes being in danger will stir them up to risk their lives. We are
going out for three days to the outposts, we fall in at five o'clock
to-morrow morning."

"You are going to risk your life," she said, indignantly, "for the
Parisians, who have no idea whatever of risking theirs. I call it
madness."

"You are going against your own doctrines, Miss Brander. Before you were
indignant with me for doing nothing and being in earnest about nothing.
Now that I am doing something and that in grim earnest, you are just as
indignant as you were before."

"I did not mean this sort of thing," she said.

"No, I don't suppose you contemplated this. But you wanted me to work
for work's sake, although as it seemed then there was no occasion for me
to work."

"If it had been on the other side I should not have minded."

"Just so," he smiled. "You have become Germanized, I have not. My
friends here have all enlisted; I am going with them partly because they
are my friends and partly because it is evident the Germans might have
well stopped this war before now, but they demand terms that France can
never submit to as long as there is the faintest hope of success. You
need not be at all anxious about me. We are not going to attack the
Prussian positions I can assure you. We are only going out to do a
little outpost duty, to learn to hear the bullets flying without
ducking, and to fire our rifles without shutting our eyes. I don't
suppose there are five men in the three companies who have ever fired a
rifle in their lives.

"You see the Franc-tireurs are to a great extent independent of the
military authorities--if you can call men military authorities who
exercise next to no authority over their soldiers. The Franc-tireurs
come and go as they choose, and a good many of them wear the uniform
only as a means of escape from serving, and as a whole they are next to
useless. I think our corps will do better things. We are all students of
art, law or physic, and a good deal like such volunteer corps as the
artists or 'Inns of Court.' Some of the younger professors are in the
ranks, and at least we are all of average intelligence and education, so
I fancy we shall fight if we get a chance. I don't mean now, but later
on when we have gained confidence in ourselves and in our rifles. Just
at present the Parisians are disposed to look upon the Germans as
bogies, but this will wear off, and as discipline is recovered by the
