and all our lives my wife and I have longed for one. So I left my home,
and went out into the world, hoping that somewhere I might find what I
was seeking.'

Then the hermit picked up an apple from the ground, and gave it to him,
saying: 'Eat half of this apple, and give the rest to your wife, and
cease wandering through the world.'

The old man stooped and kissed the feet of the hermit for sheer joy,
and left the cave. He made his way through the forest as fast as the
darkness would let him, and at length arrived in flowery fields,
which dazzled him with their brightness. Suddenly he was seized with a
desperate thirst, and a burning in his throat. He looked for a stream
but none was to be seen, and his tongue grew more parched every moment.
At length his eyes fell on the apple, which all this while he had been
holding in his hand, and in his thirst he forgot what the hermit had
told him, and instead of eating merely his own half, he ate up the old
woman's also; after that he went to sleep.

When he woke up he saw something strange lying on a bank a little way
off, amidst long trails of pink roses. The old man got up, rubbed his
eyes, and went to see what it was, when, to his surprise and joy, it
proved to be a little girl about two years old, with a skin as pink and
white as the roses above her. He took her gently in his arms, but she
did not seem at all frightened, and only jumped and crowed with delight;
and the old man wrapped his cloak round her, and set off for home as
fast as his legs would carry him.

When they were close to the cottage where they lived he laid the child
in a pail that was standing near the door, and ran into the house,
crying: 'Come quickly, wife, quickly, for I have brought you a daughter,
with hair of gold and eyes like stars!'

At this wonderful news the old woman flew downstairs, almost tumbling
down ill her eagerness to see the treasure; but when her husband led
her to the pail it was perfectly empty! The old man was nearly beside
himself with horror, while his wife sat down and sobbed with grief and
disappointment. There was not a spot round about which they did not
search, thinking that somehow the child might have got out of the pail
and hidden itself for fun; but the little girl was not there, and there
was no sign of her.

'Where can she be?' moaned the old man, in despair. 'Oh, why did I ever
leave her, even for a moment? Have the fairies taken her, or has some
wild beast carried her off?' And they began their search all over again;
but neither fairies nor wild beasts did they meet with, and with sore
hearts they gave it up at last and turned sadly into the hut.

And what had become of the baby? Well, finding herself left alone in a
strange place she began to cry with fright, and an eagle hovering near,
heard her, and went to see what the sound came from. When he beheld
the fat pink and white creature he thought of his hungry little ones
at home, and swooping down he caught her up in his claws and was soon
flying with her over the tops of the trees. In a few minutes he reached
the one in which he had built his nest, and laying little Wildrose (for
so the old man had called her) among his downy young eaglets, he flew
away. The eaglets naturally were rather surprised at this strange
animal, so suddenly popped down in their midst, but instead of beginning
to eat her, as their father expected, they nestled up close to her and
spread out their tiny wings to shield her from the sun.

Now, in the depths of the forest where the eagle had built his nest,
there ran a stream whose waters were poisonous, and on the banks of
this stream dwelt a horrible lindworm with seven heads. The lindworm had
often watched the eagle flying about the top of the tree, carrying food
to his young ones and, accordingly, he watched carefully for the moment
when the eaglets began to try their wings and to fly away from the
nest. Of course, if the eagle himself was there to protect them even the
lindworm, big and strong as he was, knew that he could do nothing; but
when he was absent, any little eaglets who ventured too near the ground
would be sure to disappear down the monster's throat. Their brothers,
who had been left behind as too young and weak to see the world, knew
nothing of all this, but supposed their turn would soon come to see the
world also. And in a few days their eyes, too, opened and their wings
flapped impatiently, and they longed to fly away above the waving
tree-tops to mountain and the bright sun beyond. But that very midnight
the lindworm, who was hungry and could not wait for his supper, came out
of the brook with a rushing noise, and made straight for the tree. Two
eyes of flame came creeping nearer, nearer, and two fiery tongues were
stretching themselves out closer, closer, to the little birds who were
trembling and shuddering in the farthest corner of the nest. But just
as the tongues had almost reached them, the lindworm gave a fearful cry,
and turned and fell backwards. Then came the sound of battle from the
ground below, and the tree shook, though there was no wind, and roars
and snarls mixed together, till the eaglets felt more frightened
than ever, and thought their last hour had come. Only Wildrose was
undisturbed, and slept sweetly through it all.

In the morning the eagle returned and saw traces of a fight below the
tree, and here and there a handful of yellow mane lying about, and here
and there a hard scaly substance; when he saw that he rejoiced greatly,
and hastened to the nest.

'Who has slain the lindworm?' he asked of his children; there were so
many that he did not at first miss the two which the lindworm had eaten.
But the eaglets answered that they could not tell, only that they had
been in danger of their lives, and at the last moment they had been
delivered. Then the sunbeam had struggled through the thick branches and
caught Wildrose's golden hair as she lay curled up in the corner, and
the eagle wondered, as he looked, whether the little girl had brought
him luck, and it was her magic which had killed his enemy.

'Children,' he said, 'I brought her here for your dinner, and you have
not touched her; what is the meaning of this?' But the eaglets did not
answer, and Wildrose opened her eyes, and seemed seven times lovelier
than before.

From that day Wildrose lived like a little princess. The eagle flew
about the wood and collected the softest, greenest moss he could find to
make her a bed, and then he picked with his beak all the brightest and
prettiest flowers in the fields or on the mountains to decorate it. So
cleverly did he manage it that there was not a fairy in the whole of the
forest who would not have been pleased to sleep there, rocked to and fro
by the breeze on the treetops. And when the little ones were able to fly
from their nest he taught them where to look for the fruits and berries
which she loved.

So the time passed by, and with each year Wildrose grew taller and more
beautiful, and she lived happily in her nest and never wanted to go out
of it, only standing at the edge in the sunset, and looking upon the
beautiful world. For company she had all the birds in the forest, who
came and talked to her, and for playthings the strange flowers which
they brought her from far, and the butterflies which danced with her.
And so the days slipped away, and she was fourteen years old.

One morning the emperor's son went out to hunt, and he had not ridden
far, before a deer started from under a grove of trees, and ran
before him. The prince instantly gave chase, and where the stag led he
followed, till at length he found himself in the depths of the forest,
where no man before had trod.

The trees were so thick and the wood so dark, that he paused for a
moment and listened, straining his ears to catch some sound to break
a silence which almost frightened him. But nothing came, not even the
baying of a hound or the note of a horn. He stood still, and wondered if
he should go on, when, on looking up, a stream of light seemed to flow
from the top of a tall tree. In its rays he could see the nest with the
young eaglets, who were watching him over the side. The prince fitted
an arrow into his bow and took his aim, but, before he could let fly,
another ray of light dazzled him; so brilliant was it, that his bow
dropped, and he covered his face with his hands. When at last he
ventured to peep, Wildrose, with her golden hair flowing round her, was
looking at him. This was the first time she had seen a man.

'Tell me how I can reach you?' cried he; but Wildrose smiled and shook
her head, and sat down quietly.

The prince saw that it was no use, and turned and made his way out of
the forest. But he might as well have stayed there, for any good he was
to his father, so full was his heart of longing for Wildrose. Twice
he returned to the forest in the hopes of finding her, but this time
fortune failed him, and he went home as sad as ever.

At length the emperor, who could not think what had caused this change,
sent for his son and asked him what was the matter. Then the prince
confessed that the image of Wildrose filled his soul, and that he would
never be happy without her. At first the emperor felt rather distressed.
He doubted whether a girl from a tree top would make a good empress;
but he loved his son so much that he promised to do all he could to find
her. So the next morning heralds were sent forth throughout the whole
land to inquire if anyone knew where a maiden could be found who lived
in a forest on the top of a tree, and to promise great riches and a
place at court to any person who should find her. But nobody knew. All
the girls in the kingdom had their homes on the ground, and laughed at
the notion of being brought up in a tree. 'A nice kind of empress she
would make,' they said, as the emperor had done, tossing their heads
with disdain; for, having read many books, they guessed what she was
wanted for.

The heralds were almost in despair, when an old woman stepped out of the
crowd and came and spoke to them. She was not only very old, but she was
very ugly, with a hump on her back and a bald head, and when the heralds
saw her they broke into rude laughter. 'I can show you the maiden who
lives in the tree-top,' she said, but they only laughed the more loudly.

'Get away, old witch!' they cried, 'you will bring us bad luck'; but the
old woman stood firm, and declared that she alone knew where to find the
maiden.

'Go with her,' said the eldest of the heralds at last. 'The emperor's
orders are clear, that whoever knew anything of the maiden was to come
at once to court. Put her in the coach and take her with us.'

So in this fashion the old woman was brought to court.

'You have declared that you can bring hither the maiden from the wood?'
said the emperor, who was seated on his throne.

'Yes, your Majesty, and I will keep my word,' said she.

'Then bring her at once,' said the emperor.

'Give me first a kettle and a tripod,' asked the old w omen, and the
emperor ordered them to be brought instantly. The old woman picked them
up, and tucking them under her arm went on her way, keeping at a little
distance behind the royal huntsmen, who in their turn followed the
prince.

Oh, what a noise that old woman made as she walked along! She chattered
to herself so fast and clattered her kettle so loudly that you would
have thought that a whole campful of gipsies must be coming round the
next corner. But when they reached the forest, she bade them all wait
outside, and entered the dark wood by herself.

She stopped underneath the tree where the maiden dwelt and, gathering
some dry sticks, kindled a fire. Next, she placed the tripod over it,
and the kettle on top. But something was the matter with the kettle. As
fast as the old woman put it where it was to stand, that kettle was sure
to roll off, falling to the ground with a crash.

It really seemed bewitched, and no one knows what might have happened
if Wildrose, who had been all the time peeping out of her nest, had not
lost patience at the old woman's stupidity, and cried out: 'The tripod
won't stand on that hill, you must move it!'

'But where am I to move it to, my child?' asked the old woman, looking
up to the nest, and at the same moment trying to steady the kettle with
one hand and the tripod with the other.

'Didn't I tell you that it was no good doing that,' said Wildrose, more
impatiently than before. 'Make a fire near a tree and hang the kettle
from one of the branches.'

The old woman took the kettle and hung it on a little twig, which broke
at once, and the kettle fell to the ground.

'If you would only show me how to do it, perhaps I should understand,'
said she.

Quick as thought, the maiden slid down the smooth trunk of the tree, and
stood beside the stupid old woman, to teach her how things ought to be
done. But in an instant the old woman had caught up the girl and swung
her over her shoulders, and was running as fast as she could go to the
edge of the forest, where she had left the prince. When he saw them
coming he rushed eagerly to meet them, and he took the maiden in his
arms and kissed her tenderly before them all. Then a golden dress was
put on her, and pearls were twined in her hair, and she took her seat in
the emperor's carriage which was drawn by six of the whitest horses in
the world, and they carried her, without stopping to draw breath, to the
gates of the palace. And in three days the wedding was celebrated, and
the wedding feast was held, and everyone who saw the bride declared that
if anybody wanted a perfect wife they must go to seek her on top of a
tree.

[ Adapted from file Roumanian.]




Tiidu The Piper

Once upon a time there lived a poor man who had more children than
bread to feed them with. However, they were strong and willing, and soon
learned to make themselves of use to their father and mother, and when
they were old enough they went out to service, and everyone was very
glad to get them for servants, for they worked hard and were always
cheerful. Out of all the ten or eleven, there was only one who gave his
parents any trouble, and this was a big lazy boy whose name was Tiidu.
Neither scoldings nor beatings nor kind words had any effect on him, and
the older he grew the idler he got. He spent his winters crouching close
to a warm stove, and his summers asleep under a shady tree; and if he
was not doing either of these things he was playing tunes on his flute.

One day he was sitting under a bush playing so sweetly that you might
easily have mistaken the notes for those of a bird, when an old man
passed by. 'What trade do you wish to follow, my son?' he asked in a
friendly voice, stopping as he did so in front of the youth.

'If I were only a rich man, and had no need to work,' replied the boy,
'I should not follow any. I could not bear to be anybody's servant, as
all my brothers and sisters are.'

The old man laughed as he heard this answer, and said: 'But I do not
exactly see where your riches are to come from if you do not work for
them. Sleeping cats catch no mice. He who wishes to become rich must
use either his hands or his head, and be ready to toil night and day, or
else--'

But here the youth broke in rudely:

'Be silent, old man! I have been told all that a hundred times over;
and it runs off me like water off a duck's back. No one will ever make a
worker out of me.'

'You have one gift,' replied the old man, taking no notice of this
speech, 'and if you would only go about and play the pipes, you would
easily earn, not only your daily bread, but a little money into the
bargain. Listen to me; get yourself a set of pipes, and learn to play on
them as well as you do on your flute, and wherever there are men to hear
you, I promise you will never lack money.'

'But where am I to get the pipes from?' asked the youth.

'Blow on your flute for a few days,' replied the old man, 'and you will
soon be able to buy your pipes. By-and-by I will come back again and see
if you have taken my advice, and whether you are likely to grow rich.'
And so saying he went his way.

Tiidu stayed where he was a little longer, thinking of all the old man
had told him, and the more he thought the surer he felt that the old
man was right. He determined to try whether his plan would really bring
luck; but as he did not like being laughed at he resolved not to tell
anyone a word about it. So next morning he left home--and never came
back! His parents did not take his loss much to heart, but were rather
glad that their useless son had for once shown a little spirit, and they
hoped that time and hardship might cure Tiidu of his idle folly.

For some weeks Tiidu wandered from one village to another, and proved
for himself the truth of the old man's promise. The people he met were
all friendly and kind, and enjoyed his flute-playing, giving him his
food in return, and even a few pence. These pence the youth hoarded
carefully till he had collected enough to buy a beautiful pair of pipes.
Then he felt himself indeed on the high road to riches. Nowhere could
pipes be found as fine as his, or played in so masterly a manner.
Tiidu's pipes set everybody's legs dancing. Wherever there was a
marriage, a christening, or a feast of any kind, Tiidu must be there, or
the evening would be a failure. In a few years he had become so noted a
piper that people would travel far and wide to hear him.

One day he was invited to a christening where many rich men from the
neighbouring town were present, and all agreed that never in all their
lives had they heard such playing as his. They crowded round him, and
praised him, and pressed him to come to their homes, declaring that it
was a shame not to give their friends the chance of hearing such music.
Of course all this delighted Tiidu, who accepted gladly, and left their
houses laden with money and presents of every kind; one great lord
clothed him in a magnificent dress, a second hung a chain of pearls
round his neck, while a third handed him a set of new pipes encrusted
in silver. As for the ladies, the girls twisted silken scarves round his
plumed hat, and their mothers knitted him gloves of all colours, to keep
out the cold. Any other man in Tiidu's place would have been contented
and happy in this life; but his craving for riches gave him no rest,
and only goaded him day by day to fresh exertions, so that even his own
mother would not have known him for the lazy boy who was always lying
asleep in one place or the other.

Now Tiidu saw quite clearly that he could only hope to become rich by
means of his pipes, and set about thinking if there was nothing he could
do to make the money flow in faster. At length he remembered having
heard some stories of a kingdom in the Kungla country, where musicians
of all sorts were welcomed and highly paid; but where it was, or how
it was reached, he could not recollect, however hard he thought. In
despair, he wandered along the coast, hoping to see some ship or sailing
boat that would take him where he wished to go, and at length he reached
