 To ascertain with certainty which foot it is that aches.

 "And when I go to dancing-class on Saturdays at three,
 I find the First Position very difficult for me.
 Though I put my best foot foremost, and good time I try to keep,
 To my chagrin, I often find a foot or two asleep.

     Athletics I attempted, but, alas! I must admit
     That every exercise I tried I put my foot in it.
     I think I'll join a foot-ball team,--as many friends suggest,--
     Before I've one foot in the grave and gout in all the rest.

 But now I'll say good-morning; for, my friend, I have to stop
 To get my boots blacked neatly at this little boot-black's shop;
 And, as you may imagine, it will keep me here some time,
 But, what is worse, I'll have to pay him many a hard-earned dime."

     The Spider said good-morning, and pursued his way alone,
     And as he went he murmured, in a thoughtful undertone:
     "I'm a happy little Spider, and I'm very glad indeed,
     That I was born an octoped and not a centipede!"

 [Illustration]




 The Smiling Shark


 There was an old Shark with a smile
 So broad you could see it a mile.
     He said to his friends,
     As he sewed up the ends,
 "It was really too wide for the style."

 [Illustration]




 The Mercury's Plaint


 [Illustration]

 I don't know why I'm slandered so,
 If I go high,--if I go low,--
 There's always some one who will say,
 "Just see that mercury to-day!"
 And whether toward the top I crawl
 Or down toward zero I may fall,
 They always fret, and say that I
 Am far too low or far too high.
 Although I try with all my might,
 I never seem to strike it right.
 Now I admit it seems to me
 They show great inconsistency.
 But _they_ imply _I_ am to blame;
 Of course that makes my anger flame,
 And in a fiery fit of pique
 I stay at ninety for a week.
 Or sometimes in a dull despair,
 I give them just a frigid stare;
 And as upon their taunts I think
 My spirits down to zero sink.
 Mine is indeed a hopeless case;
 To strive to please the human race!

 [Illustration]




 The Pirate Poodle


 Once there was a Pirate Poodle,
   And he sailed the briny seas
 From the land of Yankee Doodle
   Southward to the Caribbees.

 [Illustration]

 He would boast with tales outlandish,
   Of his valor and renown;
 And his cutlass he would brandish
   With a fearful pirate frown.

 So ferocious was his manner
   All his crew looked on, aghast;
 And his fearful pirate banner
   Floated from his pirate mast.

 He reiterated proudly
   Naught had power to make him quail;
 Yet when thunder roared _too_ loudly
   He would turn a trifle pale.

 And he turned a little paler
   When there came a sudden squall;
 For this funny little sailor
   Was ridiculously small.

 [Illustration]

 And whene'er a storm portended
   He'd betake himself below.
 So much fear and courage blended
   Did a pirate ever show?




 [Illustration]

 An Old Love


 Priscilla, Auntie's promised me
   A brand-new Paris doll;
 And though I love you, yet you see
   I cannot keep you all.

 Nursey declares I really must
   Throw one of you away;
 And you're the oldest, so I trust
   You will not care to stay.

 You've lost an arm, your dress is torn,
   Your wig is all awry;
 Priscilla, you are so forlorn,
   We'll have to say good-by.

 And yet--oh, don't! my dolly dear,
   _Don't_ look so sad, I pray!
 You precious dolly, come right here,
   You _shan't_ be thrown away!

 You're ragged, yes, and lame and blind,
   You're really but a wreck;
 But, dear Priscilla, never mind,
   _I_ do not care a speck.

 Your eyes do nicely when they're shut,
   And I can mend the rest;
 Well--p'raps I'll love the new one--but
   I'll always love _you_ best.




 Bobby's Pocket


 Our Bobby is a little boy, of six years old, or so;
 And every kind of rubbish in his pocket he will stow.

 One day he thought he'd empty it (so he again could stock it);
 And here's an alphabet of what was found in Bobby's pocket.

 A was a rosy Apple, with some bites out, here and there;
 B was a bouncing rubber Ball that bounded in the air.

 C was a crispy crusty Cake with citron on the top;
 D was a dancing Donkey that could jump around and hop.

 E was a little robin's Egg, all speckled blue and brown;
 F was a fluffy Feather that was white and soft as down.

 G was a lively Grasshopper, whose legs and wings were green;
 H was a grimy Handkerchief that once perhaps was clean.

 I was a plaster Image that had lost its plaster head;
 J was a jolly Jumping-Jack all painted blue and red.

 K was a keen and shining Knife, 'twould cut the toughest bark;
 L was a little wooden Lion, strayed out of Noah's Ark.

 M was a Marble, large and round, with colors bright and clear;
 N was a bent and rusty Nail, of little use, I fear.

 O was a tiny Oil-can, which was always upside down;
 P was a Penny Bob had saved to spend some day in town.

 Q was a Quilted ear-tab, which had lost its velvet mate;
 R was a Ring with a glassy gem of wondrous size and weight.

 S was a String, a piece of Soap, a Stone, a Sponge, a Stick;
 T was a lump of Taffy, exceeding soft and thick.

 U, an Umbrella-handle, of silver-mounted horn;
 V was a comic Valentine, a little creased and worn.

 W was some sticky Wax, lovely to pinch and mould;
 X was an old Xpress receipt, worn out in every fold.

 Y was a lot of Yellow Yarn, all bunched up like a mop;
 Z was a jagged piece of Zinc, found in a plumber's shop.

 All these are Bob's possessions; he loves every single thing;
 And owning all these treasures he's as happy as a King!




 The Instructiphone


 [Illustration]

 There was a youthful genius once, a boy of thirteen years,
 Named Cyrus Franklin Edison Lavoisier De Squeers.
 To study he was not inclined, for fun he had a bent;
 But there was just one article he wanted to invent.

 "It's a sort of a contraption which will work itself," he said,
 "And, without studying, will put my lessons in my head."
 He thought and puzzled o'er his plan, he worked with might and main
 To utilize the wondrous schemes within his fertile brain:

 Until at last the thing was done, and to his friends said he:
 "It is the wonder of the age! Success I can foresee!
 My great invention is complete, and--'tis no idle vaunt--
 I'm sure that my Instructiphone will fill a long-felt want.

 "The action is quite simple--I will try to make it clear:
 This funnel-shaped receiver I apply to my left ear;
 Then in this hopper I will put whate'er I wish to learn--
 A page of history or of Greek,--and then this crank I'll turn.

 "The topic goes into this tube, a sort of phonograph
 Which acts directly on my mind,--it _does_, you needn't laugh!
 I do not have to think at all, for, as I pull this chain,
 My wonderful machine transmits the knowledge to my brain."

 The plan was good, the works were fine, and yet there was a flaw;
 When Cyrus turned the crank around, the neighbors watched with awe.
 He confidently pulled the chain with motion quick and deft;
 The knowledge entered his right ear--and came out at his left.

 He tried again,--a page of Greek; he tried a theme occult,--
 A message and an errand,--every time the same result!
 Then Cyrus knew that somehow his machine had missed its aim;
 For though the works ran smoothly it was always just the same.

 No matter what the book might be, or what it was about,
 It would go in at one ear,--at the other 'twould come out!
 So in his laboratory, baffled Cyrus sitting lone,
 Strives to correct the sad defect in his Instructiphone.

 But it is my opinion, there's no fault in the machine:
 The trouble is that Cyrus is like other boys I've seen.




 The Lay of the Lady Lorraine


 The Lady Lorraine was sweet and fair;
   The Lady Lorraine was young;
 She had wonderful eyes and glorious hair,
 And a voice of a cadence rich and rare;
 Oh, she was a lady beyond compare--
   By all were her praises sung,
       Till valley and plain
       Took up the refrain,
 And rang with the praise of the Lady Lorraine.

 And besides all charms of form and face,
 There were other attractions about Her Grace;
 Besides her delicate, lily-white hands,
 She had rolling acres and broad, rich lands;
 Besides her patrician coat of arms,
 She had far-reaching forests and fertile farms;
 And of many an ancient and wide domain
 The beautiful lady was chatelaine.
       So of course at her door
       There were suitors galore;
 They came by the dozen, and came by the score.

 [Illustration]

 They came in droves, and they came in hordes,
 Titled nobility,--princes, lords,
 Dukes and marquises, viscounts and peers,
 Ambassadors, marshals, grandees, grenadiers,
 Barons and baronets, earls, and esquires,
