Paddy the Beaver was hard at work. He had just cut down a good-
sized aspen tree and now he was gnawing it into short lengths to
put in his food pile in the pond. As he worked, Paddy was doing a
lot of thinking about the footprint of Old Man Coyote in a little
patch of mud, for he knew that meant that Old Man Coyote had
discovered his pond, and would be hanging around, hoping to catch
Paddy off his guard. Paddy knew it just as well as if Old Man
Coyote had told him so. That was why he was at work cutting his food
supply in the daytime. Usually he works at night, and he knew
that Old Man Coyote knew it.

"He'll try to catch me then," thought Paddy, "so I'll do my working
on land now and fool him."

The tree he was cutting began to sway and crack. Paddy cut out
One more big chip, then hurried away to a safe place while the
tree fell with a crash.

"Thief! thief! thief!" screamed a voice just back of Paddy.

"Hello, Sammy Jay! I see you don't feel any better than usual
this morning," said Paddy. "Don't you want to sit up in this tree
while I cut it down?"

Sammy grew black in the face with anger, for he knew that Paddy
was laughing at him. You remember how only a few days before he
had been so intent on calling Paddy bad names that he actually
hadn't noticed that Paddy was cutting the very tree in which he
was sitting, and so when it fell he had had a terrible fright.

"You think you are very smart, Mr. Beaver, but you'll think
differently one of these fine days!" screamed Sammy. "If you knew
what I know, you wouldn't be so well satisfied with yourself."

"What do you know?" asked Paddy, pretending to be very much
alarmed.

"I'm not going to tell you what I know," retorted Sammy Jay.
"You'll find out soon enough. And when you do find out, you'll
never steal another tree from our Green Forest. Somebody is going
to catch you, and it isn't Farmer Brown's boy either!"

Paddy pretended to be terribly frightened. "Oh, who is it? Please
tell me, Mr. Jay," he begged.

Now to be called Mr. Jay made Sammy feel very important. Nearly
everybody else called him Sammy. He swelled himself out trying to
look as important as he felt, and his eyes snapped with pleasure.
He was actually making Paddy the Beaver afraid. At least, he
thought he was.

"No, Sir, I won't tell you," he replied. "I wouldn't be you for a
great deal, though! Somebody who is smarter than you are is going
to catch you, and when he gets through with you, there won't be
anything left but a few bones. No, Sir, nothing but a few bones!"

"Oh, Mr. Jay, this is terrible news! Whatever am I to do?" cried
Paddy, all the time keeping on at work cutting another tree.

"There's nothing you can do," replied Sammy, grinning wickedly at
Paddy's fright. "There's nothing you can do unless you go right
straight back to the North where you came from. You think you are
very smart, but--"

Sammy didn't finish. Crack! Over fell the tree Paddy had been
cutting and the top of it fell straight into the alder in which
Sammy was sitting. "Oh! Oh! Help!" shrieked Sammy, spreading his
wings and flying away just in time.

Paddy sat down and laughed until his sides ached. "Come make me
another call someday, Sammy!" he said. "And when you do, please
bring some real news. I know all about Old Man Coyote. You can
tell him for me that when he is planning to catch people he
should be careful not to leave footprints to give himself away."

Sammy didn't reply. He just sneaked off through the Green Forest,
looking quite as foolish as he felt.



CHAPTER XVI  Old Man Coyote is Very Crafty.

     Coyote has a crafty brain;
     His wits are sharp his ends to gain.

There is nothing in the world more true than that. Old Man Coyote
has the craftiest brain of all the little people of the Green
Forest or the Green Meadows. Sharp as are the wits of old Granny
Fox, they are not quite so sharp as the wits of Old Man Coyote.
If you want to fool him, you will have to get up very early in
the morning, and then it is more than likely that you will be the
one fooled, not he. There is very little going on around him that
he doesn't know about. But once in a while something escapes him.
The coming of Paddy the Beaver to the Green Forest was one of
these things. He didn't know a thing about Paddy until Paddy had
finished his dam and his house, and was cutting his supply of
food for the winter.

You see, it was this way: When the Merry Little Breezes of Old
Mother West Wind first heard what was going on in the Green Forest
and hurried around over the Green Meadows and through the Green
Forest to spread the news, as is their way, they took the
greatest pains not to even hint it to Old Man Coyote because they
were afraid that he would make trouble and perhaps drive Paddy
away. The place that Paddy had chosen to build his dam was so
deep in the Green Forest that Old Man Coyote seldom went that
way. So it was that he knew nothing about Paddy, and Paddy knew
nothing about him for some time.

But after awhile Old Man Coyote noticed that the little people of
the Green Meadows were not about as much as usual. They seemed to
have a secret of some kind. He mentioned the matter to his
friend, Digger the Badger.

Digger had been so intent on his own affairs that he hadn't
noticed anything unusual, but when Old Man Coyote mentioned the
matter he remembered that Blacky the Crow headed straight for the
Green Forest every morning. Several times he had seen Sammy Jay
flying in the same direction as if in a great hurry to get
somewhere.

Old Man Coyote grinned. "That's all I need to know, friend
Digger," said he. "When Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay visit a
place more than once, something interesting is going on there. I
think I'll take a stroll up through the Green Forest and have a
look around."

With that, off Old Man Coyote started. But he was too sly and
crafty to go straight to the Green Forest. He pretended to hunt
around over the Green Meadows just as he usually did, all the
time working nearer and nearer to the Green Forest. When he
reached the edge of it, he slipped in among the trees, and when
he felt that no one was likely to see him, he began to run this
way and that way with his nose to the ground.

"Ha!" he exclaimed presently, "Reddy Fox has been this way
lately."

Pretty soon he found another trail. "So," said he, "Peter Rabbit
has been over here a good deal of late, and his trail goes in the
same direction as that of Reddy Fox. I guess all I have to do now
is to follow Peter's trail, and it will lead me to what I want to
find out."

So Old Man Coyote followed Peter's trail, and he presently came
to the pond of Paddy the Beaver. "Ha!" said he, as he looked out
and saw Paddy's new  house. "So there is a newcomer to the Green
Forest! I have always heard that Beaver is very good eating. My
stomach begins to feel empty this very minute." His mouth began
to water, and a fierce, hungry look shone in his eyes.

It was just then that Sammy Jay saw him and began to scream at
the top of his lungs so that Paddy the Beaver over in his house
heard him. Old Man Coyote knew that it was of no use to stay
longer with Sammy Jay about, so he took a hasty look at the pond
and found where Paddy came ashore to cut his food. Then, shaking
his fist at Sammy Jay, he started straight back for the Green
Meadows. "I'll just pay a visit here in the night," said he, "and
give Mr. Beaver a surprise while he is at work."

But with all his craft, Old Man Coyote didn't notice that he left
a footprint in the mud.



CHAPTER XVII  Old Man Coyote is Disappointed.

Old Man Coyote lay stretched out in his favorite napping place on
the Green Meadows. He was thinking of what he had found out up in
the Green Forest that morning--that Paddy the Beaver was living
there. Old Man Coyote's thoughts seemed very pleasant to
himself, though really they were very dreadful thoughts. You see,
he was thinking how easy it was going to be to catch Paddy the
Beaver, and what a splendid meal he would make. He licked his
chops at the thought.

"He doesn't know I know he's here," thought Old Man Coyote. "In
fact, I don't believe heaven knows that I am anywhere around. Of
course he won't be watching for me. He cuts  his trees at night,
so all I will have to do is to hide right close by where he is at
work, and he'll walk right into my mouth. Sammy Jay knows I was
up there this morning, but Sammy sleeps at night, so he will not
give the alarm. My, my, how good that Beaver will taste!" He
licked his chops once more, then yawned and closed his eyes for a
nap.

Old Man Coyote waited until jolly, round red Mr. Sun had gone to
bed behind the Purple Hills, and the Black Shadows had crept out
across the Green Meadows. Then, keeping in the blackest of them,
and looking very much like a shadow of himself, he slipped into
the Green Forest. It was dark in there, and he made straight for
Paddy's new pond, trotting along swiftly without making a sound.
When he was near the aspen trees which he knew Paddy was planning
to cut, he crept forward very slowly and carefully. Everything
was still as still could be.

"Good!" thought Old Man Coyote. "I am here first, and now all I
need do is to hide and wait for Paddy to come ashore."

So he stretched himself flat behind some brush close beside the
little path Paddy had made up from the edge of the water and
waited. It was very still, so still that it seemed almost as if
he could hear his heart beat. He could see the little stars
twinkling in the sky and their own reflections twinkling back at
them from the water of Paddy's pond. Old Man Coyote waited and
