and a straw pillow or an air cushion for your head, whichever you like.
You can trim up to any extent, and be as free and easy as squaws in a
wigwam, for this corner is set apart for you ladies and we never cross
the line uncle is drawing until we ask leave. Anything more I can do for
you, cousin?"

"No, thank you. I think I'll leave the rest till auntie comes, and go
and help you somewhere else, if I may."

"Yes, indeed, come on and see to the kitchen. Can you cook?" asked
Charlie, as he led the way to the rocky nook where Archie was putting up
a sail-cloth awning.

"I can make tea and toast bread."

"Well, we'll shew you how to fry fish, and make chowder. Now you just
set these pots and pans round tastefully, and sort of tidy up a bit,
for Aunt Jessie insists on doing some of the work, and I want it to be
decent here."

By four o'clock the camp was in order, and the weary workers settled
down on Lookout Rock to watch for Mrs. Jessie and Jamie, who was never
far from mamma's apron string. They looked like a flock of blue-birds,
all being in sailor rig, with blue ribbon enough flying from the seven
hats to have set up a milliner. Very tuneful blue-birds they were, too,
for all the lads sang, and the echo of their happy voices reached Mrs.
Jessie long before she saw them.

The moment the boat hove in sight up went the Island flag, and the
blue-jackets cheered lustily, as they did on every possible occasion,
like true young Americans. This welcome was answered by the flapping of
a handkerchief and the shrill "Rah! Rah! Rah!" of the one small tar
who stood in the stern waving his hat manfully, while a maternal hand
clutched him firmly in the rear.

Cleopatra landing from her golden galley never received a heartier
greeting than "Little Mum" as she was borne to her tent by the young
folk, for love of whom she smilingly resigned herself to three days of
discomfort; while Jamie immediately attached himself to Rose, assuring
her of his protection from the manifold perils which might assail them.

Taught by long experience that boys are always hungry, Aunt Jessie soon
proposed supper, and proceeded to get it, enveloped in an immense apron,
with an old hat of Archie's stuck atop of her cap. Rose helped, and
tried to be as handy as Phebe, though the peculiar style of table she
had to set made it no easy task. It was accomplished at last, and a
very happy party lay about under the trees, eating and drinking out of
anyone's plate and cup, and quite untroubled by the frequent appearance
of ants and spiders in places which these interesting insects are not
expected to adorn.

"I never thought I should like to wash dishes, but I do," said Rose,
as she sat in a boat after supper lazily rinsing plates in the sea, and
rocking luxuriously as she wiped them.

"Mum is mighty particular; we just give 'em a scrub with sand, and dust
'em off with a bit of paper. It's much the best way, I think," replied
Geordie, who reposed in another boat alongside.

"How Phebe would like this! I wonder uncle did not have her come."

"I believe he tried to, but Dolly was as cross as two sticks, and said
she couldn't spare her. I'm sorry, for we all like the Phebe bird, and
she'd chirp like a good one out here, wouldn't she?"

"She ought to have a holiday like the rest of us. It's too bad to leave
her out."

This thought came back to Rose several times that evening, for Phebe
would have added much to the little concert they had in the moonlight,
would have enjoyed the stories told, been quick at guessing the
conundrums, and laughed with all her heart at the fun. The merry going
to bed would have been the best of all, for Rose wanted someone to
cuddle under the blue blanket with her, there to whisper and giggle and
tell secrets, as girls delight to do.

Long after the rest were asleep, Rose lay wide awake, excited by the
novelty of all about her, and a thought that had come into her mind. Far
away she heard a city clock strike twelve; a large star like a mild eye
peeped in at the opening of the tent, and the soft plash of the waves
seemed calling her to come out. Aunt Jessie lay fast asleep, with Jamie
rolled up like a kitten at her feet, and neither stirred as Rose in her
wrapper crept out to see how the world looked at midnight.

She found it very lovely, and sat down on a cracker keg to enjoy it with
a heart full of the innocent sentiment of her years. Fortunately, Dr.
Alec saw her before she had time to catch cold, for coming out to tie
back the door-flap of his tent for more air, he beheld the small
figure perched in the moonlight. Having no fear of ghosts, he quietly
approached, and, seeing that she was wide awake, said, with a hand on
her shining hair,

"What is my girl doing here?"

"Having a good time," answered Rose, not at all startled.

"I wonder what she was thinking about with such a sober look."

"The story you told of the brave sailor who gave up his place on the
raft to the woman, and the last drop of water to the poor baby. People
who make sacrifices are very much loved and admired, aren't they?" she
asked, earnestly.

"If the sacrifice is a true one. But many of the bravest never are
known, and get no praise. That does not lessen their beauty, though
perhaps it makes them harder, for we all like sympathy," and Dr. Alec
sighed a patient sort of sigh.

"I suppose you have made a great many? Would you mind telling me one of
them?" asked Rose, arrested by the sigh.

"My last was to give up smoking," was the very unromantic answer to her
pensive question.

"Why did you?"

"Bad example for the boys."

"That was very good of you, uncle! Was it hard?"

"I'm ashamed to say it was. But as a wise old fellow once said, 'It is
necessary to do right; it is not necessary to be happy.'"

Rose pondered over the saying as if it pleased her, and then said, with
a clear, bright look,

"A real sacrifice is giving up something you want or enjoy very much,
isn't it?"

"Yes."

"Doing it one's own self because one loves another person very much and
wants her to be happy?"

"Yes."

"And doing it pleasantly, and being glad about it, and not minding the
praise if it doesn't come?"

"Yes, dear, that is the true spirit of self-sacrifice; you seem to
understand it, and I dare say you will have many chances in your life to
try the real thing. I hope they won't be very hard ones."

"I think they will," began Rose, and there stopped short.

"Well, make one now, and go to sleep, or my girl will be ill to-morrow,
and then the aunts will say camping out was bad for her."

"I'll go good night!" and throwing him a kiss, the little ghost
vanished, leaving Uncle Alec to pace the shore and think about some of
the unsuspected sacrifices that had made him what he was.



Chapter 10--Rose's Sacrifice

There certainly were "larks" on Campbell's Island next day, as Charlie
had foretold, and Rose took her part in them like one intent on enjoying
every minute to the utmost. There was a merry breakfast, a successful
fishing expedition, and then the lobsters came out in full force, for
even Aunt Jessie appeared in red flannel. There was nothing Uncle Alec
could not do in the water, and the boys tried their best to equal him in
strength and skill, so there was a great diving and ducking, for every
one was bent on distinguishing himself.

Rose swam out far beyond her depth, with uncle to float her back; Aunt
Jessie splashed placidly in the shallow pools, with Jamie paddling near
by like a little whale beside its mother; while the lads careered about,
looking like a flock of distracted flamingoes, and acting like the
famous dancing party in "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland."

Nothing but chowder would have lured them from their gambols in the
briny deep; that time-honoured dish demanded the concentrated action
of several mighty minds; so the "Water Babies" came ashore and fell to
cooking.

It is unnecessary to say that, when done, it was the most remarkable
chowder ever cooked, and the quantity eaten would have amazed the
world if the secret had been divulged. After this exertion a siesta
was considered the thing, and people lay about in tents or out as they
pleased, the boys looking like warriors slumbering where they fell.

The elders had just settled to a comfortable nap when the youngsters
rose, refreshed and ready for further exploits. A hint sent them all off
to the cave, and there were discovered bows and arrows, battle clubs,
old swords, and various relics of an interesting nature. Perched upon
a commanding rock, with Jamie to "splain" things to her, Rose beheld
a series of stirring scenes enacted with great vigour and historical
accuracy by her gifted relatives.

Captain Cook was murdered by the natives of Owhyhee in the most
thrilling manner. Captain Kidd buried untold wealth in the chowder
kettle at the dead of night, and shot both the trusting villains who
shared the secret of the hiding place. Sinbad came ashore there and had
manifold adventures, and numberless wrecks bestrewed the sands.

Rose considered them by far the most exciting dramas she had ever
witnessed; and when the performance closed with a grand ballet of Feejee
Islanders, whose barbaric yells alarmed the gulls, she had no words in
which to express her gratification.

Another swim at sunset, another merry evening on the rocks watching the
lighted steamers pass seaward and the pleasure-boats come into port,
ended the second day of the camping out, and sent everyone to bed early
that they might be ready for the festivities of the morrow.

"Archie, didn't I hear uncle ask you to row home in the morning for
fresh milk and things?"

"Yes, why?"

"Please, may I go too? I have something of great importance to arrange;
you know I was carried off in a hurry," Rose said in a confidential
whisper as she was bidding her cousins good night.

"I'm willing, and I guess Charlie won't mind."

"Thank you; be sure you stand by me when I ask leave in the morning, and
don't say anything till then, except to Charlie. Promise," urged Rose,
so eagerly, that Archie struck an attitude and cried dramatically,

"By yonder moon I swear!"

"Hush! it's all right, go along"; and Rose departed as if satisfied.

"She's a queer little thing, isn't she, Prince?"

"Rather a nice little thing, I think. I'm quite fond of her."

Rose's quick ears caught both remarks, and she retired to her tent,
saying to herself with sleepy dignity,

"Little thing, indeed! Those boys talk as if I was a baby. They will
treat me with more respect after to-morrow, I guess."

Archie did stand by her in the morning, and her request was readily
granted, as the lads were coming directly back. Off they went, and Rose
waved her hand to the islanders with a somewhat pensive air, for an
heroic purpose glowed within her, and the spirit of self-sacrifice was
about to be illustrated in a new and touching manner.

While the boys got the milk Rose ran to Phebe, ordered her to leave her
dishes, to put on her hat, and take a note back to Uncle Alec, which
would explain this somewhat mysterious performance. Phebe obeyed, and
when she went to the boat Rose accompanied her, telling the boys she was
not ready to go yet, but they could, some of them, come for her when she
hung a white signal on her balcony.

"But why not come now? What are you about, miss? Uncle won't like it,"
protested Charlie, in great amazement.

"Just do as I tell you, little boy; uncle will understand and explain.
Obey, as Phebe does, and ask no questions. I can have secrets as well
as other people"; and Rose walked off with an air of lofty independence
that impressed her friends immensely.

"It's some plot between uncle and herself, so we won't meddle. All
right, Phebe? Pull away, Prince"; and off they went to be received with
much surprise by the islanders.

This was the note Phebe bore:

"Dear Uncle, I am going to take Phebe's place to-day, and let her have
all the fun she can. Please don't mind what she says, but keep her, and
tell the boys to be very good to her for my sake. Don't think it is easy
to do this; it is very hard to give up the best day of all, but I feel
so selfish to have all the pleasure and Phebe none, that I wish to make
this sacrifice. Do let me, and don't laugh at it; I truly do not wish to
be praised, and I truly want to do it. Love to all from,

"Rose."

"Bless the little dear, what a generous heart she has! Shall we go after
her, Jessie, or let her have her way?" said Dr. Alec, after the first
mingled amusement and astonishment had subsided.

"Let her alone, and don't spoil her little sacrifice. She means it, I
know, and the best way in which we can show our respect for her effort
is to give Phebe a pleasant day. I'm sure she has earned it"; and Mrs.
Jessie made a sign to the boys to suppress their disappointment and
exert themselves to please Rose's guest.

Phebe was with difficulty kept from going straight home, and declared
that she should not enjoy herself one bit without Miss Rose.

"She won't hold out all day, and we shall see her paddling back before
noon, I'll wager anything," said Charlie; and the rest so strongly
inclined to his opinion that they resigned themselves to the loss of the
little queen of the revels, sure that it would be only a temporary one.

But hour after hour passed, and no signal appeared on the balcony,
though Phebe watched it hopefully. No passing boat brought the truant
back, though more than one pair of eyes looked out for the bright hair
under the round hat; and sunset came, bringing no Rose but the lovely
colour in the western sky.

"I really did not think the child had it in her. I fancied it was a bit
of sentiment, but I see she was in earnest, and means that her sacrifice
shall be a true one. Dear little soul! I'll make it up to her a thousand
times over, and beg her pardon for thinking it might be done for
effect," Dr. Alec said remorsefully, as he strained his eyes through the
dusk, fancying he saw a small figure sitting in the garden as it had sat
on the keg the night before, laying the generous little plot that had
cost more than he could guess.

"Well, she can't help seeing the fireworks, any way, unless she is
goose enough to think she must hide in a dark closet and not look," said
Archie, who was rather disgusted at Rose's seeming ingratitude.

"She will see ours capitally, but miss the big ones on the hill, unless
papa has forgotten all about them," added Steve, cutting short the
harangue Mac had begun upon the festivals of the ancients.

"I'm sure the sight of her will be better than the finest fireworks
that ever went off," said Phebe, meditating an elopement with one of the
boats if she could get a chance.

"Let things work; if she resists a brilliant invitation we give her she
will be a heroine," added Uncle Alec, secretly hoping that she would
not.

Meanwhile Rose had spent a quiet, busy day helping Dolly, waiting on
Aunt Peace, and steadily resisting Aunt Plenty's attempts to send her
back to the happy island. It had been hard in the morning to come
in from the bright world outside, with flags flying, cannon booming,
crackers popping, and everyone making ready for a holiday, and go to
washing cups, while Dolly grumbled and the aunts lamented. It was very
hard to see the day go by, knowing how gay each hour must have been
across the water, and how a word from her would take her where she
longed to be with all her heart. But it was hardest of all when evening
came and Aunt Peace was asleep, Aunt Plenty seeing a gossip in the
parlor, Dolly established in the porch to enjoy the show, and nothing
left for the little maid to do but sit alone in her balcony and watch
the gay rockets whizz up from island, hill, and city, while bands played
and boats laden with happy people went to and fro in the fitful light.

Then it must be confessed that a tear or two dimmed the blue eyes, and
once, when a very brilliant display illuminated the island for a moment,
and she fancied she saw the tents, the curly head went down on the
railing, and a wide-awake nasturtium heard a little whisper,

"I hope someone wishes I was there!"

The tears were all gone, however, and she was watching the hill and
island answer each other with what Jamie called "whizzers, whirligigs
and busters," and smiling as she thought how hard the boys must be
working to keep up such a steady fire, when Uncle Mac came walking in
upon her, saying hurriedly,

"Come, child, put on your tippet, pelisse, or whatever you call it, and
run off with me. I came to get Phebe, but aunt says she is gone, so I
want you. I've got Fun down in the boat, and I want you to go with us
and see my fireworks. Got them up for you, and you mustn't miss them, or
I shall be disappointed."

"But, uncle," began Rose, feeling as if she ought to refuse even a
glimpse of bliss, "perhaps--"

"I know, my dear, I know; aunt told me; but no one needs you now so much
as I do, and I insist on your coming," said Uncle Mac, who seemed in a
great hurry to be off, yet was unusually kind.

So Rose went and found the little Chinaman with a funny lantern waiting
to help her in and convulse her with laughter trying to express his
emotions in pigeon English. The city clocks were striking nine as they
got out into the bay, and the island fireworks seemed to be over, for no
rocket answered the last Roman candle that shone on the Aunt-hill.

"Ours are done, I see, but they are going up all round the city, and how
pretty they are," said Rose, folding her mantle about her, and surveying
the scene with pensive interest.

"Hope my fellows have not got into trouble up there," muttered Uncle
Mac, adding with a satisfied chuckle, as a spark shone out, "No; there
it goes! Look, Rosy, and see how you like this one; it was ordered
especially in honour of your coming."

Rose looked with all her eyes, and saw the spark grow into the likeness
of a golden vase, then green leaves came out, and then a crimson flower
glowing on the darkness with a splendid lustre.

"Is it a rose, uncle?" she asked, clasping her hands with delight as she
recognised the handsome flower.

"Of course it is! Look again, and guess what those are," answered Uncle
Mac, chuckling and enjoying it all like a boy.

A wreath of what looked at first like purple brooms appeared below the
vase, but Rose guessed what they were meant for, and stood straight up,
holding by his shoulder, and crying excitedly,

"Thistles, uncle, Scotch thistles! There are seven of them one for each
boy! Oh, what a joke!" and she laughed so that she plumped into the
bottom of the boat and stayed there till the brilliant spectacle was
quite gone.

"That was rather a neat thing, I flatter myself," said Uncle Mac, in
high glee at the success of his illumination. "Now, shall I leave you
on the Island or take you home again, my good little girl?" he added,
lifting her up with such a tone of approbation in his voice that Rose
kissed him on the spot.

"Home, please uncle; and I thank you very very much for the beautiful
firework you got up for me. I'm so glad I saw it; and I know I shall
dream about it," answered Rose steadily, though a wistful glance went
toward the Island, now so near that she could smell powder and see
shadowy figures flitting about.

Home they went; and Rose fell asleep saying to herself, "It was harder
than I thought, but I'm glad I did it, and I truly don't want any reward
but Phebe's pleasure."



Chapter 11--Poor Mac

Rose's sacrifice was a failure in one respect, for, though the elders
loved her the better for it, and showed that they did, the boys were not
inspired with the sudden respect which she had hoped for. In fact, her
feelings were much hurt by overhearing Archie say that he couldn't see
any sense in it; and the Prince added another blow by pronouncing her
"the queerest chicken ever seen."

It is apt to be so, and it is hard to bear; for, though we do not want
trumpets blown, we do like to have our little virtues appreciated, and
cannot help feeling disappointed if they are not.

A time soon came, however, when Rose, quite unconsciously, won not only
the respect of her cousins, but their gratitude and affection likewise.

Soon after the Island episode, Mac had a sunstroke, and was very ill
for some time. It was so sudden that everyone was startled, and for some
days the boy's life was in danger. He pulled through, however; and then,
