themselves.

"Now we are even let's drop the subject and start afresh," he said with
irresistible affability as he coolly put the little heart in his pocket
and prepared to shut the drawer. But something caught his eye, and
exclaiming, "What's this? What's this?" he snatched up a photograph
which lay half under a pile of letters with foreign postmarks.

"Oh! I forgot that was there," said Rose hastily.

"Who is the man?" demanded Charlie, eyeing the good-looking countenance
before him with a frown.

"That is the Honorable Gilbert Murray, who went up the Nile with us and
shot crocodiles and other small game, being a mighty hunter, as I told
you in my letters," answered Rose gaily, though ill pleased at the
little discovery just then, for this had been one of the narrow escapes
her uncle spoke of.

"And they haven't eaten him yet, I infer from the pile of letters?" said
Charlie jealously.

"I hope not. His sister did not mention it when she wrote last."

"Ah! Then she is your correspondent? Sisters are dangerous things
sometimes." And Charlie eyed the packet suspiciously.

"In this case, a very convenient thing, for she tells me all about her
brother's wedding, as no one else would take the trouble to do."

"Oh! Well, if he's married, I don't care a straw about him. I fancied
I'd found out why you are such a hard-hearted charmer. But if there is
no secret idol, I'm all at sea again." And Charlie tossed the photograph
into the drawer as if it no longer interested him.

"I'm hard-hearted because I'm particular and, as yet, do not find anyone
at all to my taste."

"No one?" with a tender glance.

"No one" with a rebellious blush, and the truthful addition "I see
much to admire and like in many persons, but none quite strong and good
enough to suit me. My heroes are old-fashioned, you know."

"Prigs, like Guy Carleton, Count Altenberg, and John Halifax I know the
pattern you goody girls like," sneered Charlie, who preferred the Guy
Livingston, Beauclerc, and Rochester style.

"Then I'm not a 'goody girl,' for I don't like prigs. I want a gentleman
in the best sense of the word, and I can wait, for I've seen one, and
know there are more in the world."

"The deuce you have! Do I know him?" asked Charlie, much alarmed.

"You think you do," answered Rose with a mischievous sparkle in her eye.

"If it isn't Pem, I give it up. He's the best-bred fellow I know."

"Oh, dear, no! Far superior to Mr. Pemberton and many years older,"
said Rose, with so much respect that Charlie looked perplexed as well as
anxious.

"Some apostolic minister, I fancy. You pious creatures always like to
adore a parson. But all we know are married."

"He isn't."

"Give a name, for pity's sake I'm suffering tortures of suspense,"
begged Charlie.

"Alexander Campbell."

"Uncle? Well, upon my word, that's a relief, but mighty absurd all the
same. So, when you find a young saint of that sort, you intend to marry
him, do you?" demanded Charlie much amused and rather disappointed.

"When I find any man half as honest, good, and noble as Uncle, I shall
be proud to marry him if he asks me," answered Rose decidedly.

"What odd tastes women have!" And Charlie leaned his chin on his hand
to muse pensively for a moment over the blindness of one woman who could
admire an excellent old uncle more than a dashing young cousin.

Rose, meanwhile, tied up her parcels industriously, hoping she had not
been too severe, for it was very hard to lecture Charlie, though he
seemed to like it sometimes and came to confession voluntarily, knowing
that women love to forgive when the sinners are of his sort.

"It will be mail time before you are done," she said presently, for
silence was less pleasant than his rattle.

Charlie took the hint and dashed off several notes in his best manner.
Coming to the business letter, he glanced at it and asked, with a
puzzled expression: "What is all this? Cost of repairs, etc., from a man
named Buffum?"

"Never mind that I'll see to it by and by."

"But I do mind, for I'm interested in all your affairs, and though you
think I've no head for business, you'll find I have if you'll try me."

"This is only about my two old houses in the city, which are being
repaired and altered so that the rooms can be let singly."

"Going to make tenement houses of them? Well, that's not a bad idea such
places pay well, I've heard."

"That is just what I'm not going to do. I wouldn't have a tenement house
on my conscience for a million dollars not as they are now," said Rose
decidedly.

"Why, what do you know about it, except that people live in them and the
owners turn a pretty penny on the rents?"

"I know a good deal about them, for I've seen many such, both here
and abroad. It was not all pleasure with us, I assure you. Uncle was
interested in hospitals and prisons, and I sometimes went with him, but
they made me sad so he suggested other charities that I could be of
help about when we came home. I visited infant schools, working women's
homes, orphan asylums, and places of that sort. You don't know how much
good it did me and how glad I am that I have the means of lightening a
little some of the misery in the world."

"But, my dear girl, you needn't make ducks and drakes of your fortune
trying to feed and cure and clothe all the poor wretches you see. Give,
of course everyone should do something in that line and no one likes it
better than I. But don't, for mercy's sake, go at it as some women do
and get so desperately earnest, practical, and charity-mad that there is
no living in peace with you," protested Charlie, looking alarmed at the
prospect.

"You can do as you please. I intend to do all the good I can by asking
the advice and following the example of the most 'earnest,' 'practical,'
and 'charitable' people I know so, if you don't approve, you can drop
my acquaintance," answered Rose, emphasizing the obnoxious words and
assuming the resolute air she always wore when defending her hobbies.

"You'll be laughed at."

"I'm used to that."

"And criticized and shunned."

"Not by people whose opinion I value."

"Women shouldn't go poking into such places."

"I've been taught that they should."

"Well, you'll get some dreadful disease and lose your beauty, and then
where are you?" added Charlie, thinking that might daunt the young
philanthropist.

But it did not, for Rose answered, with a sudden kindling of the eyes as
she remembered her talk with Uncle Alec: "I shouldn't like it. But there
would be one satisfaction in it, for when I'd lost my beauty and given
away my money, I should know who really cared for me."

Charlie nibbled his pen in silence for a moment, then asked, meekly,
"Could I respectfully inquire what great reform is to be carried on in
the old houses which their amiable owner is repairing?"

"I am merely going to make them comfortable homes for poor but
respectable women to live in. There is a class who cannot afford to
pay much, yet suffer a great deal from being obliged to stay in noisy,
dirty, crowded places like tenement houses and cheap lodgings. I can
help a few of them and I'm going to try."

"May I humbly ask if these decayed gentlewomen are to inhabit their
palatial retreat rent-free?"

"That was my first plan, but Uncle showed me that it was wiser not
make genteel paupers of them, but let them pay a small rent and feel
independent. I don't want the money, of course, and shall use it in
keeping the houses tidy or helping other women in like case," said Rose,
entirely ignoring her cousin's covert ridicule.

"Don't expect any gratitude, for you won't get it; nor much comfort with
a lot of forlornities on your hands, and be sure that when it is too
late you will tire of it all and wish you had done as other people do."

"Thanks for your cheerful prophecies, but I think I'll venture."

She looked so undaunted that Charlie was a little nettled and fired his
last shot rather recklessly: "Well, one thing I do know you'll never get
a husband if you go on in this absurd way, and by Jove! you need one to
take care of you and keep the property together!"

Rose had a temper, but seldom let it get the better of her; now,
however, it flashed up for a moment. Those last words were peculiarly
unfortunate, because Aunt Clara had used them more than once when
warning her against impecunious suitors and generous projects. She was
disappointed in her cousin, annoyed at having her little plans laughed
at, and indignant with him for his final suggestion.

"I'll never have one, if I must give up the liberty of doing what I know
is right, and I'd rather go into the poorhouse tomorrow than 'keep the
property together' in the selfish way you mean!"

That was all but Charlie saw that he had gone too far and hastened to
make his peace with the skill of a lover, for, turning to the little
cabinet piano behind him, he sang in his best style the sweet old song:

    "Oh were thou in the cauld blast,"

dwelling with great effect, not only upon the tender assurance that "My
plaid should shelter thee,"

but also that, even if a king,

    "The brightest jewel in my crown
    Wad be my queen, wad be my queen."

It was very evident that Prince Charming had not gone troubadouring
in vain, for Orpheus himself could not have restored harmony more
successfully. The tuneful apology was accepted with a forgiving smile
and a frank "I'm sorry I was cross, but you haven't forgotten how to
tease, and I'm rather out of sorts today. Late hours don't agree with
me."

"Then you won't feel like going to Mrs. Hope's tomorrow, I'm afraid,"
and Charlie took up the last note with an expression of regret which was
very flattering.

"I must go, because it is made for me, but I can come away early and
make up lost sleep. I do hate to be so fractious," and Rose rubbed the
forehead that ached with too much racketing.

"But the German does not begin till late I'm to lead and depend upon
you. Just stay this once to oblige me," pleaded Charlie, for he had set
his heart on distinguishing himself.

"No I promised Uncle to be temperate in my pleasures and I must keep my
word. I'm so well now, it would be very foolish to get ill and make him
anxious not to mention losing my beauty, as you are good enough to call
it, for that depends on health, you know."

"But the fun doesn't begin till after supper. Everything will be
delightful, I assure you, and we'll have a gay old time as we did last
week at Emma's."

"Then I certainly will not, for I'm ashamed of myself when I remember
what a romp that was and how sober Uncle looked as he let me in at three
in the morning, all fagged out my dress in rags, my head aching, my feet
so tired that I could hardly stand, and nothing to show for five
hours' hard work but a pocketful of bonbons, artificial flowers, and
tissue-paper fool's caps. Uncle said I'd better put one on and go to
bed, for I looked as though I'd been to a French bal masque. I never
want to hear him say so again, and I'll never let dawn catch me out in
such a plight anymore."

"You were all right enough, for mother didn't object and I got you
both home before daylight. Uncle is notional about such things, so I
shouldn't mind, for we had a jolly time and we were none the worse for
it."

"Indeed we were, every one of us! Aunt Clara hasn't gotten over her cold
yet. I slept all the next day, and you looked like a ghost, for you'd
been out every night for weeks, I think."

"Oh, nonsense! Everyone does it during the season, and you'll get used
to the pace very soon," began Charlie, bent on making her go, for he
was in his element in a ballroom and never happier than when he had his
pretty cousin on his arm.

"Ah! But I don't want to get used to it, for it costs too much in the
end. I don't wish to get used to being whisked about a hot room by men
who have taken too much wine, to turn day into night, wasting time that
might be better spent, and grow into a fashionable fast girl who can't
get along without excitement. I don't deny that much of it is pleasant,
but don't try to make me too fond of gaiety. Help me to resist what I
know is hurtful, and please don't laugh me out of the good habits Uncle
has tried so hard to give me."

Rose was quite sincere in her appeal, and Charlie knew she was right,
but he always found it hard to give up anything he had set his heart on,
no matter how trivial, for the maternal indulgence which had harmed the
boy had fostered the habit of self-indulgence, which was ruining the
man. So when Rose looked up at him, with a very honest desire to save
him as well as herself from being swept into the giddy vortex which
keeps so many young people revolving aimlessly, till they go down or
are cast upon the shore, wrecks of what they might have been, he gave a
shrug and answered briefly: "As you please. I'll bring you home as early
as you like, and Effie Waring shall take your place in the German. What
flowers shall I send you?"

Now, that was an artful speech of Charlie's, for Miss Waring was a fast
and fashionable damsel who openly admired Prince Charming and had given
him the name. Rose disliked her and was sure her influence was bad, for
youth made frivolity forgivable, wit hid want of refinement, and beauty
always covers a multitude of sins in a man's eyes. At the sound of
Effie's name, Rose wavered, and would have yielded but for the memory
of the "first mate's" last words. She did desire to "keep a straight
course"; so, though the current of impulse set strongly in a southerly
direction, principle, the only compass worth having, pointed due north,
and she tried to obey it like a wise young navigator, saying steadily,
while she directed to Annabel the parcel containing a capacious pair of
slippers intended for Uncle Mac: "Don't trouble yourself about me. I can
go with Uncle and slip away without disturbing anybody."

"I don't believe you'll have the heart to do it," said Charlie
incredulously as he sealed the last note.

"Wait and see."

"I will, but I shall hope to the last." And kissing his hand to her, he
departed to post her letters, quite sure that Miss Waring would not lead
the German.

It certainly looked for a moment as if Miss Campbell would, because she
ran to the door with the words "I'll go" upon her lips. But she did not
open it till she had stood a minute staring hard at the old glove on
Psyche's head; then like one who had suddenly gotten a bright idea, she
gave a decided nod and walked slowly out of the room.




Chapter 6 POLISHING MAC

"Please could I say one word?" was the question three times repeated
before a rough head bobbed out from the grotto of books in which Mac
usually sat when he studied.

"Did anyone speak?" he asked, blinking in the flood of sunshine that
entered with Rose.

"Only three times, thank you. Don't disturb yourself, I beg, for I
merely want to say a word," answered Rose as she prevented him from
offering the easy chair in which he sat.

"I was rather deep in a compound fracture and didn't hear. What can I do
for you, Cousin?" And Mac shoved a stack of pamphlets off the chair near
him with a hospitable wave of the hand that sent his papers flying in
all directions.

Rose sat down, but did not seem to find her "word" an easy one to
utter, for she twisted her handkerchief about her fingers in embarrassed
silence till Mac put on his glasses and, after a keen look, asked
soberly: "Is it a splinter, a cut, or a whitlow, ma'am?"

"It is neither. Do forget your tiresome surgery for a minute and be the
kindest cousin that ever was," answered Rose, beginning rather sharply
and ending with her most engaging smile.

"Can't promise in the dark," said the wary youth.

"It is a favor, a great favor, and one I don't choose to ask any of the
