

WULLY, The Story of a Yaller Dog

WULLY WAS a little yaller dog. A yaller dog, be it understood, is not
necessarily the same as a yellow dog. He is not simply a canine whose
capillary covering is highly charged with yellow pigment. He is the
mongrelest mixture of all mongrels, the least common multiple of all
dogs, the breedless union of all breeds, and though of no breed at all,
he is yet of older, better breed than any of his aristocratic relations,
for he is nature's attempt to restore the ancestral jackal, the parent
stock of all dogs.

Indeed, the scientific name of the jackal (Canis aureus) means simply
'yellow dog,' and not a few of that animal's characteristics are seen in
his domesticated representative. For the plebeian cur is shrewd, active,
and hardy, and far better equipped for the real struggle of life than
any of his 'thoroughbred' kinsmen.

If we were to abandon a yaller dog, a greyhound, and a bulldog on a
desert island, which of them after six months would be alive and well?
Unquestionably it would be the despised yellow cur. He has not the speed
of the greyhound, but neither does he bear the seeds of lung and skin
diseases. He has not the strength or reckless courage of the bulldog,
but he has something a thousand times better, he has common sense.
Health and wit are no mean equipment for the life struggle, and when the
dog-world is not 'managed' by man, they have never yet failed to bring
out the yellow mongrel as the sole and triumphant survivor.

Once in a while the reversion to the jackal type is more complete, and
the yaller dog has pricked and pointed ears. Beware of him then. He is
cunning and plucky and can bite like a wolf. There is a strange, wild
streak in his nature too, that under cruelty or long adversity may
develop into deadliest treachery in spite of the better traits that are
the foundation of man's love for the dog.

I

Away up in the Cheviots little Wully was born. He and one other of the
litter were kept; his brother because he resembled the best dog in the
vicinity, and himself because he was a little yellow beauty.

His early life was that of a sheep-dog, in company with an experienced
collie who trained him, and an old shepherd who was scarcely inferior
to them in intelligence. By the time he was two years old Wully was
full grown and had taken a thorough course in sheep. He knew them from
ram-horn to lamb-hoof, and old Robin, his master, at length had such
confidence in his sagacity that he would frequently stay at the tavern
all night while Wully guarded the woolly idiots in the hills. His
education had been wisely bestowed and in most ways he was a very bright
little dog with a future before him, Yet he never learned to despise
that addle-pated Robin. The old shepherd, with all his faults, his
continual striving after his ideal state--intoxication--and his
mind-shrivelling life in general was rarely brutal to Wully, and Wully
repaid him with an exaggerated worship that the greatest and wisest in
the land would have aspired to in vain.

Wully could not have imagined any greater being than Robin, and yet for
the sum of five shillings a week all Robin's vital energy and mental
force were pledged to the service of a not very great cattle and sheep
dealer, the real proprietor of Wully's charge, and when this man, really
less great than the neighboring laird, ordered Robin to drive his flock
by stages to the Yorkshire moors and markets, of all the 376 mentalities
concerned, Wully's was the most interested and interesting.

The journey through Northumberland was uneventful. At the River Tyne
the sheep were driven on to the ferry and landed safely in smoky South
Shields. The great factory chimneys were just starting up for the day
and belching out fogbanks and thunder-rollers of opaque leaden smoke
that darkened the air and hung low like a storm-cloud over the streets.
The sheep thought that they recognized the fuming dun of an unusually
heavy Cheviot storm. They became alarmed, and in spite of their keepers
stampeded through the town in 374 different directions.

Robin was vexed to the inmost recesses of his tiny soul. He stared
stupidly after the sheep for half a minute, then gave the order, "Wully,
fetch them in." After this mental effort he sat down, lit his pipe, and
taking out his knitting began work on a half-finished sock.

To Wully the voice of Robin was the voice of God. Away he ran in 374
different directions, and headed off and rounded up the 374 different
wanderers, and brought them back to the ferry-house before Robin, who
was stolidly watching the process, had toed off his sock.

Finally Wully--not Robin--gave the sign that all were in. The old
shepherd proceeded to count them--370, 371, 372, 373.

"Wully," he said reproachfully, "thar no' a' here. Thur's anither." And
Wully, stung with shame, bounded off to scour the whole city for the
missing one. He was not long gone when a small boy pointed out to
Robin that the sheep were all there, the whole 374. Now Robin was in a
quandary. His order was to hasten on to Yorkshire, and yet he knew that
Wully's pride would prevent his coming back without another sheep, even
if he had to steal it. Such things had happened before, and resulted in
embarrassing complications. What should he do?

There was five shillings a week at stake. Wully was a good dog, it was
a pity to lose him, but then, his orders from the master; and again,
if Wully stole an extra sheep to make up the number, then what--in a
foreign land too? He decided to abandon Wully, and push on alone with
the sheep. And how he fared no one knows or cares.

Meanwhile, Wully careered through miles of streets hunting in vain for
his lost sheep. All day he searched, and at night, famished and worn
out, he sneaked shamefacedly back to the ferry, only to find that
master and sheep had gone. His sorrow was pitiful to see. He ran about
whimpering, then took the ferryboat across to the other side, and
searched everywhere for Robin. He returned to South Shields and searched
there, and spent the rest of the night seeking for his wretched idol.
The next day he continued his search, he crossed and recrossed the
river many times. He watched and smelt everyone that came over, and with
significant shrewdness he sought unceasingly in the neighboring taverns
for his master. The next day he set to work systematically to smell
everyone that might cross the ferry.

The ferry makes fifty trips a day, with an average of one hundred
persons a trip, yet never once did Wully fail to be on the gang-plank
and smell every pair of legs that crossed--5,000 pairs, 10,000 legs that
day did Wully examine after his own fashion. And the next day, and
the next, and all the week he kept his post, and seemed indifferent to
feeding himself. Soon starvation and worry began to tell on him. He
grew thin and ill-tempered. No one could touch him, and any attempt
to interfere with his daily occupation of leg-smelling roused him to
desperation.

Day after day, week after week Wully watched and waited for his master,
who never came. The ferry men learned to respect Wully's fidelity. At
first he scorned their proffered food and shelter, and lived no one knew
how, but starved to it at last, he accepted the gifts and learned to
tolerate the givers. Although embittered against the world, his heart
was true to his worthless master.

Fourteen months afterward I made his acquaintance. He was still on rigid
duty at his post. He had regained his good looks. His bright, keen face
set off by his white ruff and pricked ears made a dog to catch the eye
anywhere. But he gave me no second glance, once he found my legs were
not those he sought, and in spite of my friendly overtures during the
ten months following that he continued his watch. I got no farther into
his confidence than any other stranger.

For two whole years did this devoted creature attend that ferry. There
was only one thing to prevent him going home to the hills, not the
distance nor the chance of getting lost, but the conviction that Robin,
the godlike Robin, wished him to stay by the ferry; and he stayed.

But he crossed the water as often as he felt it would serve his purpose.
The fare for a dog was one penny, and it was calculated that Wully owed
the company hundreds of pounds before he gave up his quest. He
never failed to sense every pair of nethers that crossed the
gangplank--6,000,000 legs by computation had been pronounced upon by
this expert. But all to no purpose.

His unswerving fidelity never faltered, though his temper was obviously
souring under the long strain.

We had never heard what became of Robin, but one day a sturdy drover
strode down the ferry-slip and Wully mechanically assaying the new
personality, suddenly started, his mane bristled, he trembled, a low
growl escaped him, and he fixed his every sense on the drover.

One of the ferry hands not understanding, called to the stranger, "Hoot
mon, ye maunna hort oor dawg."

"Whaes hortin 'im, ye fule; he is mair like to hort me." But further
explanation was not necessary. Wully's manner had wholly changed. He
fawned on the drover, and his tail was wagging violently for the first
time in years. A few words made it all clear. Dorley, the drover, had
known Robin very well, and the mittens and comforter he wore were
of Robin's own make and had once been part of his wardrobe. Wully
recognized the traces of his master, and despairing of any nearer
approach to his lost idol, he abandoned his post at the ferry and
plainly announced his intention of sticking to the owner of the mittens,
and Dorley was well pleased to take Wully along to his home among the
hills of Derbyshire, where he became once more a sheep-dog in charge of
a flock.

II

Monsaldale is one of the best-known valleys in Derbyshire. The Pig
and Whistle is its single but celebrated inn, and Jo Greatorex, the
landlord, is a shrewd and sturdy Yorkshireman. Nature meant him for a
frontiersman, but circumstances made him an innkeeper and his inborn
tastes made him a--well, never mind; there was a great deal of poaching
done in that country.

Wully's new home was on the upland east of the valley above Jo's inn,
and that fact was not without weight in bringing me to Monsaldale. His
master, Dorley, farmed in a small way on the lowland, and on the moors
had a large number of sheep. These Wully guarded with his old-time
sagacity, watching them while they fed and bringing them to the fold at
night. He was reserved and preoccupied for a dog, and rather too
ready to show his teeth to strangers, but he was so unremitting in
his attention to his flock that Dorley did not lose a lamb that year,
although the neighboring farmers paid the usual tribute to eagles and to
foxes.

The dales are poor fox-hunting country at best. The rocky ridges, high
stone walls, and precipices are too numerous to please the riders, and
the final retreats in the rocks are so plentiful that it was a marvel
the foxes did not overrun Monsaldale. But they didn't. There had been
but little reason for complaint until the year 1881, when a sly old fox
quartered himself on the fat parish, like a mouse inside a cheese, and
laughed equally at the hounds of the huntsmen and the lurchers of the
farmers. He was several times run by the Peak hounds, and escaped by
making for the Devil's Hole. Once in this gorge, where the cracks in the
rocks extend unknown distances, he was safe. The country folk began to
see something more than chance in the fact that he always escaped at the
Devil's Hole, and when one of the hounds who nearly caught this Devil's
Fox soon after went mad, it removed all doubt as to the spiritual
paternity of said fox.

He continued his career of rapine, making audacious raids and
hair-breadth escapes, and finally began, as do many old foxes, to kill
from a mania for slaughter. Thus it was that Digby lost ten lambs in one
night. Carroll lost seven the next night. Later, the vicarage duck-pond
was wholly devastated, and scarcely a night passed but someone in the
region had to report a carnage of poultry, lambs or sheep, and, finally
even calves.

Of course all the slaughter was attributed to this one fox of the
Devil's Hole. It was known only that he was a very large fox, at least
one that made a very large track. He never was clearly seen, even by the
huntsmen. And it was noticed that Thunder and Bell, the stanchest hounds
in the pack, had refused to tongue or even to follow the trail when he
was hunted.

His reputation for madness sufficed to make the master of the Peak
hounds avoid the neighborhood. The farmers in Monsaldale, led by Jo,
agreed among themselves that if it would only come on a snow, they would
assemble and beat the whole country, and in defiance of all rules of the
hunt, get rid of the 'daft' fox in any way they could. But the snow did
not come, and the red-haired gentleman lived his life. Notwithstanding
his madness, he did not lack method. He never came two successive nights
to the same farm. He never ate where he killed, and he never left a
track that betrayed his re-treat. He usually finished up his night's
trail on the turf, or on a public highway.

Once I saw him. I was walking to Monsaldale from Bakewell late one night
during a heavy storm, and as I turned the corner of Stead's sheep-fold
there was a vivid flash of lightning. By its light, there was fixed on
my retina a picture that made me start. Sitting on his haunches by the
roadside, twenty yards away, was a very large fox gazing at me with
malignant eyes, and licking his muzzle in a suggestive manner. All
this I saw, but no more, and might have forgotten it, or thought myself
mistaken, but the next morning, in that very fold, were found the bodies
of twenty-three lambs and sheep, and the unmistakable signs that brought
home the crime to the well-known marauder.

There was only one man who escaped, and that was Dorley. This was the
more remarkable because he lived in the centre of the region raided, and
within one mile of the Devil's Hole. Faithful Wully proved himself worth
all the dogs in the neighborhood. Night after night he brought in the
sheep, and never one was missing. The Mad Fox might prowl about the
Dorley homestead if he wished, but Wully, shrewd, brave, active Wully
was more than a match for him, and not only saved his master's flock,
but himself escaped with a whole skin. Everyone entertained a profound
respect for him, and he might have been a popular pet but for his temper
which, never genial, became more and more crabbed. He seemed to like
Dorley, and Huldah, Dorley's eldest daughter, a shrewd, handsome, young
woman, who, in the capacity of general manager of the house, was Wully's
special guardian. The other members of Dorley's family Wully learned to
tolerate, but the rest of the world, men and dogs, he seemed to hate.

His uncanny disposition was well shown in the last meeting I had with
him. I was walking on a pathway across the moor behind Dorley's house.
Wully was lying on the doorstep. As I drew near he arose, and without
appearing to see me trotted toward my pathway and placed himself across
it about ten yards ahead of me. There he stood silently and intently
regarding the distant moor, his slightly bristling mane the only sign
that he had not been suddenly turned to stone. He did not stir as I
came up, and not wishing to quarrel, I stepped around past his nose and
walked on. Wully at once left his position and in the same eerie silence
trotted on some twenty feet and again stood across the pathway. Once
more I came up and, stepping into the grass, brushed past his nose.
Instantly, but without a sound, he seized my left heel. I kicked out
with the other foot, but he escaped. Not having a stick, I flung a large
stone at him. He leaped forward and the stone struck him in the ham,
bowling him over into a ditch. He gasped out a savage growl as he fell,
but scrambled out of the ditch and limped away in silence.

Yet sullen and ferocious as Wully was to the world, he was always gentle
with Dorley's sheep. Many were the tales of rescues told of him. Many
a poor lamb that had fallen into a pond or hole would have perished but
for his timely and sagacious aid, many a far-weltered ewe did he turn
right side up; while his keen eye discerned and his fierce courage
baffled every eagle that had appeared on the moor in his time.

III

The Monsaldale farmers were still paying their nightly tribute to the
Mad Fox, when the snow came, late in December. Poor Widow Cot lost her
entire flock of twenty sheep, and the fiery cross went forth early in
the morning. With guns unconcealed the burly farmers set out to follow
to the finish the tell-tale tracks in the snow, those of a very large
fox, undoubtedly the multo-murderous villain. For a while the trail was
clear enough, then it came to the river and the habitual cunning of the
animal was shown. He reached the water at a long angle pointing down
stream and jumped into the shallow, unfrozen current. But at the
other side there was no track leading out, and it was only after long
searching that, a quarter of a mile higher up the stream, they found
where he had come out. The track then ran to the top of Henley's high
stone wall, where there was no snow left to tell tales. But the patient
hunters persevered. When it crossed the smooth snow from the wall to the
high road there was a difference of opinion. Some claimed that the track
went up, others down the road. But Jo settled it, and after another long
search they found where apparently the same trail, though some said a
larger one, had left the road to enter a sheep-fold, and leaving this
without harming the occupants, the track-maker had stepped in the
footmarks of a countryman, thereby getting to the moor road, along which
he had trotted straight to Dorley's farm.

That day the sheep were kept in on account of the snow and Wully,
without his usual occupation, was lying on some planks in the sun. As
the hunters drew near the house, he growled savagely and sneaked around
to where the sheep were. Jo Greatorex walked up to where Wully had
crossed the fresh snow, gave a glance, looked dumbfounded, then pointing
to the retreating sheep-dog, he said, with emphasis:

"Lads, we're off the track of the Fox. But there's the killer of the
Widder's yowes."

Some agreed with Jo, others recalled the doubt in the trail and were for
going back to make a fresh follow. At this juncture, Dorley himself came
out of the house.

"Tom," said Jo, "that dog o' thine 'as killed twenty of Widder Gelt's
sheep, last night. An' ah fur one don't believe as its 'is first
killin'."

"Why, mon, thou art crazy," said Tom. "Ah never 'ad a better
sheep-dog--'e fair loves the sheep."

"Aye! We's seen summat o' that in las' night's work," replied Jo.

In vain the company related the history of the morning. Tom swore that
it was nothing but a jealous conspiracy to rob him of Wully.

"Wully sleeps i' the kitchen every night. Never is oot till he's let
to bide wi' the yowes. Why, mon, he's wi' oor sheep the year round, and
never a hoof have ah lost."

Tom became much excited over this abominable attempt against Wully's
reputation and life. Jo and his partisans got equally angry, and it was
a wise suggestion of Huldah's that quieted them.

"Feyther," said she, "ah'll sleep i' the kitchen the night. If Wully
'as ae way of gettin' oot ah'll see it, an' if he's no oot an' sheep's
killed on the country-side, we'll ha' proof it's na Wully."

That night Huldah stretched herself on the settee and Wully slept as
usual underneath the table. As night wore on the dog became restless. He
turned on his bed and once or twice got up, stretched, looked at Huldah
and lay down again. About two o'clock he seemed no longer able to resist
some strange impulse. He arose quietly, looked toward the low window,
then at the motionless girl. Huldah lay still and breathed as though
sleeping. Wully slowly came near and sniffed and breathed his doggy
breath in her face. She made no move. He nudged her gently with his
nose. Then, with his sharp ears forward and his head on one side he
studied her calm face. Still no sign. He walked quietly to the window,
mounted the table without noise, placed his nose under the sash-bar
and raised the light frame until he could put one paw underneath. Then
changing, he put his nose under the sash and raised it high enough to
slip out, easing down the frame finally on his rump and tail with an
adroitness that told of long practice. Then he disappeared into the
darkness.

From her couch Huldah watched in amazement. After waiting for some time
to make sure that he was gone, she arose, intending to call her father
at once, but on second thought she decided to await more conclusive
proof. She peered into the darkness, but no sign of Wully was to be
seen. She put more wood on the fire, and lay down again. For over an
hour she lay wide awake listening to the kitchen clock, and starting at
each trifling sound, and wondering what the dog was doing. Could it
be possible that he had really killed the widow's sheep? Then the
recollection of his gentleness to their own sheep came, and completed
her perplexity.

Another hour slowly tick-tocked. She heard a slight sound at the window
that made her heart jump. The scratching sound was soon followed by the
lifting of the sash, and in a short time Wully was back in the kitchen
with the window closed behind him.

By the flickering fire-light Huldah could see a strange, wild gleam in
his eye, and his jaws and snowy breast were dashed with fresh blood. The
dog ceased his slight panting as he scrutinized the girl. Then, as
she did not move, he lay down, and began to lick his paws and muzzle,
growling lowly once or twice as though at the remembrance of some recent
occurrence.

Huldah had seen enough. There could no longer be any doubt that Jo was
right and more--a new thought flashed into her quick brain, she realized
that the weird fox of Monsal was before her. Raising herself, she looked
straight at Wully, and exclaimed:

"Wully! Wully! so it's a' true--oh, Wully, ye terrible brute."

Her voice was fiercely reproachful, it rang in the quiet kitchen, and
Wully recoiled as though shot. He gave a desperate glance toward the
closed window. His eye gleamed, and his mane bristled. But he cowered
under her gaze, and grovelled on the floor as though begging for mercy.
Slowly he crawled nearer and nearer, as if to lick her feet, until quite
close, then, with the fury of a tiger, but without a sound, he sprang
for her throat.

The girl was taken unawares, but she threw up her arm in time, and
Wully's long, gleaming tusks sank into her flesh, and grated on the
bone.

"Help! help! feyther! feyther!" she shrieked.

Wully was a light weight, and for a moment she flung him off. But there
could be no mistaking his purpose. The game was up, it was his life or
hers now.

"Feyther! feyther!" she screamed, as the yellow fury, striving to kill
her, bit and tore the unprotected hands that had so often fed him.

In vain she fought to hold him off, he would soon have had her by the
throat, when in rushed Dorley.

Straight at him, now in the same horrid silence sprang Wully, and
savagely tore him again and again before a deadly blow from the
fagot-hook disabled him, dashing him, gasping and writhing, on the
stone floor, desperate, and done for, but game and defiant to the last.
Another quick blow scattered his brains on the hearthstone, where so
long he had been a faithful and honored retainer--and Wully, bright,
fierce, trusty, treacherous Wully, quivered a moment, then straightened
out, and lay forever still.




REDRUFF, The Story of the Don Valley Partridge

I

DOWN THE wooded slope of Taylor's Hill the Mother Partridge led her
brood; down toward the crystal brook that by some strange whim was
called Mud Creek. Her little ones were one day old but already quick on
foot, and she was taking them for the first time to drink.

She walked slowly, crouching low as she went, for the woods were full of
enemies. She was uttering a soft little cluck in her throat, a call
to the little balls of mottled down that on their tiny pink legs came
toddling after, and peeping softly and plaintively if left even a few
inches behind, and seeming so fragile they made the very chickadees look
big and coarse. There were twelve of them, but Mother Grouse watched
them all, and she watched every bush and tree and thicket, and the whole
woods and the sky itself. Always for enemies she seemed seeking--friends
were too scarce to be looked for--and an enemy she found. Away across
the level beaver meadow was a great brute of a fox. He was coming their
way, and in a few moments would surely wind them or strike their trail.
There was no time to lose.

'Krrr! Krrr!' (Hide!! Hide!) cried the mother in a low firm voice, and
the little bits of things, scarcely bigger than acorns and but a day
old, scattered far (a few inches) apart to hide. One dived under a leaf,
another between two roots, a third crawled into a curl of birchbark, a
fourth into a hole, and so on, till all were hidden but one who could
find no cover, so squatted on a broad yellow chip and lay very flat, and
closed his eyes very tight, sure that now he was safe from being seen.
They ceased their frightened peeping and all was still.

Mother Partridge flew straight toward the dreaded beast, alighted
fearlessly a few yards to one side of him, and then flung herself on the
ground, flopping as though winged and lame--oh, so dreadfully lame--and
whining like a distressed puppy. Was she begging for mercy--mercy from
a bloodthirsty, cruel fox? Oh, dear no! She was no fool. One often hears
of the cunning of the fox. Wait and see what a fool he is compared with
a mother-partridge. Elated at the prize so suddenly within his reach,
the fox turned with a dash and caught--at least, no, he didn't quite
catch the bird; she flopped by chance just a foot out of reach. He
followed with another jump and would have seized her this time surely,
but somehow a sapling came just between, and the partridge dragged
herself awkwardly away and under a log, but the great brute snapped his
jaws and hounded over the log, while she, seeming a trifle less lame,
made another clumsy forward spring and tumbled down a bank, and Reynard,
keenly following, almost caught her tail, but, oddly enough, fast as
he went and leaped, she still seemed just a trifle faster. It was most
extraordinary. A winged partridge and he, Reynard, the Swift-foot, had
not caught her in five minutes' racing. It was really shameful. But the
partridge seemed to gain strength as the fox put forth his, and after a
quarter of a mile race, racing that was somehow all away from Taylor's
Hill, the bird got unaccountably quite well, and, rising with a derisive
whirr, flew off through the woods leaving the fox utterly dumfounded
to realize that he had been made a fool of, and, worst of all, he now
remembered that this was not the first time he had been served this very
trick, though he never knew the reason for it.

Meanwhile Mother Partridge skimmed in a great circle and came by a
roundabout way back to the little fuzz-balls she had left hidden in the
woods.

With a wild bird's keen memory for places, she went to the very
grass-blade she last trod on, and stood for a moment fondly to admire
the perfect stillness of her children. Even at her step not one had
stirred, and the little fellow on the chip, not so very badly concealed
after all, had not budged, nor did he now; he only closed his eyes a
tiny little bit harder, till the mother said:

'K-reet!' (Come, children) and instantly like a fairy story, every hole
gave up its little baby-partridge, and the wee fellow on the chip, the
biggest of them all really, opened his big-little eyes and ran to the
shelter of her broad tail, with a sweet little 'peep peep' which an
enemy could not have heard three feet away, but which his mother could
not have missed thrice as far, and all the other thimblefuls of down
joined in, and no doubt thought themselves dreadfully noisy, and were
proportionately happy.

The sun was hot now. There was an open space to cross on the road to the
water, and, after a careful lookout for enemies, the mother gathered the
little things under the shadow of her spread fantail and kept off all
danger of sunstroke until they reached the brier thicket by the stream.

Here a cottontail rabbit leaped out and gave them a great scare. But the
flag of truce he carried behind was enough. He was an old friend; and
among other things the little ones learned that day that Bunny always
sails under a flag of truce, and lives up to it too.

And then came the drink, the purest of living water, though silly men
had called it Mud Creek.

At first the little fellows didn't know how to drink, but they copied
their mother, and soon learned to drink like her and give thanks after
every sip. There they stood in a row along the edge, twelve little brown
and golden balls on twenty-four little pink-toed, in-turned feet, with
twelve sweet little golden heads gravely bowing, drinking and giving
thanks like their mother.

Then she led them by short stages, keeping the cover, to the far side of
the beaver-meadow, where was a great grassy dome. The mother had made a
note of this dome some time before. It takes a number of such domes to
raise a brood of partridges. For this was an ant's nest. The old one
stepped on top, looked about a moment, then gave half a dozen vigorous
rakes with her daws, The friable ant-hill was broken open, and the
earthen galleries scattered in ruins down the slope. The ants swarmed
out and quarreled with each other for lack of a better plan. Some ran
around the hill with vast energy and little purpose, while a few of the
more sensible began to carry away fat white eggs. But the old partridge,
coming to the little ones, picked up one of these juicy-looking bags and
clucked and dropped it, and picked it up again and again and clucked,
then swallowed it. The young ones stood around, then one little yellow
fellow, the one that sat on the chip, picked up an ant-egg, dropped it
a few times, then yielding to a sudden impulse, swallowed it, and so had
learned to eat. Within twenty minutes even the runt had learned, and a
