its imperial plumes, making the humble waysides gorgeous; the river
chattered and sparkled till it met the logs at the Brier Neighborhood,
and then, lapsing into silence, flowed steadily under them till it found
a vent for its spirits in the dashing and splashing of the falls.

Haying was over; logging was to begin that day; then harvesting; then
wood-cutting; then eternal successions of ploughing, sowing, reaping,
haying, logging, harvesting, and so on, to the endless end of his days.
Here and there a red or a yellow branch, painted only yesterday, caught
his eye and made him shiver. He was not ready for winter; his heart
still craved the summer it had missed.

Hello! What was that? Corn-stalks prone on the earth? Sign torn down and
lying flat in the grass? Blinds open, fire in the chimney?

He leaped from the wagon, and, flinging the reins to Alcestis Crambry,
said, "Stay right here out of sight, and don't you move till I call
you!" And striding up the green pathway, he flung open the kitchen door.

A forest of corn waving in the doorway at the back, morning-glories
clambering round and round the window-frames, the table with shining
white cloth, the kettle humming and steaming, something bubbling in a
pan on the stove, the fire throwing out sweet little gleams of welcome
through the open damper. All this was taken in with one incredulous,
rapturous twinkle of an eye; but something else, too: Rose of all roses,
Rose of the river, Rose of the world, standing behind a chair, with her
hand pressed against her heart, her lips parted, her breath coming and
going! She was glowing like a jewel--glowing with the extraordinary
brilliancy that emotion gives to some women. She used to be happy in a
gay, sparkling way, like the shallow part of the stream as it chatters
over white pebbles and bright sands. Now it was a broad, steady, full
happiness like the deeps of the river under the sun.

"Don't speak, Stephen, till you hear what I have to say. It takes a good
deal of courage for a girl to do as I am doing; but I want to show how
sorry I am, and it's the only way." She was trembling, and the words
came faster and faster. "I've been very wrong and foolish, and made you
very unhappy, but I have n't done what you would have hated most. I have
n't been engaged to Claude Merrill; he has n't so much as asked me. I am
here to beg you to forgive me, to eat breakfast with me, to drive me to
the minister's and marry me quickly, quickly, before anything happens
to prevent us, and then to bring me home here to live all the days of my
life. Oh, Stephen dear, honestly, honestly, you have n't lost anything
in all this long, miserable summer. I've suffered, too, and I'm better
worth loving than I was. Will you take me back?"

Rose had a tremendous power of provoking and holding love, and Stephen
of loving. His was too generous a nature for revilings and complaints
and reproaches.

The shores of his heart were strewn with the wreckage of the troubled
summer, but if the tide of love is high enough, it washes such things
out of remembrance. He just opened his arms and took Rose to his heart,
faults and all, with joy and gratitude; and she was as happy as a child
who has escaped the scolding it richly deserves, and who determines, for
very thankfulness' sake, never to be naughty again.

"You don't know what you've done for me, Stephen," she whispered, with
her face hidden on his shoulder. "I was just a common little prickly
rosebush when you came along like a good gardener and 'grafted in'
something better; the something better was your love, Stephen dear, and
it's made everything different. The silly Rose you were engaged to long
ago has disappeared somewhere; I hope you won't be able to find her
under the new leaves."

"She was all I wanted," said Stephen.

"You thought she was," the girl answered, "because you did n't see the
prickles, but you'd have felt them some time. The old Rose was a selfish
thing, not good enough for you; the new Rose is going to be your wife,
and Rufus's sister, and your mother's daughter, all in one."

Then such a breakfast was spread as Stephen, in his sorry years of
bachelor existence, had forgotten could exist; but before he broke his
fast he ran out to the wagon and served the astonished Alcestis with his
wedding refreshments then and there, bidding him drive back to the
River Farm and bring him a package that lay in the drawer of his
shaving-stand,--a package placed there when hot youth and love and
longing had inspired him to hurry on the marriage day.

"There's an envelope, Alcestis," he cried, "a long envelope, way, way
back in the corner, and a small box on top of it. Bring them both and my
wallet too, and if you find them all and get them to me safely you shall
be bridesmaid and groomsman and best man and usher and maid of honor at
a wedding, in less than an hour! Off with you! Drive straight and use
the whip on Dolly!"

When he re-entered the kitchen, flushed with joy and excitement, Rose
put the various good things on the table and he almost tremblingly took
his seat, fearing that contact with the solid wood might wake him from
this entrancing vision.

"I'd like to put you in your chair like a queen and wait on you," he
said with a soft boyish stammer; "but I am too dazed with happiness to
be of any use."

"It's my turn to wait upon you, and I--Oh! how I love to have you
dazed," Rose answered. "I'll be at the table presently myself; but we
have been housekeeping only three minutes, and we have nothing but the
tin coffee-pot this morning, so I'll pour the coffee from the stove."

She filled a cup with housewifely care and brought it to Stephen's side.
As she set it down and was turning, she caught his look,--a look so full
of longing that no loving woman, however busy, could have resisted it;
then she stooped and kissed him fondly, fervently.

Stephen put his arm about her, and, drawing her down to his knee, rested
his head against her soft shoulder with a sigh of comfort, like that
of a tired child. He had waited for it ten years, and at last the dream
room had come true.





THE OLD PEABODY PEW

A Christmas Romance of a Country Church


DEDICATION

To a certain handful of dear New England women of names unknown to the
world, dwelling in a certain quiet village, alike unknown:--

We have worked together to make our little corner of the great universe
a pleasanter place in which to live, and so we know, not only one
another's names, but something of one another's joys and sorrows, cares
and burdens, economies, hopes, and anxieties.

We all remember the dusty uphill road that leads to the green church
common. We remember the white spire pointing upward against a background
of blue sky and feathery elms. We remember the sound of the bell
that falls on the Sabbath morning stillness, calling us across the
daisy-sprinkled meadows of June, the golden hayfields of July, or the
dazzling whiteness and deep snowdrifts of December days. The little
cabinet-organ that plays the Doxology, the hymn-books from which we sing
"Praise God from whom all blessings flow," the sweet freshness of the
old meeting-house, within and without,--how we have toiled to secure and
preserve these humble mercies for ourselves and our children!

There really is a Dorcas Society, as you and I well know, and one
not unlike that in these pages; and you and I have lived through many
discouraging, laughable, and beautiful experiences while we emulated the
Bible Dorcas, that woman "full of good works and alms deeds."

There never was a Peabody Pew in the Tory Hill Meeting-House, and
Nancy's love story and Justin's never happened within its century-old
walls, but I have imagined only one of the many romances that have had
their birth under the shadow of that steeple, did we but realize it.

As you have sat there on open-windowed Sundays, looking across purple
clover-fields to blue distant mountains, watching the palm-leaf fans
swaying to and fro in the warm stillness before sermon time, did not the
place seem full of memories, for has not the life of two villages ebbed
and flowed beneath that ancient roof? You heard the hum of droning
bees and followed the airy wings of butterflies fluttering over
the grave-stones in the old churchyard, and underneath almost every
moss-grown tablet some humble romance lies buried and all but forgotten.

If it had not been for you, I should never have written this story, so I
give it back to you tied with a sprig from Ophelia's nosegay; a sprig of
"rosemary, that's for remembrance."

K. D. W.

August, 1907




I. The Old Peabody Pew

Edgewood, like all the other villages along the banks of the Saco,
is full of sunny slopes and leafy hollows. There are little, rounded,
green-clad hillocks that might, like their scriptural sisters, "skip
with joy"; and there are grand, rocky hills tufted with gaunt pine
trees--these leading the eye to the splendid heights of a neighbor
State, where snow-crowned peaks tower in the blue distance, sweeping the
horizon in a long line of majesty.

Tory Hill holds its own among the others for peaceful beauty and fair
prospect, and on its broad, level summit sits the white-painted Orthodox
Meeting-House. This faces a grassy common where six roads meet, as if
the early settlers had determined that no one should lack salvation
because of a difficulty in reaching its visible source.

The old church has had a dignified and fruitful past, dating from that
day in 1761 when young Paul Coffin received his call to preach at a
stipend of fifty pounds sterling a year; answering "that never having
heard of any Uneasiness among the people about his Doctrine or manner of
life, he declared himself pleased to Settle as Soon as might be Judged
Convenient."

But that was a hundred and fifty years ago, and much has happened since
those simple, strenuous old days. The chastening hand of time has been
laid somewhat heavily on the town as well as on the church. Some of
her sons have marched to the wars and died on the field of honor; some,
seeking better fortunes, have gone westward; others, wearying of village
life, the rocky soil, and rigors of farm-work, have become entangled
in the noise and competition, the rush and strife, of cities. When the
sexton rings the bell nowadays, on a Sunday morning, it seems to have
lost some of its old-time militant strength, something of its hope and
courage; but it still rings, and although the Davids and Solomons,
the Matthews, Marks, and Pauls of former congregations have left few
descendants to perpetuate their labors, it will go on ringing as long as
there is a Tabitha, a Dorcas, a Lois, or a Eunice left in the community.

This sentiment had been maintained for a quarter of a century, but it
was now especially strong, as the old Tory Hill Meeting-House had been
undergoing for several years more or less extensive repairs. In point
of fact, the still stronger word, "improvements," might be used
with impunity; though whenever the Dorcas Society, being female, and
therefore possessed of notions regarding comfort and beauty, suggested
any serious changes, the finance committees, which were inevitably
male in their composition, generally disapproved of making any impious
alterations in a tabernacle, chapel, temple, or any other building used
for purposes of worship. The majority in these august bodies asserted
that their ancestors had prayed and sung there for a century and a
quarter, and what was good enough for their ancestors was entirely
suitable for them. Besides, the community was becoming less and less
prosperous, and church-going was growing more and more lamentably
uncommon, so that even from a business standpoint, any sums expended
upon decoration by a poor and struggling parish would be worse than
wasted.

In the particular year under discussion in this story, the valiant
and progressive Mrs. Jeremiah Burbank was the president of the Dorcas
Society, and she remarked privately and publicly that if her ancestors
liked a smoky church, they had a perfect right to the enjoyment of it,
but that she did n't intend to sit through meeting on winter Sundays,
with her white ostrich feather turning gray and her eyes smarting and
watering, for the rest of her natural life.

Whereupon, this being in a business session, she then and there proposed
to her already hypnotized constituents ways of earning enough money to
build a new chimney on the other side of the church.

An awe-stricken community witnessed this beneficent act of vandalism,
and, finding that no thunderbolts of retribution descended from
the skies, greatly relished the change. If one or two aged persons
complained that they could not sleep as sweetly during sermon-time in
the now clear atmosphere of the church, and that the parson's eye
was keener than before, why, that was a mere detail, and could not
be avoided; what was the loss of a little sleep compared with the
discoloration of Mrs. Jere Burbank's white ostrich feather and the
smarting of Mrs. Jere Burbank's eyes?

A new furnace followed the new chimney, in due course, and as a sense of
comfort grew, there was opportunity to notice the lack of beauty.
Twice in sixty years had some well-to-do summer parishioner painted the
interior of the church at his own expense; but although the roof had
been many times reshingled, it had always persisted in leaking, so that
the ceiling and walls were disfigured by unsightly spots and stains and
streaks. The question of shingling was tacitly felt to be outside the
feminine domain, but as there were five women to one man in the church
membership, the feminine domain was frequently obliged to extend its
limits into the hitherto unknown. Matters of tarring and waterproofing
were discussed in and out of season, and the very school-children
imbibed knowledge concerning lapping, over-lapping, and cross-lapping,
and first and second quality of cedar shingles. Miss Lobelia Brewster,
who had a rooted distrust of anything done by mere man, created strife
by remarking that she could have stopped the leak in the belfry tower
with her red flannel petticoat better than the Milltown man with his
new-fangled rubber sheeting, and that the last shingling could have been
more thoroughly done by a "female infant babe"; whereupon the person
criticized retorted that he wished Miss Lobelia Brewster had a few
infant babes to "put on the job he'd like to see 'em try." Meantime
several male members of the congregation, who at one time or another had
sat on the roof during the hottest of the dog-days to see that shingling
operations were conscientiously and skillfully performed, were very
pessimistic as to any satisfactory result ever being achieved.

"The angle of the roof--what they call the 'pitch'--they say that that's
always been wrong," announced the secretary of the Dorcas in a business
session.

"Is it that kind of pitch that the Bible says you can't touch without
being defiled? If not, I vote that we unshingle the roof and alter the
pitch!" This proposal came from a sister named Maria Sharp, who had
valiantly offered the year before to move the smoky chimney with her own
hands, if the "menfolks" would n't.

But though the incendiary suggestion of altering the pitch was received
with applause at the moment, subsequent study of the situation proved
that such a proceeding was entirely beyond the modest means of the
society. Then there arose an ingenious and militant carpenter in
a neighboring village, who asserted that he would shingle the
meeting-house roof for such and such a sum, and agree to drink every
drop of water that would leak in afterward. This was felt by all parties
to be a promise attended by extraordinary risks, but it was accepted
nevertheless, Miss Lobelia Brewster remarking that the rash carpenter,
being already married, could not marry a Dorcas anyway, and even if he
died, he was not a resident of Edgewood, and therefore could be more
easily spared, and that it would be rather exciting, just for a change,
to see a man drink himself to death with rain-water. The expected
tragedy never occurred, however, and the inspired shingler fulfilled
his promise to the letter, so that before many months the Dorcas
Society proceeded, with incredible exertion, to earn more money, and the
interior of the church was neatly painted and made as fresh as a rose.
With no smoke, no rain, no snow nor melting ice to defile it, the good
old landmark that had been pointing its finger Heavenward for over a
century would now be clean and fragrant for years to come, and the weary
sisters leaned back in their respective rocking-chairs and drew deep
breaths of satisfaction.

These breaths continued to be drawn throughout an unusually arduous
haying season; until, in fact, a visitor from a neighboring city was
heard to remark that the Tory Hill Meeting-House would be one of the
best preserved and pleasantest churches in the whole State of Maine, if
only it were suitably carpeted.

This thought had secretly occurred to many a Dorcas in her hours
of pie-making, preserving, or cradle-rocking, but had been promptly
extinguished as flagrantly extravagant and altogether impossible. Now
that it had been openly mentioned, the contagion of the idea spread, and
in a month every sort of honest machinery for the increase of funds had
been set in motion: harvest suppers, pie sociables, old folks' concerts,
apron sales, and, as a last resort, a subscription paper, for the
church floor measured hundreds of square yards, and the carpet committee
announced that a good ingrain could not be purchased, even with the
church discount, for less than ninety-seven cents a yard.

The Dorcases took out their pencils, and when they multiplied the
surface of the floor by the price of the carpet per yard, each Dorcas
attaining a result entirely different from all the others, there was a
shriek of dismay, especially from the secretary, who had included in her
mathematical operation certain figures in her possession representing
the cubical contents of the church and the offending pitch of the roof,
thereby obtaining a product that would have dismayed a Croesus. Time
sped and efforts increased, but the Dorcases were at length obliged to
clip the wings of their desire and content themselves with carpeting
the pulpit and pulpit steps, the choir, and the two aisles, leaving the
floor in the pews until some future year.

How the women cut and contrived and matched that hardly-bought red
ingrain carpet, in the short December afternoons that ensued after its
purchase; so that, having failed to be ready for Thanksgiving, it could
be finished for the Christmas festivities!

They were sewing in the church, and as the last stitches were being
taken, Maria Sharp suddenly ejaculated in her impulsive fashion:--

"Would n't it have been just perfect if we could have had the pews
repainted before we laid the new carpet!"

"It would, indeed," the president answered; "but it will take us all
winter to pay for the present improvements, without any thought of fresh
paint. If only we had a few more men-folks to help along!"

"Or else none at all!" was Lobelia Brewster's suggestion. "It's havin'
so few that keeps us all stirred up. If there wa'n't any anywheres,
we'd have women deacons and carpenters and painters, and get along first
rate; for somehow the supply o' women always holds out, same as it does
with caterpillars an' flies an' grasshoppers!"

Everybody laughed, although Maria Sharp asserted that she for one was
not willing to be called a caterpillar simply because there were too
many women in the universe.

"I never noticed before how shabby and scarred and dirty the pews are,"
said the minister's wife, as she looked at them reflectively.

"I've been thinking all the afternoon of the story about the poor old
woman and the lily," and Nancy Wentworth's clear voice broke into the
discussion. "Do you remember some one gave her a stalk of Easter lilies
and she set them in a glass pitcher on the kitchen table? After looking
at them for a few minutes, she got up from her chair and washed the
pitcher until the glass shone. Sitting down again, she glanced at
the little window. It would never do; she had forgotten how dusty and
blurred it was, and she took her cloth and burnished the panes. Then she
scoured the table, then the floor, then blackened the stove before she
sat down to her knitting. And of course the lily had done it all, just
by showing, in its whiteness, how grimy everything else was."

The minister's wife, who had been in Edgewood only a few months, looked
admiringly at Nancy's bright face, wondering that five-and-thirty years
of life, including ten of school-teaching, had done so little to mar its
serenity.

"The lily story is as true as the gospel!" she exclaimed, "and I can see
how one thing has led you to another in making the church comfortable.
But my husband says that two coats of paint on the pews would cost a
considerable sum."

"How about cleaning them? I don't believe they've had a good hard
washing since the flood." The suggestion came from Deacon Miller's wife
to the president.

"They can't even be scrubbed for less than fifteen or twenty dollars,
for I thought of that and asked Mrs. Simpson yesterday, and she said
twenty cents a pew was the cheapest she could do it for."

"We've done everything else," said Nancy Wentworth, with a twitch of her
thread; "why don't we scrub the pews? There's nothing in the Orthodox
creed to forbid, is there?"

"Speakin' o' creeds," and here old Mrs. Sargent paused in her work,
"Elder Ransom from Acreville stopped with us last night, an' he tells
me they recite the Euthanasian Creed every few Sundays in the Episcopal
Church. I did n't want him to know how ignorant I was, but I looked up
the word in the dictionary. It means easy death, and I can't see any
sense in that, though it's a terrible long creed, the Elder says, an'
if it's any longer 'n ourn, I should think anybody _might_ easy die
