
"You'll do more than that, or I'll have you patched!" roared the angry
Boolooroo. "And don't waste any time, either, for as soon as we find
out the secret of the umbrella I'm going to have the three strangers
marched through the Arch of Phinis, and that will be the end of them."

"You can't do that, your Majesty," said the Majordomo.

"Why can't I?"

"They haven't lived six hundred years yet, and only those who have
lived that length of time are allowed to march through the Arch of
Phinis into the Great Blue Grotto."

The King looked at him with a sneer. "Has anyone ever come out of that
Arch alive?" he asked.

"No," said Ghip-ghisizzle, "but no one has ever gone into the Blue
Grotto until his allotted time was up."

"Well, I'm going to try the experiment," declared the Boolooroo. "I
shall march these three strangers through the Arch, and if by chance
they come out alive, I'll do a new sort of patching--I'll chop off
their heads and mix 'em up, putting the wrong head on each of 'em. Ha,
ha! Won't it be funny to see the old Moonface's head on the little
girl? Ho, ho! I really hope they'll come out of the Great Blue Grotto
alive!"

"I also hope they will," replied Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"Then I'll bet you four buttonholes they don't. I've a suspicion that
once they enter the Great Blue Grotto that's the last of them."

Ghip-Ghisizzle went away quite sad and unhappy. He did not approve the
way the strangers were being treated and thought it was wicked and
cruel to try to destroy them.

During his absence, the prisoners had been talking together very
earnestly. "We must get away from here somehow 'r other," said Cap'n
Bill, "but o' course we can't stir a step without the Magic Umbrel."

"No, I must surely manage to get my umbrella first," said Button-Bright.

"Do it quick, then," urged Trot, "for I can't stand those snubnoses
much longer."

"I'll do it tonight," said the boy.

"The sooner, the better, my lad," remarked the sailor, "but seein' as
the Blue Boolooroo has locked it up in his Treasure Chamber, it mayn't
be easy to get hold of."

"No, it won't be easy," Button-Bright admitted. "But it has to be done,
Cap'n Bill, and there's no use waiting any longer. No one here likes
us, and in a few days they may make an end of us."

"Oh, Button-Bright! There's a Blue Wolf in the Treasure Chamber!"
exclaimed Trot.

"Yes, I know."

"An' a patched man on guard outside," Cap'n Bill reminded him.

"I know," repeated Button-Bright.

"And the key's in the King's own pocket," added Trot despairingly.

The boy nodded. He didn't say how he would overcome all these
difficulties, so the little girl feared they would never see the Magic
Umbrella again. But their present position was a very serious one, and
even Cap'n Bill dared not advise Button-Bright to give up the desperate
attempt.

When Ghip-Ghisizzle returned, he said, "You must be very careful not to
anger the Boolooroo, or he may do you a mischief. I think the little
girl had better keep away from the Princesses for tonight unless they
demand her presence. The boy must go for the King's shoes and blue them
and polish them and then take them back to the Royal Bedchamber. Cap'n
Bill won't have anything to do, for I've ordered Tiggle to mix the
nectar."

"Thank 'e, friend Sizzle," said Cap'n Bill.

"Now follow me, and I will take you to your rooms."

He led them to the rear of the palace, where he gave them three small
rooms on the ground floor, each having a bed in it. Cap'n Bill's room
had a small door leading out into the street of the City, but Ghip
Ghisizzle advised him to keep this door locked, as the city people
would be sure to hurt the strangers if they had the chance to attack
them.

"You're safer in the palace than anywhere else," said the Majordomo,
"for there is no way you can escape from the island, and here the
servants and soldiers dare not injure you for fear of the Boolooroo."

He placed Trot and her six pets--which followed her wherever she
went--in one room, and Cap'n Bill in another, and took Button-Bright
away with him to show the boy the way to the King's bedchamber. As they
proceeded, they passed many rooms with closed doors, and before one of
these a patched Blueskin was pacing up and down in a tired and sleepy
way. It was Jimfred Jinksjones, the double of the Fredjim Jonesjinks
they had talked with in the servants' hall, and he bowed low before the
Majordomo.

"This is the King's new bootblue, a stranger who has lately arrived
here," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, introducing the boy to the patched man.

"I'm sorry for him," muttered Jimfred. "He's a queer-looking chap, with
his pale yellow skin, and I imagine our cruel Boolooroo is likely to
patch him before long, as he did me--I mean us."

"No he won't," said Button-Bright positively. "The Boolooroo's afraid
of me."

"Oh, that's different," said Jimfred. "You're the first person I ever
knew that could scare our Boolooroo."

They passed on, and Ghip-Ghisizzle whispered, "That is the Royal
Treasure Chamber." Button-Bright nodded. He had marked the place well
so he couldn't miss it when he wanted to find it again. When they came
to the King's apartments there was another guard before the door, this
time a long-necked soldier with a terrible scowl.

"This slave is the Royal Bootblue," said Ghip-Ghisizzle to the guard.
"You will allow him to pass into his Majesty's chamber to get the royal
shoes and to return them when they are blued."

"All right," answered the guard. "Our Boolooroo is in an ugly mood
tonight. It will go hard with this little short-necked creature if he
doesn't polish the shoes properly."

Then Ghip-Ghisizzle left Button-Bright and went away, and the boy
passed through several rooms to the Royal Bedchamber, where his Majesty
sat undressing.

"Hi, there! What are you doing here?" he roared as he saw Button-Bright.

"I've come for the shoes," said the boy.

The king threw them at his head, aiming carefully, but Button-Bright
dodged the missiles, and one smashed a mirror while the other shattered
a vase on a small table. His Majesty looked around for something else
to throw, but the boy seized the shoes and ran away, returning to his
own room.

While he polished the shoes he told his plans to Cap'n Bill and Trot
and asked them to be ready to fly with him as soon as he returned with
the Magic Umbrella. All they need to do was to step out into the
street, through the door of Cap'n Bill's room, and open the umbrella.
Fortunately, the seats and the lunch-basket were still attached to the
handle--or so they thought--and there would be nothing to prevent their
quickly starting on the journey home.

They waited a long time, however, to give the Boolooroo time to get to
sleep, so it was after midnight when Button-Bright finally took the
shoes in his hand and started for the Royal Bedchamber. He passed the
guard of the Royal Treasury and Fredjim nodded good-naturedly to the
boy. But the sleepy guard before the King's apartments was cross and
surly.

"What are you doing here at this hour?" he demanded.

"I'm returning his Majesty's shoes," said Button-Bright.

"Go back and wait till morning," commanded the guard.

"If you prevent me from obeying the Boolooroo's orders," returned the
boy quietly, "he will probably have you patched."

This threat frightened the long-necked guard, who did not know what
orders the Boolooroo had given his Royal Bootblue. "Go in, then," said
he, "but if you make a noise and waken his Majesty, the chances are
you'll get yourself patched."

"I'll be quiet," promised the boy.

Indeed, Button-Bright had no desire to waken the Boolooroo, whom he
found snoring lustily with the curtains of his high-posted bed drawn
tightly around him. The boy had taken off his own shoes after he passed
the guard and now he tiptoed carefully into the room, set down the
royal shoes very gently and then crept to the chair where his Majesty's
clothes were piled. Scarcely daring to breathe for fear of awakening
the terrible monarch, the boy searched in the royal pockets until he
found a blue-gold key attached to a blue-gold chain. At once he decided
this must be the key to the Treasure Chamber, but in order to make sure
he searched in every other pocket--without finding another key.

Then Button-Bright crept softly out of the room again, and in one of
the outer rooms he sat down near a big cabinet and put on his shoes.
Poor Button-Bright did not know that lying disregarded beneath that
very cabinet at his side was the precious umbrella he was seeking, or
that he was undertaking a desperate adventure all for nothing. He
passed the long-necked guard again, finding the man half asleep, and
then made his way to the Treasure Chamber. Facing Jimfred, he said to
the patched man in a serious tone, "His Majesty commands you to go at
once to the corridor leading to the apartments of the Six Snubnosed
Princesses and to guard the entrance until morning. You are to permit
no one to enter or leave the apartments."

"But--good gracious!" exclaimed the surprised Jimfred. "Who will guard
the Treasure Chamber?"

"I am to take your place," said Button-Bright.

"Oh, very well," replied Jimfred. "This is a queer freak for our
Boolooroo to indulge in, but he is always doing something absurd.
You're not much of a guard, seems to me, but if anyone tries to rob the
Treasure Chamber you must ring this big gong, which will alarm the
whole palace and bring the soldiers to your assistance. Do you
understand?"

"Yes," said Button-Bright.

Then Fredjim stalked away to the other side of the palace to guard the
Princesses, and Button-Bright was left alone with the key to the
Treasure Chamber in his hand. But he had not forgotten that the
ferocious Blue Wolf was guarding the interior of the Chamber, so he
searched in some of the rooms until he found a sofa-pillow, which he
put under his arm and then returned to the corridor.

He placed the key in the lock, and the bolt turned with a sharp click.
Button-Bright did not hesitate. He was afraid, to be sure, and his
heart was beating fast with the excitement of the moment, but he knew
he must regain the Magic Umbrella if he would save his comrades and
himself from destruction, for without it they could never return to the
Earth. So he summoned up his best courage, opened the door, stepped
quickly inside, and closed the door after him.




BUTTON-BRIGHT ENCOUNTERS THE BLUE WOLF

CHAPTER 11


A low, fierce growl greeted him. The Treasure Chamber was pretty dark,
although the moonlight came in through some of the windows, but the boy
had brought with him the low brass lamp that lighted the corridor, and
this he set upon a table beside the door before he took time to look
around him.

The Treasure Chamber was heaped and crowded with all the riches the
Boolooroo had accumulated during his reign of two or three hundred
years. Piles of gold and jewels were on all sides, and precious
ornaments and splendid cloths, rare pieces of carved furniture, vases,
bric-a-brac and the like, were strewn about the room in astonishing
profusion.

Just at the boy's feet crouched a monstrous animal of most fearful
aspect. He knew at a glance it was the terrible Blue Wolf, and the
sight of the beast sent a shiver through him. The Blue Wolf's head was
fully as big as that of a lion, and its wide jaws were armed with rows
of long, pointed teeth. His shoulders and front legs were huge and
powerful, but the rest of the wolf's body dwindled away until at the
tail it was no bigger than a dog. The jaws were therefore the dangerous
part of the creature, and its small blue eyes flashed wickedly at the
intruder.

Just as the boy made his first step forward, the Blue Wolf sprang upon
him with its enormous jaws stretched wide open. Button-Bright jammed
the sofa-pillow into the brute's mouth and crowded it in as hard as he
could. The terrible teeth came together and buried themselves in the
pillow, and then Mr. Wolf found he could not pull them out
again--because his mouth was stuffed full. He could not even growl or
yelp, but rolled upon the floor trying in vain to release himself from
the conquering pillow.

Button-Bright paid no further attention to the helpless animal, but
caught up the blue-brass lamp and began a search for his umbrella. Of
course he could not find it, as it was not there. He came across a
small book bound in light-blue leather which lay upon an exquisitely
carved center-table. It was named, in dark-blue letters stamped on the
leather, "The Royal Record Book," and remembering Ghip-Ghisizzle longed
to possess this book, Button-Bright hastily concealed it inside his
blouse. Then he renewed his search for the umbrella, but it was quite
in vain. He hunted in every crack and corner, bumbling the treasures
here and there in the quest, but at last he became positive that the
Magic Umbrella was not there.

The boy was bitterly disappointed and did not know what to do next. But
he noticed that the Blue Wolf had finally seized an edge of the
sofa-pillow in its sharp claws and was struggling to pull the thing out
of his mouth; so, there being no object in his remaining longer in the
room where he might have to fight the wolf again, Button-Bright went
out and locked the door behind him.

While he stood in the corridor wondering what to do next, a sudden
shouting reached his ears. It was the voice of the Boolooroo, saying
"My Key, my Key! Who has stolen my golden Key?" And then there followed
shouts of soldiers and guards and servants, and the rapid pattering of
feet was heard throughout the palace.

Button-Bright took to his heels and ran along the passages until he
came to Cap'n Bill's room, where the sailorman and Trot were anxiously
awaiting him.

"Quick!" cried the boy. "We must escape from here at once, or we will
be caught and patched."

"Where's the umbrel?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"I don't know. I can't find it. But all the palace is aroused, and the
Boolooroo is furious. Come, let's get away at once!"

"Where'll we go?" inquired Trot.

"We must make for the open country and hide in the Fog Bank or in the
Arch of Phinis," replied the boy.

They did not stop to argue any longer, but all three stepped out of the
little door into the street, where they first clasped hands so they
would not get separated in the dark, and then ran as swiftly as they
could down the street, which was deserted at this hour by the citizens.
They could not go very fast because the sailorman's wooden leg was
awkward to run with and held them back, but Cap'n Bill hobbled quicker
than he had ever hobbled before in all his life, and they really made
pretty good progress.

They met no one on the streets and continued their flight until at last
they came to the City Wall, which had a blue-iron gate in it. Here was
a Blueskin guard, who had been peacefully slumbering when aroused by
the footsteps of the fugitives. "Halt!" cried the guard fiercely.

Cap'n Bill halted long enough to grab the man around his long neck with
one hand and around his long leg with the other hand. Then he raised
the Blueskin in the air and threw him far over the wall. A moment later
they had unfastened the gate and fled into the open country, where they
headed toward the low mountain whose outlines were plainly visible in
the moonlight.

The guard was now howling and crying for help. In the city were
answering shouts. A hue and cry came from every direction, reaching as
far as the palace. Lights began to twinkle everywhere in the streets,
and the Blue city hummed like a beehive filled with angry bees. "It
won't do for us to get caught now," panted Cap'n Bill as they ran
along. "I'm more afeared o' them Blue citizens ner I am 'o the Blue
Boolooroo. They'd tear us to pieces if they could."

Sky Island was not a very big place, especially the blue part of it,
and our friends were now very close to the low mountain. Presently they
paused before a grim archway of blue marble, above which was carved the
one word, "Phinis." The interior seemed dark and terrible as they
stopped to regard it as a possible place of refuge.

"Don't like that place, Cap'n," whispered Trot.

"No more do I, mate," he answered.

"I think I'd rather take a chance on the Fog Bank," said Button-Bright.

Just then they were all startled by a swift flapping of wings, and a
voice cried in shrill tones,

