  But who, instead, didst give
  This life we live--
  Who feedest with blood and tears
  The hungry years--
  I make one prayer to Thee,
  O Great God! grant it me.

  Some day when summer shows
  Her leaf, her rose,
  God, let Thy sinner lie
  Under Thy sky,
  And feel Thy sun's large grace
  Upon his face;
  Then grant him this, that he
  May not believe in Thee!


  THE NEW DISPENSATION.

  OUT in the sun the buttercups are gold,
  The daisies silver all the grassy lane,
  And spring has given love a flower to hold,
  And love lays blindness on the eyes of pain.

  Within are still, chill aisles and blazoned panes
  And carven tombs where memory weeps no more.
  And from the lost and holy days remains
  One saint beside the long-closed western door.

  Outside the world goes laughing lest it weep,
  With here and there some happy child at play;
  A mother worshipping the babe asleep,
  Or two young lovers dreaming 'neath the May.

  Within, the soul of love broods o'er the place;
  The carven saint forgotten many a year
  Still lifts to heaven his rapt adoring face
  To pray, for those who leave him lonely here,

  That once again the silent church may ring
  With songs of joy triumphant over pain--
  Ah! God, who makest the miracle of spring
  Make Thou dead faith and love to rise again.


  THE THREE KINGS.

  WHEN the star in the East was lit to shine
  The three kings journeyed to Palestine;

  They came from the uttermost parts of earth
  With long trains laden with gifts of worth.

  The first king rode on a camel's back,
  He came from the land where the kings are black,

  Bringing treasures desired of kings,
  Rubies and ivory and precious things.

  An elephant carried the second king,
  He came from the land of the sun-rising,

  And gems and gold and spices he bare
  With broidered raiment for kings to wear.

  The third king came without steed or train
  From the misty land where the white kings reign.

  He bore no gifts save the myrrh in his hand,
  For he came on foot from a far-off land.

  Now when they had travelled a-many days
  Through tangled forests and desert ways,

  By angry seas and by paths thorn-set
  On Christmas Vigil the three kings met.

  And over their meeting a shrouded sky
  Made dark the star they had travelled by.

  Then the first king spake and he frowned and said:
  "By some ill spell have our feet been led,

  "Now I see in the darkness the fools we are
  To follow the light of a lying star.

  "Let us fool no more, but like kings and men
  Each get him home to his land again!"

  Then the second king with the weary face,
  Gold-tinct as the sun of his reigning place,

  Lifted sad eyes to the clouds and said,
  "It was but a dream and the dream is sped.

  "We dreamed of a star that rose new and fair,
  But it sets in the night of the old despair.

  "Yet night is faithful though stars betray,
  It will lead to our kingdoms far away."

  Then spake the king who had fared alone
  From the far-off kingdom, the white-hung throne:

  "O brothers, brothers, so very far
  Ye have followed the light of the radiant star,

  "And because for a while ye see it not
  Shall its faithful shining be all forgot?

  "On the spirit's pathway the light still lies
  Though the star be hid from our longing eyes.

  "To-morrow our star will be bright once more
  The little pin-hole in heaven's floor--

  "The Angels pricked it to let it bring
  Our feet to the throne of the new-born King!"

  And the first king heard and the second heard
  And their hearts grew humble before the third.

  And they laid them down beside bale and beast
  and their sleeping eyes saw light in the East.

  For the Angels fanned them with starry wings
  And the waft of visions of unseen things.

  And the next gold day waned trembling and white
  And the star was born of the waxing night.

  And the three kings came where the Great King lay,
  A little baby among the hay,

  The ox and the ass were standing near
  And Mary Mother beside her Dear.

  Then low in the litter the kings bowed down,
  They gave Him gold for a kingly crown,

  And frankincense for a great God's breath
  and Myrrh to sweeten the day of death.

  The Maiden Mother she stood and smiled
  And she took from the manger her little child.

  On the dark king's head she laid His hand
  And anger died at that dear command.

  She laid His hand on the gold king's head
  And despair itself was comforted.

  But when the pale king knelt in the stall
  She heard on the straw his tears down fall.

  And she stooped where he knelt beside her feet
  And laid on his bosom her baby sweet.

  And the king in the holy stable-place
  Felt the little lips through the tears on his face.

       *     *     *     *     *     *     *

  Christ! lay Thy hand on the angry king
  Who reigns in my breast to my undoing,

  And lay thy hands on the king who lays
  The spell of sadness on all my days,

  And give the white king my soul, Thy soul,
  Of these other kings the high control.

  That soul and spirit and sense may meet
  In adoration before Thy feet!

  Now Glory to God the Father Most High,
  And the Star, the Spirit, He leads us by.

  And to God's dear Son, the Babe who was born
  And laid in the manger on Christmas morn!




  IX.


  AFTER DEATH.

  IF we must part, this parting is the best:
  How would you bear to lay
  Your head on some warm pillow far away--
  Your head, so used to lying on my breast?

  But now your pillow is cold;
  Your hands have flowers, and not my hands, to hold;
  Upon our bed the worn bride-linen lies.
  I have put the death-money upon your eyes,
  So that you should not wake up in the night.
  I have bound your face with white;
  I have washed you, yes, with water and not with tears,--
  Those arms wherein I have slept so many years,
  Those feet that hastened when they came to me,
  And all your body that belonged to me.
  I have smoothed your dear dull hair,
  And there is nothing left to say for you
  And nothing left to fear or pray for you;
  And I have got the rest of life to bear:
  Thank God it is you, not I, who are lying there.

  If I had died
  And you had stood beside
  This still white bed
  Where the white, scented, horrible flowers are spread,--
  I know the thing it is,
  And I thank God that He has spared you this.
  If one must bear it, thank God it was I
  Who had to live and bear to see you die,
  Who have to live, and bear to see you dead.

  You will have nothing of it all to bear:
  You will not even know that in your bed
  You lie alone. You will not miss my head
  Beside you on the pillow: you will rest
  So soft in the grave you will not miss my breast.
  But I--but I--Your pillow and your place--
  And only the darkness laid against my face,
  And only my anguish pressed against my side--
  Thank God, thank God, that it was you who died!


  CHLOE.

  NIGHT wind sighing through the poplar leaves,
  Trembling of the aspen, shivering of the willow,
  Every leafy voice of all the night-time grieves,
  Mourning, weeping over Chloe's pillow.

  Chloe, fresher than the breeze of dawn,
  Fairer than the larches in their young spring glory,
  Brighter than the glow-worms on the dewy lawn,
  Hear the dirge the green trees sing to end your story:--

  "Chloe lived and Chloe loved: she brought new gladness,
  Hope and life and all things good to all who met her;
  Only, dying, wept to know the lifelong sadness
  Willed, against her will, to those who can't forget her."


  INVOCATION.

  COME to-night in a dream to-night,
  Come as you used to do,
  Come in the gown, in the gown of white,
  Come in the ribbon of blue;
  Come in the virgin's colours you wear,
  Come through the dark and the dew,
  Come with the scent of the night in your hair,
  Come as you used to do.

  Blue and white of your eyes and your face,
  White of your gown and blue,
  Will you not come from the happy place,
  Come as you used to do?
  Tears so many, so many tears
  Where there were once so few--
  Can they not wash the gray of the years
  From the white of your gown and blue?


  THE LAST BETRAYAL.

  AND I shall lie alone at last,
  Clear of the stream that ran so fast,
  And feel the flower roots in my hair,
  And in my hands the roots of trees;
  Myself wrapt in the ungrudging peace
  That leaves no pain uncovered anywhere.

  What--this hope left? this way not barred?
  This last best treasure without guard?
  This heaven free--no prayers to pay?
  Fool--are the Rulers of men asleep?
  Thou knowest what tears They bade thee weep,
  But, when peace comes, 'tis thou wilt sleep, not They.


  A PRAYER FOR THE KING'S MAJESTY.

  22nd January, 1901.

  THE Queen is dead. God save the King,
  In this his hour of grief,
  When sorrow gathers memories in a sheaf
  To lay them on his shoulders as he stands
  Inheriting her glories and her lands--
  First gain of his at which his Mother's voice
  Has not been first to bless and to rejoice--
  A man, set lonely between gain and loss.
  (O words of love the heart remembereth,
  O mighty loss outweighing every gain!)
  A Son whose kingdom Death's arm lies across,
  A King whose Mother lies alone with Death
  Wrapped in the folds of white implacable sleep.
  O God, who seest the tears Thy children weep,
  O God, who countest each sad heart-beat, see
  How our King needs the grace we ask of Thee!
  Thou knowest how little and how vain a thing
  Is Empire, when the heart is sick with pain--
  God, save the King!
  The Queen is dead. The splendour of her days,
  The sorrow of them both alike merge now
  In the new aureole that lights her brow.
