breathlessly.

Jinny Montaubyn was kneeling down and laying her small old hand on the
muddied forehead.  She held it there a second or so and spoke in a voice
whose low clearness brought back at once to Dart the voice in which she
had spoken to the Something upstairs.

"Bet," she said, "Bet."  And then more soft still and yet more clear,
"Bet, my dear."

It seemed incredible, but it was a fact.  Slowly the lids of the woman's
eyes lifted and the pupils fixed themselves on Jinny Montaubyn, who
leaned still closer and spoke again.

"'T ain't true," she said.  "Not this.  'T ain't TRUE.  There IS NO
DEATH," slow and soft, but passionately distinct.  "THERE--IS--NO--
DEATH."

The muscles of the woman's face twisted it into a rueful smile.  The
three words she dragged out were so faint that perhaps none but Dart's
strained ears heard them.

"Wot--price--ME?"

The soul of her was loosening fast and straining away, but Jinny
Montaubyn followed it.

"THERE--IS--NO--DEATH," and her low voice had the tone of a slender
silver trumpet.  "In a minit yer 'll know--in a minit.  Lord," lifting
her expectant face, "show her the wye."

Mysteriously the clouds were clearing from the sodden face--mysteriously.
Miss Montaubyn watched them as they were swept away!  A minute--two
minutes--and they were gone.  Then she rose noiselessly and stood
looking down, speaking quite simply as if to herself.

"Ah," she breathed, "she DOES know now--fer sure an' certain."

Then Antony Dart, turning slightly, realized that a man who had entered
the house and been standing near him, breathing with light quickness,
since the moment Miss Montaubyn had knelt, was plainly the person Glad
had called the "curick," and that he had bowed his head and covered his
eyes with a hand which trembled.

IV

He was a young man with an eager soul, and his work in Apple Blossom
Court and places like it had torn him many ways.  Religious conventions
established through centuries of custom had not prepared him for life
among the submerged. He had struggled and been appalled, he had wrestled
in prayer and felt himself unanswered, and in repentance of the feeling
had scourged himself with thorns.  Miss Montaubyn, returning from the
hospital, had filled him at first with horror and protest.

"But who knows--who knows?" he said to Dart, as they stood and talked
together afterward, "Faith as a little child.  That is literally hers.
And I was shocked by it--and tried to destroy it, until I suddenly saw
what I was doing.  I was--in my cloddish egotism--trying to show her
that she was irreverent BECAUSE she could believe what in my soul I do
not, though I dare not admit so much even to myself.  She took from some
strange passing visitor to her tortured bedside what was to her a
revelation.  She heard it first as a child hears a story of magic.  When
she came out of the hospital, she told it as if it was one.  I--I--" he
bit his lips and moistened them, "argued with her and reproached her.
Christ the Merciful, forgive me!  She sat in her squalid little room
with her magic--sometimes in the dark--sometimes without fire, and she
clung to it, and loved it and asked it to help her, as a child asks its
father for bread.  When she was answered--and God forgive me again for
doubting that the simple good that came to her WAS an answer--when any
small help came to her, she was a radiant thing, and without a shadow of
doubt in her eyes told me of it as proof--proof that she had been heard.
When things went wrong for a day and the fire was out again and the room
dark, she said, 'I 'aven't kept near enough--I 'aven't trusted TRUE.  It
will be gave me soon,' and when once at such a time I said to her, 'We
must learn to say, Thy will be done,' she smiled up at me like a happy
baby and answered:

"'Thy will be done on earth AS IT IS IN 'EAVEN.  Lor', there's no cold
there, nor no 'unger nor no cryin' nor pain. That's the way the will is
done in 'eaven.  That's wot I arst for all day long--for it to be done
on earth as it is in 'eaven.'  What could I say?  Could I tell her that
the will of the Deity on the earth he created was only the will to do
evil--to give pain--to crush the creature made in His own image.  What
else do we mean when we say under all horror and agony that befalls, 'It
is God's will--God's will be done.' Base unbeliever though I am, I could
not speak the words.  Oh, she has something we have not.  Her poor,
little misspent life has changed itself into a shining thing, though it
shines and glows only in this hideous place. She herself does not know
of its shining.  But Drunken Bet would stagger up to her room and ask to
be told what she called her 'pantermine' stories.  I have seen her there
sitting listening--listening with strange quiet on her and dull yearning
in her sodden eyes.  So would other and worse women go to her, and I,
who had struggled with them, could see that she had reached some remote
longing in their beings which I had never touched.  In time the seed
would have stirred to life--it is beginning to stir even now.  During
the months since she came back to the court--though they have laughed at
her--both men and women have begun to see her as a creature weirdly set
apart.  Most of them feel something like awe of her; they half believe
her prayers to be bewitchments, but they want them on their side. They
have never wanted mine.  That I have known--KNOWN.  She believes that
her Deity is in Apple Blossom Court--in the dire holes its people live
in, on the broken stairway, in every nook and awful cranny of it--a
great Glory we will not see--only waiting to be called and to answer. Do
_I_ believe it--do you--do any of those anointed of us who preach each
day so glibly 'God is EVERYWHERE'? Who is the one who believes?  If
there were such a man he would go about as Moses did when 'He wist not
that his face shone.'"

They had gone out together and were standing in the fog in the court.
The curate removed his hat and passed his handkerchief over his damp
forehead, his breath coming and going almost sobbingly, his eyes staring
straight before him into the yellowness of the haze.

"Who," he said after a moment of singular silence, "who are you?"

Antony Dart hesitated a few seconds, and at the end of his pause he put
his hand into his overcoat pocket.

"If you will come upstairs with me to the room where the girl Glad
lives, I will tell you," he said, "but before we go I want to hand
something over to you."

The curate turned an amazed gaze upon him.

"What is it?" he asked.

Dart withdrew his hand from his pocket, and the pistol was in it.

"I came out this morning to buy this," he said.  "I intended--never mind
what I intended.  A wrong turn taken in the fog brought me here.  Take
this thing from me and keep it."

The curate took the pistol and put it into his own pocket without
comment. In the course of his labors he had seen desperate men and
desperate things many times.  He had even been--at moments--a desperate
man thinking desperate things himself, though no human being had ever
suspected the fact.  This man had faced some tragedy, he could see. Had
he been on the verge of a crime--had he looked murder in the eyes? What
had made him pause?  Was it possible that the dream of Jinny Montaubyn
being in the air had reached his brain--his being?

He looked almost appealingly at him, but he only said aloud:

"Let us go upstairs, then."

So they went.

As they passed the door of the room where the dead woman lay Dart went
in and spoke to Miss Montaubyn, who was still there.

"If there are things wanted here," he said, "this will buy them."  And
he put some money into her hand.

She did not seem surprised at the incongruity of his shabbiness
producing money.

"Well, now," she said, "I WAS wonderin' an' askin'.  I'd like 'er clean
an' nice, an' there's milk wanted bad for the biby."

In the room they mounted to Glad was trying to feed the child with bread
softened in tea.  Polly sat near her looking on with restless, eager
eyes.  She had never seen anything of her own baby but its limp newborn
and dead body being carried away out of sight.  She had not even dared
to ask what was done with such poor little carrion.  The tyranny of the
law of life made her want to paw and touch this lately born thing, as
her agony had given her no fruit of her own body to touch and paw and
nuzzle and caress as mother creatures will whether they be women or
tigresses or doves or female cats.

"Let me hold her, Glad," she half whimpered.  "When she's fed let me
get her to sleep."

"All right," Glad answered; "we could look after 'er between us well
enough."

The thief was still sitting on the hearth, but being full fed and
comfortable for the first time in many a day, he had rested his head
against the wall and fallen into profound sleep.

"Wot's up?" said Glad when the two men came in.  "Is anythin'
'appenin'?"

"I have come up here to tell you something," Dart answered.  "Let us sit
down again round the fire.  It will take a little time."

Glad with eager eyes on him handed the child to Polly and sat down
without a moment's hesitance, avid of what was to come.  She nudged the
thief with friendly elbow and he started up awake.

"'E's got somethin' to tell us," she explained.  "The curick's come
up to 'ear it, too.  Sit 'ere, Polly," with elbow jerk toward the bundle
of sacks.  "It's got its stummick full an' it'll go to sleep fast
enough."

So they sat again in the weird circle.  Neither the strangeness of the
group nor the squalor of the hearth were of a nature to be new things to
the curate.  His eyes fixed themselves on Dart's face, as did the eyes
of the thief, the beggar, and the young thing of the street.  No one
glanced away from him.

His telling of his story was almost monotonous in its semi-reflective
quietness of tone.  The strangeness to himself--though it was a
strangeness he accepted absolutely without protest--lay in his telling
it at all, and in a sense of his knowledge that each of these creatures
would understand and mysteriously know what depths he had touched this
day.

"Just before I left my lodgings this morning," he said, "I found myself
standing in the middle of my room and speaking to Something aloud.  I
did not know I was going to speak.  I did not know what I was speaking
to.  I heard my own voice cry out in agony, 'Lord, Lord, what shall I do
to be saved?'"

The curate made a sudden movement in his place and his sallow young
face flushed.  But he said nothing.

Glad's small and sharp countenance became curious.

"'Speak, Lord, thy servant 'eareth,'" she quoted tentatively.

"No," answered Dart; "it was not like that.  I had never thought of such
things.  I believed nothing. I was going out to buy a pistol and when I
returned intended to blow my brains out."

"Why?" asked Glad, with passionately intent eyes; "why?"

"Because I was worn out and done for, and all the world seemed worn out
and done for.  And among other things I believed I was beginning slowly
to go mad."

From the thief there burst forth a low groan and he turned his face to
the wall.

"I've been there," he said; "I 'm near there now."

Dart took up speech again.

"There was no answer--none. As I stood waiting--God knows for what--the
dead stillness of the room was like the dead stillness of the grave. And
I went out saying to my soul, 'This is what happens to the fool who
cries aloud in his pain.'"

"I've cried aloud," said the thief, "and sometimes it seemed as if an
answer was coming--but I always knew it never would!" in a tortured
voice.

"'T ain't fair to arst that wye," Glad put in with shrewd logic.

"Miss Montaubyn she allers knows it WILL come--an' it does."

"Something--not myself--turned my feet toward this place," said Dart. "I
was thrust from one thing to another.  I was forced to see and hear
