Whitefoot the Wood Mouse was very proud of his home. He showed it as he
led Mrs. Whitefoot there. He felt sure that she would say at once that
that would be the place for them to live. You remember that it was high
up in a tall, dead stub and had once been the home of Timmy the Flying
Squirrel.

"There, my dear, what do you think of that?" said Whitefoot proudly as
they reached the little round doorway.

Mrs. Whitefoot said nothing, but at once went inside. She was gone what
seemed a long time to Whitefoot, anxiously waiting outside. You see,
Mrs. Whitefoot is a very thorough small person, and she was examining
the inside of that house from top to bottom. At last she appeared at the
doorway.

"Don't you think this is a splendid house?" asked Whitefoot rather
timidly.

"It is very good of its kind," replied Mrs. Whitefoot.

Whitefoot's heart sank. He didn't like the tone in which Mrs. Whitefoot
had said that.

"Just what do you mean, my dear?" Whitefoot asked.

"I mean," replied Mrs. Whitefoot, in a most decided way, "that it is a
very good house for winter, but it won't do at all for summer. That
is, it won't do for me. In the first place it is so high up that if we
should have babies, I would worry all the time for fear the darlings
would have a bad fall. Besides, I don't like an inside house for summer.
I think, Whitefoot, we must look around and find a new home."

As she spoke Mrs. Whitefoot was already starting down the stub.
Whitefoot followed.

"All right, my dear, all right," said he meekly. "You know best. This
seems to me like a very fine home, but of course, if you don't like it
we'll look for another."

Mrs. Whitefoot said nothing, but led the way down the tree with
Whitefoot meekly following. Then began a patient search all about. Mrs.
Whitefoot appeared to know just what she wanted and turned up her nose
at several places Whitefoot thought would make fine homes. She hardly
glanced at a fine hollow log Whitefoot found. She merely poked her nose
in at a splendid hole beneath the roots of an old stump. Whitefoot
began to grow tired from running about and climbing stumps and trees and
bushes.

He stopped to rest and lost sight of Mrs. Whitefoot. A moment later he
heard her calling excitedly. When he found her, she was up in a small
tree, sitting on the edge of an old nest a few feet above the ground.
It was a nest that had once belonged to Melody the Wood Thrush. Mrs.
Whitefoot was sitting on the edge of it, and her bright eyes snapped
with excitement and pleasure.

"I've found it!" she cried. "I've found it! It is just what I have been
looking for."

"Found what?" Whitefoot asked. "I don't see anything but an old nest of
Melody's."

"I've found the home we've been looking for, stupid," retorted Mrs.
Whitefoot.

Still Whitefoot stared. "I don't see any house," said he.

Mrs. Whitefoot stamped her feet impatiently. "Right here, stupid," said
she. "This old nest will make us the finest and safest home that ever
was. No one will ever think of looking for us here. We must get busy at
once and fix it up."

Even then Whitefoot didn't understand. Always he had lived either in a
hole in the ground, or in a hollow stump or tree. How they were to live
in that old nest he couldn't see at all.



CHAPTER XXIX: Making Over An Old House

   A home is always what you make it.
   With love there you will ne'er forsake it.
    --Whitefoot.

Whitefoot climbed up to the old nest of Melody the Wood Thrush over the
edge of which little Mrs. Whitefoot was looking down at him. It took
Whitefoot hardly a moment to get up there, for the nest was only a few
feet above the ground in a young tree, and you know Whitefoot is a very
good climber.

He found Mrs. Whitefoot very much excited. She was delighted with
that old nest and she showed it. For his part, Whitefoot couldn't see
anything but a deserted old house of no use to any one. To be sure, it
had been a very good home in its time. It had been made of tiny twigs,
stalks of old weeds, leaves, little fine roots and mud. It was still
quite solid, and was firmly fixed in a crotch of the young tree. But
Whitefoot couldn't see how it could be turned into a home for a Mouse.
He said as much.

Little Mrs. Whitefoot became more excited than ever. "You dear old
stupid," said she, "whatever is the matter with you? Don't you see that
all we need do is to put a roof on, make an entrance on the under side,
and make a soft comfortable bed inside to make it a delightful home?"

"I don't see why we don't make a new home altogether," protested
Whitefoot. "It seems to me that hollow stub of mine is ever so much
better than this. That has good solid walls, and we won't have to do a
thing to it."

"I told you once before that it doesn't suit me for summer," replied
little Mrs. Whitefoot rather sharply, because she was beginning to lose
patience. "It will be all right for winter, but winter is a long way
off. It may suit you for summer, but it doesn't suit me, and this place
does. So this is where we are going to live."

"Certainly, my dear. Certainly," replied Whitefoot very meekly. "If you
want to live here, here we will live. But I must confess it isn't clear
to me yet how we are going to make a decent home out of this old nest."

"Don't you worry about that," replied Mrs. Whitefoot. "You can get the
material, and I'll attend to the rest. Let us waste no time about it. I
am anxious to get our home finished and to feel a little bit settled. I
have already planned just what has got to be done and how we will do it.
Now you go look for some nice soft, dry weed stalks and strips of soft
bark, and moss and any other soft, tough material that you can find.
Just get busy and don't stop to talk."

Of course Whitefoot did as he was told. He ran down to the ground
and began to hunt for the things Mrs. Whitefoot wanted. He was very
particular about it. He still didn't think much of her idea of making
over that old home of Melody's, but if she would do it, he meant that
she should have the very best of materials to do it with.

So back and forth from the ground to the old nest in the tree Whitefoot
hurried, and presently there was quite a pile of weed stalks and
soft grass and strips of bark in the old nest. Mrs. Whitefoot joined
Whitefoot in hunting for just the right things, but she spent more time
in arranging the material. Over that old nest she made a fine high roof.
Down through the lower side she cut a little round doorway just big
enough for them to pass through. Unless you happened to be underneath
looking up, you never would have guessed there was an entrance at all.
Inside was a snug, round room, and in this she made the softest and
most comfortable of beds. As it began to look more and more like a home,
Whitefoot himself became as excited and eager as Mrs. Whitefoot had
been from the beginning. "It certainly is going to be a fine home," said
Whitefoot.

"Didn't I tell you it would be?" retorted Mrs. Whitefoot.



CHAPTER XXX: The Whitefoots Enjoy Their New Home

   No home is ever mean or poor
   Where love awaits you at the door.
    --Whitefoot.

"There," said Mrs. Whitefoot, as she worked a strip of white birch bark
into the roof of the new home she and Whitefoot had been building out of
the old home of Melody the Wood Thrush, "this finishes the roof. I don't
think any water will get through it even in the hardest rain."

"It is wonderful," declared Whitefoot admiringly. "Wherever did you
learn to build such a house as this?"

"From my mother," replied Mrs. Whitefoot. "I was born in just such a
home. It makes the finest kind of a home for Wood Mouse babies."

"You don't think there is danger that the wind will blow it down, do
you?" ventured Whitefoot.

"Of course I don't," retorted little Mrs. Whitefoot scornfully. "Hasn't
this old nest remained right where it is for over a year? Do you suppose
that if I had thought there was the least bit of danger that it would
blow down, I would have used it? Do credit me with a little sense, my
dear."

"Yes'm, I do," replied Whitefoot meekly. "You are the most sensible
person in all the Great World. I wasn't finding fault. You see, I have
always lived in a hole in the ground or a hollow stump, or a hole in
a tree, and I have not yet become used to a home that moves about and
rocks as this one does when the wind blows. But if you say it is all
right, why of course it is all right. Probably I will get used to it
after awhile."

Whitefoot did get used to it. After living in it for a few days, it no
longer seemed strange, and he no longer minded its swaying when the wind
blew. The fact is, he rather enjoyed it. So Whitefoot and Mrs. Whitefoot
settled down to enjoy their new home. Now and then they added a bit to
it here and there.

Somehow Whitefoot felt unusually safe, safer than he had ever felt in
any of his other homes. You see, he had seen several feathered folk
alight close to it and not give it a second look. He knew that they
had seen that home, but had mistaken it for what it had once been, the
deserted home of one of their own number.

Whitefoot had chuckled. He had chuckled long and heartily. "If they make
that mistake," said he to himself, "everybody else is likely to make it.
That home of ours is right in plain sight, yet I do believe it is safer
than the best hidden home I ever had before. Shadow the Weasel never
will think of climbing up this little tree to look at an old nest, and
Shadow is the one I am most afraid of."

It was only a day or two later that Buster Bear happened along that way.
Now Buster is very fond of tender Wood Mouse. More than once Whitefoot
had had a narrow escape from Buster's big claws as they tore open an old
stump or dug into the ground after him. He saw Buster glance up at the
new home without the slightest interest in those shrewd little eyes of
his. Then Buster shuffled on to roll over an old log and lick up the
ants he found under it. Again Whitefoot chuckled. "Yes, sir," said he.
"It is the safest home I 've ever had."

So Whitefoot and little Mrs. Whitefoot were very happy in the home
which they had built, and for once in his life Whitefoot did very little
worrying. Life seemed more beautiful than it had ever been before. And
he almost forgot that there was such a thing as a hungry enemy.



CHAPTER XXXI: Whitefoot Is Hurt

   The hurts that hardest are to bear
   Come from those for whom we care.
    --Whitefoot.

Whitefoot was hurt. Yes, sir, Whitefoot was hurt. He was very much hurt.
It wasn't a bodily hurt; it was an inside hurt. It was a hurt that made
his heart ache. And to make it worse, he couldn't understand it at all.
One evening he had been met at the little round doorway by little Mrs.
Whitefoot.

"You can't come in," said she.

"Why can't I?" demanded Whitefoot, in the greatest surprise.

"Never mind why. You can't, and that is all there is to it," replied
Mrs. Whitefoot.

"You mean I can't ever come in any more?" asked Whitefoot.

"I don't know about that," replied Mrs. Whitefoot, "but you can't come
in now, nor for some time. I think the best thing you can do is to go
