
"I suppose she has some good qualities," conceded Mr. Harrison
grudgingly. "Most folks have. I have some myself, though you might never
suspect it. But anyhow I ain't going to give anything to that carpet.
Folks are everlasting begging for money here, it seems to me. How's your
project of painting the hall coming on?"

"Splendidly. We had a meeting of the A.V.I.S. last Friday night and
found that we had plenty of money subscribed to paint the hall and
shingle the roof too. MOST people gave very liberally, Mr. Harrison."

Anne was a sweet-souled lass, but she could instill some venom into
innocent italics when occasion required.

"What color are you going to have it?"

"We have decided on a very pretty green. The roof will be dark red, of
course. Mr. Roger Pye is going to get the paint in town today."

"Who's got the job?"

"Mr. Joshua Pye of Carmody. He has nearly finished the shingling. We had
to give him the contract, for every one of the Pyes . . .  and there are
four families, you know . . . said they wouldn't give a cent unless Joshua
got it. They had subscribed twelve dollars between them and we thought
that was too much to lose, although some people think we shouldn't have
given in to the Pyes. Mrs. Lynde says they try to run everything."

"The main question is will this Joshua do his work well. If he does I
don't see that it matters whether his name is Pye or Pudding."

"He has the reputation of being a good workman, though they say he's a
very peculiar man. He hardly ever talks."

"He's peculiar enough all right then," said Mr. Harrison drily. "Or at
least, folks here will call him so. I never was much of a talker till
I came to Avonlea and then I had to begin in self-defense or Mrs. Lynde
would have said I was dumb and started a subscription to have me taught
sign language. You're not going yet, Anne?"

"I must. I have some sewing to do for Dora this evening. Besides, Davy
is probably breaking Marilla's heart with some new mischief by this
time. This morning the first thing he said was, 'Where does the dark go,
Anne? I want to know.' I told him it went around to the other side of
the world but after breakfast he declared it didn't . . . that it went
down the well. Marilla says she caught him hanging over the well-box
four times today, trying to reach down to the dark."

"He's a limb," declared Mr. Harrison. "He came over here yesterday and
pulled six feathers out of Ginger's tail before I could get in from the
barn. The poor bird has been moping ever since. Those children must be a
sight of trouble to you folks."

"Everything that's worth having is some trouble," said Anne, secretly
resolving to forgive Davy's next offence, whatever it might be, since he
had avenged her on Ginger.

Mr. Roger Pye brought the hall paint home that night and Mr. Joshua Pye,
a surly, taciturn man, began painting the next day. He was not disturbed
in his task. The hall was situated on what was called "the lower road."
In late autumn this road was always muddy and wet, and people going to
Carmody traveled by the longer "upper" road. The hall was so closely
surrounded by fir woods that it was invisible unless you were near it.
Mr. Joshua Pye painted away in the solitude and independence that were
so dear to his unsociable heart.

Friday afternoon he finished his job and went home to Carmody. Soon
after his departure Mrs. Rachel Lynde drove by, having braved the mud of
the lower road out of curiosity to see what the hall looked like in its
new coat of paint. When she rounded the spruce curve she saw.

The sight affected Mrs. Lynde oddly. She dropped the reins, held up her
hands, and said "Gracious Providence!" She stared as if she could not
believe her eyes. Then she laughed almost hysterically.

"There must be some mistake . . . there must. I knew those Pyes would make
a mess of things."

Mrs. Lynde drove home, meeting several people on the road and stopping
to tell them about the hall. The news flew like wildfire. Gilbert
Blythe, poring over a text book at home, heard it from his father's
hired boy at sunset, and rushed breathlessly to Green Gables, joined on
the way by Fred Wright. They found Diana Barry, Jane Andrews, and Anne
Shirley, despair personified, at the yard gate of Green Gables, under
the big leafless willows.

"It isn't true surely, Anne?" exclaimed Gilbert.

"It is true," answered Anne, looking like the muse of tragedy. "Mrs.
Lynde called on her way from Carmody to tell me. Oh, it is simply
dreadful! What is the use of trying to improve anything?"

"What is dreadful?" asked Oliver Sloane, arriving at this moment with a
bandbox he had brought from town for Marilla.

"Haven't you heard?" said Jane wrathfully. "Well, its simply this. . .
Joshua Pye has gone and painted the hall blue instead of green. . .
a deep, brilliant blue, the shade they use for painting carts and
wheelbarrows. And Mrs. Lynde says it is the most hideous color for a
building, especially when combined with a red roof, that she ever saw
or imagined. You could simply have knocked me down with a feather when I
heard it. It's heartbreaking, after all the trouble we've had."

"How on earth could such a mistake have happened?" wailed Diana.

The blame of this unmerciful disaster was eventually narrowed down to
the Pyes. The Improvers had decided to use Morton-Harris paints and
the Morton-Harris paint cans were numbered according to a color card.
A purchaser chose his shade on the card and ordered by the accompanying
number. Number 147 was the shade of green desired and when Mr. Roger Pye
sent word to the Improvers by his son, John Andrew, that he was going to
town and would get their paint for them, the Improvers told John Andrew
to tell his father to get 147. John Andrew always averred that he did
so, but Mr. Roger Pye as stanchly declared that John Andrew told him
157; and there the matter stands to this day.

That night there was blank dismay in every Avonlea house where an
Improver lived. The gloom at Green Gables was so intense that it
quenched even Davy. Anne wept and would not be comforted.

"I must cry, even if I am almost seventeen, Marilla," she sobbed. "It
is so mortifying. And it sounds the death knell of our society. We'll
simply be laughed out of existence."

In life, as in dreams, however, things often go by contraries. The
Avonlea people did not laugh; they were too angry. Their money had
gone to paint the hall and consequently they felt themselves bitterly
aggrieved by the mistake. Public indignation centered on the Pyes. Roger
Pye and John Andrew had bungled the matter between them; and as for
Joshua Pye, he must be a born fool not to suspect there was something
wrong when he opened the cans and saw the color of the paint. Joshua
Pye, when thus animadverted upon, retorted that the Avonlea taste in
colors was no business of his, whatever his private opinion might be; he
had been hired to paint the hall, not to talk about it; and he meant to
have his money for it.

The Improvers paid him his money in bitterness of spirit, after
consulting Mr. Peter Sloane, who was a magistrate.

"You'll have to pay it," Peter told him. "You can't hold him responsible
for the mistake, since he claims he was never told what the color was
supposed to be but just given the cans and told to go ahead. But it's a
burning shame and that hall certainly does look awful."

The luckless Improvers expected that Avonlea would be more prejudiced
than ever against them; but instead, public sympathy veered around in
their favor. People thought the eager, enthusiastic little band who had
worked so hard for their object had been badly used. Mrs. Lynde told
them to keep on and show the Pyes that there really were people in the
world who could do things without making a muddle of them. Mr. Major
Spencer sent them word that he would clean out all the stumps along the
road front of his farm and seed it down with grass at his own expense;
and Mrs. Hiram Sloane called at the school one day and beckoned Anne
mysteriously out into the porch to tell her that if the "Sassiety"
wanted to make a geranium bed at the crossroads in the spring they
needn't be afraid of her cow, for she would see that the marauding
animal was kept within safe bounds. Even Mr. Harrison chuckled, if he
chuckled at all, in private, and was all sympathy outwardly.

"Never mind, Anne. Most paints fade uglier every year but that blue is
as ugly as it can be to begin with, so it's bound to fade prettier. And
the roof is shingled and painted all right. Folks will be able to sit in
the hall after this without being leaked on. You've accomplished so much
anyhow."

"But Avonlea's blue hall will be a byword in all the neighboring
settlements from this time out," said Anne bitterly.

And it must be confessed that it was.




X

Davy in Search of a Sensation


Anne, walking home from school through the Birch Path one November
afternoon, felt convinced afresh that life was a very wonderful thing.
The day had been a good day; all had gone well in her little kingdom.
St. Clair Donnell had not fought any of the other boys over the question
of his name; Prillie Rogerson's face had been so puffed up from the
effects of toothache that she did not once try to coquette with the
boys in her vicinity. Barbara Shaw had met with only ONE accident . . .
spilling a dipper of water over the floor . . . and Anthony Pye had not
been in school at all.

"What a nice month this November has been!" said Anne, who had never
quite got over her childish habit of talking to herself. "November is
usually such a disagreeable month . . . as if the year had suddenly found
out that she was growing old and could do nothing but weep and fret over
it. This year is growing old gracefully . . . just like a stately old lady
who knows she can be charming even with gray hair and wrinkles. We've
had lovely days and delicious twilights. This last fortnight has been so
peaceful, and even Davy has been almost well-behaved. I really think
he is improving a great deal. How quiet the woods are today . . .  not
a murmur except that soft wind purring in the treetops! It sounds like
surf on a faraway shore. How dear the woods are! You beautiful trees! I
love every one of you as a friend."

Anne paused to throw her arm about a slim young birch and kiss its
cream-white trunk. Diana, rounding a curve in the path, saw her and
laughed.

"Anne Shirley, you're only pretending to be grown up. I believe when
you're alone you're as much a little girl as you ever were."

"Well, one can't get over the habit of being a little girl all at once,"
said Anne gaily. "You see, I was little for fourteen years and I've only
been grown-uppish for scarcely three. I'm sure I shall always feel like
a child in the woods. These walks home from school are almost the only
time I have for dreaming . . .  except the half-hour or so before I go to
sleep. I'm so busy with teaching and studying and helping Marilla with
the twins that I haven't another moment for imagining things. You don't
know what splendid adventures I have for a little while after I go to
bed in the east gable every night. I always imagine I'm something very
brilliant and triumphant and splendid . . .  a great prima donna or a Red
Cross nurse or a queen. Last night I was a queen. It's really splendid
to imagine you are a queen. You have all the fun of it without any of
the inconveniences and you can stop being a queen whenever you want to,
which you couldn't in real life. But here in the woods I like best to
imagine quite different things . . . I'm a dryad living in an old pine, or
a little brown wood-elf hiding under a crinkled leaf. That white birch
you caught me kissing is a sister of mine. The only difference is, she's
a tree and I'm a girl, but that's no real difference. Where are you
going, Diana?"

"Down to the Dicksons. I promised to help Alberta cut out her new dress.
Can't you walk down in the evening, Anne, and come home with me?"

"I might . . . since Fred Wright is away in town," said Anne with a rather
too innocent face.

Diana blushed, tossed her head, and walked on. She did not look
offended, however.

Anne fully intended to go down to the Dicksons' that evening, but she
did not. When she arrived at Green Gables she found a state of affairs
which banished every other thought from her mind. Marilla met her in the
yard . . . a wild-eyed Marilla.

"Anne, Dora is lost!"

"Dora! Lost!" Anne looked at Davy, who was swinging on the yard gate,
and detected merriment in his eyes. "Davy, do you know where she is?"

"No, I don't," said Davy stoutly. "I haven't seen her since dinner time,
cross my heart."

"I've been away ever since one o'clock," said Marilla. "Thomas Lynde
took sick all of a sudden and Rachel sent up for me to go at once. When
I left here Dora was playing with her doll in the kitchen and Davy was
making mud pies behind the barn. I only got home half an hour ago . . .
and no Dora to be seen. Davy declares he never saw her since I left."

"Neither I did," avowed Davy solemnly.

"She must be somewhere around," said Anne. "She would never wander far
away alone . . . you know how timid she is. Perhaps she has fallen asleep
in one of the rooms."

Marilla shook her head.

"I've hunted the whole house through. But she may be in some of the
buildings."

A thorough search followed. Every corner of house, yard, and
outbuildings was ransacked by those two distracted people. Anne roved
the orchards and the Haunted Wood, calling Dora's name. Marilla took a
candle and explored the cellar. Davy accompanied each of them in turn,
and was fertile in thinking of places where Dora could possibly be.
Finally they met again in the yard.

"It's a most mysterious thing," groaned Marilla.

"Where can she be?" said Anne miserably

"Maybe she's tumbled into the well," suggested Davy cheerfully.

Anne and Marilla looked fearfully into each other's eyes. The thought
had been with them both through their entire search but neither had
dared to put it into words.

"She . . . she might have," whispered Marilla.

Anne, feeling faint and sick, went to the wellbox and peered over. The
bucket sat on the shelf inside. Far down below was a tiny glimmer of
still water. The Cuthbert well was the deepest in Avonlea. If Dora. . .
but Anne could not face the idea. She shuddered and turned away.

"Run across for Mr. Harrison," said Marilla, wringing her hands.

"Mr. Harrison and John Henry are both away . . . they went to town today.
I'll go for Mr. Barry."

Mr. Barry came back with Anne, carrying a coil of rope to which was
attached a claw-like instrument that had been the business end of a
grubbing fork. Marilla and Anne stood by, cold and shaken with horror
and dread, while Mr. Barry dragged the well, and Davy, astride the gate,
watched the group with a face indicative of huge enjoyment.

Finally Mr. Barry shook his head, with a relieved air.

"She can't be down there. It's a mighty curious thing where she could
have got to, though. Look here, young man, are you sure you've no idea
where your sister is?"

"I've told you a dozen times that I haven't," said Davy, with an injured
air. "Maybe a tramp come and stole her."

"Nonsense," said Marilla sharply, relieved from her horrible fear of
the well. "Anne, do you suppose she could have strayed over to Mr.
Harrison's? She has always been talking about his parrot ever since that
time you took her over."

"I can't believe Dora would venture so far alone but I'll go over and
see," said Anne.

Nobody was looking at Davy just then or it would have been seen that a
very decided change came over his face. He quietly slipped off the gate
and ran, as fast as his fat legs could carry him, to the barn.

Anne hastened across the fields to the Harrison establishment in no
very hopeful frame of mind. The house was locked, the window shades
were down, and there was no sign of anything living about the place. She
stood on the veranda and called Dora loudly.

Ginger, in the kitchen behind her, shrieked and swore with sudden
fierceness; but between his outbursts Anne heard a plaintive cry
from the little building in the yard which served Mr. Harrison as a
toolhouse. Anne flew to the door, unhasped it, and caught up a small
mortal with a tearstained face who was sitting forlornly on an upturned
nail keg.

