City, and paused before the magnificent jewel-studded gates.

These were opened by a cheerful-looking little man who wore green
spectacles over his eyes.  Dorothy introduced him to her friends as the
Guardian of the Gates, and they noticed a big bunch of keys suspended
on the golden chain that hung around his neck.  The chariot passed
through the outer gates into a fine arched chamber built in the thick
wall, and through the inner gates into the streets of the Emerald City.

Polychrome exclaimed in rapture at the wondrous beauty that met her
eyes on every side as they rode through this stately and imposing City,
the equal of which has never been discovered, even in Fairyland.
Button-Bright could only say "My!" so amazing was the sight; but his
eyes were wide open and he tried to look in every direction at the same
time, so as not to miss anything.

The shaggy man was fairly astounded at what he saw, for the graceful
and handsome buildings were covered with plates of gold and set with
emeralds so splendid and valuable that in any other part of the world
any one of them would have been worth a fortune to its owner.  The
sidewalks were superb marble slabs polished as smooth as glass, and the
curbs that separated the walks from the broad street were also set
thick with clustered emeralds.  There were many people on these
walks--men, women and children--all dressed in handsome garments of
silk or satin or velvet, with beautiful jewels.  Better even than this:
all seemed happy and contented, for their faces were smiling and free
from care, and music and laughter might be heard on every side.

"Don't they work at all?" asked the shaggy man.

"To be sure they work," replied the Tin Woodman; "this fair city could
not be built or cared for without labor, nor could the fruit and
vegetables and other food be provided for the inhabitants to eat.  But
no one works more than half his time, and the people of Oz enjoy their
labors as much as they do their play."

"It's wonderful!" declared the shaggy man.  "I do hope Ozma will let me
live here."

The chariot, winding through many charming streets, paused before a
building so vast and noble and elegant that even Button-Bright guessed
at once that it was the Royal Palace.  Its gardens and ample grounds
were surrounded by a separate wall, not so high or thick as the wall
around the City, but more daintily designed and built all of green
marble.  The gates flew open as the chariot appeared before them, and
the Cowardly Lion and Hungry Tiger trotted up a jeweled driveway to the
front door of the palace and stopped short.

"Here we are!" said Dorothy, gaily, and helped Button-Bright from the
chariot.  Polychrome leaped out lightly after them, and they were
greeted by a crowd of gorgeously dressed servants who bowed low as the
visitors mounted the marble steps.  At their head was a pretty little
maid with dark hair and eyes, dressed all in green embroidered with
silver.  Dorothy ran up to her with evident pleasure, and exclaimed:

"O, Jellia Jamb! I'm so glad to see you again.  Where's Ozma?"

"In her room, your Highness," replied the little maid demurely, for
this was Ozma's favorite attendant.  "She wishes you to come to her as
soon as you have rested and changed your dress, Princess Dorothy.  And
you and your friends are to dine with her this evening."

"When is her birthday, Jellia?" asked the girl.

"Day after to-morrow, your Highness."

"And where's the Scarecrow?"

"He's gone into the Munchkin country to get some fresh straw to stuff
himself with, in honor of Ozma's celebration," replied the maid.  "He
returns to the Emerald City to-morrow, he said."

By this time, Tok-tok, the Tin Woodman, and the shaggy man had arrived
and the chariot had gone around to the back of the palace, Billina
going with the Lion and Tiger to see her chickens after her absence
from them.  But Toto stayed close beside Dorothy.

"Come in, please," said Jellia Jamb; "it shall be our pleasant duty to
escort all of you to the rooms prepared for your use."

The shaggy man hesitated.  Dorothy had never known him to be ashamed of
his shaggy looks before, but now that he was surrounded by so much
magnificence and splendor the shaggy man felt sadly out of place.

Dorothy assured him that all her friends were welcome at Ozma's palace,
so he carefully dusted his shaggy shoes with his shaggy handkerchief
and entered the grand hall after the others.

Tik-tok lived at the Royal Palace and the Tin Woodman always had the
same room whenever he visited Ozma, so these two went at once to remove
the dust of the journey from their shining bodies.  Dorothy also had a
pretty suite of rooms which she always occupied when in the Emerald
City; but several servants walked ahead politely to show the way,
although she was quite sure she could find the rooms herself.  She took
Button-Bright with her, because he seemed too small to be left alone in
such a big palace; but Jellia Jamb herself ushered the beautiful
Daughter of the Rainbow to her apartments, because it was easy to see
that Polychrome was used to splendid palaces and was therefore entitled
to especial attention.




19.  The Shaggy Man's Welcome


The shaggy man stood in the great hall, his shaggy hat in his hands,
wondering what would become of him.  He had never been a guest in a
fine palace before; perhaps he had never been a guest anywhere.  In the
big, cold, outside world people did not invite shaggy men to their
homes, and this shaggy man of ours had slept more in hay-lofts and
stables than in comfortable rooms.  When the others left the great hall
he eyed the splendidly dressed servants of the Princess Ozma as if he
expected to be ordered out; but one of them bowed before him as
respectfully as if he had been a prince, and said:

"Permit me, sir, to conduct you to your apartments."

The shaggy man drew a long breath and took courage.

"Very well," he answered.  "I'm ready."

Through the big hall they went, up the grand staircase carpeted thick
with velvet, and so along a wide corridor to a carved doorway.  Here
the servant paused, and opening the door said with polite deference:

"Be good enough to enter, sir, and make yourself at home in the rooms
our Royal Ozma has ordered prepared for you.  Whatever you see is for
you to use and enjoy, as if your own.  The Princess dines at seven, and
I shall be here in time to lead you to the drawing-room, where you will
be privileged to meet the lovely Ruler of Oz.  Is there any command, in
the meantime, with which you desire to honor me?"

"No," said the shaggy man; "but I'm much obliged."

He entered the room and shut the door, and for a time stood in
bewilderment, admiring the grandeur before him.

He had been given one of the handsomest apartments in the most
magnificent palace in the world, and you can not wonder that his good
fortune astonished and awed him until he grew used to his surroundings.

The furniture was upholstered in cloth of gold, with the royal crown
embroidered upon it in scarlet.  The rug upon the marble floor was so
thick and soft that he could not hear the sound of his own footsteps,
and upon the walls were splendid tapestries woven with scenes from the
Land of Oz.  Books and ornaments were scattered about in profusion, and
the shaggy man thought he had never seen so many pretty things in one
place before.  In one corner played a tinkling fountain of perfumed
water, and in another was a table bearing a golden tray loaded with
freshly gathered fruit, including several of the red-cheeked apples
that the shaggy man loved.

At the farther end of this charming room was an open doorway, and he
crossed over to find himself in a bedroom containing more comforts than
the shaggy man had ever before imagined.  The bedstead was of gold and
set with many brilliant diamonds, and the coverlet had designs of
pearls and rubies sewed upon it.  At one side of the bedroom was a
dainty dressing-room with closets containing a large assortment of
fresh clothing; and beyond this was the bath--a large room having a
marble pool big enough to swim in, with white marble steps leading down
to the water.  Around the edge of the pool were set rows of fine
emeralds as large as door-knobs, while the water of the bath was clear
as crystal.

For a time the shaggy man gazed upon all this luxury with silent
amazement.  Then he decided, being wise in his way, to take advantage
of his good fortune.  He removed his shaggy boots and his shaggy
clothing, and bathed in the pool with rare enjoyment.  After he had
dried himself with the soft towels he went into the dressing-room and
took fresh linen from the drawers and put it on, finding that
everything fitted him exactly.  He examined the contents of the closets
and selected an elegant suit of clothing.  Strangely enough, everything
about it was shaggy, although so new and beautiful, and he sighed with
contentment to realize that he could now be finely dressed and still be
the shaggy man.  His coat was of rose-colored velvet, trimmed with
shags and bobtails, with buttons of blood-red rubies and golden shags
around the edges.  His vest was a shaggy satin of a delicate cream
color, and his knee-breeches of rose velvet trimmed like the coat.
Shaggy creamy stockings of silk, and shaggy slippers of rose leather
with ruby buckles, completed his costume, and when he was thus attired
the shaggy man looked at himself in a long mirror with great
admiration.  On a table he found a mother-of-pearl chest decorated with
delicate silver vines and flowers of clustered rubies, and on the cover
was a silver plate engraved with these words:

  THE SHAGGY MAN:
  HIS BOX OF ORNAMENTS


The chest was not locked, so he opened it and was almost dazzled by the
brilliance of the rich jewels it contained.  After admiring the pretty
things, he took out a fine golden watch with a big chain, several
handsome finger-rings, and an ornament of rubies to pin upon the breast
of his shaggy shirt-bosom.  Having carefully brushed his hair and
whiskers all the wrong way to make them look as shaggy as possible, the
shaggy man breathed a deep sigh of joy and decided he was ready to meet
the Royal Princess as soon as she sent for him.  While he waited he
returned to the beautiful sitting room and ate several of the
red-cheeked apples to pass away the time.

Meanwhile, Dorothy had dressed herself in a pretty gown of soft grey
embroidered with silver, and put a blue-and-gold suit of satin upon
little Button-Bright, who looked as sweet as a cherub in it.  Followed
by the boy and Toto--the dog with a new green ribbon around his
neck--she hastened down to the splendid drawing-room of the palace,
where, seated upon an exquisite throne of carved malachite and nestled
amongst its green satin cushions was the lovely Princess Ozma, waiting
eagerly to welcome her friend.




20.  Princess Ozma Of Oz


The royal historians of Oz, who are fine writers and know any number of
big words, have often tried to describe the rare beauty of Ozma and
failed because the words were not good enough.  So of course I cannot
hope to tell you how great was the charm of this little Princess, or
how her loveliness put to shame all the sparkling jewels and
magnificent luxury that surrounded her in this her royal palace.
Whatever else was beautiful or dainty or delightful of itself faded to
dullness when contrasted with Ozma's bewitching face, and it has often
been said by those who know that no other ruler in all the world can
ever hope to equal the gracious charm of her manner.

Everything about Ozma attracted one, and she inspired love and the
sweetest affection rather than awe or ordinary admiration.  Dorothy
threw her arms around her little friend and hugged and kissed her
rapturously, and Toto barked joyfully and Button-Bright smiled a happy
smile and consented to sit on the soft cushions close beside the
Princess.

"Why didn't you send me word you were going to have a birthday party?"
asked the little Kansas girl, when the first greetings were over.

"Didn't I?" asked Ozma, her pretty eyes dancing with merriment.

"Did you?" replied Dorothy, trying to think.

"Who do you imagine, dear, mixed up those roads, so as to start you
wandering in the direction of Oz?" inquired the Princess.

"Oh!  I never 'spected YOU of that," cried Dorothy.

"I've watched you in my Magic Picture all the way here," declared Ozma,
"and twice I thought I should have to use the Magic Belt to save you
and transport you to the Emerald City.  Once was when the Scoodlers
caught you, and again when you reached the Deadly Desert. But the
shaggy man was able to help you out both times, so I did not interfere."

"Do you know who Button-Bright is?" asked Dorothy.

"No; I never saw him until you found him in the road, and then only in
my Magic Picture."

"And did you send Polly to us?"

"No, dear; the Rainbow's Daughter slid from her father's pretty arch
just in time to meet you."

"Well," said Dorothy, "I've promised King Dox of Foxville and King
Kik-a-bray of Dunkiton that I'd ask you to invite them to your party."

"I have already done that," returned Ozma, "because I thought it would
please you to favor them."

"Did you 'vite the Musicker?" asked Button-Bright.

"No; because he would be too noisy, and might interfere with the
comfort of others.  When music is not very good, and is indulged in all
the time, it is better that the performer should be alone," said the
Princess.

"I like the Musicker's music," declared the boy, gravely.

"But I don't," said Dorothy.

"Well, there will be plenty of music at my celebration," promised Ozma;
"so I've an idea Button-Bright won't miss the Musicker at all."

Just then Polychrome danced in, and Ozma rose to greet the Rainbow's
Daughter in her sweetest and most cordial manner.

Dorothy thought she had never seen two prettier creatures together than
these lovely maidens; but Polly knew at once her own dainty beauty
could not match that of Ozma, yet was not a bit jealous because this
was so.

The Wizard of Oz was announced, and a dried-up, little, old man,
clothed all in black, entered the drawing-room.  His face was cheery
and his eyes twinkling with humor, so Polly and Button-Bright were not
at all afraid of the wonderful personage whose fame as a humbug
magician had spread throughout the world.  After greeting Dorothy with
much affection, he stood modestly behind Ozma's throne and listened to
the lively prattle of the young people.

Now the shaggy man appeared, and so startling was his appearance, all
clad in shaggy new raiment, that Dorothy cried "Oh!" and clasped her
hands impulsively as she examined her friend with pleased eyes.

"He's still shaggy, all right," remarked Button-Bright; and Ozma nodded
brightly because she had meant the shaggy man to remain shaggy when she
provided his new clothes for him.

Dorothy led him toward the throne, as he was shy in such fine company,
and presented him gracefully to the Princess, saying:

"This, your Highness, is my friend, the shaggy man, who owns the Love
Magnet."

"You are welcome to Oz," said the girl Ruler, in gracious accents.
"But tell me, sir, where did you get the Love Magnet which you say you
own?"

The shaggy man grew red and looked downcast, as he answered in a low
voice:

"I stole it, your Majesty."

"Oh, Shaggy Man!" cried Dorothy.  "How dreadful!  And you told me the
Eskimo gave you the Love Magnet."

He shuffled first on one foot and then on the other, much embarrassed.

"I told you a falsehood, Dorothy," he said; "but now, having bathed in
the Truth Pond, I must tell nothing but the truth."

"Why did you steal it?" asked Ozma, gently.

"Because no one loved me, or cared for me," said the shaggy man, "and I
wanted to be loved a great deal.  It was owned by a girl in Butterfield
who was loved too much, so that the young men quarreled over her, which
made her unhappy.  After I had stolen the Magnet from her, only one
young man continued to love the girl, and she married him and regained
her happiness."

"Are you sorry you stole it?" asked the Princess.

"No, your Highness; I'm glad," he answered; "for it has pleased me to
be loved, and if Dorothy had not cared for me I could not have
accompanied her to this beautiful Land of Oz, or met its kind-hearted
Ruler.  Now that I'm here, I hope to remain, and to become one of your
Majesty's most faithful subjects."

"But in Oz we are loved for ourselves alone, and for our kindness to
one another, and for our good deeds," she said.

"I'll give up the Love Magnet," said the shaggy man, eagerly; "Dorothy
shall have it."

"But every one loves Dorothy already," declared the Wizard.

"Then Button-Bright shall have it."

"Don't want it," said the boy, promptly.

"Then I'll give it to the Wizard, for I'm sure the lovely Princess Ozma
does not need it."

"All my people love the Wizard, too," announced the Princess, laughing;
"so we will hang the Love Magnet over the gates of the Emerald City,
that whoever shall enter or leave the gates may be loved and loving."

"That is a good idea," said the shaggy man; "I agree to it most
willingly."

Those assembled now went in to dinner, which you can imagine was a
grand affair; and afterward Ozma asked the Wizard to give them an
exhibition of his magic.

The Wizard took eight tiny white piglets from an inside pocket and set
them on the table.  One was dressed like a clown, and performed funny
antics, and the others leaped over the spoons and dishes and ran around
the table like race-horses, and turned hand-springs and were so
sprightly and amusing that they kept the company in one roar of merry
laughter.  The Wizard had trained these pets to do many curious things,
and they were so little and so cunning and soft that Polychrome loved
to pick them up as they passed near her place and fondle them as if
they were kittens.

It was late when the entertainment ended, and they separated to go to
their rooms.

"To-morrow," said Ozma, "my invited guests will arrive, and you will
find among them some interesting and curious people, I promise you.
The next day will be my birthday, and the festivities will be held on
the broad green just outside the gates of the City, where all my people
can assemble without being crowded."

"I hope the Scarecrow won't be late," said Dorothy, anxiously.

"Oh, he is sure to return to-morrow," answered Ozma.  "He wanted new
straw to stuff himself with, so he went to the Munchkin Country, where
straw is plentiful."

With this the Princess bade her guests good night and went to her own
room.




21.  Dorothy Receives the Guests


Next morning Dorothy's breakfast was served in her own pretty sitting
room, and she sent to invite Polly and the shaggy man to join her and
Button-Bright at the meal.  They came gladly, and Toto also had
breakfast with them, so that the little party that had traveled
together to Oz was once more reunited.

No sooner had they finished eating than they heard the distant blast of
many trumpets, and the sound of a brass band playing martial music; so
they all went out upon the balcony.  This was at the front of the
palace and overlooked the streets of the City, being higher than the
wall that shut in the palace grounds.  They saw approaching down the
street a band of musicians, playing as hard and loud as they could,
while the people of the Emerald City crowded the sidewalks and cheered
so lustily that they almost drowned the noise of the drums and horns.

Dorothy looked to see what they were cheering at, and discovered that
behind the band was the famous Scarecrow, riding proudly upon the back
of a wooden Saw-Horse which pranced along the street almost as
gracefully as if it had been made of flesh.  Its hoofs, or rather the
ends of its wooden legs, were shod with plates of solid gold, and the
saddle strapped to the wooden body was richly embroidered and glistened
with jewels.

As he reached the palace the Scarecrow looked up and saw Dorothy, and
at once waved his peaked hat at her in greeting.  He rode up to the
front door and dismounted, and the band stopped playing and went away
and the crowds of people returned to their dwellings.

By the time Dorothy and her friends had re-entered her room, the
Scarecrow was there, and he gave the girl a hearty embrace and shook
the hands of the others with his own squashy hands, which were white
gloves filled with straw.

The shaggy man, Button-Bright, and Polychrome stared hard at this
celebrated person, who was acknowledged to be the most popular and most
beloved man in all the Land of Oz.

"Why, your face has been newly painted!" exclaimed Dorothy, when the
first greetings were over.

"I had it touched up a bit by the Munchkin farmer who first made me,"
answered the Scarecrow, pleasantly.  "My complexion had become a bit
grey and faded, you know, and the paint had peeled off one end of my
mouth, so I couldn't talk quite straight.  Now I feel like myself
again, and I may say without immodesty that my body is stuffed with the
loveliest oat-straw in all Oz."  He pushed against his chest.  "Hear me
crunkle?" he asked.

"Yes," said Dorothy; "you sound fine."

Button-Bright was wonderfully attracted by the strawman, and so was
Polly.  The shaggy man treated him with great respect, because he was
so queerly made.

Jellia Jamb now came to say that Ozma wanted Princess Dorothy to
receive the invited guests in the Throne-Room, as they arrived.  The
Ruler was herself busy ordering the preparations for the morrow's
festivities, so she wished her friend to act in her place.

Dorothy willingly agreed, being the only other Princess in the Emerald
City; so she went to the great Throne-Room and sat in Ozma's seat,
placing Polly on one side of her and Button-Bright on the other.  The
Scarecrow stood at the left of the throne and the Tin Woodman at the
right, while the Wonderful Wizard and the shaggy man stood behind.

The Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger came in, with bright new bows of
ribbon on their collars and tails.  After greeting Dorothy
affectionately the huge beasts lay down at the foot of the throne.

While they waited, the Scarecrow, who was near the little boy, asked:

"Why are you called Button-Bright?"

"Don't know," was the answer.

"Oh yes, you do, dear," said Dorothy.  "Tell the Scarecrow how you got
your name."

"Papa always said I was bright as a button, so mama always called me
Button-Bright," announced the boy.

"Where is your mama?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

"Where is your home?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

"Don't you want to find your mama again?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright, calmly.

The Scarecrow looked thoughtful.

"Your papa may have been right," he observed; "but there are many kinds
of buttons, you see.  There are silver and gold buttons, which are
highly polished and glitter brightly.  There are pearl and rubber
buttons, and other kinds, with surfaces more or less bright.  But there
is still another sort of button which is covered with dull cloth, and
that must be the sort your papa meant when he said you were bright as a
button.  Don't you think so?"

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

Jack Pumpkinhead arrived, wearing a pair of new, white kid gloves; and
he brought a birthday present for Ozma consisting of a necklace of
pumpkin-seeds.  In each seed was set a sparkling carolite, which is
considered the rarest and most beautiful gem that exists.  The necklace
was in a plush case and Jellia Jamb put it on a table with the Princess
Ozma's other presents.

Next came a tall, beautiful woman clothed in a splendid trailing gown,
trimmed with exquisite lace as fine as cobweb.  This was the important
Sorceress known as Glinda the Good, who had been of great assistance to
both Ozma and Dorothy.  There was no humbug about her magic, you may be
sure, and Glinda was as kind as she was powerful.  She greeted Dorothy
most lovingly, and kissed Button-Bright and Polly, and smiled upon the
shaggy man, after which Jellia Jamb led the Sorceress to one of the
most magnificent rooms of the royal palace and appointed fifty servants
to wait upon her.

The next arrival was Mr. H. M. Woggle-Bug, T.E.; the "H. M." meaning
Highly Magnified and the "T.E." meaning Thoroughly Educated.  The
Woggle-Bug was head professor at the Royal College of Oz, and he had
composed a fine Ode in honor of Ozma's birthday.  This he wanted to
read to them; but the Scarecrow wouldn't let him.

Soon they heard a clucking sound and a chorus of "cheep! cheep!" and a
servant threw open the door to allow Billina and her ten fluffy chicks
to enter the Throne-Room.  As the Yellow Hen marched proudly at the
head of her family, Dorothy cried, "Oh, you lovely things!" and ran
down from her seat to pet the little yellow downy balls.  Billina wore
a pearl necklace, and around the neck of each chicken was a tiny gold
chain holding a locket with the letter "D" engraved upon the outside.

"Open the lockets, Dorothy," said Billina.  The girl obeyed and found a
picture of herself in each locket.  "They were named after you, my
dear," continued the Yellow Hen, "so I wanted all my chickens to wear
your picture.  Cluck--cluck! come here, Dorothy--this minute!" she
cried, for the chickens were scattered and wandering all around the big
room.

They obeyed the call at once, and came running as fast as they could,
fluttering their fluffy wings in a laughable way.

It was lucky that Billina gathered the little ones under her soft
breast just then, for Tik-tok came in and tramped up to the throne on
his flat copper feet.

