"I am always proud of myself," asserted Hippy. "In the first place there
is a great deal of me to be proud of; and in the second place I don't
believe in hiding my light under a bushel."

"Now Jessica, you have started him," said David with a groan. "He'll
talk about himself for an hour unless Reddy and I lead him out."

"I dare you to lead me out," defied Hippy.

"I never take a dare," replied David calmly, making a lunge for Hippy.
"Come on, Reddy."

Reddy sprang forward and Hippy was hustled out, chanting as he went:

    "Now children do not blame me, for I have so
        much to say,
    That from myself I really cannot tear myself
        away,"

and remained outside for the space of two minutes, when he suddenly
reappeared wearing Grace's coat and Miriam Nesbit's plumed hat and
performed a wild dance down the middle of the room that made his friends
shriek with laughter.

"Hippy, when will you be good?" inquired Miriam, as she rescued her hat,
and smoothed its ruffled plumes.

"Never, I hope," replied Hippy promptly.

"That's the judge's ring," cried Grace as the sound of the bell echoed
through the big room, and the guests flocked into the hall to welcome
their host.

"This is what I call a warm reception," laughed Judge Putnam, as he
stood surrounded by laughing faces.

"I claim the privilege of escorting Judge Putnam down the hall," cried
Nora, and she conducted him directly to where the mistletoe hung.

"I must be an object of envy to you young men," chuckled the judge, as
he walked unsuspectingly to his fate.

"The mistletoe! The mistletoe! You're standing under the mistletoe!" was
the cry and the seven girls and Miss Putnam joined hands and circled
around the judge. Then each girl in turn stepped up and imprinted a kiss
on the good old judge's cheek.

[Illustration: The Girls Circled Around the Judge]

"Well, I never!" exclaimed the old gentleman, but there were tears in
his blue eyes and his voice trembled as he said to his sister, who was
the last to salute him, "It takes me back over the years, Mary."

It was a merry party that ran upstairs to dress for dinner that night,
and the spirit of Christmas seemed to have settled down upon the judge's
borrowed household.

The only thing that had dimmed Grace Harlowe's pleasure in the least was
the passage at arms that had occurred between herself and Henry Hammond.
Grace's conscience smote her. She felt that she should not have spoken
to him as she had, even though she disliked him. To be sure, his remark
about Marian's gown had caused her inwardly to accuse him of influencing
Marian to make herself ridiculous in the eyes of her friends, but she
could not forgive herself for having unthinkingly spoken as she had
done.

After due reflection Grace decided that she had acted unwisely, and made
up her mind that she would try to make amends for her unkind retort. She
decided, however, to see if she could not persuade Marian to go back to
her usual style of dress.

Grace hurried through her dressing, and looking very sweet and wholesome
in her dainty blue organdie, knocked at the door of the room occupied by
Marian and Eva Allen.

"Come in," cried Eva's voice, and Grace entered, to find Eva completely
dressed in a pretty white pongee, eyeing with great disfavor the
tight-fitting princess gown of black silk that the maid was struggling
to hook Marian into.

"Marian!" exclaimed Grace. "What ever made you have a black evening
gown? It makes you look years older than you are."

"That's exactly what I told her," said Eva Allen, "but she won't believe
it."

Marian looked sulky, then said rather sullenly: "I really can't see what
difference it makes to you girls what I wear. I haven't interfered with
you in the matter of your gowns, have I?"

"No," replied Grace truthfully, "but Marian, I think the judge likes to
see us in the simple evening dresses we have been accustomed to wearing,
and as we are his guests we ought to try and please him. Besides, you
would look so much better in your white embroidered dress, or your pink
silk, that you wore to commencement last year."

"I don't agree with, you at all," replied Marian so stiffly that the
maid smiled openly, as she put the final touches to Marian's hair
preparatory to adjusting the cluster of puffs that had completed her
astonishing coiffure the night before. "Furthermore, I have been assured
by persons of extreme good taste that my new gowns give me a distinct
individuality I have never before possessed."

"That person of extreme good taste is named Hammond," thought Grace.
"That remark about 'individuality' sounds just like him. I'll make one
more appeal to her."

Going over to where Marian stood viewing herself with satisfaction in
the long mirror, Grace slipped her arm around her old friend.

"Listen, dear," she coaxed, "we mustn't quarrel on Christmas Eve. You
know we are all Phi Sigma Taus and it seems so strange to see you
looking so stately and grown up. Put on your white dress to-night, just
to please me."

But Marian drew away from her, frowning angrily. "Really, Grace," she
exclaimed, "you are too provoking for any use, and I wish you would mind
your own business and let me wear what I choose."

"Please pardon me, Marian," said Grace, turning toward the door. "I am
sorry to have troubled you," and was gone like a flash.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Marian Barber!" burst forth Eva.
"The idea of telling Grace to mind her own business! You haven't been a
bit like yourself lately, and I know that it's all on account of that
Henry Hammond, the old snake."

"You will oblige me greatly, Eva, by referring more respectfully to my
friend, Mr. Hammond," said Marian with offended dignity. Then she sailed
out of the room, her train dragging half a yard behind her, while Eva
turned to the mirror with a contemptuous sniff and powdered her little
freckled nose almost savagely before following her irate roommate down
stairs.




CHAPTER XI

SANTA CLAUS VISITS THE JUDGE


The moment that dinner was over the judge was hustled into the library
by Nora and Miriam, and informed by them that they constituted a
committee of two to amuse him until eleven o'clock. He was their
prisoner and they dared him to try to escape.

Next to Grace, Nora, with her rosy cheeks and ready Irish wit was
perhaps the judge's favorite, while he had a profound admiration for
stately Miriam; so he was well satisfied with his captors, who
triumphantly conducted him to the drawing room, where Miriam played and
Nora sang Irish ballads with a delicious brogue that completely
captivated the old gentleman.

At eleven o'clock there was a great jingling of bells and into the room
dashed Santa Claus, looking as fat and jolly as a story-book Kris
Kringle.

"Merry Christmas," he cried in a high squeaky voice. "It's a little
early to wish you Merry Christmas, judge, but I've an engagement in
China at midnight so I thought I'd drop in here a trifle early, leave a
few toys for you and your little playmates and be gone. I always make it
a point to remember good little boys. So hurry up, everybody, and follow
me, for I haven't long to stay."

With these words Kris Kringle dashed through the hall followed by the
judge who, entering fully into the spirit of the affair, seized Nora and
Miriam by the hand and the three raced after their strange visitor at
full speed, catching up with him at the door of the dining room which
was closed. Here Santa Claus paused and gave three knocks on the oak
door.

"Who is there?" demanded a voice, that sounded like David Nesbit's.

"Kris Kringle and three good children."

"Enter into the realm of Christmas," answered the voice, and the door
was flung open.

The sight that greeted them was sufficiently brilliant to dazzle their
eyes for a moment. In one corner of the dining room stood the great
tree, radiant with gilt and silver ornaments. At the top was a huge
silver star, while the branches were wound with glittering tinsel, and
heavily laden with beribboned bundles of all shapes and sizes, while the
space around the base of the tree was completely filled with presents.

At one side of the tree stood a graceful figure clad in a white robe
that glittered and sparkled as though covered with diamonds. She wore a
gilt crown on her head and carried a scepter, while over her shoulder
trailed a long garland of holly fastened with scarlet ribbons. It was
Grace Harlowe in a robe made of cotton wadding thickly sprinkled with
diamond dust, gotten up to represent the spirit of Christmas.

On the other side of the tree lay old Father Time, apparently fast
asleep, his sickle by his side. His long white cotton beard flowed
realistically down to his waist, and in his folded hands was a placard
bearing these words, "Gone to sleep for the next hundred years," while
in the opposite corner his sister and the rest of the guests had grouped
themselves, and as the old gentleman stepped over the threshold, a
chorus of laughing voices rang out:

"Merry Christmas! Merry Christmas!"

Then Grace glided forward and escorted the judge to a sort of double
throne that had been improvised from two easy chairs raised to a small
platform constructed by the boys, and draped with the piano cover, and a
couple of silken curtains, while Santa Claus performed the same office
for Miss Putnam.

After they had been established with great pomp and ceremony, Santa
Claus awoke Father Time by shaking him vigorously, apologizing to the
company between each shake for doing so, and promising to put him to
sleep the moment the festivities were over.

Then the fun of distributing the presents began, and for the next hour a
great unwrapping and rattling of papers ensued, mingled with constant
exclamations of surprise and delight from all present, as they opened
and admired their gifts.

The judge was particularly pleased with the little personal gifts that
the girls themselves had made for him, and exclaimed with the delight of
a schoolboy as he opened each one. At last nothing remained save one
rather imposing package.

"This must be something very remarkable," said the judge, as he untied
the bow of scarlet ribbon and unwrapped the folds of tissue paper,
disclosing a cut glass inkstand, with a heavy silver top, on which were
engraved his initials in block letters.

There was a general murmur of admiration from all.

"Very fine, very fine," said the judge, picking up the card which read,
"Merry Christmas, from Miss Barber."

"Miss Barber?" he repeated questioningly. Then it dawned upon him that
this expensive gift was from one of his guests.

"Pardon me, my dear," he said turning to Marian, who looked half
complacent, half embarrassed. "I am an old man and don't always remember
names as well as I should. The beauty of your gift quite overcame me.
Allow me to thank you and express my appreciation of it."

Marian smiled affectedly at the judge's words, in a manner so foreign to
her former, blunt, good-natured self, that the girl chums watched her in
silent amazement.

But the judge's inkstand was merely the fore-runner of surprises. A
sudden cry from Grace attracted the attention of the others.

"Why, Marian Barber, what made you do it?"

Then other exclamations followed in quick succession as the Phi Sigma
Taus rushed over to her in a body, each carrying a jeweler's box.

"You shouldn't have been so generous, Marian," said Grace. "I never
dreamed of receiving this beautiful gold chain."

"Just look at my bracelet!" cried Jessica.

"And my lovely ring!" put in Nora.

"Not half so fine as my silver purse," commented Anne.

Miriam Nesbit was the recipient of a cut glass powder box with a silver
top, while Eva Allen was in raptures over a gold chatelaine pin, that
more than once she had vainly sighed for.

Even the boys had been so well remembered that they felt rather
embarrassed when they compared their simple gifts to Marian with those
she had given them. As for Mr. Henry Hammond, he had received a complete
toilet set mounted in silver that was truly a magnificent affair, while
Marian proudly exhibited a gold chain and locket set with small
diamonds, which she had received from him.

When the last package had been opened, Santa Claus removed his huge
white beard, slipped out of his scarlet bath robe bordered with cotton
and stood forth as Hippy Wingate; while Father Time set his sickle
carefully up in one corner, divested himself of his flowing beard and
locks, took off David's gray dressing gown and appeared as Tom Gray.

It was long after midnight before the guests sought their rooms, their
arms piled with gifts.

"Come into my room for an after-gathering," said Miriam to the girls, as
they stood in a group at the head of the stairs.

"Wait until we deposit our spoils and get comfy," said Grace.

Fifteen minutes later the Phi Sigma Taus, with the exception of Marian
Barber, wrapped in kimonos, were monopolizing the floor space around the
big open fireplace in Miriam's room.

"Where's Marian?" asked Grace.

"Gone to bed," answered Eva laconically. "She said she didn't propose to
stay up half the night to gossip."

"The very idea!" exclaimed Jessica. "We never do gossip, but I think she
has furnished plenty of material so far for a gossiping match."

"And it looks as though we were in a fair way to start one, now," said
Anne slyly.

"Anne, you rascal," said Jessica laughing. "I'll acknowledge my sins and
change the subject."

"My presents were all beautiful!" said Miriam Nesbit, who, clad in a
kimono of cream-colored silk bordered with red poppies, her long black
braids hanging far below her waist, looked like a princess of the
Orient.

"And mine," echoed Grace. "The chain Marian gave me is a dear."

She stopped abruptly. A sudden silence had fallen upon the group at her
words. Grace instantly divined that in the minds of her friends there
lurked a secret disapproval of Marian's extravagance in the matter of
gifts.




CHAPTER XII

THE MISTLETOE BOUGH


After breakfast the next morning the judge proposed a sleigh ride, and
soon the entire party were skimming over the ground in two big
old-fashioned sleighs. Though the day was fairly cold, the guests were
too warmly wrapped to pay any attention to the weather, and keenly
enjoyed every moment of the ride.

After lunch a mysterious council took place in the library, and directly
after a visit was made to the attic, Grace having received permission to
rummage there. Later Reddy and Tom Gray were seen staggering down the
stairs under the weight of a huge cedar chest, and later still the girls
hurried down, their arms piled high with costumes of an earlier period.
