portrait bear a stronger resemblance. He had painted himself upon one
knee, holding the princess' picture in one hand, and in the other a
label with this inscription, "She is better in my heart." When the
princess went into her cabinet, she was amazed to see the portrait of
a man; and she fixed her eyes upon it with so much the more surprise,
because she also saw her own with it, and because the words which
were written upon the label afforded her ample room for curiosity. She
persuaded herself that it was Abricotina's doing; and all she desired
to know was whether the portrait was real or imaginary. Rising in haste,
she called Abricotina, while the invisible Leander, with his little
red cap, slipped into the cabinet, impatient to know what passed. The
princess bade Abricotina look upon the picture and tell her what she
thought of it.

After she had viewed it, "I protest!" said she, "'tis the picture of
that generous stranger to whom I am indebted for my life. Yes, yes, I am
sure it is he; his very features, shape, and hair."

"Thou pretendest surprise," said the princess, "but I know it was thou
thyself who put it there."

"Who! I, madam?" replied Abricotina. "I protest I never saw the picture
before in my life. Should I be so bold as to conceal from your knowledge
a thing that so nearly concerns you? And by what miracle could I come by
it? I never could paint, nor did any man ever enter this place; yet here
he is painted with you?"

"Some spirit, then, must have brought it hither," cried the princess.

"How I tremble for fear, madam!" said Abricotina. "Was it not rather
some lover? And therefore, if you will take my advice, let us burn it
immediately."

"'Twere a pity to burn it," cried the princess, sighing; "a finer piece,
methinks, cannot adorn my cabinet." And saying these words, she cast her
eyes upon it. But Abricotina continued obstinate in her opinion that
it ought to be burned, as a thing that could not come there but by the
power of magic.

"And these words--'She is better in my heart,'" said the princess;
"must we burn them too?"

"No favor must be shown to anything," said Abricotina, "not even to your
own portrait."

Abricotina ran away immediately for some fire, while the princess went
to look out at the window. Leander, unwilling to let his performance be
burned, took this opportunity to convey it away without being perceived.
He had hardly quitted the cabinet, when the princess turned about to
look once more upon that enchanting picture, which had so delighted her.
But how was she surprised to find it gone! She sought for it all the
room over; and Abricotina, returning, was no less surprised than her
mistress; so that this last adventure put them both in the most terrible
fright.

Leander took great delight in hearing and seeing his incomparable
mistress; even though he had to eat every day at her table with the
tabby-cat, who fared never the worse for that; but his satisfaction was
far from being complete, seeing he durst neither speak nor show himself;
and he knew it was not a common thing for ladies to fall in love with
persons invisible.

The princess had a universal taste for amusement. One day, she was
saying to her attend-ants that it would give her great pleasure to know
how the ladies were dressed in all the courts of the universe. There
needed no more words to send Leander all over the world. He wished
himself in China, where he bought the richest stuffs he could lay his
hands on, and got patterns of all the court fashions. From thence he
flew to Siam, where he did the same; in three days he traveled over
all the four parts of the world, and from time to time brought what
he bought to the Palace of Calm Delights, and hid it all in a chamber,
which he kept always locked. When he had thus collected together all the
rarities he could meet with--for he never wanted money, his rose always
supplying him--he went and bought five or six dozen of dolls, which he
caused to be dressed at Paris, the place in the world where most
regard is paid to fashions. They were all dressed differently, and as
magnificent as could be, and Leander placed them all in the princess'
closet. When she entered it, she was agreeably surprised to see such
company of little mutes, every one decked with watches bracelets,
diamond buckles, or necklaces; and the most remarkable of them held a
picture box in its hand, which the princess opening, found it contained
Leander's portrait. She gave a loud shriek, and looking upon Abricotina,
"There have appeared of late," said she, "so many wonders in this place,
that I know not what to think of them: my birds are all grown witty; I
cannot so much as wish, but presently I have my desires; twice have I
now seen the portrait of him who rescued thee from the ruffians; and
here are silks of all sorts, diamonds, embroideries, laces, and an
infinite number of other rarities. What fairy is it that takes such care
to pay me these agreeable civilities?"

Leander was overjoyed to hear and see her so much interested about his
picture, and calling to mind that there was in a grotto which she often
frequented a certain pedestal, on which a Diana, not yet finished, was
to be erected, on this pedestal he resolved to place himself, crowned
with laurel, and holding a lyre in his hand, on which he played like
another Apollo. He most anxiously waited the princess' retiring to the
grotto, which she did every day since her thoughts had taken up with
this unknown person; for what Abricotina had said, joined to the sight
of the picture, had almost destroyed her repose: her lively humor
changed into a pensive melancholy, and she grew a great lover of
solitude. When she entered the grotto, she made a sign that nobody
should follow her, so that her young damsels dispersed themselves into
the neighboring walks. The princess threw herself upon a bank of green
turf, sighed, wept, and even talked, but so softly that Leander could
not hear what she said. He had put his red cap on, that she might not
see him at first; but having taken it off, she beheld him standing on
the pedestal. At first she took him for a real statue, for he observed
exactly the attitude in which he had placed himself, without moving so
much as a finger. She beheld with a kind of pleasure intermixed with
fear, but pleasure soon dispelled her fear, and she continued to view
the pleasing figure, which so exactly resembled life. The prince having
tuned his lyre, began to play; at which the princess, greatly surprised,
could not resist the fear that seized her; she grew pale and fell into
a swoon. Leander leaped from the pedestal, and putting on his little red
cap, that he might not be perceived, took the princess in his arms and
gave her all the assistance that his zeal and tenderness could inspire.
At length she opened her charming eyes and looked about in search of
him, but she could perceive nobody; yet she felt somebody who held her
hands, kissed them, and bedewed them with his tears. It was a long time
before she durst speak, and her spirits were in a confused agitation
between fear and hope. She was afraid of the spirit, but loved the
figure of the unknown. At length she said: "Courtly invisible, why are
you not the person I desire you should be?" At these words Leander was
going to declare himself, but durst not do it yet. "For," thought he,
"if I again affright the object I adore and make her fear me, she will
not love me." This consideration caused him to keep silence.

The princess, then, believing herself alone, called Abricotina and told
her all the wonders of the animated statue; that it had played divinely,
and that the invisible person had given her great assistance when she
lay in a swoon.

"What pity 'tis," said she, "that this person should be so frightful,
for nothing can be more amiable or acceptable than his behavior!"

"Who told you, madam," answered Abricotina, "that he is frightful? If he
is the youth who saved me, he is beautiful as Cupid himself."

"If Cupid and the unknown are the same," replied the princess, blushing,
"I could be content to love Cupid; but alas! how far am I from such a
happiness! I love a mere shadow; and this fatal picture, joined to what
thou hast told me, have inspired me with inclinations so contrary to the
precepts which I received from my mother that I am daily afraid of being
punished for them."

"Oh! madam," said Abricotina, interrupting her, "have you not troubles
enough already? Why should you anticipate afflictions which may never
come to pass?"

It is easy to imagine what pleasure Leander took in this conversation.

In the meantime the little Furibon, still enamored of the princess
whom he had never seen, expected with impatience the return of the four
servants whom he had sent to the Island of Calm Delights. One of them at
last came back, and after he had given the prince a particular account
of what had passed, told him that the island was defended by Amazons,
and that unless he sent a very powerful army, it would be impossible to
get into it. The king his father was dead, and Furibon was now lord
of all: disdaining, therefore, any repulse, he raised an army of four
hundred thousand men, and put himself at the head of them, appearing
like another Tom Thumb upon a war-horse. Now, when the Amazons perceived
his mighty host, they gave the princess notice of its who immediately
dispatched away her trusty Abricotina to the kingdom of the fairies,
to beg her mother's instructions as to what she should do to drive the
little Furibon from her territories. But Abricotina found the fairy in
an angry humor.

"Nothing that my daughter does," said she, "escapes my knowledge.
The Prince Leander is now in her palace; he loves her, and she has a
tenderness for him. All my cares and precepts have not been able to
guard her from the tyranny of love, and she is now under its fatal
dominion. But it is the decree of destiny, and I must submit; therefore,
Abricotina, begone! nor let me hear a word more of a daughter whose
behavior has so much displeased me."

Abricotina returned with these ill tidings, whereat the princess was
almost distracted; and this was soon perceived by Leander, who was near
her, though she did not see him. He beheld her grief with the greatest
pain. However, he durst not then open his lips; but recollecting that
Furibon was exceedingly covetous, he thought that, by giving him a sum
of money, he might perhaps prevail with him to retire. Thereupon, he
dressed himself like an Amazon, and wished himself in the forest, to
catch his horse. He had no sooner called him than Gris-de-line came
leaping, prancing, and neighing for joy, for he was grown quite weary
of being so long absent from his dear master; but when he beheld him
dressed as a woman he hardly knew him. However, at the sound of his
voice, he suffered the prince to mount, and they soon arrived in the
camp at Furibon, where they gave notice that a lady was come to speak
with him from the Princess of Calm Delights. Immediately the little
fellow put on his royal robes, and having placed himself upon his
throne, he looked like a great toad counterfeiting a king.

Leander harangued him, and told him that the princess, preferring a
quiet and peaceable life to the fatigues of war, had sent to offer his
majesty as much money as he pleased to demand, provided he would suffer
her to continue in peace; but if he refused her proposal, she would omit
no means that might serve for her defense. Furibon replied that he took
pity on her, and would grant her the honor of his protection; but that
he demanded a hundred thousand millions of pounds, and without which he
would not return to his kingdom. Leander answered that such a vast sum
would be too long a-counting, and therefore, if he would say how many
rooms full he desired to have, the princess was generous and rich enough
to satisfy him. Furibon was astonished to hear that, instead of
entreating, she would rather offer more; and it came into his wicked
mind to take all the money he could get, and then seize the Amazon and
kill her, that she might never return to her mistress. He told Leander,
therefore, that he would have thirty chambers of gold, all full to the
ceiling. Leander, being conducted into the chambers, took his rose and
shook it, till every room was filled with all sorts of coin. Furibon was
in an ecstasy, and the more gold he saw the greater was his desire
to get hold of the Amazon; so that when all the rooms were full,
he commanded his guards to seize her, alleging she had brought him
counterfeit money. Immediately Leander put on his little red cap and
disappeared. The guards, believing that the lady had escaped, ran
out and left Furibon alone; when Leander, availing himself of the
opportunity, took the tyrant by the hair, and twisted his head off with
the same ease he would a pullet's; nor did the little wretch of a king
see that hand that killed him.

Leander having got his enemy's head, wished himself in the Palace of
Calm Delights, where he found the princess walking, and with grief
considering the message which her mother had sent her, and on the means
to repel Furibon.

Suddenly she beheld a head hanging in the air, with nobody to hold it.
This prodigy astonished her so that she could not tell what to think of
it; but her amazement was increased when she saw the head laid at her
feet, and heard a voice utter these words:

     "Charming Princess, cease your fear
     Of Furibon; whose head see here."

Abricotina, knowing Leander's voice, cried:

"I protest, madam, the invisible person who speaks is the very stranger
that rescued me."

The princess seemed astonished, but yet pleased.

"Oh," said she, "if it be true that the invisible and the stranger
are the same person, I confess I shall be glad to make him my
acknowledgments."

Leander, still invisible, replied, "I will yet do more to deserve them;"
and so saying he returned to Furibon's army, where the report of the
king's death was already spread throughout the camp. As soon as Leander
appeared there in his usual habit, everybody knew him; all the officers
and soldiers surrounded him, uttering the loudest acclamations of joy.
In short, they acknowledged him for their king, and that the crown of
right belonged to him, for which he thanked them, and, as the first
mark of his royal bounty, divided the thirty rooms of gold among the
soldiers. This done he returned to his princess, ordering his army to
march back into his kingdom.

The princess was gone to bed. Leander, therefore, retired into his own
apartment, for he was very sleepy--so sleepy that he forgot to bolt his
door; and so it happened that the princess, rising early to taste the
morning air, chanced to enter into this very chamber, and was astonished
to find a young prince asleep upon the bed. She took a full view of him,
and was convinced that he was the person whose picture she had in
her diamond box. "It is impossible," said she, "that this should be a
spirit; for can spirits sleep? Is this a body composed of air and fire,
without substance, as Abricotina told me?" She softly touched his hair,
and heard him breathe, and looked at him as if she could have looked
forever. While she was thus occupied, her mother, the fairy entered with
such a noise that Leander started out of his sleep. But how deeply
was he afflicted to behold his beloved princess in the most deplorable
condition! Her mother dragged her by the hair and loaded her with a
thousand bitter reproaches. In what grief and consternation were the two
young lovers, who saw themselves now upon the point of being separated
forever! The princess durst not open her lips, but cast her eyes upon
Leander, as if to beg his assistance. He judged rightly that he ought
not to deal rudely with a power superior to his own, and therefore he
sought, by his eloquence and submission, to move the incensed fairy.
He ran to her, threw himself at her feet, and besought her to have pity
upon a young prince who would never change in his affection for her
daughter. The princess, encouraged, also embraced her mother's knees,
and declared that without Leander she should never be happy.

"Happy!" cried the fairy; "you know not the miseries of love nor the
treacheries of which lovers are capable. They bewitch us only to poison
our lives; I have known it by experience; and will you suffer the same?"

"Is there no exception, madam?" replied Leander, and his countenance
showed him to be one.

But neither tears nor entreaties could move the implacable fairy; and
it is very probable that she would have never pardoned them, had not the
lovely Gentilla appeared at that instant in the chamber, more brilliant
than the sun. Embracing the old fairy:

"Dear sister," said she, "I am persuaded you cannot have forgotten the
good office I did you when, after your unhappy marriage, you besought
a readmittance into Fairyland; since then I never desired any favor
at your hands, but now the time is come. Pardon, then, this lovely
princess; consent to her nuptials with this young prince. I will engage
he shall be ever constant to her; the thread of their days shall be spun
of gold and silk; they shall live to complete your happiness; and I will
never forget the obligation you lay upon me."

"Charming Gentilla," cried the fairy, "I consent to whatever you desire.
Come, my dear children, and receive my love." So saying, she embraced
them both.

Abricotina, just then entering, cast her eyes upon Leander; she knew
him again, and saw he was perfectly happy, at which she, too, was quite
satisfied.

"Prince," condescendingly said the fairy-mother, "I will remove the
Island of Calm Delights into your own kingdom, live with you myself, and
do you great services."

Whether or not Prince Leander appreciated this offer, he bowed low, and
assured his mother-in-law that no favor could be equal to the one he
had that day received from her hands. This short compliment pleased the
fairy exceedingly, for she belonged to those ancient days when people
used to stand a whole day upon one leg complimenting one another. The
nuptials were performed in a most splendid manner, and the young prince
and princess lived together happily many years, beloved by all around
them.




PRINCE CHERRY

LONG ago there lived a monarch, who was such a very, honest man that his
subjects entitled him the Good King. One day, when he was out hunting,
a little white rabbit, which had been half-killed by his hounds,
leaped right into his majesty's arms. Said he, caressing it: "This poor
creature has put itself under my protection, and I will allow no one to
injure it." So he carried it to his palace, had prepared for it a neat
little rabbit-hutch, with abundance of the daintiest food, such as
rabbits love, and there he left it.

The same night, when he was alone in his chamber, there appeared to
him a beautiful lady. She was dressed neither in gold, nor silver,
nor brocade; but her flowing robes were white as snow, and she wore a
garland of white roses on her head. The Good King was greatly astonished
at the sight; for his door was locked, and he wondered how so dazzling a
lady could possibly enter; but she soon removed his doubts.

"I am the fairy Candide," said she, with a smiling and gracious air.
"Passing through the wood where you were hunting, I took a desire to
know if you were as good as men say you are I therefore changed myself
into a white rabbit and took refuge in your arms. You saved me and now I
know that those who are merciful to dum beasts will be ten times more so
to human beings. You merit the name your subjects give you: you are the
Good King. I thank you for your protection, and shall be always one
of your best friends. You have but to say what you most desire, and I
promise you your wish shall be granted."

"Madam," replied the king, "if you are a fairy, you must know, without
my telling you, the wish of my heart. I have one well-beloved son,
Prince Cherry: whatever kindly feeling you have toward me, extend it to
him."

"Willingly," said Candide. "I will make him the handsomest, richest, or
most powerful prince in the world: choose whichever you desire for him."

"None of the three," returned the father. "I only wish him to be
good--the best prince in the whole world. Of what use would riches,
power, or beauty be to him if he were a bad man?"

"You are right," said the fairy; "but I can not make him good: he
must do that himself. I can only change his external fortunes; for
his personal character, the utmost I can promise is to give him good
counsel, reprove him for his faults, and even punish him, if he will not
punish himself. You mortals can do the same with your children."

"Ah, yes!" said the king, sighing. Still, he felt that the kindness of a
fairy was something gained for his son, and died not long after, content
and at peace.

Prince Cherry mourned deeply, for he dearly loved his father, and would
have gladly given all his kingdoms and treasures to keep him in life a
little longer. Two days after the Good King was no more, Prince Cherry
was sleeping in his chamber, when he saw the same dazzling vision of the
fairy Candide.

"I promised your father," said she, "to be your best friend, and in
pledge of this take what I now give you;" and she placed a small gold
ring upon his finger. "Poor as it looks, it is more precious than
diamonds; for whenever you do ill it will prick your finger. If, after
that warning, you still continue in evil, you will lose my friendship,
and I shall become your direst enemy."'

So saying, she disappeared, leaving Cherry in such amazement that he
would have believed it all a dream, save for the ring on his finger.

He was for a long time so good that the ring never pricked him at all;
and this made him so cheerful and pleasant in his humor that everybody
called him "Happy Prince Cherry." But one unlucky day he was out hunting
and found no sport, which vexed him so much that he showed his ill
temper by his looks and ways. He fancied his ring felt very tight and
uncomfortable, but as it did not prick him he took no heed of this:
until, re-entering his palace, his little pet dog, Bibi, jumped up
upon him and was sharply told to get away. The creature, accustomed to
nothing but caresses, tried to attract his attention by pulling at his
garments, when Prince Cherry turned and gave it a severe kick. At this
moment he felt in his finger a prick like a pin.

"What nonsense!" said he to himself. "The fairy must be making game of
me. Why, what great evil have I done! I, the master of a great empire,
cannot I kick my own dog?"

A voice replied, or else Prince Cherry imagined it, "No, sire; the
master of a great empire has a right to do good, but not evil. I--a
fairy--am as much above you as you are above your dog. I might punish
you, kill you, if I chose; but I prefer leaving you to amend your
ways. You have been guilty of three faults today--bad temper, passion,
cruelty: do better to-morrow."

The prince promised, and kept his word a while; but he had been brought
up by a foolish nurse, who indulged him in every way and was always
telling him that he would be a king one day, when he might do as he
liked in all things. He found out now that even a king cannot always do
that; it vexed him and made him angry. His ring began to prick him so
often that his little finger was continually bleeding. He disliked
this, as was natural, and soon began to consider whether it would not be
easier to throw the ring away altogether than to be constantly annoyed
by it. It was such a queer thing for a king to have a spot of blood on
his finger! At last, unable to put up with it any more, he took his ring
off and hid it where he would never see it; and believed himself the
happiest of men, for he could now do exactly what he liked. He did it,
and became every day more and more miserable.

One day he saw a young girl, so beautiful that, being always accustomed
to have his own way, he immediately determined to espouse her. He never
doubted that she would be only too glad to be made a queen, for she
was very poor. But Zelia--that was her name--answered, to his great
astonishment, that she would rather not marry him.

"Do I displease you?" asked the prince, into whose mind it had never
entered that he could displease anybody.

"Not at all, my prince," said the honest peasant maiden. "You are very
handsome, very charming; but you are not like your father the Good King.
I will not be your queen, for you would make me miserable."

At these words the prince's love seemed all to turn to hatred: he gave
orders to his guards to convey Zelia to a prison near the palace,
and then took counsel with his foster brother, the one of all his ill
companions who most incited him to do wrong.

"Sir," said this man, "if I were in your majesty's place, I would never
vex myself about a poor silly girl. Feed her on bread and water till
she comes to her senses; and if she still refuses you, let her die in
torment, as a warning to your other subjects should they venture to
dispute your will. You will be disgraced should you suffer yourself to
be conquered by a simple girl."

"But," said Prince Cherry, "shall I not be disgraced if I harm a
creature so perfectly innocent?"

"No one is innocent who disputes your majesty's authority," said the
courtier, bowing; "and it is better to commit an injustice than allow it
to be supposed you can ever be contradicted with impunity."

This touched Cherry on his weak point--his good impulses faded; he
resolved once more to ask Zelia if she would marry him, and if she again
refused, to sell her as a slave. Arrived at the cell in which she was
confined, what was his astonishment to find her gone! He knew not whom
to accuse, for he had kept the key in his pocket the whole time. At
last, the foster-brother suggested that the escape of Zelia might have
been contrived by an old man, Suliman by name, the prince's former
tutor, who was the only one who now ventured to blame him for anything
that he did. Cherry sent immediately, and ordered his old friend to be
brought to him, loaded heavily with irons. Then, full of fury, he went
and shut himself up in his own chamber, where he went raging to and fro,
till startled by a noise like a clap of thunder. The fairy Candide stood
before him.

"Prince," said she, in a severe voice, "I promised your father to give
you good counsels and to punish you if you refused to follow them. My
counsels were forgotten, my punishment despised. Under the figure of a
man, you have been no better than the beasts you chase: like a lion in
fury, a wolf in gluttony, a serpent in revenge, and a bull in brutality.
Take, therefore, in your new form the likeness of all these animals."

Scarcely had Prince Cherry heard these words than to his horror he found
himself transformed into what the Fairy had named. He was a creature
with the head of a lion, the horns of a bull, the feet of a wolf, and
the tail of a serpent. At the same time he felt himself transported to
a distant forest, where, standing on the bank of a stream, he saw
reflected in the water his own frightful shape, and heard a voice
saying:

"Look at thyself, and know thy soul has become a thousand times uglier
even than thy body."

Cherry recognized the voice of Candide, and in his rage would have
sprung upon her and devoured her; but he saw nothing and the same voice
said behind him:

"Cease thy feeble fury, and learn to conquer thy pride by being in
submission to thine own subjects."

Hearing no more, he soon quitted the stream, hoping at least to get rid
of the sight of himself; but he had scarcely gone twenty paces when he
tumbled into a pitfall that was laid to catch bears; the bear-hunters,
descending from some trees hard by, caught him, chained him, and only
too delighted to get hold of such a curious-looking animal, led him
along with them to the capital of his own kingdom.

There great rejoicings were taking place, and the bear-hunters, asking
what it was all about, were told that it was because Prince Cherry,
the torment of his subjects, had just been struck dead by a
thunderbolt--just punishment of all his crimes. Four courtiers, his
wicked companions, had wished to divide his throne between them; but the
people had risen up against them and offered the crown to Suliman, the
old tutor whom Cherry had ordered to be arrested.

All this the poor monster heard. He even saw Suliman sitting upon his
own throne and trying to calm the populace by representing to them that
it was not certain Prince Cherry was dead; that he might return one day
to reassume with honor the crown which Suliman only consented to wear as
a sort of viceroy.
