such things.

Clad in her best, Rebecca had gone to take tea with the Cobbs; but
while crossing the bridge she was suddenly overcome by the beauty of
the river and leaned over the newly painted rail to feast her eyes on
the dashing torrent of the fall. Resting her elbows on the topmost
board, and inclining her little figure forward in delicious ease, she
stood there dreaming.

The river above the dam was a glassy lake with all the loveliness of
blue heaven and green shore reflected in its surface; the fall was a
swirling wonder of water, ever pouring itself over and over
inexhaustibly in luminous golden gushes that lost themselves in snowy
depths of foam. Sparkling in the sunshine, gleaming under the summer
moon, cold and gray beneath a November sky, trickling over the dam in
some burning July drought, swollen with turbulent power in some April
freshet, how many young eyes gazed into the mystery and majesty of the
falls along that river, and how many young hearts dreamed out their
futures leaning over the bridge rail, seeing "the vision splendid"
reflected there and often, too, watching it fade into "the light of
common day."

Rebecca never went across the bridge without bending over the rail to
wonder and to ponder, and at this special moment she was putting the
finishing touches on a poem.

  Two maidens by a river strayed
       Down in the state of Maine.
  The one was called Rebecca,
       The other Emma Jane.
  "I would my life were like the stream,"
       Said her named Emma Jane,
  "So quiet and so very smooth,
       So free from every pain."

  "I'd rather be a little drop
       In the great rushing fall!
  I would not choose the glassy lake,
       'T would not suit me at all!"
  (It was the darker maiden spoke
       The words I just have stated,
  The maidens twain were simply friends
       And not at all related.)

  But O! alas I we may not have
       The things we hope to gain;
  The quiet life may come to me,
       The rush to Emma Jane!

"I don't like 'the rush to Emma Jane,' and I can't think of anything
else. Oh! what a smell of paint! Oh! it is ON me! Oh! it's all over my
best dress! Oh I what WILL aunt Miranda say!"

With tears of self-reproach streaming from her eyes, Rebecca flew up
the hill, sure of sympathy, and hoping against hope for help of some
sort.

Mrs. Cobb took in the situation at a glance, and professed herself able
to remove almost any stain from almost any fabric; and in this she was
corroborated by uncle Jerry, who vowed that mother could git anything
out. Sometimes she took the cloth right along with the spot, but she
had a sure hand, mother had!

The damaged garment was removed and partially immersed in turpentine,
while Rebecca graced the festal board clad in a blue calico wrapper of
Mrs. Cobb's.

"Don't let it take your appetite away," crooned Mrs. Cobb. "I've got
cream biscuit and honey for you. If the turpentine don't work, I'll try
French chalk, magneshy, and warm suds. If they fail, father shall run
over to Strout's and borry some of the stuff Marthy got in Milltown to
take the currant pie out of her weddin' dress."

"I ain't got to understandin' this paintin' accident yet," said uncle
Jerry jocosely, as he handed Rebecca the honey. "Bein' as how there's
'Fresh Paint' signs hung all over the breedge, so 't a blind asylum
couldn't miss 'em, I can't hardly account for your gettin' int' the
pesky stuff."

"I didn't notice the signs," Rebecca said dolefully. "I suppose I was
looking at the falls."

"The falls has been there sence the beginnin' o' time, an' I cal'late
they'll be there till the end on 't; so you needn't 'a' been in sech a
brash to git a sight of 'em. Children comes turrible high, mother, but
I s'pose we must have 'em!" he said, winking at Mrs. Cobb.

When supper was cleared away Rebecca insisted on washing and wiping the
dishes, while Mrs. Cobb worked on the dress with an energy that plainly
showed the gravity of the task. Rebecca kept leaving her post at the
sink to bend anxiously over the basin and watch her progress, while
uncle Jerry offered advice from time to time.

"You must 'a' laid all over the breedge, deary," said Mrs. Cobb; "for
the paint 's not only on your elbows and yoke and waist, but it about
covers your front breadth."

As the garment began to look a little better Rebecca's spirits took an
upward turn, and at length she left it to dry in the fresh air, and
went into the sitting-room.

"Have you a piece of paper, please?" asked Rebecca. "I'll copy out the
poetry I was making while I was lying in the paint."

Mrs. Cobb sat by her mending basket, and uncle Jerry took down a
gingham bag of strings and occupied himself in taking the snarls out of
them,--a favorite evening amusement with him.

Rebecca soon had the lines copied in her round school-girl hand, making
such improvements as occurred to her on sober second thought.

    THE TWO WISHES
        BY
    REBECCA RANDALL

  Two maidens by a river strayed,
       'T was in the state of Maine.
  Rebecca was the darker one,
       The fairer, Emma Jane.
  The fairer maiden said, "I would
       My life were as the stream;
  So peaceful, and so smooth and still,
       So pleasant and serene."

  "I'd rather be a little drop
       In the great rushing fall;
  I'd never choose the quiet lake;
       'T would not please me at all."
  (It was the darker maiden spoke
       The words we just have stated;
  The maidens twain were simply friends,
       Not sisters, or related.)

  But O! alas! we may not have
       The things we hope to gain.
  The quiet life may come to me,
       The rush to Emma Jane!

She read it aloud, and the Cobbs thought it not only surpassingly
beautiful, but a marvelous production.

"I guess if that writer that lived on Congress Street in Portland could
'a' heard your poetry he'd 'a' been astonished," said Mrs. Cobb. "If
you ask me, I say this piece is as good as that one o' his, 'Tell me
not in mournful numbers;' and consid'able clearer."

"I never could fairly make out what 'mournful numbers' was," remarked
Mr. Cobb critically.

"Then I guess you never studied fractions!" flashed Rebecca. "See here,
uncle Jerry and aunt Sarah, would you write another verse, especially
for a last one, as they usually do--one with 'thoughts' in it--to make
a better ending?"

"If you can grind 'em out jest by turnin' the crank, why I should say
the more the merrier; but I don't hardly see how you could have a
better endin'," observed Mr. Cobb.

"It is horrid!" grumbled Rebecca. "I ought not to have put that 'me'
in. I'm writing the poetry. Nobody ought to know it IS me standing by
the river; it ought to be 'Rebecca,' or 'the darker maiden;' and 'the
rush to Emma Jane' is simply dreadful. Sometimes I think I never will
try poetry, it's so hard to make it come right; and other times it just
says itself. I wonder if this would be better?

  But O! alas! we may not gain
       The good for which we pray
  The quiet life may come to one
       Who likes it rather gay,

I don't know whether that is worse or not. Now for a new last verse!"

In a few minutes the poetess looked up, flushed and triumphant. "It was
as easy as nothing. Just hear!" And she read slowly, with her pretty,
pathetic voice:--

  Then if our lot be bright or sad,
       Be full of smiles, or tears,
  The thought that God has planned it so
       Should help us bear the years.

Mr. and Mrs. Cobb exchanged dumb glances of admiration; indeed uncle
Jerry was obliged to turn his face to the window and wipe his eyes
furtively with the string-bag.

"How in the world did you do it?" Mrs. Cobb exclaimed.

"Oh, it's easy," answered Rebecca; "the hymns at meeting are all like
that. You see there's a school newspaper printed at Wareham Academy
once a month. Dick Carter says the editor is always a boy, of course;
but he allows girls to try and write for it, and then chooses the best.
Dick thinks I can be in it."

"IN it!" exclaimed uncle Jerry. "I shouldn't be a bit surprised if you
had to write the whole paper; an' as for any boy editor, you could lick
him writin', I bate ye, with one hand tied behind ye."

"Can we have a copy of the poetry to keep in the family Bible?"
inquired Mrs. Cobb respectfully.

"Oh! would you like it?" asked Rebecca. "Yes indeed! I'll do a clean,
nice one with violet ink and a fine pen. But I must go and look at my
poor dress."

The old couple followed Rebecca into the kitchen. The frock was quite
dry, and in truth it had been helped a little by aunt Sarah's
ministrations; but the colors had run in the rubbing, the pattern was
blurred, and there were muddy streaks here and there. As a last resort,
it was carefully smoothed with a warm iron, and Rebecca was urged to
attire herself, that they might see if the spots showed as much when it
was on.

They did, most uncompromisingly, and to the dullest eye. Rebecca gave
one searching look, and then said, as she took her hat from a nail in
the entry, "I think I'll be going. Good-night! If I've got to have a
scolding, I want it quick, and get it over."

"Poor little onlucky misfortunate thing!" sighed uncle Jerry, as his
eyes followed her down the hill. "I wish she could pay some attention
to the ground under her feet; but I vow, if she was ourn I'd let her
slop paint all over the house before I could scold her. Here's her
poetry she's left behind. Read it out ag'in, mother. Land!" he
continued, chuckling, as he lighted his cob pipe; "I can just see the
last flap o' that boy-editor's shirt tail as he legs it for the woods,
while Rebecky settles down in his revolvin' cheer! I'm puzzled as to
what kind of a job editin' is, exactly; but she'll find out, Rebecky
will. An' she'll just edit for all she's worth!

  "'The thought that God has planned it so
       Should help us bear the years.'

Land, mother! that takes right holt, kind o' like the gospel. How do
you suppose she thought that out?"

"She couldn't have thought it out at her age," said Mrs. Cobb; "she
must have just guessed it was that way. We know some things without
bein' told, Jeremiah."


Rebecca took her scolding (which she richly deserved) like a soldier.
There was considerable of it, and Miss Miranda remarked, among other
things, that so absent-minded a child was sure to grow up into a
driveling idiot. She was bidden to stay away from Alice Robinson's
birthday party, and doomed to wear her dress, stained and streaked as
it was, until it was worn out. Aunt Jane six months later mitigated
this martyrdom by making her a ruffled dimity pinafore, artfully shaped
to conceal all the spots. She was blessedly ready with these mediations
between the poor little sinner and the full consequences of her sin.

When Rebecca had heard her sentence and gone to the north chamber she
began to think. If there was anything she did not wish to grow into, it
was an idiot of any sort, particularly a driveling one; and she
resolved to punish herself every time she incurred what she considered
to be the righteous displeasure of her virtuous relative. She didn't
mind staying away from Alice Robinson's. She had told Emma Jane it
would be like a picnic in a graveyard, the Robinson house being as near
an approach to a tomb as a house can manage to be. Children were
commonly brought in at the back door, and requested to stand on
newspapers while making their call, so that Alice was begged by her
friends to "receive" in the shed or barn whenever possible. Mrs.
Robinson was not only "turrible neat," but "turrible close," so that
the refreshments were likely to be peppermint lozenges and glasses of
well water.

After considering the relative values, as penances, of a piece of
haircloth worn next the skin, and a pebble in the shoe, she dismissed
them both. The haircloth could not be found, and the pebble would
attract the notice of the Argus-eyed aunt, besides being a foolish bar
to the activity of a person who had to do housework and walk a mile and
a half to school.

Her first experimental attempt at martyrdom had not been a
distinguished success. She had stayed at home from the Sunday-school
concert, a function of which, in ignorance of more alluring ones, she
was extremely fond. As a result of her desertion, two infants who
relied upon her to prompt them (she knew the verses of all the children
better than they did themselves) broke down ignominiously. The class to
which she belonged had to read a difficult chapter of Scripture in
rotation, and the various members spent an arduous Sabbath afternoon
counting out verses according to their seats in the pew, and practicing
the ones that would inevitably fall to them. They were too ignorant to
realize, when they were called upon, that Rebecca's absence would make
everything come wrong, and the blow descended with crushing force when
the Jebusites and Amorites, the Girgashites, Hivites, and Perizzites
had to be pronounced by the persons of all others least capable of
grappling with them.

Self-punishment, then, to be adequate and proper, must begin, like
charity, at home, and unlike charity should end there too. Rebecca
looked about the room vaguely as she sat by the window. She must give
up something, and truth to tell she possessed little to give, hardly
anything but--yes, that would do, the beloved pink parasol. She could
not hide it in the attic, for in some moment of weakness she would be
sure to take it out again. She feared she had not the moral energy to
break it into bits. Her eyes moved from the parasol to the apple-trees
in the side yard, and then fell to the well curb. That would do; she
would fling her dearest possession into the depths of the water. Action
followed quickly upon decision, as usual. She slipped down in the
darkness, stole out the front door, approached the place of sacrifice,
lifted the cover of the well, gave one unresigned shudder, and flung
the parasol downward with all her force. At the crucial instant of
renunciation she was greatly helped by the reflection that she closely
resembled the heathen mothers who cast their babes to the crocodiles in
the Ganges.

She slept well and arose refreshed, as a consecrated spirit always
should and sometimes does. But there was great difficulty in drawing
water after breakfast. Rebecca, chastened and uplifted, had gone to
school. Abijah Flagg was summoned, lifted the well cover, explored,
found the inciting cause of trouble, and with the help of Yankee wit
succeeded in removing it. The fact was that the ivory hook of the
parasol had caught in the chain gear, and when the first attempt at
drawing water was made, the little offering of a contrite heart was
jerked up, bent, its strong ribs jammed into the well side, and
entangled with a twig root. It is needless to say that no
sleight-of-hand performer, however expert, unless aided by the powers
of darkness, could have accomplished this feat; but a luckless child in
the pursuit of virtue had done it with a turn of the wrist.

We will draw a veil over the scene that occurred after Rebecca's return
from school. You who read may be well advanced in years, you may be
gifted in rhetoric, ingenious in argument; but even you might quail at
the thought of explaining the tortuous mental processes that led you
into throwing your beloved pink parasol into Miranda Sawyer's well.
Perhaps you feel equal to discussing the efficacy of spiritual
self-chastisement with a person who closes her lips into a thin line
and looks at you out of blank, uncomprehending eyes! Common sense,
right, and logic were all arrayed on Miranda's side. When poor Rebecca,
driven to the wall, had to avow the reasons lying behind the sacrifice
of the sunshade, her aunt said, "Now see here, Rebecca, you're too big
to be whipped, and I shall never whip you; but when you think you ain't
punished enough, just tell me, and I'll make out to invent a little
something more. I ain't so smart as some folks, but I can do that much;
and whatever it is, it'll be something that won't punish the whole
family, and make 'em drink ivory dust, wood chips, and pink silk rags
with their water."



XIII

SNOW-WHITE; ROSE-RED

Just before Thanksgiving the affairs of the Simpsons reached what might
have been called a crisis, even in their family, which had been born
and reared in a state of adventurous poverty and perilous uncertainty.

Riverboro was doing its best to return the entire tribe of Simpsons to
the land of its fathers, so to speak, thinking rightly that the town
which had given them birth, rather than the town of their adoption,
should feed them and keep a roof over their heads until the children
were of an age for self-support. There was little to eat in the
household and less to wear, though Mrs. Simpson did, as always, her
poor best. The children managed to satisfy their appetites by sitting
modestly outside their neighbors' kitchen doors when meals were about
to be served. They were not exactly popular favorites, but they did
receive certain undesirable morsels from the more charitable housewives.

Life was rather dull and dreary, however, and in the chill and gloom of
November weather, with the vision of other people's turkeys bursting
with fat, and other people's golden pumpkins and squashes and corn
being garnered into barns, the young Simpsons groped about for some
inexpensive form of excitement, and settled upon the selling of soap
for a premium. They had sold enough to their immediate neighbors during
the earlier autumn to secure a child's handcart, which, though very
weak on its pins, could be trundled over the country roads. With large
business sagacity and an executive capacity which must have been
inherited from their father, they now proposed to extend their
operations to a larger area and distribute soap to contiguous villages,
if these villages could be induced to buy. The Excelsior Soap Company
paid a very small return of any kind to its infantile agents, who were
scattered through the state, but it inflamed their imaginations by the
issue of circulars with highly colored pictures of the premiums to be
awarded for the sale of a certain number of cakes. It was at this
juncture that Clara Belle and Susan Simpson consulted Rebecca, who
threw herself solidly and wholeheartedly into the enterprise, promising
her help and that of Emma Jane Perkins. The premiums within their
possible grasp were three: a bookcase, a plush reclining chair, and a
banquet lamp. Of course the Simpsons had no books, and casting aside,
without thought or pang, the plush chair, which might have been of some
use in a family of seven persons (not counting Mr. Simpson, who
ordinarily sat elsewhere at the town's expense), they warmed themselves
rapturously in the vision of the banquet lamp, which speedily became to
them more desirable than food, drink, or clothing. Neither Emma Jane
nor Rebecca perceived anything incongruous in the idea of the Simpsons
striving for a banquet lamp. They looked at the picture daily and knew
that if they themselves were free agents they would toil, suffer, ay
sweat, for the happy privilege of occupying the same room with that
lamp through the coming winter evenings. It looked to be about eight
feet tall in the catalogue, and Emma Jane advised Clara Belle to
measure the height of the Simpson ceilings; but a note in the margin of
the circular informed them that it stood two and a half feet high when
set up in all its dignity and splendor on a proper table, three dollars
extra. It was only of polished brass, continued the circular, though it
was invariably mistaken for solid gold, and the shade that accompanied
it (at least it accompanied it if the agent sold a hundred extra cakes)
was of crinkled crepe paper printed in a dozen delicious hues, from
which the joy-dazzled agent might take his choice.

Seesaw Simpson was not in the syndicate. Clara Belle was rather a
successful agent, but Susan, who could only say "thoap," never made
large returns, and the twins, who were somewhat young to be thoroughly
trustworthy, could be given only a half dozen cakes at a time, and were
obliged to carry with them on their business trips a brief document
stating the price per cake, dozen, and box. Rebecca and Emma Jane
offered to go two or three miles in some one direction and see what
they could do in the way of stirring up a popular demand for the
Snow-White and Rose-Red brands, the former being devoted to laundry
purposes and the latter being intended for the toilet.

There was a great amount of hilarity in the preparation for this event,
and a long council in Emma Jane's attic. They had the soap company's
circular from which to arrange a proper speech, and they had, what was
still better, the remembrance of a certain patent-medicine vender's
discourse at the Milltown Fair. His method, when once observed, could
never be forgotten; nor his manner, nor his vocabulary. Emma Jane
practiced it on Rebecca, and Rebecca on Emma Jane.

"Can I sell you a little soap this afternoon? It is called the
Snow-White and Rose-Red Soap, six cakes in an ornamental box, only
twenty cents for the white, twenty-five cents for the red. It is made
