on?  Just fancy our Elsie behaving so, Clover!  Why, papa would have
a fit.  I declare, I've a great mind to get up a society to put down
flirting."

"Do!" said Rose.  "What fun it would be!  Call it 'The Society for
the Suppression of Young Men.'  I'll join."

"You, indeed!" replied Katy, shaking her head.  "Didn't I see Berry
Searles throw a bunch of syringa into your window only this morning?"

"Dear me! did he?  I shall have to speak to Mary again.  It's quite
shocking to have her go on so.  But really and truly do let us have
a Society.  It would be so jolly.  We could meet on Saturday
afternoons, and write pieces and have signals and a secret, as
Sylvia's Society did when she was at school.  Get one up, Katy,--
that's a dear."

"But," said Katy, taken aback by having her random idea so suddenly
adopted, "if I did get one up, it would be in real earnest, and it
would be a society against flirting.  And you know you can't help
it, Rosy."

"Yes, I can.  You are doing me great injustice.  I don't behave like
those girls in Attic Row.  I never did.  I just bow to Berry and the
rest whom I really know,--never to anybody else.  And you must see,
Katherine darling, that it would be the height of ingratitude if I
didn't bow to the boys who made mud pies for me when I was little,
and lent me their marbles, and did all sorts of kind things.  Now
wouldn't it?"--coaxingly.

"Per--haps," admitted Katy, with a smile.  "But you're such a witch!"

"I'm not,--indeed I'm not.  I'll be a pillar of society if only you'll
provide a Society for me to be a pillar of.  Now, Katy, do--ah, do, do!"

When Rose was in a coaxing mood, few people could resist her.  Katy
yielded, and between jest and earnest the matter was settled.  Katy
was to head the plan and invite the members.

"Only a few at first," suggested Rose.  "When it is proved to be a
success, and everybody wants to join, we can let in two or three more
as a great favor.  What shall the name be?  We'll keep it a secret,
whatever it is.  There's no fun in a society without a secret."

What should the name be?  Rose invented half a dozen, each more absurd
than the last.  "The Anti-Jane Society" would sound well, she insisted.
Or, no!--the "Put-him-down-Club" was better yet!  Finally they settled
upon "The Society for the Suppression of Unladylike Conduct."

"Only we'll never use the whole name," said Rose: "We'll say, 'The
S. S .U. C.'  That sounds brisk and snappy, and will drive the whole
school wild with curiosity.  What larks!  How I long to begin!"

The next Saturday was fixed upon for the first meeting.  During the
week Katy proposed the plan to the elect few, all of whom accepted
enthusiastically.  Lilly Page was the only person who declined.  She
said it would be stupid; that for her part she didn't set up to be
"proper" or better than she was, and that in any case she shouldn't
wish to be mixed up in a Society of which "Miss Agnew" was a member.
The girls did not break their hearts over this refusal.  They had
felt obliged to ask her for relationship's sake, but everybody was
a little relieved that she did not wish to join.

No. 6 looked very full indeed that Saturday afternoon when the S. S.
U. C. came together for the first time.  Ten members were present.
Mary Silver and Louisa were two; and Rose's crony, Esther Dearborn,
another.  The remaining four were Sally Alsop and Amy Erskine; Alice
Gibbons, one of the new scholars, whom they all liked, but did not
know very well; and Ellen Gray, a pale, quiet girl, with droll blue
eyes, a comical twist to her mouth, and a trick of saying funny
things in such a demure way that half the people who listened never
found out that they were funny.  All Rose's chairs had been borrowed
for the occasion.  Three girls sat on the bed, and three on the floor.
With a little squeezing, there was plenty of room for everybody.

Katy was chosen President, and requested to take the rocking-chair as
a sign of office.  This she did with much dignity, and proceeded to
read the Constitution and By-Laws of the Society, which had been drawn
up by Rose Red, and copied on an immense sheet of blue paper.

They ran thus:--


CONSTITUTION FOR THE SOCIETY FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF UNLADYLIKE
    CONDUCT, KNOWN TO THE UNINITIATED AS THE S. S. U. C.


ARTICLE I.

     The object of this Society is twofold: it combines
     having a good time with the Pursuit of VIRTUE.


ARTICLE II.

     The good time is to take place once a week in No. 6
     Quaker Row, between the hours of four and six P. M.


ARTICLE III.

     The nature of the good time is to be decided upon by
     a Committee to be appointed each Saturday by the members
     of the Society.


ARTICLE IV.

     VIRTUE is to be pursued at all times and in all seasons,
     by the members of the Society setting their faces against
     the practice of bowing and speaking to young gentlemen
     who are not acquaintances; waving of pocket handkerchiefs,
     signals from windows, and any species of conduct which
     would be thought unladylike by nice people anywhere, and
     especially by the mammas of the Society.


ARTICLE V.

     The members of the Society pledge themselves to use their
     influence against these practices, both by precept and
     example.

             In witness whereof we sign.

                             Katherine Carr, President.
                             Rosamond Redding, Secretary.
                             Clover E. Carr.
                             Mary L. Silver.
                             Esther Dearborn.
                             Sally P. Alsop.
                             Amy W. Erskine.
                             Alice Gibbons.
                             Ellen Whitworth Gray.


Next followed the By-Laws.  Katy had not been able to see the necessity
of having any By-Laws, but Rose had insisted.  She had never heard of
a Society without them, she said, and she didn't think it would be
"legal" to leave them out.  It had cost her some trouble to invent
them, but at last they stood thus:--



BY-LAW NO. 1.

The members of the S. S. U. C. will observe the following signals:--

  1st. The Grip.--This is given by inserting the first and middle
    finger of the right hand between the thumb and fourth finger of
    the respondent's left, and describing a rotatory motion in the
    air with the little finger.  N. B. Much practice is necessary
    to enable members to exchange this signal in such a manner as
    not to attract attention.

  2nd. The Signal of Danger.--This signal is for use when Miss Jane,
    or any other foe-woman, heaves into sight.  It consists in
    rubbing the nose violently, and at the same time giving three
    stamps on the floor with the left foot.  It must be done with
    an air of unconsciousness.

  3rd. The Signal for Consultation.--This signal is for use when
    immediate communication is requisite between members of the
    Society.  It consists of a pinch on the back of the right
    hand, accompanied by the word "Holofernes" pronounced in a
    low voice.


BY-LAW NO. 2.

  The members of the S. S. U. C.  pledge themselves to inviolable
    secrecy about all Society proceedings.


BY-LAW NO. 3

  The members of the S. S. U. C. will bring their Saturday corn-
    balls to swell the common entertainment.


BY-LAW NO. 4.

  Members having boxes from home are at liberty to contribute such
    part of the contents as they please to the aforementioned
    common entertainment.



Here the By-Laws ended.  There was much laughter over them, especially
over the last.

"Why did you put that in, Rosy?" asked Ellen Gray: "it strikes me as
hardly necessary."

"Oh," replied Rose, "I put that in to encourage Silvery Mary there.
She's expecting a box soon, and I knew that she would pine to give
the Society a share, but would be too timid to propose it; so I
thought I would just pave the way."

"How truly kind!" laughed Clover.

"Now," said the President, "the entertainment of the meeting will
begin by the reading of 'Trailing Arbutus,' a poem by C. E. C."

Clover had been very unwilling to read the first piece, and had only
yielded after much coaxing from Rose, who had bestowed upon her in
consequence the name of Quintia Curtia.  She felt very shy as she
stood up with her paper in hand, and her voice trembled perceptibly;
but after a minute she grew used to the sound of it, and read steadily.


                           TRAILING ARBUTUS.

                    I always think, when looking
                       At its mingled rose and white,
                    Of the pink lips of children
                       Put up to say good-night.


                    Cuddled its green leaves under,
                       Like babies in their beds,
                    Its blossoms shy and sunny
                       Conceal their pretty heads.


                    And when I lift the blanket up,
                       And peep inside of it,
                    They seem to give me smile for smile,
                       Nor be afraid a bit.


                    Dear little flower, the earliest
                       Of all the flowers that are;
                    Twinkling upon the bare, brown earth,
                       As on the clouds a star.


                    How can we fail to love it well,
                       Or prize it more and more!
                    It is the first small signal
                       That winter time is o'er;


                    That spring has not forgotten us,
                       Though late and slow she be,
                    But is upon her flying way,
                       And we her face shall see.


This production caused quite a sensation among the girls.  They had
never heard any of Clover's verses before, and thought these wonderful.

"Why!" cried Sally Alsop, "it is almost as good as Tupper!"  Sally
meant this for a great compliment, for she was devoted to the
"Proverbial Philosophy."

"A Poem by E.D." was the next thing on the list.  Esther Dearborn rose
with great pomp and dignity, cleared her throat, put on a pair of eye-
glasses, and began.


                              MISS JANE.

                   Who ran to catch me on the spot,
                   If I the slightest rule forgot,
                   Believing and excusing not?
                                                 Miss Jane.

                   Who lurked outside my door all day
                   In hopes that I would disobey,
                   And some low whispered word would say?
                                                 Miss Jane.

                   Who caught our Rose-bud half way through
                   The wall which parted her from two
                   Friends, and that small prank made her rue?
                                                 Miss Jane.

                   Who is our bane, our foe, our fear?
                   Who's always certain to appear
                   Just when we do not think her near?
                                                 Miss Jane.


--"Who down the hall is creeping now
   With stealthy step, but knowing not how
   Exactly to discover"--

broke in Rose, improvising rapidly.  Next moment came a knock at the
door.  It was Miss Jane.

"Your drawers, Miss Carr,--your cupboard,"--she said, going across
the room and examining each in turn.  There was no fault to be found
with either, so she withdrew, giving the laughing girls a suspicious
glance, and remarking that it was a bad habit to sit on beds,--it
always injured them.

"Do you suppose she heard?" whispered Mary Silver.

"No, I don't think she did," replied Rose.  "Of course she suspected
us of being in some mischief or other,--she always does that.  Now,
Mary, it's you turn to give us an intellectual treat.  Begin."

Poor Mary shrank back, blushing and protesting.

"You know I can't," she said, "I'm too stupid."

"Rubbish!" cried Rose,  "You're the dearest girl that ever was."  She
gave Mary's shoulder a reassuring pat.

"Mary is excused this time," put in Katy.  "It is the first meeting,
so I shall be indulgent.  But, after this, every member will be
expected to contribute something for each meeting.  I mean to be
very strict."

"Oh, I never, never can!" cried Mary.  Rose was down on her at once.
"Nonsense! hush!" she said.  "Of course you can.  You shall, if I
have to write it for you myself!"

"Order!" said the President, rapping on the table with a pencil.
