
"If this is Central Park," said Frank, who naturally felt
disappointed, "I don't think much of it. My father's got a large
pasture that is much nicer."

"It'll look better some time," said Dick. "There aint much to see
now but rocks. We will take a walk over it if you want to."

"No," said Frank, "I've seen as much of it as I want to. Besides, I
feel tired."

"Then we'll go back. We can take the Sixth Avenue cars. They will
bring us out at Vesey Street just beside the Astor House."

"All right," said Frank. "That will be the best course. I hope," he
added, laughing, "our agreeable lady friend won't be there. I don't
care about being accused of _stealing_ again."

"She was a tough one," said Dick. "Wouldn't she make a nice wife for
a man that likes to live in hot water, and didn't mind bein' scalded
two or three times a day?"

"Yes, I think she'd just suit him. Is that the right car, Dick?"

"Yes, jump in, and I'll follow."

The Sixth Avenue is lined with stores, many of them of very good
appearance, and would make a very respectable principal street for a
good-sized city. But it is only one of several long business streets
which run up the island, and illustrate the extent and importance of
the city to which they belong.

No incidents worth mentioning took place during their ride down
town. In about three-quarters of an hour the boys got out of the car
beside the Astor House.

"Are you goin' in now, Frank?" asked Dick.

"That depends upon whether you have anything else to show me."

"Wouldn't you like to go to Wall Street?"

"That's the street where there are so many bankers and brokers,--isn't
it?"

"Yes, I s'pose you aint afraid of bulls and bears,--are you?"

"Bulls and bears?" repeated Frank, puzzled.

"Yes."

"What are they?"

"The bulls is what tries to make the stocks go up, and the bears is
what try to growl 'em down."

"Oh, I see. Yes, I'd like to go."

Accordingly they walked down on the west side of Broadway as far as
Trinity Church, and then, crossing, entered a street not very wide
or very long, but of very great importance. The reader would be
astonished if he could know the amount of money involved in the
transactions which take place in a single day in this street. It
would be found that although Broadway is much greater in length, and
lined with stores, it stands second to Wall Street in this respect.

"What is that large marble building?" asked Frank, pointing to a
massive structure on the corner of Wall and Nassau Streets. It was
in the form of a parallelogram, two hundred feet long by ninety
wide, and about eighty feet in height, the ascent to the entrance
being by eighteen granite steps.

"That's the Custom House," said Dick.

"It looks like pictures I've seen of the Parthenon at Athens," said
Frank, meditatively.

"Where's Athens?" asked Dick. "It aint in York State,--is it?"

"Not the Athens I mean, at any rate. It is in Greece, and was a
famous city two thousand years ago."

"That's longer than I can remember," said Dick. "I can't remember
distinctly more'n about a thousand years."

"What a chap you are, Dick! Do you know if we can go in?"

The boys ascertained, after a little inquiry, that they would be
allowed to do so. They accordingly entered the Custom House and made
their way up to the roof, from which they had a fine view of the
harbor, the wharves crowded with shipping, and the neighboring
shores of Long Island and New Jersey. Towards the north they looked
down for many miles upon continuous lines of streets, and thousands
of roofs, with here and there a church-spire rising above its
neighbors. Dick had never before been up there, and he, as well as
Frank, was interested in the grand view spread before them.

At length they descended, and were going down the granite steps on
the outside of the building, when they were addressed by a young
man, whose appearance is worth describing.

He was tall, and rather loosely put together, with small eyes and
rather a prominent nose. His clothing had evidently not been
furnished by a city tailor. He wore a blue coat with brass buttons,
and pantaloons of rather scanty dimensions, which were several
inches too short to cover his lower limbs. He held in his hand a
piece of paper, and his countenance wore a look of mingled
bewilderment and anxiety.

"Be they a-payin' out money inside there?" he asked, indicating the
interior by a motion of his hand.

"I guess so," said Dick. "Are you a-goin' in for some?"

"Wal, yes. I've got an order here for sixty dollars,--made a kind of
speculation this morning."

"How was it?" asked Frank.

"Wal, you see I brought down some money to put in the bank, fifty
dollars it was, and I hadn't justly made up my mind what bank to put
it into, when a chap came up in a terrible hurry, and said it was
very unfortunate, but the bank wasn't open, and he must have some
money right off. He was obliged to go out of the city by the next
train. I asked him how much he wanted. He said fifty dollars. I told
him I'd got that, and he offered me a check on the bank for sixty,
and I let him have it. I thought that was a pretty easy way to earn
ten dollars, so I counted out the money and he went off. He told
me I'd hear a bell ring when they began to pay out money. But I've
waited most two hours, and I haint heard it yet. I'd ought to be
goin', for I told dad I'd be home to-night. Do you think I can get
the money now?"

"Will you show me the check?" asked Frank, who had listened
attentively to the countryman's story, and suspected that he had
been made the victim of a swindler. It was made out upon the
"Washington Bank," in the sum of sixty dollars, and was signed
"Ephraim Smith."

"Washington Bank!" repeated Frank. "Dick, is there such a bank in
the city?"

"Not as I knows on," said Dick. "Leastways I don't own any shares
in it."

"Aint this the Washington Bank?" asked the countryman, pointing to
the building on the steps of which the three were now standing.

"No, it's the Custom House."

"And won't they give me any money for this?" asked the young man,
the perspiration standing on his brow.

"I am afraid the man who gave it to you was a swindler," said
Frank, gently.

"And won't I ever see my fifty dollars again?" asked the youth in
agony.

"I am afraid not."

"What'll dad say?" ejaculated the miserable youth. "It makes me feel
sick to think of it. I wish I had the feller here. I'd shake him out
of his boots."

"What did he look like? I'll call a policeman and you shall describe
him. Perhaps in that way you can get track of your money."

Dick called a policeman, who listened to the description, and
recognized the operator as an experienced swindler. He assured the
countryman that there was very little chance of his ever seeing his
money again. The boys left the miserable youth loudly bewailing his
bad luck, and proceeded on their way down the street.

"He's a baby," said Dick, contemptuously. "He'd ought to know how to
take care of himself and his money. A feller has to look sharp in
this city, or he'll lose his eye-teeth before he knows it."

"I suppose you never got swindled out of fifty dollars, Dick?"

"No, I don't carry no such small bills. I wish I did," he added.

"So do I, Dick. What's that building there at the end of the street?"

"That's the Wall-Street Ferry to Brooklyn."

"How long does it take to go across?"

"Not more'n five minutes."

"Suppose we just ride over and back."

"All right!" said Dick. "It's rather expensive; but if you don't
mind, I don't."

"Why, how much does it cost?"

"Two cents apiece."

"I guess I can stand that. Let us go."

They passed the gate, paying the fare to a man who stood at the
entrance, and were soon on the ferry-boat, bound for Brooklyn.

They had scarcely entered the boat, when Dick, grasping Frank
by the arm, pointed to a man just outside of the gentlemen's cabin.

"Do you see that man, Frank?" he inquired.

"Yes, what of him?"

"He's the man that cheated the country chap out of his fifty dollars."



CHAPTER XI

DICK AS A DETECTIVE


Dick's ready identification of the rogue who had cheated the
countryman, surprised Frank.

"What makes you think it is he?" he asked.

"Because I've seen him before, and I know he's up to them kind of
tricks. When I heard how he looked, I was sure I knowed him."

"Our recognizing him won't be of much use," said Frank. "It won't
give back the countryman his money."

"I don't know," said Dick, thoughtfully. "May be I can get it."

"How?" asked Frank, incredulously.

"Wait a minute, and you'll see."

Dick left his companion, and went up to the man whom he suspected.

"Ephraim Smith," said Dick, in a low voice.

The man turned suddenly, and looked at Dick uneasily.

"What did you say?" he asked.

"I believe your name is Ephraim Smith," continued Dick.

"You're mistaken," said the man, and was about to move off.

"Stop a minute," said Dick. "Don't you keep your money in the
Washington Bank?"

"I don't know any such bank. I'm in a hurry, young man, and I can't
stop to answer any foolish questions."

The boat had by this time reached the Brooklyn pier, and Mr. Ephraim
Smith seemed in a hurry to land.

"Look here," said Dick, significantly; "you'd better not go on shore
unless you want to jump into the arms of a policeman."

"What do you mean?" asked the man, startled.

"That little affair of yours is known to the police," said Dick;
"about how you got fifty dollars out of a greenhorn on a false
check, and it mayn't be safe for you to go ashore."

"I don't know what you're talking about," said the swindler with
affected boldness, though Dick could see that he was ill at ease.

"Yes you do," said Dick. "There isn't but one thing to do. Just give
me back that money, and I'll see that you're not touched. If you
don't, I'll give you up to the first p'liceman we meet."

Dick looked so determined, and spoke so confidently, that the other,
overcome by his fears, no longer hesitated, but passed a roll of
bills to Dick and hastily left the boat.

All this Frank witnessed with great amazement, not understanding
what influence Dick could have obtained over the swindler sufficient
to compel restitution.

"How did you do it?" he asked eagerly.

"I told him I'd exert my influence with the president to have him
tried by _habeas corpus_," said Dick.

"And of course that frightened him. But tell me, without joking, how
you managed."

Dick gave a truthful account of what occurred, and then said, "Now
we'll go back and carry the money."

"Suppose we don't find the poor countryman?"

"Then the p'lice will take care of it."

They remained on board the boat, and in five minutes were again in
New York. Going up Wall Street, they met the countryman a little
distance from the Custom House. His face was marked with the traces
of deep anguish; but in his case even grief could not subdue the
cravings of appetite. He had purchased some cakes of one of the old
women who spread out for the benefit of passers-by an array of
apples and seed-cakes, and was munching them with melancholy
satisfaction.

"Hilloa!" said Dick. "Have you found your money?"

"No," ejaculated the young man, with a convulsive gasp. "I shan't
ever see it again. The mean skunk's cheated me out of it. Consarn
his picter! It took me most six months to save it up. I was workin'
for Deacon Pinkham in our place. Oh, I wish I'd never come to New
York! The deacon, he told me he'd keep it for me; but I wanted to
put it in the bank, and now it's all gone, boo hoo!"

And the miserable youth, having despatched his cakes, was so
overcome by the thought of his loss that he burst into tears.

"I say," said Dick, "dry up, and see what I've got here."

The youth no sooner saw the roll of bills, and comprehended that it
was indeed his lost treasure, than from the depths of anguish he was
exalted to the most ecstatic joy. He seized Dick's hand, and shook
it with so much energy that our hero began to feel rather alarmed
for its safety.

"'Pears to me you take my arm for a pump-handle," said he. "Couldn't
you show your gratitood some other way? It's just possible I may
want to use my arm ag'in some time."

The young man desisted, but invited Dick most cordially to come up
and stop a week with him at his country home, assuring him that he
wouldn't charge him anything for board.

"All right!" said Dick. "If you don't mind I'll bring my wife along,
too. She's delicate, and the country air might do her good."

Jonathan stared at him in amazement, uncertain whether to credit the
fact of his marriage. Dick walked on with Frank, leaving him in an
apparent state of stupefaction, and it is possible that he has not
yet settled the affair to his satisfaction.

"Now," said Frank, "I think I'll go back to the Astor House. Uncle
has probably got through his business and returned."

"All right," said Dick.

The two boys walked up to Broadway, just where the tall steeple of
Trinity faces the street of bankers and brokers, and walked
leisurely to the hotel. When they arrived at the Astor House, Dick
said, "Good-by, Frank."

"Not yet," said Frank; "I want you to come in with me."

Dick followed his young patron up the steps. Frank went to the
reading-room, where, as he had thought probable, he found his uncle
already arrived, and reading a copy of "The Evening Post," which he
had just purchased outside.

"Well, boys," he said, looking up, "have you had a pleasant jaunt?"

"Yes, sir," said Frank. "Dick's a capital guide."

"So this is Dick," said Mr. Whitney, surveying him with a smile.
"Upon my word, I should hardly have known him. I must congratulate
him on his improved appearance."

"Frank's been very kind to me," said Dick, who, rough street-boy as
he was, had a heart easily touched by kindness, of which he had
