knowing you, knock at the door and say, "My sister dear, open; I'm
here." If you don't speak I shan't open the door.'

So off sprang the little Roe, and he felt quite well and happy in the
free open air.

The King and his huntsmen soon saw the beautiful creature and started in
pursuit, but they could not come up with it, and whenever they thought
they were sure to catch it, it bounded off to one side into the bushes
and disappeared. When night came on it ran home, and knocking at the
door of the little house cried:

'My sister dear, open; I'm here.' The door opened, and he ran in and
rested all night on his soft mossy bed.

Next morning the hunt began again, and as soon as the little Roe heard
the horns and the 'Ho! ho! 'of the huntsmen, he could not rest another
moment, and said:

'Sister, open the door, I must get out.'

So sister opened the door and said, 'Now mind and get back by nightfall,
and say your little rhyme.'

As soon as the King and his huntsmen saw the Roe with the golden collar
they all rode off after it, but it was far too quick and nimble for
them. This went on all day, but as evening came on the huntsmen had
gradually encircled the Roe, and one of them wounded it slightly in the
foot, so that it limped and ran off slowly.

Then the huntsman stole after it as far as the little house, and heard
it call out, 'My sister dear, open; I'm here,' and he saw the door open
and close immediately the fawn had run in.

The huntsman remembered all this carefully, and went off straight to the
King and told him all he had seen and heard.

'To-morrow we will hunt again,' said the King.

Poor sister was terribly frightened when she saw how her little Fawn had
been wounded. She washed off the blood, bound up the injured foot with
herbs, and said: 'Now, dear, go and lie down and rest, so that your
wound may heal.'

The wound was really so slight that it was quite well next day, and the
little Roe did not feel it at all. No sooner did it hear the sounds of
hunting in the forest than it cried:

'I can't stand this, I must be there too; I'll take care they shan't
catch me.'

Sister began to cry, and said, 'They are certain to kill you, and then I
shall be left all alone in the forest and forsaken by everyone. I can't
and won't let you out.'

'Then I shall die of grief,' replied the Roe, 'for when I hear that horn
I feel as if I must jump right out of my skin.'

So at last, when sister found there was nothing else to be done, she
opened the door with a heavy heart, and the Roe darted forth full of
glee and health into the forest.

As soon as the King saw the Roe, he said to his huntsman, 'Now then,
give chase to it all day till evening, but mind and be careful not to
hurt it.'

When the sun had set the King said to his huntsman, 'Now come and show
me the little house in the wood.'

And when he got to the house he knocked at the door and said, 'My sister
dear, open; I'm here.' Then the door opened and the King walked in, and
there stood the loveliest maiden he had ever seen.

The girl was much startled when instead of the little Roe she expected
she saw a man with a gold crown on his head walk in. But the King looked
kindly at her, held out his hand, and said, 'Will you come with me to my
castle and be my dear wife?'

'Oh yes!' replied the maiden, 'but you must let my Roe come too. I could
not possibly forsake it.'

'It shall stay with you as long as you live, and shall want for
nothing,' the King promised.

In the meantime the Roe came bounding in, and sister tied the rush cord
once more to its collar, took the end in her hand, and so they left the
little house in the forest together.

The King lifted the lonely maiden on to his horse, and led her to his
castle, where the wedding was celebrated with the greatest splendour.
The Roe was petted and caressed, and ran about at will in the palace
gardens.

Now all this time the wicked stepmother, who had been the cause of these
poor children's misfortunes and trying adventures, was feeling fully
persuaded that sister had been torn to pieces by wild beasts, and
brother shot to death in the shape of a Roe. When she heard how happy
and prosperous they were, her heart was filled with envy and hatred,
and she could think of nothing but how to bring some fresh misfortune
on them. Her own daughter, who was as hideous as night and had only one
eye, reproached her by saying, 'It is I who ought to have had this good
luck and been Queen.'

'Be quiet, will you,' said the old woman; 'when the time comes I shall
be at hand.'

Now after some time it happened one day when the King was out hunting
that the Queen gave birth to a beautiful little boy. The old witch
thought here was a good chance for her; so she took the form of the lady
in waiting, and, hurrying into the room where the Queen lay in her bed,
called out, 'The bath is quite ready; it will help to make you strong
again. Come, let us be quick, for fear the water should get cold.' Her
daughter was at hand, too, and between them they carried the Queen, who
was still very weak, into the bath-room and laid her in the bath; then
they locked the door and ran away.

They took care beforehand to make a blazing hot fire under the bath, so
that the lovely young Queen might be suffocated.

As soon as they were sure this was the case, the old witch tied a cap on
her daughter's head and laid her in the Queen's bed. She managed, too,
to make her figure and general appearance look like the Queen's, but
even her power could not restore the eye she had lost; so she made
her lie on the side of the missing eye, in order to prevent the King's
noticing anything.

In the evening, when the King came home and heard the news of his son's
birth, he was full of delight, and insisted on going at once to his dear
wife's bedside to see how she was getting on. But the old witch cried
out, 'Take care and keep the curtains drawn; don't let the light get
into the Queen's eyes; she must be kept perfectly quiet.' So the King
went away and never knew that it was a false Queen who lay in the bed.

When midnight came and everyone in the palace was sound asleep, the
nurse who alone watched by the baby's cradle in the nursery saw the door
open gently, and who should come in but the real Queen. She lifted the
child from its cradle, laid it on her arm, and nursed it for some time.
Then she carefully shook up the pillows of the little bed, laid the baby
down and tucked the coverlet in all round him. She did not forget the
little Roe either, but went to the corner where it lay, and gently
stroked its back. Then she silently left the room, and next morning when
the nurse asked the sentries if they had seen any one go into the castle
that night, they all said, 'No, we saw no one at all.'

For many nights the Queen came in the same way, but she never spoke a
word, and the nurse was too frightened to say anything about her visits.

After some little time had elapsed the Queen spoke one night, and said:


     'Is my child well? Is my Roe well?
     I'll come back twice and then farewell.'


The nurse made no answer, but as soon as the Queen had disappeared she
went to the King and told him all. The King exclaimed, 'Good heavens!
what do you say? I will watch myself to-night by the child's bed.'

When the evening came he went to the nursery, and at midnight the Queen
appeared and said:


     'Is my child well? Is my Roe well?
     I'll come back once and then farewell.'


And she nursed and petted the child as usual before she disappeared. The
King dared not trust himself to speak to her, but the following night he
kept watch again.

That night when the Queen came she said:


     'Is my child well? Is my Roe well?
     I've come this once, and now farewell.'


Then the King could restrain himself no longer, but sprang to her side
and cried, 'You can be no one but my dear wife!'

'Yes,' said she, 'I am your dear wife!' and in the same moment she was
restored to life, and was as fresh and well and rosy as ever. Then she
told the King all the cruel things the wicked witch and her daughter had
done. The King had them both arrested at once and brought to trial,
and they were condemned to death. The daughter was led into the forest,
where the wild beasts tore her to pieces, and the old witch was burnt at
the stake.

As soon as she reduced to ashes the spell was taken off the little Roe,
and he was restored to his natural shape once more, and so brother and
sister lived happily ever after.(6)

(6) Grimm.




PRINCESS ROSETTE

ONCE upon a time there lived a King and Queen who had two beautiful sons
and one little daughter, who was so pretty that no one who saw her could
help loving her. When it was time for the christening of the Princess,
the Queen--as she always did--sent for all the fairies to be present at
the ceremony, and afterwards invited them to a splendid banquet.

When it was over, and they were preparing to go away, the Queen said to
them:

'Do not forget your usual good custom. Tell me what is going to happen
to Rosette.'

For that was the name they had given the Princess.

But the fairies said they had left their book of magic at home, and they
would come another day and tell her.

'Ah!' said the Queen, 'I know very well what that means--you have
nothing good to say; but at least I beg that you will not hide anything
from me.'

So, after a great deal of persuasion, they said:

'Madam, we fear that Rosette may be the cause of great misfortunes to
her brothers; they may even meet with their death through her; that is
all we have been able to foresee about your dear little daughter. We are
very sorry to have nothing better to tell you.'

Then they went away, leaving the Queen very sad, so sad that the King
noticed it, and asked her what was the matter.

The Queen said that she had been sitting too near the fire, and had
burnt all the flax that was upon her distaff.

'Oh! is that all?' said the King, and he went up into the garret and
brought her down more flax than she could spin in a hundred years. But
the Queen still looked sad, and the King asked her again what was the
matter. She answered that she had been walking by the river and had
dropped one of her green satin slippers into the water.

'Oh! if that's all,' said the King, and he sent to all the shoe-makers
in his kingdom, and they very soon made the Queen ten thousand green
satin slippers, but still she looked sad. So the King asked her again
what was the matter, and this time she answered that in eating her
porridge too hastily she had swallowed her wedding-ring. But it so
happened that the King knew better, for he had the ring himself, and he
said:

'Oh I you are not telling me the truth, for I have your ring here in my
purse.'

Then the Queen was very much ashamed, and she saw that the King was
vexed with her; so she told him all that the fairies had predicted about
Rosette, and begged him to think how the misfortunes might be prevented.

Then it was the King's turn to look sad, and at last he said:

'I see no way of saving our sons except by having Rosette's head cut off
while she is still little.'

But the Queen cried that she would far rather have her own head cut
off, and that he had better think of something else, for she would never
consent to such a thing. So they thought and thought, but they could not
tell what to do, until at last the Queen heard that in a great forest
near the castle there was an old hermit, who lived in a hollow tree, and
that people came from far and near to consult him; so she said:

'I had better go and ask his advice; perhaps he will know what to do to
prevent the misfortunes which the fairies foretold.'

She set out very early the next morning, mounted upon a pretty little
white mule, which was shod with solid gold, and two of her ladies
rode behind her on beautiful horses. When they reached the forest they
dismounted, for the trees grew so thickly that the horses could not
pass, and made their way on foot to the hollow tree where the hermit
lived. At first when he saw them coming he was vexed, for he was not
fond of ladies; but when he recognised the Queen, he said:

'You are welcome, Queen. What do you come to ask of me?'

Then the Queen told him all the fairies had foreseen for Rosette, and
asked what she should do, and the hermit answered that she must shut the
Princess up in a tower and never let her come out of it again. The Queen
thanked and rewarded him, and hastened back to the castle to tell the
King. When he heard the news he had a great tower built as quickly as
possible, and there the Princess was shut up, and the King and Queen and
her two brothers went to see her every day that she might not be dull.
The eldest brother was called 'the Great Prince,' and the second
'the Little Prince.' They loved their sister dearly, for she was the
sweetest, prettiest princess who was ever seen, and the least little
smile from her was worth more than a hundred pieces of gold. When
Rosette was fifteen years old the Great Prince went to the King and
asked if it would not soon be time for her to be married, and the Little
Prince put the same question to the Queen.

Their majesties were amused at them for thinking of it, but did not make
any reply, and soon after both the King and the Queen were taken ill,
and died on the same day. Everybody was sorry, Rosette especially, and
all the bells in the kingdom were tolled.

Then all the dukes and counsellors put the Great Prince upon a golden
throne, and crowned him with a diamond crown, and they all cried,
'Long live the King!' And after that there was nothing but feasting and
rejoicing.

The new King and his brother said to one another:

'Now that we are the masters, let us take our sister out of that dull
tower which she is so tired of.'

They had only to go across the garden to reach the tower, which was very
high, and stood up in a corner. Rosette was busy at her embroidery, but
when she saw her brothers she got up, and taking the King's hand cried:

'Good morning, dear brother. Now that you are King, please take me out
of this dull tower, for I am so tired of it.'

Then she began to cry, but the King kissed her and told her to dry her
tears, as that was just what they had come for, to take her out of the
tower and bring her to their beautiful castle, and the Prince showed her
the pocketful of sugar plums he had brought for her, and said:

'Make haste, and let us get away from this ugly tower, and very soon the
King will arrange a grand marriage for you.'

When Rosette saw the beautiful garden, full of fruit and flowers, with
green grass and sparkling fountains, she was so astonished that not a
word could she say, for she had never in her life seen anything like it
before. She looked about her, and ran hither and thither gathering fruit
and flowers, and her little dog Frisk, who was bright green all over,
and had but one ear, danced before her, crying 'Bow-wow-wow,' and
turning head over heels in the most enchanting way.

Everybody was amused at Frisk's antics, but all of a sudden he ran away
into a little wood, and the Princess was following him, when, to her
great delight, she saw a peacock, who was spreading his tail in the
sunshine. Rosette thought she had never seen anything so pretty. She
could not take her eyes off him, and there she stood entranced until the
King and the Prince came up and asked what was amusing her so much. She
showed them the peacock, and asked what it was, and they answered that
it was a bird which people sometimes ate.

'What!' said the Princess, 'do they dare to kill that beautiful creature
and eat it? I declare that I will never marry any one but the King of
the Peacocks, and when I am Queen I will take very good care that nobody
eats any of my subjects.'

At this the King was very much astonished.

'But, little sister,' said he, 'where shall we find the King of the
Peacocks?'

'Oh! wherever you like, sire,' she answered, 'but I will never marry any
one else.'

After this they took Rosette to the beautiful castle, and the peacock
was brought with her, and told to walk about on the terrace outside her
windows, so that she might always see him, and then the ladies of
the court came to see the Princess, and they brought her beautiful
presents--dresses and ribbons and sweetmeats, diamonds and pearls and
dolls and embroidered slippers, and she was so well brought up, and
said, 'Thank you!' so prettily, and was so gracious, that everyone went
away delighted with her.

Meanwhile the King and the Prince were considering how they should find
the King of the Peacocks, if there was such a person in the world. And
first of all they had a portrait made of the Princess, which was so like
her that you really would not have been surprised if it had spoken to
you. Then they said to her:

'Since you will not marry anyone but the King of the Peacocks, we are
going out together into the wide world to search for him. If we find him
for you we shall be very glad. In the meantime, mind you take good care
of our kingdom.'

Rosette thanked them for all the trouble they were taking on her
account, and promised to take great care of the kingdom, and only to
amuse herself by looking at the peacock, and making Frisk dance while
they were away.

So they set out, and asked everyone they met--

'Do you know the King of the Peacocks?'

But the answer was always, 'No, no.'

Then they went on and on, so far that no one has ever been farther, and
at last they came to the Kingdom of the Cockchafers.

They had never before seen such a number of cockchafers, and the buzzing
was so loud that the King was afraid he should be deafened by it. He
asked the most distinguished-looking cockchafer they met if he knew
where they could find the King of the Peacocks.

'Sire,' replied the cockchafer, 'his kingdom is thirty thousand leagues
from this; you have come the longest way.'

'And how do you know that?' said the King.

'Oh!' said the cockchafer, 'we all know you very well, since we spend
two or three months in your garden every year.'

Thereupon the King and the Prince made great friends with him, and they
all walked arm-in-arm and dined together, and afterwards the cockchafer
showed them all the curiosities of his strange country, where the
tiniest green leaf costs a gold piece and more. Then they set out again
to finish their journey, and this time, as they knew the way, they were
not long upon the road. It was easy to guess that they had come to the
right place, for they saw peacocks in every tree, and their cries could
be heard a long way off:

When they reached the city they found it full of men and women who were
dressed entirely in peacocks' feathers, which were evidently thought
prettier than anything else.

They soon met the King, who was driving about in a beautiful little
golden carriage which glittered with diamonds, and was drawn at full
speed by twelve peacocks. The King and the Prince were delighted to see
that the King of the Peacocks was as handsome as possible. He had
curly golden hair and was very pale, and he wore a crown of peacocks'
feathers.

When he saw Rosette's brothers he knew at once that they were strangers,
and stopping his carriage he sent for them to speak to him. When they
had greeted him they said:

'Sire, we have come from very far away to show you a beautiful
portrait.'

So saying they drew from their travelling bag the picture of Rosette.

The King looked at it in silence a long time, but at last he said:

'I could not have believed that there was such a beautiful Princess in
the world!'

'Indeed, she is really a hundred times as pretty as that,' said her
brothers.

'I think you must be making fun of me,' replied the King of the
Peacocks.

'Sire,' said the Prince, 'my brother is a King, like yourself. He
is called "the King," I am called "the Prince," and that is the
portrait of our sister, the Princess Rosette. We have come to ask if you
would like to marry her. She is as good as she is beautiful, and we will
give her a bushel of gold pieces for her dowry.'

'Oh! with all my heart,' replied the King, 'and I will make her very
happy. She shall have whatever she likes, and I shall love her dearly;
only I warn you that if she is not as pretty as you have told me, I will
have your heads cut off.'

'Oh! certainly, we quite agree to that,' said the brothers in one
breath.

'Very well. Off with you into prison, and stay there until the Princess
arrives,' said the King of the Peacocks.

And the Princes were so sure that Rosette was far prettier than her
portrait that they went without a murmur. They were very kindly treated,
and that they might not feel dull the King came often to see them. As
for Rosette's portrait that was taken up to the palace, and the King did
nothing but gaze at it all day and all night.

As the King and the Prince had to stay in prison, they sent a letter
to the Princess telling her to pack up all her treasures as quickly as
possible, and come to them, as the King of the Peacocks was waiting to
marry her; but they did not say that they were in prison, for fear of
making her uneasy.

When Rosette received the letter she was so delighted that she ran about
telling everyone that the King of the Peacocks was found, and she was
going to marry him.

Guns were fired, and fireworks let off. Everyone had as many cakes and
sweetmeats as he wanted. And for three days everybody who came to
see the Princess was presented with a slice of bread-and-jam, a
nightingale's egg, and some hippocras. After having thus entertained her
friends, she distributed her dolls among them, and left her brother's
kingdom to the care of the wisest old men of the city, telling them to
take charge of everything, not to spend any money, but save it all up
until the King should return, and above all, not to forget to feed
her peacock. Then she set out, only taking with her her nurse, and the
nurse's daughter, and the little green dog Frisk.

They took a boat and put out to sea, carrying with them the bushel of
gold pieces, and enough dresses to last the Princess ten years if she
wore two every day, and they did nothing but laugh and sing. The nurse
