did not immediately give the signal for study to be commenced. Instead,
he cleared his throat, saying:

"Boys, I have a few words to say to you. This morning a new boy made his
appearance among us. His uncle, or perhaps I should say his guardian,
attracted by the well-deserved fame of Smith Institute, came hither to
enter him among my pupils. I received him cordially, and promised
that he should share with you the rich, the inestimable educational
advantages which our humble seminary affords. I hoped he would be an
acquisition, that by his obedience and his fidelity to duty he would
shed luster on our school."

Here Socrates blew his nose sonorously, and resumed:

"But what has happened? On the very first day of his residence here he
brutally assaults one of our numbers, my nephew, and displays the savage
instincts of a barbarian. His uncle did well to warn me that he would
need salutary restraint."

Hector, who had been amused by the solemn and impressive remarks of
Socrates, looked up in surprise. Had Allan Roscoe really traduced him
in this manner, after robbing him of his inheritance, as Hector felt
convinced that he had done?

"Hector Roscoe!" said Socrates, severely; "stand up, and let me hear
what you have to say for yourself."

Hector rose calmly, and faced the principal, by no means awe-stricken at
the grave arraignment to which he had listened.

"I say this, Mr. Smith," he answered, "that I did not attack your
nephew till he had first attacked me. This he did without the slightest
provocation, and I defended myself, as I had a right to do."

"It's a lie!" muttered Jim, in a tone audible to his uncle.

"My nephew's report is of a different character. I am disposed to
believe him."

"I regret to say, sir, that he has made a false statement. I will give
you an account of what actually occurred. On my return from a walk he
sent a boy summoning me to his presence. As he was not a teacher, and
had no more authority over me than I over him, I declined to obey, but
sent word that if he wished to see me he could come where I was. I then
walked down to the brook in Carver's field. He followed me, as soon
as he had received my message, and, charging me with impertinence,
challenged me to a fight. Well, we had a fight; but he attacked me
first."

"I don't know whether this account is correct or not," said Socrates, a
little nonplused by this new version of the affair.

"I am ready to accept the decision of any one of the boys," said Hector.

"Bates," said Socrates, who knew that this boy was an adherent of his
nephew, "is this account of Roscoe's true?"

Bates hesitated a moment. He was still afraid of Jim, but when he
thought of Hector's prowess, he concluded that he had better tell the
truth.

"Yes, sir," he answered.

Jim Smith darted an angry and menacing glance at his failing adherent.

"Ahem!" said Socrates, looking puzzled: "it is not quite so bad as I
supposed. I regret, however, that you have exhibited such a quarrelsome
disposition."

"I don't think I am quarrelsome, sir," said Hector.

"Silence, sir! I have Mr. Allan Roscoe's word for it."

"It appears to me," said Hector, undauntedly, "that your nephew is at
least as quarrelsome as I am. He forced the fight upon me."

"Probably you will not be in a hurry to attack him again," said
Socrates, under the impression that Hector had got the worst of it.

Some of the boys smiled, but Socrates did not see it.

"As you have probably received a lesson, I will not punish you as I had
anticipated. I will sentence you, however, to commit to memory the first
fifty lines of Virgil's 'AEneid.' Mr. Crabb, will you see that Roscoe
performs his penance?"

"Yes, sir," said Crabb, faintly.

"Is your nephew also to perform a penance?" asked Hector, undaunted.

"Silence, sir! What right have you to question me on this subject?"

"Because, sir, he is more to blame than I."

"I don't know that. I am not at all sure that your story is correct."

Mr. Crabb, meek as he was, was indignant at this flagrant partiality.

"Mr. Smith," he said, "I happen to know that Roscoe's story is strictly
correct, and that your nephew made an unprovoked attack upon him."

Hector looked grateful, and Jim Smith furious.

"Mr. Crabb," said Socrates, angrily, "I did not ask your opinion. So far
as my nephew is concerned, I will deal with him privately. Boys, you may
begin your studies."

All the boys understood that Jim was to be let off, and they thought it
a shame. But Mr. Crabb took care to make Hector's penance as light as
possible.

And thus passed the first day at Smith Institute.




CHAPTER XV. THE USHER CONFIDES IN HECTOR.



Mr. Crabb acted rashly in siding with Hector, and speaking against Mr.
Smith's nephew. Socrates showed his displeasure by a frigid demeanor,
and by seeking occasions for snubbing his assistant. On the other hand,
Hector felt grateful for his intercession, and an intimacy sprang up
between them.

A few days afterward, on a half holiday, Mr. Crabb said: "Roscoe, I am
going out for a walk. Do you care to accompany me?"

"I will do so with pleasure," said Hector, sincerely.

"Mr. Crabb," he said, after they were fairly on their way, "I am sorry
to see that Mr. Smith has not forgiven you for taking my part against
Jim."

"I would do it again, Roscoe," said the usher. "I could not sit silent
while so great an injustice was being done."

"Do you think Jim was punished?"

"I am sure he was not. He is a boy after Mr. Smith's own heart, that
is, he possesses the same mean and disagreeable qualities, perhaps in a
greater degree. Has he interfered with you since?"

"No," answered Hector, smiling; "he probably found that I object to
being bullied."

"You are fortunate in being strong enough to withstand his attacks."

"Yes," said Hector, quietly; "I am not afraid of him."

"Bullies are generally cowards," said the usher.

"I wonder, Mr. Crabb, you are willing to stay at Smith Institute, as
usher to such a man as Mr. Smith."

"Ah, Roscoe!" said Mr. Crabb, sighing; "it is not of my own free will
that I stay. Poverty is a hard task-master. I must teach for a living."

"But surely you could get a better position?"

"Perhaps so; but how could I live while I was seeking for it. My lad,"
he said, after a pause, "I have a great mind to confide in you; I want
one friend to whom I can talk unreservedly."

"Mr. Crabb," said Hector, earnestly, "I shall feel flattered by your
confidence."

"Thank you, Roscoe; or, rather, since we are going to be friends, let me
distinguish you from the other boys and call you Hector."

"I wish you would, sir."

"I need not tell you that I am poor," continued Mr. Crabb; "you can read
it in my shabby clothes. I sometimes see the boys looking at my poor
suit, as if they wondered why I dressed so badly. Smith has more than
once cast insulting looks at my rusty coat. It is not penuriousness, as
some of the boys may think--it is poverty that prevents me from attiring
myself more becomingly."

"Mr. Crabb, I sympathize with you," said Hector.

"Thank you, Hector. Of that I am sure."

"Mr. Smith ought to pay you enough to clothe yourself neatly. He makes
you work hard enough."

"He pays me twenty dollars a month," said the usher; "twenty dollars and
my board."

"Is that all?" asked Hector, in amazement. "Why, the girl in the kitchen
earns nearly that."

"To be sure," answered the usher, bitterly; "but in Mr. Smith's
estimation, I stand very little higher. He does not value education, not
possessing it himself. However, you may wonder why, even with this
sum, I cannot dress better. It is because I have another than myself to
support."

"You are not married?" asked Hector, in surprise.

"No; but I have an invalid sister, who is wholly dependent upon me. To
her I devote three-quarters of my salary, and this leaves me very little
for myself. My poor sister is quite unable to earn anything for herself,
so it is a matter of necessity."

"Yes, I understand," said Hector, in a tone of sympathy.

"You now see why I do not dare to leave this position, poor as it is.
For myself, I might take the risk, but I should not feel justified in
exposing my sister to the hazard of possible want."

"You are right, Mr. Crabb. I am very sorry now that you spoke up for me.
It has prejudiced Mr. Smith against you."

"No, no; I won't regret that. Indeed, he would hesitate to turn me
adrift, for he would not be sure of getting another teacher to take my
place for the same beggarly salary."

"Something may turn up for you yet, Mr. Crabb," said Hector, hopefully.

"Perhaps so," answered the usher, but his tone was far from sanguine.

When they returned to the school, Hector carried out a plan which had
suggested itself to him in the interest of Mr. Crabb. He wrote to a boy
of his acquaintance, living in New York, who, he had heard, was in want
of a private tutor, and recommended Mr. Crabb, in strong terms, for that
position. He did this sincerely, for he had found the usher to be a good
teacher, and well versed in the studies preparatory to college. He did
not think it best to mention this to Mr. Crabb, for the answer might be
unfavorable, and then his hopes would have been raised only to be dashed
to the earth.

Later in the day, Hector fell in with Bates, already referred to as a
special friend of Jim Smith. The intimacy, however, had been diminished
since the contest in which Hector gained the victory. Bates was not
quite so subservient to the fallen champion, and Jim resented it.

"I saw you walking out with old Crabb," said Bates.

"He isn't particularly old," said Hector.

"Oh, you know what I mean. Did you ever see such a scarecrow?"

"Do you refer to his dress?" asked Hector.

"Yes; he'll soon be in rags. I shouldn't wonder at all if that old suit
of his was worn by one of Noah's sons in the ark."

"You don't suppose he wears it from choice, do you?"

"I don't know. He's stingy, I suppose--afraid to spend a cent."

"You are mistaken. He has a sister to support, and his salary is very
small."

"I can believe that. Old Sock is mean with his teachers. How much does
he pay Crabb?"

"It is very little, but I don't know that I ought to tell."

"I say, though, Roscoe, I wouldn't go to walk with him again."

"Why not?"

"The boys will say that, you are trying to get into his good graces, so
he'll let you off easy in your lessons."

"I don't want him to let me off easy; I generally intend to be
prepared."

"I know, but that's what they will say."

"Let them say what they please, and I will do what I please," said
Hector, independently.

"Old Sock ain't any too fond of Crabb since he took your part the other
day. Jim says the old man means to bounce him before long."

"I suppose that means discharge him."

"It means giving him his walking papers. Jim will see that he does it,
too."

Hector did not reply, but he felt more than ever glad that he had
written a letter which might possibly bring the poor usher more
profitable and, at the same time, agreeable employment.

"Jim doesn't like you, either," added Bates.

"I never supposed he did. I can do without his favor."

"He will get you into a scrape if he can."

"I have no doubt whatever of his benevolent intentions toward me. I
shall not let it interfere with my happiness."

Just then a sharp cry was heard, as of a boy in pain. It came from the
school yard, which the two boys were approaching on their return from a
walk.

"What's that?" asked Hector, quickly.

"I expect it's the new boy."

One had arrived the day before.

"Is he hurt, I wonder?" asked Hector, quickening his steps.

"Jim's got hold of him, probably," said Bates; "he said this morning
he was going to give the little chap a lesson to break him into school
ways."

"He did, did he?" said Hector, compressing his lips. "I shall have
something to say to that," and he quickened his steps.




CHAPTER XVI. TOSSED IN A BLANKET.



The last new boy was a little fellow only eleven years old. His name was
Tommy Cooper, as he was called at home. It was his first absence from
the sheltering care of his mother, and he felt lonesome in the great,
dreary school building, where he was called "Cooper," and "you little
chap." He missed the atmosphere of home, and the tenderness of his
mother and sister. In fact, the poor boy was suffering from that most
distressing malady, homesickness.

Had Mrs. Socrates Smith been a kind, motherly woman, she might have done
much to reconcile the boy to his new home; but she was a tall, gaunt,
bony woman, more masculine than feminine, not unlike Miss Sally Brass,
whom all readers of Dickens will remember.

I am sorry to say that a homesick boy in a boarding school does not meet
with much sympathy. Even those boys who have once experienced the same
malady are half ashamed of it, and, if they remember it at all, remember
it as a mark of weakness. There was but one boy who made friendly
approaches to Tommy, and this was Hector Roscoe.

Hector had seen the little fellow sitting by himself with a sad face,
and he had gone up to him, and asked him in a pleasant tone some
questions about himself and his home.

"So you have never been away from home before, Tommy," he said.

"No, sir," answered the boy, timidly.

"Don't call me sir. I am only a boy like you. Call me Hector."

"That is a strange name. I never heard it before."

"No, it is not a common name. I suppose you don't like school very
much?"

"I never shall be happy here," sighed Tommy.

"You think so now, but you will get used to it."

"I don't think I shall."

"Oh, yes, you will. It will never seem like home, of course, but you
will get acquainted with some of the boys, and will join in their games,
and then time will pass more pleasantly."

"I think the boys are very rough," said the little boy.

"Yes, they are rough, but they don't mean unkindly. Some of them were
homesick when they came here, just like you."

"Were you homesick?" asked Tommy, looking up, with interest.

"I didn't like the school very well; but I was much older than you when
I came here, and, besides, I didn't leave behind me so pleasant a home.
I am not so rich as you, Tommy. I have no father nor mother," and for
the moment Hector, too, looked sad.

The little fellow became more cheerful under the influence of Hector's
kind and sympathetic words. Our hero, however, was catechised about his
sudden intimacy with the new scholar.

"I see you've got a new situation, Roscoe," said Bates, when Hector was
walking away.

"What do you mean?"

"You've secured the position of nurse to that little cry baby."

"You mean Tommy Cooper?"

"Yes, if that's his name."

"I was cheering up the little fellow a bit. He's made rather a bad
exchange in leaving a happy home for Smith Institute."

"That's so. This is a dreary hole, but there's no need of crying about
it."
