which was quite probable, as he spent little, and was known to have
received, four years before, a considerable legacy from the estate of a
brother who had died, a successful merchant in the city of New York.

The boys had to pass by the small and weather-stained house where he
lived, as the path ran very near it.

When within a few rods of the house, the boys were startled by a sharp
cry of terror, which appeared to proceed from inside the house.

Both simultaneously stood still.

"What's that!" exclaimed both in concert.

"Somebody must be trying to rob Mr. Lovett," suggested Frank.

"Can't we do something!" said Phil quickly.

"We can try."

There were two stout sticks or clubs lying on the ground at their feet.
They stooped, picked them up, and ran to the house. A glance showed that
one of the windows on the north side had been raised.

The window sill was low. Pausing a moment before springing over it into
the room, they looked in and this was what they saw:

The farmer lay half-prostrate on the floor, half supporting himself by a
chair, which he had mechanically grasped as he was forced downward. Over
him stood a ruffianly looking tramp, whom Phil remembered to have seen
about the streets during the day, with a stick uplifted. He had not
heard the approach of the boys.

"Give me two hundred dollars, and I'll go," he said to the man at his
feet.

"I cannot do it. I haven't got as much here."

"That's a lie!" said the other coarsely. "I heard all about you to-day.
You're a miser, and you've got no end of money stowed away here. Get it
for me, quick, or I'll dash your brains out."

Just then the prostrate farmer saw what the tramp could not see, his
back being turned to the window, the faces of the two boys looking
through the window. Fresh courage came to him. Single-handed, and taken
at advantage, he was no match for the ruffian who had entered his house;
but with these two young auxiliaries he felt that all was not lost.



CHAPTER XVII. A REFORMED BURGLAR.



"What do you say!" demanded the tramp impatiently. "Speak quick! I can't
stay here all night."

"Let me up, and I'll see if I can find the money for you."

"I thought I'd bring you to terms," said the tramp, laughing grimly.

He allowed his victim to rise, as he certainly would not have done if he
had looked behind him and seen the two boys at the window.

"Now's our time," answered Philip.

He gave a light spring into the room, followed by Frank.

Of course, the tramp heard them, and turned in sudden alarm. As he
turned, the farmer snatched the club from his hand, and he found himself
unexpectedly unarmed and confronted by three enemies.

"It's my turn now," said Lovett. "Do you surrender?"

The tramp saw that the game was up and made a dash for the open window,
but Philip skillfully inserted a stick between his legs, and tripped him
up, and, with the help of Mr. Lovett, held him, struggling desperately,
till Frank fetched a rope, with which he was securely bound.

"Confound you!" he said, scowling at the two boys. "But for you I would
have succeeded and got away with my booty."

"That's true!" said the farmer. "I owe my escape from robbery, and,
perhaps, bodily injury, to you."

"I am glad we were at hand," said Philip.

"And now, my friend," said the farmer, "I may as well say that you
were quite mistaken in supposing I kept a large amount of money in this
lonely house. I should be a fool to do it, and I am not such a fool as
that."

"Where do you keep your money, then?" growled the tramp.

"In different savings-banks. I am ready to tell you, for it will do you
no good."

"I wish I'd known it sooner. I came here on a fool's errand."

"I am glad you have found it out."

"Now, what are you going to do with me!"

"Keep you here till I can deliver you into the hands of the law."

"That won't do you any good."

"It will give you a home, where you cannot prey on the community."

"I don't mean to do so any more. I'm going to turn over a new leaf and
become an honest man--that is, if you'll let me go."

"Your conversion is rather sudden. I haven't any faith in it."

"Listen to me," said the man, "and then decide. Do you think I am a
confirmed lawbreaker?"

"You look like it."

"Yes, I do; but I am not. Never in my life have I been confined in any
prison or penitentiary. I have never been arrested on any charge. I see
you don't believe me. Let me tell you how I came to be what I am: Two
years since I was a mechanic, tolerably well-to-do, owning a house with
a small mortgage upon it. It was burned to the ground one night. I built
another, but failed to insure it. Six months since, that, too, burned
down, and left me penniless and in debt. Under this last blow I lost all
courage. I left the town where I had long lived, and began a wandering
life. In other words, I became a tramp. Steadily I lost my self-respect
till I was content to live on such help as the charitable chose
to bestow on me. It was not until to-day that I formed the plan of
stealing. I heard in the village that you kept a large sum of money in
your house, and an evil temptation assailed me. I had become tired of
wandering, and determined to raise a sum which would enable me to live
at ease for a time, I should have succeeded but for these two boys."

"And you are sorry you did not succeed?"

"I was, five minutes since, but I feel differently now. I have been
saved from crime. Now, I have told you my story. Do with me as you
will."

The man's appearance was rough, but there was something in his tone
which led Mr. Lovett to think that he was speaking the truth.

"Boys," he said, "you have heard what this man says. What do you think
of it?"

"I believe him!" said Philip promptly.

"Thank you, boy," said the tramp. "I am glad some one has confidence in
me."

"I believe you, too," said Frank.

"I have not deceived you. Your words have done me more good than you
think. It is my first attempt to steal, and it shall be my last."

"If you want to become an honest man, God forbid that I should do aught
to prevent you!" said the farmer. "I may be acting unwisely, but I mean
to cut this rope and let you go."

"Will you really do this?" said the tramp, his face lighting up with
mingled joy and surprise.

"I will."

He knelt on the floor, and drawing from his pocket a large jack-knife,
cut the rope.

The tramp sprang to his feet.

"Thank you," he said, in a husky voice. "I believe you are a good man.
There are not many who would treat me as generously, considering what
I tried to do just now. You sha'n't repent it. Will you give me your
hand!"

"Gladly," said the farmer; and he placed his hand in that of the
visitor, lately so unwelcome. "I wish you better luck."

"Boys, will you give me your hands, too?" asked tke tramp, turning to
Philip and Frank.

Tke boys readily complied with his request, and repeated the good wishes
of the farmer.

The stranger was about to leave the house, when Lovett said:

"Stay, my friend, I wish to ask you a question."

"Very well, sir."

"Have you any money?"

"Not a cent."

"Then take this," said the farmer, drawing from his vest pocket a
five-dollar bill. "I lend it to you. Some time you will be able to repay
it, if you keep to your resolution of leading an honest life. When that
time comes, lend it to some man who needs it as you do now."

"Thank you, sir. I will take it, for it will help me greatly at this
time. Good-by! If you ever see me again, you will see a different man."

He leaped through the window and was gone.

"I don't know if I have done a wise thing, but I will take the risk,"
said the farmer. "And now, boys, I want to make you some return for your
assistance to-night." Both Frank and Philip earnestly protested that
they would receive nothing in the conversation that ensued. Philip made
known his intention to leave Norton the next morning.

"What are your plans? Where do you mean to go?" asked the farmer.

"I don't know, sir. I shall make up my mind as I go along. I think I can
make my living somehow."

"Wait here five minutes," said Lovett, and he went into an adjoining
room.

Within the time mentioned, he returned, holding in his hand a sealed
letter.

"Philip," he said, "put this envelope in your pocket, and don't open it
till you are fifty miles from here."

"Very well, sir," answered Philip, rather puzzled, but not so much
surprised as he might have been if he had not known the farmer's
reputation for eccentricity.

"I suppose it contains some good advice," he thought. "Well, good advice
is what I need."

The two boys went home immediately upon leaving the farmhouse. Though so
much had happened, it was not late, being not quite half-past nine.

Philip received a cordial welcome from Mr. and Mrs. Dunbar, who,
however, hardly expected to see him so soon. "Are you willing to receive
a pauper beneath your roof?" asked Philip, smiling.

"That you will never be while you have health and strength, I'll be
bound," said Mr. Dunbar. "I like your pride and independence, Philip."

They tried to induce Philip to give up his resolution to leave Norton
the next morning, but did not succeed.

"I will come back some time," he said. "Now I feel better to go."

At five o'clock the next morning, with a small bundle swung over his
shoulder, attached to a stick, Philip Gray, carrying his violin, left
the village, which, for some years, had been his home. Frank accompanied
him for the first mile of his journey. Then the two friends shook hands
and parted--not without sorrow, for who could tell when they would meet
again?



CHAPTER XVIII. A PROFESSIONAL ENGAGEMENT.



A depressing feeling of loneliness came to Phil after he had parted with
Frank. He was going out into the world with no one to lean upon, and no
one to sympathize with him or lend him a helping hand. No wonder he felt
friendless and alone. But this mood did not last long.

"I shall find friends if I deserve them," he reflected, "and I don't
mean to do anything dishonorable or wrong. I am willing to work, and I
believe I can make a living."

Leaving him to proceed, we go back to the poor-house, where his absence
was not noticed till morning.

Joe Tucker, in spite of the blow which his nasal organ had received,
slept pretty comfortably, and was awakened at an early hour by his
vigilant spouse.

"You'd better go up and wake that boy and set him to work, Mr. Tucker,"
she said. "There are plenty of chores for him to do."

"You are right, Abigail," said Mr. Tucker, with approval. He reflected
that he could assign to Philip some of the work which generally fell to
himself, and the reflection was an agreeable one. He had tried to get
work out of Zeke, but he generally found that it was harder to keep him
at work than it was to do the job himself.

After he had made his toilet--not a very elaborate one--Mr. Tucker went
up-stairs to arouse his young prisoner. He found the key in the outside
of the door. Everything seemed right.

"I wonder how he feels this morning?" chuckled Mr. Tucker. "Wonder
whether he's tamed down a little?"

He turned the key in the lock and threw open the door. He glanced at
the bed, started in amazement to find that it had not been slept in, and
then his wonder ceased, for the telltale rope explained how the boy had
escaped.

He ran down-stairs in anger and excitement.

"What's the matter with you, Joe Tucker?" demanded his wife. "Are you
drunk or crazy?"

"Enough to make me both, wife," he answered. "The boy's gone!"

"Gone!" exclaimed Mrs. Tucker, stopping short, with a saucepan in her
hand.

"Gone!" ejaculated Zeke, his mouth wide open.

"I don't believe it," said Mrs. Tucker positively. "He couldn't go. He'd
have to jump out of the third-story window."

"Sure enough!" said Zeke.

"I can't help it--he's gone," declared Mr. Tucker. "He tied a
clothesline to the bedstead and let himself down from the window. Now, I
want to know who left a clothesline in the room?"

"There wasn't any," said Mrs. Tucker.

"Maybe he had one in his pocket," suggested Zeke.

But this suggestion was not considered worthy of notice by his parents.

"Now I know who hit me in the nose!" exclaimed Mr. Tucker, light
flashing upon him. "There was two of 'em--the ones I took for burglars."

"Then the other one must have been Frank Dunbar," said Mrs. Tucker.

"Zeke," said his father, "go right off and tell Squire Pope that Philip
Gray has escaped. Ask him if I can't have him arrested for assault and
battery. It's likely he's at Frank Dunbar's now. We'll have him back
before the day is out, and then I'll see he don't get out!"

"All right, dad! As soon as I've had breakfast I'll go."

The result of Zeke's message was that Squire Pope hurried over to the
poorhouse and held a conference with Mr. and Mrs. Tucker.

The next step was that he and Joe rode over to Mr. Dunbar's, to demand
the return of the fugitive.

They found Frank splitting wood in the yard. To him they made known
their errand, requesting him to call Philip out.

"He isn't here," answered Frank.

"Isn't here? I don't believe it!" said the squire hastily.

"Sorry you doubt my word, Squire Pope, but it's just as I say."

"Where is he, then?" demanded the squire suspiciously.

"He has left town."

"Left town?" repeated the squire and Joe Tucker, in dismay. "Where is he
gone!"

"He's probably ten miles away by this time," answered Frank, enjoying
their perplexity. "I guess you'd better wait till he comes back."

Joe and the squire conferred together, but no satisfactory result
was arrived at, except it wouldn't pay to pursue Philip, for two
reasons--one, because they were quite uncertain in what direction he had
gone; another, because, even if overtaken, they would have no authority
to apprehend him, since he had been guilty of no crime.

Finally a bright idea came to the squire.

"Bring me out his fiddle," he said to Frank. "I'm his guardian, and I
will take care of it for him."

"He carried it away with him," said Frank. The squire's lower jaw fell.
He was defeated at all points. "I guess we can't do nothing, under the
circumstances, squire," said Joe Tucker, scratching his head.

"I shall have to reflect upon it," said Squire Pope, in a crestfallen
tone.

"That's as good as a circus," thought Frank, as his roguish glance
followed the two baffled conspirators as they rode out of the yard.
"It's a pity Phil was not here to enjoy it."

At the end of the second day, Philip was some forty miles distant from
Norton. He had not walked all the way, but had got a lift for a few
miles from a tin-peddler, with whom he had a social chat.

It cannot be said that he was depressed, or that he regretted having
left Norton, but he certainly did feel uncomfortable, and his discomfort
sprang from a very homely cause.

To tell the plain truth, he was hungry. He had not had anything to eat
for six hours except an apple, which he had picked up by the roadside,
and during those six hours he had walked not far from fifteen miles.

"I believe I never was so hungry before," thought Philip. "The question
is, where is my supper to come from?"

Although he knew pretty well the state of his finances, he began to
search his pockets to see if he could not somewhere find a stray dime,
or, better still, a quarter, with which to purchase the meal of which he
stood so much in need. But his search was unproductive, or, rather, it
only resulted in the discovery of a battered cent.

"So that penny constitutes my whole fortune," thought Philip.

There were two houses in sight, one on each side of the road.

Probably they would have given Philip a supper at either, but our hero's
honest pride revolted at the idea of begging for a meal, much as
he stood in need of it. He might as well be a pauper, as he justly
reflected. So he pushed on.

Evidently he was drawing near a village, for houses began to appear at
nearer intervals.

"Hello, my boy! Where are you traveling!" asked a hearty voice.

Philip turned round, and his glance rested on a stout young farmer,
whose face, though very much sunburned, was pleasant and good-natured.
