there was no sail or tiller. Sylvia could row, but Estralla could not
be of any use. But it seemed the only way in which they could reach
either Fort Moultrie or their home, for both the little girls realized
that they might wander about the sand-hills all night without finding
their way back to the fort. It was chilly and dark, and the old cabin
with its sagging roof and open doorway was not a very inviting shelter.
Indeed, Estralla was quite sure that a lion, or at the very least a
family of wolves, was at that moment safely hidden in one of the dark
corners of the cabin.

"The moon is out! Look!" said Sylvia, "and there goes a steamer."

Sylvia did not know that this steamer was a guard-boat which Governor
Pickens of South Carolina had ordered stationed between Sullivan's
Island and Fort Sumter to prevent, if possible, any United States
troops being landed at that fort.

"I can see the fort!" declared Sylvia. "That's it off beyond the boat,"
and she pointed down the harbor. "Now, we will start. I know I can row
the boat that far, and I am sure my father will not go home without us.
To-morrow we will send this boat back."

Sylvia had now forgotten all her weariness, and she was no longer
afraid. She was sure that in a little while she would be safely at the
fort, and then, she resolved, she would at once tell Mrs. Carleton that
Mr. Doane had the letter and ask permission to tell her mother of her
part in the secret message.

The boat was already half afloat, and it was an easy matter to pull up
the big stone attached to a strong rope which served as an anchor, and
then to push off from shore.

"You watch, Estralla, and if any other boat comes near shout at the top
of your voice," said Sylvia as she dipped the oars into the dark water
and pulled off from shore.

"My lan', Missy! Bar's dat light agin," called the half-frightened
darky, "an' we's right in it dis time!"

An instant later a call came from the guardboat. "Boat ahoy! Where
bound?" and before Sylvia could ship her oars or answer the call she
found herself looking straight into the blinding light, and felt the
little boat rising on the crest of the wave made by the steamer.

"We's gwine to be drownded, Missy!" shouted Estralla, and before Sylvia
could say a word the frightened little darky had sprung up and lurched
forward across Sylvia's knees.

The boat tipped and the water rushed over one side, but Sylvia,
clutching the oars steadily, and remembering her father's frequent
warnings, sat perfectly still and the little craft righted itself.

"You nearly upset us; keep still where you are. Don't move!" said
Sylvia angrily. The light had flashed in another direction now, and the
guard-boat had moved on, thinking the boat contained two young darkies
bound for Sullivan's Island after a visit to Charleston.

Sylvia could feel the water about her feet and ankles. She wished that
she had called for help, for she realized now that they might be run
into and sunk by some passing craft. Beside that the wind and tide were
now carrying them swiftly along toward the open sea. Then, suddenly,
Sylvia dropped her oars and screamed at the top of her voice. Estralla
shouted loudly. Their boat had run directly against the wall of Fort
Sumter. In an instant there were lights flashing over the parapet.
There was the sound of voices, a call, and then the little craft was
held firmly against the barricade and a gruff voice called:

"Stop your noise, and we'll have you safe in a jiffy."

But it seemed a long time to the frightened children before a tall
soldier swung over into the boat and lifted Sylvia and then Estralla up
to the outstretched hands which grasped them so firmly.

"What on earth were you out in that boat for?" questioned an elderly
gruff-voiced officer, when Sylvia and Estralla, thoroughly drenched and
wondering what new misfortune was in store for them, followed him into
a bare little cell-like room where the lamplight made them blink and
shield their eyes for a moment.

Sylvia told of their adventures as quickly as possible, and the officer
listened in amazement.

"Upon my word!" he said as she finished. "It's a wonder you are alive
to tell the story. And so you are a little Yankee girl? Well! Come
along to my quarters and my wife will put you both to bed, or you'll be
too ill to go home to-morrow."

"Can't we go to Fort Moultrie right away?" pleaded Sylvia. "My father
must be worried about me."

"No one from this fort can go to Fort Moultrie," he responded gravely.
"Those flash-lights are from a guard-boat which the South Carolina
people have sent down the harbor so that Major Anderson won't send us
reinforcements without their knowledge. I wish Anderson would send some
message to the President," he added, as if thinking aloud.

Sylvia wondered to herself if the letter she had carried to Mr. Doane
might not be a message to the President? She wished she could tell this
big officer about it. But she remembered her promise to Mrs. Carleton
not to speak of it to anyone.

"Here's a half-drowned little Yankee girl and her little darky," said
the officer, as he led the two girls into a warm pleasant room where a
pretty elderly lady with white hair sat with her needlework.

"For pity sake, Gerald!" she exclaimed. "They are shivering with cold,"
and without asking a single question she began to take off Sylvia's wet
dress.

"Gerald, send Sally right in with hot milk," she directed, and the
officer vanished.

It was not long before Sylvia was sitting up in bed wrapped in a
gay-colored blanket and drinking milk so hot and sweet and spicy that
it seemed as if she could never have enough of it. Estralla was curled
up in a big scarlet wrapper on a rug near the fire with a big mug of
the spiced and sweetened milk. And when they had finished this a plate
of hot buttered biscuit, and thin slices of ham, was brought in. Then
there was more warm milk.

"Now you must both go straight to sleep," commanded Mrs. Gerald, "and
to-morrow morning my husband will take you safely home," and kissing
Sylvia, and with a kindly smile for Estralla, the friendly woman bade
them good-night.

There was no light now in the room save the dancing firelight, Sylvia
lay watching the shadows on the wall. Estralla was fast asleep, but her
little mistress lay awake thinking over the adventures of the day. She
was at Fort Sumter, the long dark fort which she had so often seen with
the Stars and Stripes waving above it from her home, from Miss Patten's
schoolroom, and in her sails about the harbor. Sylvia snuggled down in
her comfortable bed with a sense of safety and comfort. "I wish my
father and mother could know I am at Fort Sumter," was her last waking
thought.




CHAPTER XVII

A CHRISTMAS PRESENT


Every nook and corner of Fort Moultrie was searched for the missing
Sylvia, and when no trace of her could be discovered, her friends
became nearly certain that the little girl must have slipped from the
landing-place into the sea, and that it was useless to search for her.
But it was late in the evening before Mr. Fulton gave up the search,
and with a sad and anxious heart headed the Butterfly toward
Charleston. He still hoped that his little girl might be found. A party
of soldiers, headed by Captain Carleton, had started to search for her
on Sullivan's Island, but this had not been determined upon until late
in the evening, at about the time when Estralla and Sylvia were
embarking upon their adventurous voyage to Fort Sumter.

No one had given a thought to the little darky girl. She was supposed
to be somewhere about the fort.

Grace, warmly wrapped in a thick shawl, sat beside Mr. Fulton as the
Butterfly made its swift way across the dark harbor. They could see the
dark line of the guard-boat, but they were not molested and came into
the wharf safely. Grace held close to Mr. Fulton's hand as they hurried
toward home with the sad news of Sylvia's disappearance. Neither of
them spoke until they reached the walk leading to the door of Grace's
home, then Grace said:

"I know Sylvia will be found. Estralla will surely find her and bring
her home."

"Estralla! Why, I had entirely forgotten her," responded Mr. Fulton.

"She ran off as soon as Sylvia was missed," Grace continued earnestly,
"and she will find her. Probably she has found her before this."

"I believe you are right. Estralla is a clever little darky, and if she
started in search of Sylvia perhaps she has been able to find her. I
had not thought of it," and Mr. Fulton's voice had a new note of hope.

"Thank you, Grace. I will start back to the fort as soon as I have
talked with Sylvia's mother."

But on Mr. Fulton's return to the wharf he found a sentry on guard who
refused him permission to go to the fort. It was in vain that Mr.
Fulton explained that his little daughter was lost, that he must be
permitted to return to the fort.

The sentry wasted no words. "Orders, sir. Sorry," was the only response
he could get, and at midnight Mr. Fulton was in his own house looking
out over the harbor. Mingled with his anxious fear for the safety of
his little daughter was the thought of the sentries now guarding
Charleston's water-front, of the assembling of soldiers in the city,
and the evident plan of the southerners to seize the forts in the
harbor and force the Government into war.

He realized that in that case it would not be possible for his family
to remain in Charleston.

Early the next morning Sylvia was awakened and made ready for her
return, and when the sun shone brightly over the waters of the harbor
she and Estralla, with Captain Gerald and a strong negro servant, were
on board a boat sailing rapidly toward home.

They landed at the wharf where the Butterfly was fastened, and before
Captain Gerald had stepped on shore Sylvia called out: "Father! Father!
There he is! And Mother, too!" and in another moment her mother's arms
were about her, and she was telling as rapidly as possible the story of
her adventures, and of Estralla coming to her rescue.

Grace came running to meet Sylvia as they came near their home.

"Oh, Sylvia, I wish I had been with you," she exclaimed. "That is twice
you have been to Fort Sumter without meaning to go, isn't it?"

"We will hope that her next visit will not be as dangerous as this
one," said Mr. Fulton soberly.

For several days Sylvia could think and talk only of her wanderings
among the sand-hills, and of her first sight of the guard-boat. She
began teaching Estralla on the very day of her return, and the little
darky made rapid progress.

"Father, when may we go to Fort Moultrie again?" she asked one morning
a few days later, for she wanted very much to see Mrs. Carleton, and
was quite sure that her father would be ready to sail down the harbor
on any pleasant day, and his reply made her look up in surprise.

"I do not know that we shall ever go to the forts again," her father
had replied. "Did you not hear the bells ringing and the military music
yesterday? South Carolina has seceded from the Union. No one is allowed
to go to the forts. And unless Major Anderson takes possession of Fort
Sumter the Confederates will."

"And we are to start for Boston next week, dear child," Sylvia's mother
added.

It seemed to Sylvia that her mother was very glad at the thought of
returning to her former home. But Sylvia was not glad. What would
become of Estralla?

Mr. Waite had said that as long as Sylvia lived in his house the little
colored girl could be her maid. But if they went to Boston and left
Estralla behind Sylvia was sure that there would be nothing but trouble
for the faithful little darky.

"Why, Sylvia! What is the matter?" questioned her mother anxiously; for
Sylvia was leaning her head on the table.

"I can't go to Boston and leave Estralla!" she sobbed. "She has done
lots of brave things for me. She wouldn't leave me to be a slave."

Mr. and Mrs. Fulton looked at each other with puzzled eyes.

"But Estralla would not want to leave her mammy," suggested Mr. Fulton.

"Oh, Father! Can't Aunt Connie and Estralla go with us?" and Sylvia
lifted her head and looked hopefully at her father. "Couldn't I buy
Estralla and then make her free? I've got that gold money Grandma gave
me."

"I am afraid it wouldn't be much use for me to even try to buy a
slave's freedom now," Mr. Fulton said a little sadly. "Don't suggest
such a thing to Aunt Connie, Sylvia."

"When shall we go to Boston?" Sylvia asked.

"Right away after Christmas, unless Fort Sumter is attacked before that
time. Washington ought to send troops and provisions for the forts at
once!" replied Mr. Fulton.

After her father had left the house Sylvia and her mother went up to
Mrs. Fulton's pleasant sitting-room.

"We must begin to pack at once," declared Sylvia's mother, "and do not
go outside the gate alone, Sylvia. I wish we could leave Charleston
immediately."

"Won't I see Mrs. Carleton again?" Sylvia asked anxiously.

"I do not know, dear child, but run away and give Estralla her lesson,
as usual. It will not be a very gay Christmas for any of us this year,"
responded Mrs. Fulton, and Sylvia went slowly to her own room where
Estralla was waiting for her.

The little colored girl had put the room in order; there was a bright
fire in the grate, the morning sunshine filled the room, and Miss Molly
and Polly, smiling as usual, were in the tiny chairs behind the little
round table.

"Dar's gwine to be war, Missy!" Estralla declared solemnly. "Yas'm.
Dar's soldiers comin' in from ebery place. Won't de Yankees come and
set us free, Missy?"

Sylvia shook her head. "I don't know, Estralla! Let's not talk about
it," she replied.

"Wal, Missy, lots of darkies are runnin' off! My mammy say we'll stay
right here 'til Massa Fulton goes, an' den"--Estralla stopped, leaned a
little nearer to Sylvia and whispered, "an' den my mammy an' I we'se
gwine to go with Massa Fulton."

Mrs. Fulton was not in her room, so Sylvia went down the stairs to look
for her. She heard voices in the sitting-room, and turned in that
direction.

"Oh!" she whispered, as she stood in the open door. For her mother was
sitting on the big sofa near the open fire, and beside her sat Mr.
Robert Waite, while her father was standing in front of them. They were
all talking so earnestly that they did not notice the surprised little
girl standing in the doorway, and Sylvia heard Mr. Waite say:

"I shall be glad to protect your interests here, Mr. Fulton, as far as
it is possible to do so. And you had better leave Charleston
immediately. The city is no longer a safe place for northern people.
The conflict may begin at any moment."

"'Conflict,'" Sylvia repeated the word to herself. Probably it meant
something dreadful, she thought, recalling the "question period" at
Miss Rosalie's school.

Just then Mr. Waite glanced toward the door and saw Sylvia. In a second
he was on his feet, bowing as politely as on their last meeting.

"Miss Sylvia, I am glad to see you again," and he stepped forward to
meet her.

Sylvia, feeling quite grown-up, made her pretty curtsey, and smiled
with delight at Mr. Waite's greeting, as he led her toward her mother
and, with another polite bow, gave her the seat on the sofa.

"I was hoping to see Miss Sylvia," he said. "I had meant to make her a
little Christmas gift, with your permission," and he bowed again to
Mrs. Fulton. "She was kind enough to interest herself in behalf of one
of my people, the little darky, Estralla. And so I thought this would
please you," and he smiled at Sylvia, who began to be sure that Mr.
Waite and Santa Claus must be exactly alike. As he spoke he handed
Sylvia a long envelope.

"Do not open it until to-morrow, if you please," he added.

Sylvia promised and thanked him. She wondered if the envelope might not
contain a picture of this kind friend. She knew that she must not ask a
question; questions were never polite, she remembered, especially about
a gift. But whatever it was she was very happy to think Mr. Robert
Waite had remembered her.

They all went to the door with their friendly visitor, and stood there
until he had reached the gate. Then Sylvia said, speaking very slowly:

"I think Mr. Robert Waite is just like the Knights in that book, 'The
Age of Chivalry.' They always did exactly what was right, and so does
he; and they were polite and so is he."

"Then, my dear, perhaps you will always remember that to do brave and
gentle deeds with kindness is what 'chivalry' means," responded Mrs.
Fulton.

Grace came in that afternoon greatly excited that it was a holiday. The
whole city was rejoicing over the fact that South Carolina had been the
first of the southern states to secede from the Union. Palmetto flags
floated everywhere; the streets were filled with marching men. Major
Anderson in Fort Moultrie watched Fort Sumter with anxious eyes, hoping
for a word from Washington which would give him authority to occupy it
before the Charleston men could turn its guns against him. Already Mr.
Doane had reached Washington; the message Sylvia had carried through
the night had been delivered, and its answer, by a trusted messenger,
was on its way south.




CHAPTER XVIII

GREAT NEWS


Sylvia carried the long envelope which Mr. Robert Waite had given her
to her room, and put it in the drawer of her desk with the treasured
gold pieces.

"It will be splendid to have a picture of Mr. Waite to show Grandma
Fulton," she thought happily, "and I can tell her all about him."

Then her thoughts rested on Flora, in the "haunted house," and she
opened the silk-covered work-box and tried on the pretty gold thimble.
She thought of her gold pieces, and a sudden resolve came into her mind:

"I will give Flora and Grace each a gold locket, with my picture in
it." And just then Mrs. Fulton entered the room, and Sylvia ran toward
her:

"Mother! Mother! I have a beautiful plan. I want to give Flora and
Grace each a present. I want to give them each a gold locket with my
picture in it. On Grace's locket I want 'Grace from Sylvia,' and on
Flora's, 'Flora from Sylvia.' I can pay for them with my gold money. I
may, mayn't I, Mother?" and Sylvia looked eagerly toward her mother.

"Of course you may; but it is too late to get the pictures and lockets
in time for Christmas," responded Mrs. Fulton.

"I don't care when; only if we do go back to Boston I want them to have
something to remember me by," said Sylvia, remembering the unfailing
loyalty of her two little southern friends.

"The day after Christmas we will select the lockets, and see about the
pictures," said Mrs. Fulton. Before Sylvia could answer there came a
tap at the door, and Aunt Connie, evidently rather anxious and
uncertain, whispered:

"Dar's a lady, Mistress, a lady f'um de fort, an' she say--"

"It must be Mrs. Carleton. I'll go right down," responded Mrs. Fulton,
and, followed by Sylvia, she hurried down the stairs, to find Mrs.
Carleton awaiting them.

"Captain Carleton insisted that I should come to you," she said. "He
feels sure that the Charleston men mean to take Fort Sumter at once.
Major Anderson is sending the women and children away from Fort
Moultrie to places of safety."

"Of course you must stay with us, and we are delighted to have you,"
said Mrs. Fulton. "We want to stay in Charleston unless it becomes
necessary for us to leave."

Mrs. Carleton greeted Sylvia warmly, and, greatly to her surprise, said:

"I have not had the opportunity to thank you, dear child, for
delivering the message safely. We have heard that Mr. Doane has
presented the letter to the President, and Major Anderson is sure that
reinforcements and provisions for the forts will be sent at once." Then
turning to Mrs. Fulton, she continued: "I know this loyal child kept
her secret, and that even you and her father do not realize what a
service your little daughter has rendered to the cause of Freedom!"

Mrs. Fulton was looking at her visitor in amazement.

"Sylvia! Message! Secret?" she exclaimed in such a puzzled tone that
both Mrs. Carleton and Sylvia laughed aloud.

"Tell her, Sylvia! And I want to hear how you delivered the letter,"
said Mrs. Carleton.

So Sylvia told the story of creeping out of the house at nearly
midnight, of the man who had declared her to be a runaway darky, of
Estralla following her, and of their return. "And the door was closed
and fastened, although I left it open," she concluded.

Mrs. Fulton recalled that one night they had been slightly disturbed by
some unusual noise and that Mr. Fulton had gone down-stairs and
discovered the front door open. "And we blamed Aunt Connie," she added.

"I did want to tell you, Mother," said Sylvia, "but it's even better to
have Mrs. Carleton tell you."

That evening the story was retold to Mr. Fulton, who listened with even
more surprise than Sylvia's mother had shown. He said that Estralla had
been as brave as Sylvia, and that he wished he could do an equal
service for the United States.

"This will be a fine story to tell Grandma Fulton," he whispered to
Sylvia, when he gave her his good-night kiss.

She awoke early, before Estralla appeared with the usual pitcher of hot
water and to light the fire in the grate, and in a moment was out of
bed and at her desk. She opened the envelope very carefully, expecting
to see the pictured face of her kind friend smiling at her, But there
was no picture. There were only two documents tied with red tape, and
with big red seals on them, and a number of printed and signed papers.

"Oh, clear! It isn't anything at all except letters," exclaimed Sylvia,
nearly ready to cry with disappointment. And, suddenly, she did cry--a
cry so like Estralla's wail that the little darky just entering the
room stopped short, and nearly dropped the pitcher of hot water.

"Wat's de matter, Missy? Wat is de matter?" Estralla demanded.

Tears were in Sylvia's eyes as she turned toward the little darky. They
were not tears for her own disappointment at not finding the expected
picture, but they were tears for what Sylvia believed to be the most
bitter misfortune that could befall Estralla and Aunt Connie. For she
was sure that the papers in that envelope were to tell her that Aunt
Connie and Estralla had both been sold. But she resolved quickly that
Estralla should not know of this until she had told her mother.

"Nothing I can tell you now, Estralla," she said, wiping away her tears.

Estralla looked quite ready to weep with her young mistress, but she
lit the fire, and crept silently out of the room.

Sylvia dressed as quickly as possible, picked up the papers and ran to
her mother's room.

"Look, Mother! It's dreadful. It wasn't a picture of Mr. Robert Waite
at all. It's just a lot of papers about Estralla and Aunt Connie being
sold," and Sylvia began to cry bitterly.

Mr. Fulton took the papers and looked them over, while Sylvia with her
mother's arm about her sobbed out her disappointment.

"Sold! Estralla! Why, my dear Sylvia, these papers give Aunt Connie and
Estralla their freedom, from yesterday. And these," and Mr. Fulton held
up the smaller documents, "give them permission to leave Charleston for
the north at any time within six months."

For a moment neither Sylvia nor her mother made any response to this
wonderful statement.

"Truly, Father? Truly?" exclaimed Sylvia with shining eyes.

"Yes. These papers have been recorded. Estralla and her mother are no
longer slaves. They are free," said Mr. Fulton, as he folded the
papers. "Mr. Waite has made you the finest gift in the world, little
daughter," he added seriously.

"And Estralla and Aunt Connie may go to Boston with us?" pleaded
Sylvia, quite sure that her father and mother would agree. "Won't
Grandma be surprised to see them?"

Mrs. Carleton was as pleased and surprised as Sylvia herself over Mr.
Waite's gift, and it was decided that directly after breakfast Sylvia
should tell Aunt Connie and Estralla the wonderful news. It was too
great to be kept a secret even until Christmas Day.

"Dar, Mammy! Wat I tells yo'? I tells yo' Missy Sylvia gwine to look
out fer us," Estralla declared triumphantly, evidently not at all
surprised.

"But it is Mr. Robert Waite who has given you your freedom," Sylvia
reminded them, "and my father says that you must both go with me and
