Eben's mean nature and utter selfishness, and felt that he wished to
have nothing to do with him. Ebenezer Graham was very "close," but he
was a hard-working man and honest as the world goes. He was tolerably
respected in Wayneboro, though not popular, but Eben seemed on the high
road to become a rascal.

A week slipped by, and a circular containing the list of prizes drawn
was sent to Eben.

He ran his eyes over it in a flutter of excitement. Alas! for his hopes.
In the list of lucky numbers the number on his ticket was not included.

"I have drawn a blank! Curse the luck!" he muttered, savagely. "The old
man needn't think I am going to stay here in Wayneboro. If he won't give
me money to go out West, why, then--"

But he did not say what then.




CHAPTER XIV. A TRIP TO BOSTON.



"To-morrow, Herbert," said George Melville, as they parted for the day,
"I shall propose a new excursion to you."

Herbert regarded him inquiringly.

"I want to go to Boston to make a few purchases, but principally to
consult my physician."

"I hope you are not feeling any worse, Mr. Melville," said Herbert, with
genuine concern, for he had come to feel a regard for his employer, who
was always kind and considerate to him.

"No, I am feeling as well as usual; but I wish to consult Dr. Davies
about the coming winter--whether he would advise me to spend it in
Massachusetts."

"If Mr. Melville goes away, I shall have to look for another place,"
thought Herbert, soberly. It was hardly likely, he knew, that he would
obtain a position so desirable as the one he now filled.

"I hope he will be able to do so, Mr. Melville," he said, earnestly.

"I hope so; but I shall not be surprised if the doctor ordered me away."

"Then you won't want me to come to-morrow?"

"Certainly, unless you object to going to Boston with me."

"Object?" repeated Herbert, eagerly. "I should like nothing better."

In fact, our hero, though a well-grown boy of sixteen, had never been to
Boston but three times, and the trip, commonplace as it may seem to
my traveled young readers, promised him a large amount of novelty and
pleasurable excitement.

"I shall be glad of your company, Herbert. I hardly feel the strength
or enterprise to travel alone, even for so trifling a trip as going to
Boston."

"At what hour will you go, Mr. Melville?"

"I will take the second train, at nine o'clock. It will afford me time
enough, and save my getting up before my usual time."

Herbert would have preferred going by the first train, starting at
half-past seven, as it would have given him a longer day in the city,
but of course he felt that his employer had decided wisely.

"It will be quite a treat to me, going to Boston," he said. "I have only
been there three times in my life."

"You certainly have not been much of a traveler, Herbert," said George
Melville, smiling. "However, you are young, and you may see a good deal
of the world yet before you die."

"I hope I will. It must be delightful to travel."

"Yes, when you are young and strong," said Melville, thoughtfully. "That
makes a great deal of difference in the enjoyment."

Herbert did not fail to put in an appearance at the hotel considerably
before it was time to leave for the train. George Melville smiled at his
punctuality.

"I wish, Herbert," he said, "that I could look forward with as much
pleasure as you feel to our trip to-day."

"I wish so, too, Mr. Melville."

"At any rate, I shall enjoy it better for having a companion."

The tickets were bought, and they took their places in one of the
passenger cars.

Just as the train was ready to start, Herbert saw a young man with a
ticket in his hand hurrying along the platform.

"Why, there's Eben Graham!" he said, in surprise.

"Is he entering the cars?"

"Yes, he has just got into the car behind us."

"I wonder if he is going to leave Wayneboro for good?"

"Probably he is only going to Boston for the day, perhaps to buy goods."

Herbert thought it doubtful whether Ebenezer Graham would trust his son
so far, but did not say so. Eben, on his part, had not seen Herbert on
board the train, and was not aware that he was a fellow passenger.

The journey was a tolerably long one--forty miles--and consumed an hour
and a half. At last they rolled into the depot, and before the train
had fairly stopped the passengers began to crowd toward the doors of the
car.

"Let us remain till the crowd has passed out," said George Melville. "It
is disagreeable to me to get into the throng, and it saves very little
time."

"Very well, sir."

Looking out of the car window, Herbert saw Eben Graham walking swiftly
along the platform, and could not forbear wondering what had brought him
to the city.

"My doctor's office is on Tremont Street," said Mr. Melville. "I
shall go there immediately, and may have to wait some time. It will be
tiresome to you, and I shall let you go where you please. You can meet
me at the Parker House, in School Street, at two o'clock."

"Very well, sir."

"Do you know where the hotel is?"

"No, but I can find it," answered Herbert, confidently.

"I believe I will also get you to attend to a part of my business for
me."

"I shall be very glad to do so," said Herbert, sincerely. It made him
feel more important to be transacting business in Boston.

"Here is a check for a hundred and fifty dollars on the Merchants'
Bank," continued George Melville. "It is payable to the bearer, and you
will have no trouble in getting the money on it. You may present it at
the bank, and ask for fives and tens and a few small bills."

"Very well, sir."

Herbert felt rather proud to have so much confidence reposed in him, for
to him a hundred and fifty dollars seemed a large sum of money, and he
felt that George Melville was a rich man to draw so much at one time.

"Had I better go to the bank at once?" he asked.

"Yes, I think so; of course, I need not caution you to take good care of
the money."

"I'll be sure to do that, sir."

They walked together to Tremont Street, and Mr. Melville paused at a
doorway opposite the Common.

"My doctor's office is upstairs," he said. "We will part here and meet
at the hotel. If you are late, I may go into the dining room; so if you
don't see me in the reading room, go to the door of the dining room and
look in."

"Very well, sir; but I think I shall be on time."

"The bank is open now, and you can cash the check if you go down there."

Left to himself, Herbert walked slowly along, looking into shop windows
and observing with interested attention the people whom he met.

"It must be very pleasant to live in the city," he thought; "there is so
much going on all the time."

It is no wonder that country boys are drawn toward the city, and feel
that their cup of happiness would be full if they could get a position
in some city store. They do not always find the reality equal to their
anticipations. The long hours and strict discipline of a city office or
mercantile establishment are not much like the freedom they pictured
to themselves, and after they have paid their board bill in some shabby
boarding house they seldom find much left over, either for amusement
or needful expenses. The majority of boys would do better to remain in
their country homes, where at least they can live comfortably and at
small expense, and take such employment as may fall in their way. They
will stand a much better chance of reaching a competence in middle life
than if they helped to crowd the ranks of city clerks and salesmen.
There is many a hard-working clerk of middle age, living poorly, and
with nothing laid by, in the city, who, had he remained in his native
village, might have reached a modest independence. It was hardly to be
expected, however, that Herbert would feel thus. Upon him the show and
glitter of the city shops and streets produced their natural effect, and
he walked on buoyantly, seeing three times as much as a city boy would
have done.

He turned down School Street, passing the Parker House, where he was to
meet Mr. Melville. Just before he reached it he saw Eben Graham emerge
from the hotel and walk towards Washington Street. Eben did not look
behind him, and therefore did not see Herbert.

"I wonder where he is going?" thought our hero, as he followed a few
steps behind Eben.




CHAPTER XV. AN OBLIGING GUIDE.



On Washington Street, not far from Old South Church, is an office for
the sale of railroad tickets to western points. It was this office which
Eben entered.

"He is going to inquire the price of a ticket to some western city,"
thought Herbert. "I heard him say one day that he wanted to go West."

Our hero's curiosity was naturally aroused, and he stood at the
entrance, where he could not only see but hear what passed within.

"What do you charge for a ticket to Chicago?" he heard Eben ask.

"Twenty-two dollars," was the answer of the young man behind the
counter.

"You may give me one," said Eben.

As he spoke he drew from his vest pocket a roll of bills, and began to
count off the requisite sum.

Herbert was surprised. He had supposed that Eben was merely making
inquiries about the price of tickets. He had not imagined that he was
really going.

"Can Mr. Graham have given him money to go?" he asked himself.

"When can I start?" asked Eben, as he received a string of tickets from
the clerk.

"At three this afternoon."

Eben seemed well pleased with this reply. He carefully deposited the
tickets in an inside vest pocket, and turned to go out of the office. As
he emerged from it he caught sight of Herbert, who had not yet started
to go. He looked surprised and annoyed.

"Herbert Carr!" he exclaimed. "How came you here?"

Mingled with his surprise there was a certain nervousness of manner, as
Herbert thought.

"I came to Boston with Mr. Melville," said Herbert, coldly.

"Oh!" ejaculated Eben, with an air of perceptible relief. "Where is Mr.
Melville?"

"He has gone to the office of his physician, on Tremont Street."

"Leaving you to your own devices, eh?"

"Yes."

"Look out you don't get lost!" said Eben, with affected gayety. "I am
here on a little business for the old man."

Herbert did not believe this, in view of what he had seen, but he did
not think it necessary to say so.

"Good-morning!" said Herbert, in a tone polite but not cordial.

"Good-morning! Oh, by the way, I have just been inquiring the cost of a
ticket to St. Louis," said Eben, carelessly.

"Indeed! Do you think of going out there?"

"Yes, if the old man will let me," said Eben.

"Do you prefer St. Louis to Chicago?" asked Herbert, watching the face
of Eben attentively.

Eben's face changed, and he looked searchingly at our hero, but could
read nothing in his face.

"Oh, decidedly!" he answered, after a slight pause. "I don't think I
would care for Chicago."

"And all the while you have a ticket for Chicago in your pocket!"
thought Herbert, suspiciously, "Well, that's your own affair entirely,
not mine."

"What train do you take back to Wayneboro?" asked Eben, not without
anxiety.

"We shall not go before four o'clock."

"I may be on the train with you," said Eben, "though possibly I shall
get through in time to take an earlier one."

"He is trying to deceive me," thought Herbert.

"Good-morning," he said, formally, and walked away.

"I wish I hadn't met him," muttered Eben to himself. "He may give the
old man a clew. However, I shall be safe out of the way before anything
can be done."

Herbert kept on his way, and found the bank without difficulty.

He entered and looked about him. Though unaccustomed to banks, he
watched to see where others went to get checks cashed, and presented
himself in turn.

"How will you have it?" asked the paying teller.

"Fives and tens, and a few small bills," answered Herbert, promptly.

The teller selected the requisite number of bank bills quickly, and
passed them out to Herbert. Our hero counted them, to make sure that
they were correct, and then put them away in his inside pocket. It gave
him a feeling of responsibility to be carrying about so much money, and
he felt that it was incumbent on him to be very careful.

"Where shall I go now?" he asked himself.

He would have liked to go to Charlestown, and ascend Bunker Hill
Monument, but did not know how to go. Besides, he feared he would not
get back to the Parker House at the time fixed by Mr. Melville. Still,
he might be able to do it. He addressed himself to a rather sprucely
dressed man of thirty-five whom he met at the door of the bank.

"I beg your pardon, sir, but can you tell me how far it is to Bunker
Hill Monument?"

"About a mile and a half," answered the stranger.

"Could I go there and get back to the Parker House before one o'clock."

"Could you?" repeated the man, briskly. "Why, to be sure you could!"

"But I don't know the way."

"You have only to take one of the Charlestown horse cars, and it will
land you only a couple of minutes' walk from the monument."

"Can you tell me what time it is, sir?"

"Only a little past eleven. So you have never been to Bunker Hill
Monument, my lad?"

"No sir; I live in the country, forty miles away and seldom come to
Boston."

"I see, I see," said the stranger, his eyes snapping in a very peculiar
way. "Every patriotic young American ought to see the place where Warren
fell."

"I should like to if you could tell me where to take the cars."

"Why, certainly I will," said the other, quickly. "In fact--let me see,"
and he pulled out a silver watch from his vest pocket, "I've a great
mind to go over with you myself."

"I shouldn't like to trouble you, sir," said Herbert.

"Oh, it will be no trouble. Business isn't pressing this morning, and
I haven't been over for a long time myself. If you don't object to my
company, I will accompany you."

"You are very kind," said Herbert. "If you are quite sure that you are
not inconveniencing yourself, I shall be very glad to go with you--that
is, if you think I can get back to the Parker House by one o'clock."

"I will guarantee that you do," said the stranger, confidently. "My
young friend, I am glad to see that you are particular to keep your
business engagements. In a varied business experience, I have observed
that it is precisely that class who are destined to win the favor of
their employer and attain solid success."

"He seems a very sensible man," thought Herbert; "and his advice is
certainly good."

"Come this way," said the stranger, crossing Washington Street.
"Scollay's Square is close at hand, and there we shall find a
Charlestown horse car."

Of course Herbert yielded himself to the guidance of his new friend, and
they walked up Court Street together.

