interfere. The wrangle was as to whether it was best to go directly
ahead upon the route they were pursuing, trusting not only to the
possibility that the strangers there were friends, but to the prospect
of their getting by without detection, or whether they should go to the
trouble of a flank movement.

Waukko was inclined to go directly ahead, while the others were opposed,
and, as is frequently the case with such people, the dispute was excited
and hot for awhile; but the hideous Apache triumphed by virtue of his
official position. Lone Wolf had placed the lad in his charge, and he
was bent upon managing the business in his own fashion.

It was agreed, therefore, that they should continue on up the ravine, as
this offered so much the better chance for their mustangs to make good
progress. Waukko took the lead, his horse walking at a steady gait,
while he scrutinized the camp-fire as closely and searchingly as if his
life depended on the result.

The flame seemed to have been started directly behind a mass of rocks,
large and compact enough to shelter a dozen men, if they wished to
conceal themselves. The smoke showed that it was burning so vigorously
that fuel must have been placed upon it but a short time before.
It would seem that, if set going by hostile hands, the owners were
short-sighted in thus exposing their location; but the mischief of such
a thing is that the smoke of a camp-fire in an Indian country may have
one or more of a dozen dangerous meanings.

In the West and Southwest the Indians have a system of telegraphy,
conducted entirely by means of signal fires from mountain top to
mountain top. Treaties signed in Washington in one day have been known
hundreds of miles away at night, by the redskins chiefly concerned, who
had no means of gaining the news except by some system of telegraphy,
understood only by themselves. The most cunning and effective war
movements, where the success depends upon the cooperation of widely
separated parties, have been managed and conducted by the smoke curling
upward from hills and mountain peaks. Still further, a camp-fire is
frequently used as a way of confusing an approaching enemy, for by what
means could the latter judge whether the parties who had kindled it were
in the immediate neighborhood?

Was there not, in this instance, one stealthy Kiowa carefully keeping up
the blaze, while his companions had stolen around and across the chasm,
where they were ambushed and awaiting the coming of their victims? Were
not the sly dogs successful in hiding their positions by the very means
which would generally be supposed to betray it?

At any rate, Waukko was not yet abreast of the dangerous point when
he again checked his mustang, and the three Apaches consulted in a low
voice and with every appearance of suppressed excitement. There
was something in the wind which made all three feel anything but
comfortable.

The consultation was brief and decisive. Waukko and one of his warriors
dismounted, leaving Fred and his guardian upon the remaining horse.
Waukko moved off to the right, as though he meant to reconnoiter the
camp-fire, while the other savage stole off to the left. Very evidently
there was something which needed looking after, and it may have been that
Waukko was in quest of information for his leader, Lone Wolf.

Be that as it may, before Fred Munson fairly suspected it he found
himself alone with another mounted Apache, both the others having
vanished as effectually as if the ground had opened and swallowed them
up.

"Now is my chance, if I could only get an opening," was the truthful
conclusion of the lad, whose heart suddenly beat with an awakened hope.
"If I can manage to get this old fellow off, or if I could steal a
little march on him, so as to gain a chance, I could escape. Anyhow,
I'm going to try it," he added, and his boyish heart was fired with a
renewed determination to make a desperate leap for liberty.

One Apache, however, if he attended to his business, could guard him as
effectually as a dozen, and it all depended upon the disposition this
warrior should manifest. Just now his great and all absorbing interest
was in the efforts of his comrades to detect the meaning of the signal
fire.

Fred sat behind him upon the horse, and he stealthily looked to the
right and left, in the hope of detecting some place which offered an
opportunity for concealment, for he felt that there would be but the
single chance offered him. If he should fail in that, the savages would
guard him too closely to permit a second effort.

The ravine at this place was about a hundred feet in width. The sides
sloped abruptly downward, growing nearly perpendicular further ahead, so
that the Apaches, if caught in any trap at all, would be caught in the
worst possible manner. Hence the extreme caution they displayed before
committing themselves.

There were rocks and stones on the right and left, and here and there
some stunted vegetation. A few minutes start would give any one a chance
to hide, but just there was the whole difficulty. How was the start to
be obtained? It seemed, at this juncture, as if the fates were unusually
propitious. Everything conspired to invite the attempt which the boy was
so anxious to make.

Waukko and his companion had not been gone more than ten minutes when
one of them signaled to the Indian left behind. It came in the shape
of a soft low whistle, which could easily be mistaken for the call of
a bird. The horseman started and turned his head sidewise to listen the
instant it fell upon his ear, and this caused Fred to notice it. The
Indian held his head a moment in the attitude of deep attention, and
then he replied in precisely the same manner without turning his head.
A full minute passed. Then a second call was heard, emitted in precisely
the same manner as before. This was the one which did the business.

The trained ear of the veteran scout could have detected no difference
that had been made, but there was, for all that, and a very wide one, so
far as meaning was concerned. The red-skin had no sooner caught it than
he dismounted and moved carefully forward, his mustang quietly following
him, bearing the lad upon his back.

The warrior glanced backward only once, to satisfy himself that
his steed was there, and understood what was required of it. In the
meantime, the heart of Fred was throbbing painfully with hope. He felt
as if Providence was interfering directly in his behalf.

"Now is my time," he added, a moment later.



CHAPTER XV. A LEAP FOR LIBERTY

It seemed that nothing could be more favorable for the attempt to
escape. There was Fred seated upon the back of a mustang. His copper
colored captors were some distance away at the side of the ravine, while
the only Indian in sight was a dozen feet ahead with his back toward
him. True, there was the risk of being shot, but he felt that he did not
deserve safety unless he was willing to run that or any risk.

There was a loose rein hanging on the neck of the mustang. Fred gently
pulled it and the beast stopped. He was walking so quietly that his
hoofs made scarcely any sound in falling upon the flinty surface, and
the Indian, from some cause or other, failed to notice the cessation of
sound until the distance between them had about doubled.

At that instant, the redskin turned his head as quick as lightning.
Fred, who had been washing for that identical movement, whirled the
steed about and started him back in the ravine at full gallop, the brute
responding gallantly to the sudden demand made upon him.

The fugitive was expecting a shot from the rifle in the hand of the
Apache, and he threw himself forward upon the horse, so as to make the
target as difficult to hit as possible. But the Indian did not fire,
not only on account of the risk to his favorite mustang, but because
it would have been certain to disarrange the reconnoissance upon which
Waukko and his companions were engaged.

But the red-skin did not stand in stupid helplessness. A glance told
him everything, and, running with extraordinary swiftness to the nearest
mustang, he vaulted upon his back and started in pursuit, putting his
animal upon the jump from the first. The few seconds' unavoidable
delay gave the young fugitive something like a hundred yards start, an
advantage which he used every effort to increase, and which, for a brief
spell, he succeeded in doing.

Fred's object was to avoid a regular chase, for he dreaded that in such
case the superior knowledge of the country possessed by the Indian would
enable him to outwit him at every turn. Night was close at hand, and,
if he could dodge the red-skin until darkness, the lad was confident of
escaping him altogether.

For a short distance, the ravine continued in almost a straight line,
and then it turned at a sharp angle. Without attempting to guide the
mustang in the least, Fred kept himself thrown forward, with his arms
about his neck, while he hammered his sides with his heels, spoke
sharply to him, and did everything he could to urge him to the highest
possible rate of speed. The animal whirled about the corner, and,
with his neck extended, went down the ravine with almost incredible
swiftness--a speed which was steadily drawing him away from his pursuer,
and which would have carried him beyond his reach in a brief time, but
for a singular and altogether unexpected check.

The pursuing red-skin saw his charge quietly slipping from his grasp,
and he must have viewed the wonderful speed of his favorite mustang,
under the circumstances, with mixed emotions. At any rate, it took him
but a short time to see that in a stern chase he had no chance of coming
up with his own animal, and so he commanded him to halt. This was done
by a peculiar, tremulous whooping sound, which he had used scores of
times to summon his animal to him, and which had never failed. Nor did
it fail now.

Fred was careering along at this amazing speed, congratulating himself
meanwhile upon his cleverness, when the brute checked himself so
suddenly that the rider narrowly escaped being pitched over his head. He
jerked the bit, and pounded his heels against his ribs, but it was of no
avail. The horse had pricked up his ears, neighed, and was looking back,
with very much the appearance of an animal that was in a mental muddle.

The Indian saw it, and repeated the signal. Thereupon the mustang
wheeled and started backward at a gallop, directly toward his master.

"If that's your idea, I'm not going with you!" gasped the lad, who
slipped off his back, as nimbly as a monkey, and made a dash for the
side of the ravine, without any clear idea of where he was going.

It seemed that there was no possible escape for the lad, for the Indian
was but a short distance behind him, and was twice as fleet of foot as
he; but one of those fortunate interferences which seem to be in their
nature like special Providences occurred at this juncture.

The flight and pursuit of Fred Munson took place at a critical period
in the affairs of all parties and so mixed up the business that it was
thrown entirely out of gear and almost into inextricable confusion.
It seemed that there was a party of Kiowas in hiding, and awaiting the
chance to open fire upon the approaching Apaches. The sly scamps saw
every movement of the warriors, and it looked as if the flies were about
walking into their trap when the unexpected by-play occurred.

There must have been all of half a dozen Kiowas, enough to extinguish
the Apaches, and when Fred Munson started in his flight, two of the
Indians hurried down the ravine for the purpose of taking a hand in the
business. They unavoidably fell behind in such a trial of speed, but
when they saw the Apache about to reach out his hand to grasp the
fugitive, two shots were fired almost simultaneously at him.

They were intended to kill, too, for the Kiowas, who were actuated by no
love for the despairing white boy, felt that they could afford to give
him this temporary respite. They were certain of their own ability
to step in and pluck the prize at the very moment it might seem to be
beyond their reach. Rather curiously, however, neither of the shots did
what was intended. One of them missed the Apache altogether, and the
other only slightly wounded him.

As it was, however, the pursuing warrior was dumbfounded, and he stopped
as suddenly as if smitten by a bolt from heaven. Leaving his mustang to
look out for himself, he darted to the opposite side of the ravine from
that taken by the lad, for the purpose of securing cover before a second
volley could be fired.

Fred heard the report of the rifle-shots, and sup posed that he was the
target and that they had been fired by Waukko and his companion.
Instead of stopping to ascertain, he continued his flight with all the
desperation of combined hope and despair.

A few seconds sufficed to carry him across the ravine, and among the
rocks, boulders, and stunted growth. The panting fugitive was rendered
almost frantic by the thought that he was about to elude the red-skin
after all. As he bounded into cover, he cast a terrified glance
backward, to see how close to his heels was his dreaded enemy.

Not an Indian was visible.

But although Fred failed to see anything of his enemies, he could not
but believe that they were somewhere in the immediate neighborhood, and
he did not relax his efforts in the slightest. Such strenuous efforts
speedily exhausted him, and after climbing, clambering, and stumbling
forward and upward for some twenty rods or so, he tripped and pitched
forward upon his face, where he lay panting, and so weak that he could
not rise. He was sure he heard the footsteps of his pursuer but a short
distance away, and the most that he could do was to raise his head and
glance furtively in the direction. He had not the strength absolutely to
rise to his feet and run away.

Again and again he was confident that the Apache was close to him, but
still he did not become visible, and all this time Fred was rapidly
regaining his strength. In a very short time his rapid breathing
subsided, and he felt his old vigor and vitality creeping back into his
limbs. He was ready to spring to his feet again, but he did not deem it
best. It seemed to him that the warrior had lost sight of him, and was
looking about. If the boy, therefore, should rise to his feet, he would
be the more likely to be seen, and if he remained where he was he was
sure of being found.

He compromised the matter by crawling forward on his hands and knees,
listening and looking, and continually pausing to prevent creeping into
the arms of his enemies. All this time night was approaching, and with
the passage of each minute came a corresponding rise in the hopes of the
fugitive. Fred kept moving forward upon his hands and knees, climbing
higher and further away from the point of danger.

Everything remained as silent as the tomb.

The Apache that Fred fancied was so close upon him was, in reality,
playing hide and seek with the Kiowas, a business which is generally
conducted in silence, unless the stillness be broken by the occasional
crack of the rifle, or the death-yell of one of the participants. The
footsteps which the boy fancied he heard were all in his imagination.
In fact, he was alone. No human eye saw him, or took cognizance of his
movements. For the present he was left to himself.

There was but One who held him in view and remembrance at this critical
juncture. To Him Fred appealed again and again to lead him through
the labyrinth of peril, and to permit him to return in safety to his
friends.

Still the boy picked his way along as does the frightened animal, and
still he failed to see or hear anything of his enemy. Meanwhile
the gloom deepened, and with the passage of every moment his heart
lightened, until he felt that for the time being, at least, his safety
was assured.



CHAPTER XVI. THE RECONNOISSANCE

It was a mystery to young Munson why the shots fired, as he supposed, by
the Apaches, should have checked his pursuer, who was so close upon him.
Had he known that they came from a couple of hostile Kiowas, and that
they were intended for the warrior whose hand was outstretched to grasp
him, the matter would not have been so hard to understand. But he saw
the night closing in about him, while he remained among the rocks,
moving forward in the same stealthy manner, upon his hands and knees,
and his strained ear failed to catch the slightest sound that could make
him fear that any of his enemies were near at hand.

Of course he looked with all the eyes at his command, but they also
stared upon a blank, so far as animated creation was concerned. At last
Fred halted, tired out with this species of locomotion.

"I do believe I've given them the slip," he exclaimed, his heart
throbbing more than ever with renewed hope. "I don't exactly understand
how it was done, but I thank the Lord all the more for it."

He now arose to his feet and reconnoitered his own position. So far as
he could judge, he was fully two hundred yards away from and above the
ravine where he had made this successful attempt at escape. The day was
so far gone by this time that he could barely discern the open space
which led through the mountain. His view on the left was shut off by the
angle to which reference has been made, and on the right the gathering
obscurity ended the field of vision.

