does have a good opinion of himself. It is one of his faults. He
quite lost sight of the fact that it was entirely by accident that
he had come over to this swamp. Now that he had guessed who this
might be, he was less impatient. He waited as still as you please,
and at last the green head was slowly stretched out again, and
Sammy could see that the neck was green, too, and that around the
neck was a white collar. Sammy could keep still no longer.

[Illustration with caption: "Yes," said he in a low voice, "I am
Mr. Quack."]

"Are you Mr. Quack?" he asked eagerly.

The beautiful head disappeared like a flash. Sammy waited a minute
or two, before he repeated his question, adding: "You needn't be
afraid. There isn't anybody here but me, and I'm your friend. I
just want to know if you are Mr.  Quack because I've been looking
for you for Mrs. Quack. Are you?"

Slowly, looking this way and that way with fear and suspicion in
his eyes, a handsome Duck came out from under the pile of brush.
"Yes," said he in a low voice, "I am Mr. Quack. Where is Mrs.
Quack?"

"Safe and sound over on the Big River," replied Sammy joyfully.
"Oh, I'm so glad I've found you!"




XVIII

SAMMY JAY SENDS MRS. QUACK TO THE SWAMP


When Sammy Jay left Mr. Quack in the swamp over by the bank of the
Big River, he flew straight back to the Smiling Pool. At first he
thought of flying out over the Big River and screaming the news to
Mrs. Quack, who, you know, was swimming about out there. But he
knew that if he did, she would very likely fly right over where Mr.
Quack was, and that wouldn't do at all. No, indeed, that wouldn't
do at all. One of the hunters would be sure to see her. So Sammy
wisely flew back to the Smiling Pool to wait until Mrs. Quack should
come back there for the night.

Of course he told Peter Rabbit all about Mr. Quack, and Peter was
so delighted at the thought that Mr. Quack was alive that he capered
about in quite the craziest way. "Does Mrs. Quack know yet?" asked
Peter.

Sammy shook his head. "I'm going to tell her when she comes back
here to-night," he explained. "I was afraid if I told her before
then she would fly straight to him and perhaps get them both in
trouble."

"Quite right, Sammy! Quite right!" Peter exclaimed. "I wouldn't
have thought of that. My, won't she be happy when you do tell her!
I wonder what she'll say and what she'll do. I'm going to stay right
here so as to see her when she hears the good news. Here comes your
cousin, Blacky the Crow. Does he know yet?"

"No," replied Sammy, "but I'm going to tell him as soon as he gets
here." They watched Blacky draw nearer and nearer, and as soon
as he was within hearing Sammy shouted the news. "Caw, caw, caw,"
replied Blacky, hurrying a little faster.

As soon as he reached the Big Hickory-tree, Sammy told the whole
story over again, and Blacky was quite as glad as the others. While
they waited for Mrs.  Quack he told how he had hunted and hunted
along the farther bank of the Big River and how he had seen the
hunters with their terrible guns hiding and had warned Mrs. Quack
just where each one was.

Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun was getting ready to go to bed behind
the Purple Hills and the Black Shadows were beginning to creep out
over the Green Meadows before Mrs. Quack came. In fact, Sammy Jay
and Blacky were getting very uneasy. It was almost bed-time for
them, for neither of them dared stay out after dark. They had almost
made up their minds to leave Peter to tell the news when they saw
Mrs. Quack coming swiftly from the direction of the Big River. She
looked so sad and discouraged that even Blacky the Crow was sorry
for her, and you know Blacky isn't much given to such feelings.

"What's the news, Mrs. Quack?" asked Peter, his eyes dancing.

"There isn't any," replied Mrs. Quack.

"Oh, yes, there is!" cried Sammy Jay, who couldn't possibly keep
still any longer.

"What is it?" demanded Mrs. Quack eagerly, and it seemed to Peter
that there was a wee bit of hope in her voice.

"Did you happen to notice that just before the Laughing Brook joins
the Big River it flows through a little swamp?" asked Sammy.

Mrs. Quack nodded her head rapidly. "What of it?" she demanded.

"Nothing much, only if I were you I would go down there after dark,"
replied Sammy.

Mrs. Quack looked up at Sammy sharply. "Why should I go down there?"
she asked.

"If I tell you, will you wait until I get quite through?" asked
Sammy in his turn.

Mrs. Quack promised that she would.

"Well, then," replied Sammy, "this afternoon I found a stranger
hiding in there, a stranger with a beautiful green head and neck
and a white collar."

"Mr. Quack! Oh, it was Mr. Quack!" cried Mrs. Quack joyfully and
lifted her wings as if she would start for the swamp at once.

"Stop!" cried Sammy sharply. "You said you would wait until I am
through. It won't do for you to go there until after dark, because
there is a hunter hiding very near Mr. Quack's hiding-place.
Wait until it is dark and he has gone home.  Then take my advice,
and when you have found Mr. Quack, bring him right up here to the
Smiling Pool. He can't fly, but he can swim up the Laughing Brook,
and this is the safest place for both of you. Now good night and
good luck."




XIX

JERRY MUSKRAT'S GREAT IDEA


A friendly friend is a friend indeed      When he proves a friend
in the time of need.

Mr. and Mrs. Quack had been so much taken up with each other and
with their troubles that they had quite forgotten they were not
alone in the Smiling Pool, which they had reached by swimming up
the Laughing Brook. So it happened that when Mrs. Quack suggested
that if Mr. Quack's wing got strong they might be able to find
a lonesome pond not too far away where they could make their home
for the summer, they were a little startled to hear a voice say:
"I know where there is one, and you will not have to fly at all to
get to it." Both jumped a little.  You see their nerves had been
very much upset for a long time, and the least unexpected thing
made them jump. Then both laughed.

"Hello, Jerry Muskrat! We'd forgotten all about you," said Mrs.
Quack. "What was that you said?"

Jerry good-naturedly repeated what he had said. Mrs. Quack's face
brightened.  "Do you really mean it?" she asked eagerly. "Do you
really mean that you know of a pond where we could live and not be
likely to be seen by these two-legged creatures called men?"

"That's what I said," replied Jerry briefly.

"Oh, Jerry, you're not joking, are you? Tell me you're not joking,"
begged Mrs.  Quack.

"Of course I'm not joking," returned Jerry just a little bit
indignantly, "I am not the kind of a fellow to joke people who are
in such trouble as you and Mr.  Quack seem to be in. The idea came
to me while you were talking. I couldn't help overhearing what you
were saying, and the minute you mentioned a lonesome pond, the idea
came to me, and I think it's a perfectly splendid idea. I know of
just the lonesomest kind of a lonesome pond, and you won't have to
fly a stroke to get to it. If you are smart enough not to be caught
by Reddy Fox or Hooty the Owl or Billy Mink or any of those people
who hunt for a living, there isn't any reason I know of why you
shouldn't spend the summer there in peace and comfort."

Mrs. Quack's eyes fairly shone with hope and eagerness. "Oh, Jerry,
tell us where it is, and we'll start for it right away!" she cried.

Jerry's eyes twinkled. "Of course, the owner of that pond might
not like to have neighbors. I hadn't thought of that," said he.
"Perhaps he ought to be asked first."

Mrs. Quack's face fell. "Who is the owner?" she asked.

"My cousin, Paddy the Beaver. He made it," replied Jerry proudly.

Mrs. Quack's face lighted up again at once. "I'm sure he won't
object," said she. "We know a great many of the Beaver family. In
fact, they are very good neighbors of ours in our home in the far
Northland. I didn't suppose there was a Beaver pond anywhere around
here. Tell me where it is, Jerry, and I'll go right up there and
call on your cousin."

"All you've got to do is to follow the Laughing Brook way back
into the Green Forest, and you'll come to Paddy's pond," said he.
"He made that pond himself two years ago. He came down from the Great
Woods and built a dam across the Laughing Brook way back there in
the Green Forest and gave us a great scare here in the Smiling Pool
by cutting off the water for a few days. He has got a very nice
pond there now. Honker the Goose and his flock spent a night in it
on their way south last fall."

Mrs. Quack waited to hear no more. She shot up into the air and
disappeared over the tops of the trees in the Green Forest.

"What do you think of my idea?" asked Jerry, as he and Mr. Quack
watched her out of sight.

"I think it is great, just simply great," replied Mr. Quack.




XX

HAPPY DAYS FOR MR. AND MRS. QUACK


Whose heart is true and brave and strong,      Who ne'er gives up
to grim despair,      Will find some day that skies are blue      And
all the world is bright and fair.

If you don't believe it, just ask Mr. and Mrs. Quack. They know.
Certainly the world never looked darker for any one than it did
