A second time it tried to carry its load up the rough trunk of the
tree, and a second time it failed.

Tamerlane watched the brave little insect. It tried three times, four
times, a dozen times, twenty times--but always with the same result.

Then it tried the twenty-first time. Slowly, one little step at a time,
it crept up across the rough place where it had slipped and fallen so
often. The next minute it ran safely into its home, carrying its
precious load. "Well done!" said Tamerlane. "You have taught me a
lesson. I, too, will try, try again, till I succeed."

And this he did.

Of what other story does this remind you?




WHY HE CARRIED THE TURKEY



In Richmond, Virginia, one Saturday morning, an old man went into the
market to buy something. He was dressed plainly, his coat was worn,
and his hat was dingy. On his arm he carried a small basket.

"I wish to get a fowl for to-morrow's dinner," he said.

The market man showed him a fat turkey, plump and white and ready for
roasting.

"Ah! that is just what I want," said the old man. "My wife will be
delighted with it."

He asked the price and paid for it. The market man wrapped a paper
round it and put it in the basket.

Just then a young man stepped up. "I will take one of those turkeys,"
he said. He was dressed in fine style and carried a small cane.

"Shall I wrap it up for you?" asked the market man.

"Yes, here is your money," answered the young gentleman; "and send it
to my house at once."

"I cannot do that," said the market man. "My errand boy is sick to-
day, and there is no one else to send. Besides, it is not our custom
to deliver goods."

"Then how am I to get it home?" asked the young gentleman.

"I suppose you will have to carry it yourself," said the market man.
"It is not heavy."

"Carry it myself! Who do you think I am? Fancy me carrying a turkey
along the street!" said the young gentleman; and he began to grow very
angry. The old man who had bought the first turkey was standing quite
near. He had heard all that was said.

"Excuse me, sir," he said; "but may I ask where you live?"

"I live at Number 39, Blank Street," answered the young gentleman;
"and my name is Johnson."

"Well, that is lucky," said the old man, smiling. "I happen to be going
that way, and I will carry your turkey, if you will allow me."

"Oh, certainly!" said Mr. Johnson. "Here it is. You may follow me."

When they reached Mr. Johnson's house, the old man politely handed him
the turkey and turned to go.

"Here, my friend, what shall I pay you?" said the young gentleman.

"Oh, nothing, sir, nothing," answered the old man. "It was no trouble
to me, and you are welcome."

He bowed and went on. Young Mr. Johnson looked after him and wondered.
Then he turned and walked briskly back to the market.

"Who is that polite old gentleman who carried my turkey for me?" he
asked of the market man.

"That is John Marshall, Chief Justice of the United States. He is one
of the greatest men in our country," was the answer.

The young gentleman was surprised and ashamed. "Why did he offer to
carry my turkey?" he asked.

"He wished to teach you a lesson," answered the market man.

"What sort of lesson?"
"He wished to teach you that no man should feel himself too fine to
carry his own packages."

"Oh, no!" said another man who had seen and heard it all. "Judge
Marshall carried the turkey simply because he wished to be kind and
obliging. That is his way."




THE PADDLE-WHEEL BOAT



More than a hundred years ago, two boys were fishing in a small river.
They sat in a heavy flat-bottomed boat, each holding a long, crooked
rod in his hands and eagerly waiting for "a bite."

When they wanted to move the boat from one place to another they had
to pole it; that is, they pushed against a long pole, the lower end
of which reached the bottom of the stream.

"This is slow work, Robert," said the older of the boys as they were
poling up the river to a new fishing place. "The old boat creeps over
the water no faster than a snail."

"Yes, Christopher; and it is hard work, too," answered Robert. "I think
there ought to be some better way of moving a boat."

"Yes, there is a better way, and that is by rowing," said Christopher.
"But we have no oars."

"Well, I can make some oars," said Robert; "but I think there ought
to be still another and a better way. I am going to find such a way
if I can." The next day Robert's aunt heard a great pounding and sawing
in her woodshed. The two boys were there, busily working with hammer
and saw. "What are you making, Robert?" she asked.

"Oh, I have a plan for making a boat move without poling it or rowing
it," he answered.

His aunt laughed and said, "Well, I hope that you will succeed."

After a great deal of tinkering and trying, they did succeed in making
two paddle wheels. They were very rough and crude, but strong and
serviceable. They fastened each of these wheels to the end of an iron
rod which they passed through the boat from side to side. The rod was
bent in the middle so that it could be turned as with a crank. When
the work was finished, the old fishing boat looked rather odd, with
a paddle wheel on each side which dipped just a few inches into the
water. The boys lost no time in trying it.

[Illustration]

"She goes ahead all right," said Christopher, "but how shall we guide
her?"

"Oh, I have thought of that," said Robert. He took something like an
oarlock from his pocket and fastened it to the stern of the boat; then
with a paddle which worked in this oarlock one of the boys could guide
the boat while the other turned the paddle wheels.

"It is better than poling the boat," said Christopher.

"It is better than rowing, too," said Robert. "See how fast she goes!"

That night when Christopher went home he had a wonderful story to tell.
"Bob Fulton planned the whole thing," he said, "and I helped him make
the paddles and put them on the boat."

"I wonder why we didn't think of something like that long ago," said
his father. "Almost anybody could rig up an old boat like that."

"Yes, I wonder, too," said Christopher. "It looks easy enough, now
that Bob has shown how it is done."

When Robert Fulton became a man, he did not forget his experiment with
the old fishing boat. He kept on, planning and thinking and working,
until at last he succeeded in making a boat with paddle wheels that
could be run by steam.

He is now remembered and honored as the inventor of the steamboat. He
became famous because he was always thinking and studying and working.




THE CALIPH AND THE GARDENER



There was once a caliph of Cordova whose name was Al Mansour. One day
a strange merchant came to him with some diamonds and pearls which he
had brought from beyond the sea. The caliph was so well pleased with
these jewels that he bought them and paid the merchant a large
sum of money. The merchant put the gold in a bag of purple silk which
he tied to his belt underneath his long cloak. Then he set out on foot
to walk to another city.

It was midsummer, and the day was very hot. As the merchant was walking
along, he came to a river that flowed gently between green and shady
banks.

He was hot and covered with dust. No one was near. Very few people
ever came that way. Why should he not cool himself in the refreshing
water? He took off his clothes and laid them on the bank. He put the
bag of money on top of them and then leaped into the water. How cool
and delicious it was!

Suddenly he heard a rustling noise behind him. He turned quickly and
saw an eagle rising into the air with his moneybag in its claws. No
doubt the bird had mistaken the purple silk for something good to eat.

The merchant shouted. He jumped out of the water and shouted again.
But it was no use. The great bird was high in the air and flying
towards the far-off mountains with all his money.

The poor man could do nothing but dress himself and go sorrowing on
his way.

A year passed by and then the merchant appeared once more before Al
Mansour. "O Caliph," he said, "here are a few jewels which I had
reserved as a present for my wife. But I have met with such bad luck
that I am forced to sell them. I pray that you will look at them and
take them at your own price."

Al Mansour noticed that the merchant was very sad and downcast. "Why,
what has happened to you?" he asked. "Have you been sick?"

Then the merchant told him how the eagle had flown away with his money.

"Why didn't you come to us before?" he asked. "We might have done
something to help you. Toward what place was the eagle flying when you
last saw it?"

"It was flying toward the Black Mountains," answered the merchant.

The next morning the caliph called ten of his officers before him.
"Ride at once to the Black Mountains," he said. "Find all the old men
that live on the mountains or in the flat country around, and command
them to appear before me one week from to-day."

The officers did as they were bidden. On the day appointed, forty gray-
bearded, honest old men stood before the caliph. All were asked the
same question. "Do you know of any person who was once poor but who
has lately and suddenly become well-to-do?"

Most of the old men answered that they did not know of any such person.
A few said that there was one man in their neighborhood who seemed to
have had some sort of good luck.

This man was a gardener. A year ago he was so poor that he had scarcely
clothes for his back. His children were crying for food. But lately
everything had changed for him. Both he and his family dressed well;
they had plenty to eat; he had even bought a horse to help him carry
his produce to market.

The caliph at once gave orders for the gardener to be brought before
him the next day. He also ordered that the merchant should come at the
same time.

Before noon the next day the gardener was admitted to the palace. As
soon as he entered the hall the caliph went to meet him. "Good friend,"
he said, "if you should find something that we have lost, what would
you do with it?"

[Illustration]

The gardener put his hand under his cloak and drew out the very bag
that the merchant had lost.

"Here it is, my lord," he said.

At sight of his lost treasure, the merchant began to dance and shout
for joy.

"Tell us," said Al Mansour to the gardener, "tell us how you came to
find that bag."

The gardener answered: "A year ago, as I was spading in my garden, I
saw something fall at the foot of a palm tree. I ran to pick it up and
was surprised to find that it was a bag full of bright gold pieces.
I said to myself, 'This money must belong to our master, Al Mansour.
Some large bird has stolen it from his palace.'"

"Well, then," said the caliph, "why did you not return it to us at
once?" "It was this way," said the gardener: "I looked at the gold
pieces, and then thought of my own great necessities. My wife and
children were suffering from the want of food and clothing. I had no
shoes for my feet, no coat for my back. So I said to myself, 'My lord
Al Mansour is famous for his kindness to the poor. He will not care.'
So I took ten gold pieces from the many that were in the bag.

"I meant only to borrow them. And I put the bag in a safe place, saying
that as soon as I could replace the ten pieces, I would return all to
my lord Al Mansour. With much hard labor and careful management I have
saved only five little silver pieces. But, as I came to your palace
this morning, I kept saying to myself, 'When our lord Al Mansour learns
just how it was that I borrowed the gold, I have no doubt that in his
kindness of heart he will forgive me the debt.'"

Great was the caliph's surprise when he heard the poor man's story.
He took the bag of money and handed it to the merchant. "Take the bag
and count the money that is in it," he said. "If anything is lacking,
I will pay it to you."

The merchant did as he was told. "There is nothing lacking," he said,
"but the ten pieces he has told you about; and I will give him these
as a reward."

"No," said Al Mansour, "it is for me to reward the man as he deserves."

Saying this, he ordered that ten gold pieces be given to the merchant
in place of those that were lacking. Then he rewarded the gardener
with ten more pieces for his honesty.

"Your debt is paid. Think no more about it," he said.




THE COWHERD WHO BECAME A POET

I



In England there was once a famous abbey, called Whitby. It was so
close to the sea that those who lived in it could hear the waves
forever beating against the shore. The land around it was rugged,
with only a few fields in the midst of a vast forest.

In those far-off days, an abbey was half church, half castle. It was
a place where good people, and timid, helpless people could find
shelter in time of war. There they might live in peace and safety
while all the country round was overrun by rude and barbarous men.

One cold night in winter the serving men of the abbey were gathered
in the great kitchen. They were sitting around the fire and trying to
keep themselves warm.

Out of doors the wind was blowing. The men heard it as it whistled
through the trees and rattled the doors of the abbey. They drew up
closer to the fire and felt thankful that they were safe from the
raging storm. "Who will sing us a song?" said the master woodman as
he threw a fresh log upon the fire.

"Yes, a song! a song!" shouted some of the others. "Let us have a good
old song that will help to keep us warm."

"We can all be minstrels to-night," said the chief cook. "Suppose we
each sing a song in turn. What say you?"

"Agreed! agreed!" cried the others. "And the cook shall begin."

The woodman stirred the fire until the flames leaped high and the
sparks flew out of the roof hole. Then the chief cook began his song.
He sang of war, and of bold rough deeds, and of love and sorrow.

After him the other men were called, one by one; and each in turn sang
his favorite song. The woodman sang of the wild forest; the plowman
sang of the fields; the shepherd sang of his sheep; and those who
listened forgot about the storm and the cold weather.

But in the corner, almost hidden from his fellows, one poor man was
sitting who did not enjoy the singing. It was Caedmon, the
cowherd. "What shall I do when it comes my turn?" he said to himself.
"I
do not know any song. My voice is harsh and I cannot sing."

So he sat there trembling and afraid; for he was a timid, bashful man
and did not like to be noticed.

At last, just as the blacksmith was in the midst of a stirring song,
he rose quietly and went out into the darkness. He went across the
narrow yard to the sheds where the cattle were kept in stormy weather.

"The gentle cows will not ask a song of me," said the poor man. He
soon found a warm corner, and there he lay down, covering himself with
the straw.

Inside of the great kitchen, beside the fire, the men were shouting
and laughing; for the blacksmith had finished his song, and it was
very pleasing.

"Who is next?" asked the woodman.

"Caedmon, the keeper of the cows," answered the chief cook.

"Yes, Caedmon! Caedmon!" all shouted together. "A song from Caedmon!"
But when they looked, they saw that his seat was vacant.

"The poor, timid fellow!" said the blacksmith. "He was afraid and has
slipped away from us."



II


In his safe, warm place in the straw, Caedmon soon fell asleep. All
around him were the cows of the abbey, some chewing their cuds, and
others like their master quietly sleeping. The singing in the kitchen
was ended, the fire had burned low, and each man had gone to his place.

Then Caedmon had a strange dream. He thought that a wonderful light
was shining around him. His eyes were dazzled by it. He rubbed them
with his hands, and when they were quite open he thought that he saw
a beautiful face looking down upon him, and that a gentle voice
said,--

"Caedmon, sing for me."

At first he was so bewildered that he could not answer. Then he heard
the voice again.

"Caedmon, sing something."

"Oh, I cannot sing," answered the poor man." I do not know any song;
and my voice is harsh and unpleasant. It was for this reason that I
left my fellows in the abbey kitchen and came here to be alone."

"But you _must_ sing," said the voice. "You _must_ sing."

"What shall I sing?" he asked.

"Sing of the creation," was the answer.

Then Caedmon, with only the cows as his hearers, opened his mouth and
began to sing. He sang of the beginning of things; how the world was
made; how the sun and moon came into being; how the land rose from the
water; how the birds and the beasts were given life.

[Illustration: Caedmon signing in the cow byre]

All through the night he sat among the abbey cows, and sang his
wonderful song. When the stable boys and shepherds came out in the
morning, they heard him singing; and they were so amazed that they
stood still in the drifted snow and listened with open mouths.

At length, others of the servants heard him, and were entranced by his
wonderful song. And one ran quickly and told the good abbess, or
mistress of the abbey, what strange thing had happened.

"Bring the cowherd hither, that I and those who are with me may hear
him," said she.

So Caedmon was led into the great hall of the abbey. And all of the
sweet-faced sisters and other women of the place listened while he
sang again the wonderful song of the creation.

"Surely," said the abbess, "this is a poem, most sweet, most true,
most beautiful. It must be written down so that people in other places
and in other times may hear it read and sung."

So she called her clerk, who was a scholar, and bade him write the
song, word for word, as it came from Caedmon's lips. And this he did.

Such was the way in which the first true English poem was written. And
Caedmon, the poor cowherd of the abbey, was the first great poet of
England.




THE LOVER OF MEN



In the Far East there was once a prince whose name was Gautama. He
lived in a splendid palace where there was everything that could give
delight. It was the wish of his father and mother that every day of
his life should be a day of perfect happiness.

So this prince grew up to be a young man, tall and fair and graceful.
He had never gone beyond the beautiful gardens that surrounded his
father's palace. He had never seen nor heard of sorrow or sickness or
poverty. Everything that was evil or disagreeable had been carefully
kept out of his sight. He knew only of those things that give joy and
health and peace.

But one day after he had become a man, he said: "Tell me about the
great world which, you say, lies outside of these palace walls. It
must be a beautiful and happy place; and I wish to know all about it."
"Yes, it is a beautiful place," was the answer. "In it there are
numberless trees and flowers and rivers and waterfalls, and other
things to make the heart glad."

"Then to-morrow I will go out and see some of those things," he said.

His parents and friends begged him not to go. They told him that there
were beautiful things at home--why go away to see other things less
beautiful? But when they saw that his mind was set on going, they said
no more.

The next morning, Gautama sat in his carriage and rode out from the
palace into one of the streets of the city. He looked with wonder at
the houses on either side, and at the faces of the children who stood
in the doorways as he passed. At first he did not see anything that
disturbed him; for word had gone before him to remove from sight
everything that might be displeasing or painful.

Soon the carriage turned into another street--a street less carefully
guarded. Here there were no children at the doors. But suddenly, at
a narrow place, they met a very old man, hobbling slowly along over
the stony way.

"Who is that man?" asked Gautama, "and why is his face so pinched and
his hair so white? Why do his legs tremble under him as he walks,
leaning upon a stick? He seems weak, and his eyes are dull. Is he some
new kind of man?"

"Sir," answered the coachman, "that is an old man. He has lived more
than eighty years. All who reach old age must lose their strength and
