shawl, but she still looked very odd.

"You look exactly like a savage from New Zealand," said the cousin.
"Do you think you are improving your appearance by plastering your
hair all over your face?"

"No," said Cornelli fiercely.

"Neither do I," said the cousin. "I cannot make you out at all. What
will you put on next, I wonder, when your hair is brushed away?"

"My fur cap," replied Cornell, according to the truth.

"I never heard such nonsense," exclaimed Miss Dorner. "I really think
that the child is capable of doing that. She will probably pull it
down over her head to her nose when the temperature is eighty. I have
never seen such a child. What shall I do with her?"

Cornelli really looked as if she did not know how well brought up
European girls usually wore their hair. From the middle of her head
thick uneven strands of dark hair hung down over her forehead and deep
into her eyes. The hair was not hanging loose, but was firmly glued
to her skin. Her intention seemed to be to keep it there to prevent
it from being blown away.

"You look positively repulsive and no person on earth will want to
look at you if you go around like that. This may teach you to give up
your terrible obstinacy! Nothing else can be done with you."

With these words the cousin rose and left the room. Miss Grideelen
promptly followed.

That evening a letter was sent to Cornelli's father:

ILLER-STREAM,
July 20th, 18--.

MY DEAR COUSIN:

Your affairs are going brilliantly, for your manager is splendid. I
can also inform you that perfect order reigns in your house, your
garden and the stable. Your place is perfectly magnificent; it abounds
in fruit and vegetables and lovely flowers. I should never have imagined
this possible years ago, when I wandered about here with my friend
Cornelia.

I am coming now to the principal subject of this letter, which is less
pleasant. I do not understand how your daughter has gotten her
disposition. She does not either resemble you, with your fresh and
open manner, or Cornelia, with her merry, pliant disposition, which
won every one's heart. The child has a dull and sullen nature, a
roughness of manner and an unheard-of stubbornness. I can do nothing
for her, at least not by anything I say. But I have decided to leave
physical or other punishment to you. I shall do all I can by good
example and admonishment as long as I am here. My friend is supporting
me faithfully. I do not dare raise in you the hope that the child will
ever make you happy. A rebellious nature like hers is sure to get worse
from year to year. I hope, however, that the success of all your
ventures will give you the satisfaction that your home life cannot
give you.

Your faithful cousin,

KITTY DORNER.




CHAPTER V

A NEWCOMER IN ILLER-STREAM



Old Matthew was raking the gravel paths in the garden when Cornelli
stepped out of the house and slowly approached. She held a book in her
hand and now sat down on the bench under the hazel bush. Laying the
book on her lap, she watched Matthew while he cleaned up the paths.
Looking up he said: "Come with me, Cornelli, and let us go over to the
stable together, for you have not been there for a long time. You
should see how the little kid is growing."

Cornelli merely shook her head and gave no answer. Matthew looked over
at the child a few more times, but said no more.

Esther, carrying a large basket, now arrived. As she was going to the
vegetable garden she called over to the child: "You must have a
specially nice book to be sitting there so quietly, Cornelli."

Cornelli shook her head.

"No?" laughed Esther. "All right, then, come with me and I'll show you
how many yellow plums there are going to be this year; the whole tree
is full and they are already beginning to ripen."

"I don't care," said Cornelli.

"No?" laughed Esther. "All right, then, plums," Esther exclaimed. "And
our large juicy pears are beginning to get ripe, too. Don't you want
to come and see how long it will be before they are ripe?"

"No," was the reply.

Esther now went her ways. A short time after that Matthew joined her.
"What is the matter with the child, Esther," he asked. "She is so
changed! One can hardly recognize any more our gay and friendly
Cornelli. And why does she have her hair hanging into her face that
way? One absolutely does not know her any more."

"That is just what I say," Esther replied. "I really can't understand
it. One hardly ever sees the child, and if one does meet her somewhere,
she scarcely says a word. She never sings or laughs the way she used
to, and she always wears such a terribly unhappy expression that it
fairly makes one's heart ache. How happy the child used to be!

"They say that she needs to be educated, and it may be so; but since
she is getting an education she is absolutely changed, and not for the
better. However, things may go well again when her education is
finished."

"She misses her mother," said Matthew. "It is awfully hard on a little
one to grow up without a mother, for she needs her at every step. It
is so easy when you have a mother to whom you can tell your joys and
troubles."

"One might think that you still run to your mother whenever anyone
does you harm, Matthew," said Esther, a little mockingly.

"I should love to," Matthew assured her. "I know what my mother meant
to me and so I am always sorry for every child that has none. One can
see how it is with our master's child; nothing is of any good to her
as long as she has no mother."

Matthew went away, looking once more with pity at Cornelli, who was
sitting quite motionless on the bench. The book by now was lying on
the ground.

Soon afterwards Mr. Maelinger entered the garden and neared the house,
but Cornelli intercepted him.

"I could not come at 9 o'clock to-day," he said, "but I think one hour
is better than none, so am here now, at 11 o'clock. I hope you have
spent a pleasant, useful morning."

"No, I haven't," said Cornelli drily.

"But you have a fine book in your hand. It is sure to have something
nice in it. What is it all about?"

"I do not know," replied Cornelli.

"Let us go to our work now. Your reading does not seem to have impressed
you much, so let us hope for a better result from our lesson."

The teacher entered the house with his pupil, and they were just getting
settled in their accustomed places when he said: "It seems to me,
Cornelli, that your hair hangs a little too much over your face. It
must be very uncomfortable. Could not this be changed?"

"No, I can never change that, never, never," Cornelli said passionately,
tightly pressing down the hair on her forehead. "Oh, really! But this
is no affair of mine," said the teacher calmly. "Only it seems to me
a rather disfiguring manner of wearing the hair. You would feel much
more comfortable without these weeping-willow-like hangings in front
of your eyes."

Cornelli was still pressing both her hands against her forehead, as
if the teacher might try by force to straighten up her hair. But he
now began the lesson quite peacefully.

When the ladies were leaving the room after lunch, the cousin said to
the child: "You are not going to run off again immediately, Cornelli.
You must begin a proper and orderly existence. When your work is done
you can read one of your many lovely books. You have enough time after
our coffee hour to take walks and to pay visits."

As usual the work was soon finished. Afterwards Cornelli sat down on
the garden bench. Just as before, she put the book in her lap, and it
soon fell to the ground. Cornelli peeped about her, at the trees and
at the ground, but she did not really seem to see them.

At coffee time Cornelli punctually appeared at table and quickly gulped
down everything that was poured out for her, as if it were a medicine
that simply had to be swallowed. Afterwards she sat there frowning,
for she had to remain at her seat till the ladies got up; she had
learned this custom from her cousin.

"Don't always frown and make such horns! One can see them quite plainly
even through your curtains," said Miss Dorner. "It won't be long before
you can go away."

At last the ladies got up to go into the garden. Cornelli sneaked out
behind them, turned unseen around the corner of the house, and walked
across the meadow to the path.

"To sit here under the hazel bush and read a fine book is really a
pleasure not many children have," said Miss Dorner, sitting down on
the bench. "For this alone you should be grateful, instead of frowning
and sulking all day, Cornelli--yes! But where has she gone again?" the
lady interrupted herself, glancing around.

"She disappeared as soon as we came out," her friend answered. "Isn't
Cornelli really peculiar? She never says a friendly word and never
gives a single sign of childish love. She always runs away as soon as
she possibly can."

"I am so sorry for her father, who must long for a pleasant family
life," Miss Dorner continued. "He will never have this by the side of
his only daughter, who seems to become more unfriendly and stubborn
every day. Others in the house have noticed it, too, so Mina tells me.
Oh, what a life it will be here in two or three years. My poor cousin
with his beautiful estate! What good is that to him?"

"Many things can happen in two years that can't be foretold, Kitty,
and that can change a household entirely," replied the other lady.
"For the benefit of your cousin let us hope that this may come true."

Cornelli was not leaping or running, but was quietly creeping along
the edge of the path. She was staring at the ground, without once
looking up at the merry birds which were whistling above her. Not once
did she glance to right or left in the meadows, though they were full
of red daisies and blue forget-me-nots which Cornelli ordinarily loved
to pick.

Martha saw the approaching child. She came out with a worried face and
full of sympathy asked: "What is wrong with you, Cornelli? Can you
never again be merry?"

"No, not any more," replied Cornelli, entering Martha's little chamber
and sitting down on the stool which her old friend had put for her in
the usual place. Cornelli's words did not come rapidly and angrily any
more, as they had done before. With a deep sigh she added: "I only
wish I had never learned to read."

"What! But child, what an idea," exclaimed Martha, "what a foolish
wish! You should realize what it means to want to find out something
and not be able to. One has to begin over and over again, and nothing
helps one. That is what happened to me to-day. If you don't help me
I won't ever understand it. I often wish I could read and write as
fast as our Cornelli does. It is a great gift to be able to read and
write easily, and everybody who can't do it knows that well. Don't you
like the pretty books your father has given you?"

"No, I don't. They are pretty, but awfully tiresome, Martha," Cornelli
assured her. "There are all kinds of stories and descriptions in them
of famous people and discoveries. Father said that he used to love
them when he was young, but he was probably different from me. Now I
can't run to the stable any more, nor into the woods as I feel like
doing; now I have to sit around all the time and read a book. Oh, I
wish nobody had written any books, then nobody would have to read
them."

"But Cornelli, I do not think that this would suit everybody," Martha
said. "Please help me to read a letter I got to-day, and then you will
see what an advantage it is to be able to read. I need your help, for
I do not understand what is wanted of me."

Cornelli, taking up the letter, was quite willing to help her dear old
friend.

"Who wrote it?" asked the child.

"That is just the thing I cannot read," Martha answered. "I only know
that it comes from town, but I cannot guess who could possibly write
to me from there."

Cornelli began to read the letter aloud. It was an inquiry as to whether
the spare room had yet been taken, and if Mrs. Wolf could take care
of a boy of twelve years for a few weeks. He did not need special care,
as he was not exactly ill; but the boy undoubtedly was not very strong.
Good air and fresh milk were the chief things he needed. If no refusal
came, the boy would arrive in the middle of July. It was signed: Nika
Halm, rector's widow.

"Oh, how easily you read. It seems to go all of itself," said Martha
admiringly, when Cornelli had finished. "I never could have made it
out so well. Just think how proud I can be that a rector's wife will
bring her son to me. Oh, I'll take the best care of him, and I must
ask Matthew to let him have some milk from the cows every morning and
evening. Isn't it too bad it is not a girl; then you would have a
playmate. But you will entertain each other just the same. Are you not
a little bit glad that he is coming?"

"No, not a bit," Cornelli returned curtly. "I know quite well that he
won't have anything to do with me, and I know why, too. I do not care
whether it is a boy or a girl. I don't want him."

"But Cornelli, you never used to be that way. You used to be so friendly
and bright with everybody. What has happened to you?" asked Martha,
quite grieved. "You do not look about you with bright eyes and your
hair hangs too low on your face. Can't I push it back a little?"

Martha, fetching a comb, was going to touch Cornelli's hair, when
Cornelli hindered her by crying out: "No, Martha, leave it! It has to
stay that way all my life."

"Oh, no, I won't believe that. Why should your face be half covered
up? One can hardly recognize you," Martha said regretfully. "What do
the ladies say about it?"

"Miss Dorner says that I am the most obstinate being in the whole
