
The little procession covered about three slow miles, arriving finally at a
little sleepy town. Frank had never been there before. Jem led the horse
down the main street of the place, and finally turned into a vacant lot, at
the rear of which stood a livery stable. A lantern was burning just beyond
the wide open door of the place.

Frank lined a board fence that bounded one side of the livery stable yard.
When he got opposite the open doorway where Jem had halted, he posted
himself at a crack in the fence, where he could see and hear what was going
on.

"Hi, there, somebody--wake up!" bawled Jem loudly.

A sleepy-eyed hostler made his appearance in a few minutes. There was a
lengthy explanation as to the broken wagon. Jem seemed to make this all
satisfactory in a money way. Then he told the hostler that he must have a
light single rig, and the man took the horse into the stable, while Jem and
Dan remained outside.

"Going on alone, are you?" inquired the latter.

"It's best," replied Jem. "You see, I've got one place in view I want to
visit. You know--Staggers."

"Yes, I've heard of him," nodded Dan. "He's a mighty close one, though. Get
the full value, Jem."

"I will, never fear."

"What shall I do?"

"Oh, go up to the old hut and snooze until I come back."

"I hope that will be soon."

"I won't be any longer than I can help."

"What are you doing?"

Jem was acting strangely, and the peering Frank was surprised and
interested. Jem was going through a puzzling pantomime. He would touch his
head in various places in a whimsical manner, then pause and appear
undecided as to what he would do next.

"It's funny," he remarked, after silently going through these apparently
meaningless gestures for some moments.

"What's that?" inquired Dan.

"I can't get it."

"Can't get what?"

"The high sign."

"Oho!"

"You know what I mean?"

"Yes, indeed. Brady told us that Staggers will have no dealings with any
one not having the high sign."

"Exactly. Brady said it was L.E.H."

"I remember that."

"But I've forgotten part of it. Let's see, L. is lip. I know that--you
touch your lip. Then E. Is it eye or ear?"

"Ear," cried Dan. "Say, I'm sure Brady said ear."

"All right. And the last? Oh, of course--hand. You touch your lip, then
your ear, and then put out your hand," and Jem went rapidly through these
maneuvers. "As to the grip, it's easy--slip the forefinger up the wrist.
O.K.--I've got it. Say, what kind of an old tumbledown trap is that thing?"
demanded Jem, as the hostler reappeared leading a sorry nag attached to an
old buggy with an enormous hood and a big shallow boot at the rear.

"It's an old mail carrier cart," replied the hostler. "But it's the only
single rig we've got in the stable at the present time."

"Well, I suppose it will have to do," observed Jem indifferently. "I'll be
back soon, Dan."

"All right."

Jem drove out of the yard and down a road leading out of the town. The
horse was a decrepit animal and did not go very fast. While trying to think
out the best plan to pursue, Frank followed after the cart at a safe
distance.

He had gone only a little way when he wished he had remained near the
stable and had followed Dan. That would have been easier. Dan had planned
to return to the hut and had already disappeared in its direction.
Unguided, however, Frank did not believe that he could locate it. He kept
on down the road, therefore, after Jem, unwilling to lose sight of both of
the men who certainly knew all about the diamond bracelet stolen from
Lemuel Mace's jewelry store at Tipton.

"This man Jem has the bracelet," reflected Frank, "and just as surely he is
going to some man named Staggers to sell it or get him to sell it for them.
Then he will return to Dan to divide the spoils. I can't miss scoring some
kind of a point following that cart."

This Frank did for over two miles. Then he began to grow wearied and
footsore. He had no idea how many miles Jem planned to go, and finally he
carried out a bold idea.

This was to climb into the deep boot at the back of the vehicle. The hood
in front prevented Jem from seeing what was going on behind him. As the
horse struck a patch of very rutty road, Frank ran close up to the buggy.

The vehicle was wobbling and jolting so that the action of his additional
weight on the springs did not attract the attention of the driver. Frank
cuddled down in the shell-shaped receptacle for mail and parcels, fairly
out of sight.

It must have been fully two hours later when Jem drove into a town of quite
some size. It was, in fact, a small city, and from what Frank knew of the
district he decided that it must be Rockton, a place about eleven miles
from the academy town.

Frank slipped from the boot of the cart after the vehicle had made one or
two turnings. When he did this he dropped flat in the middle of the road
and remained there until Jem had made another turn, when he was up and
away, again on the trail of the man.

After proceeding quite some distance, Jem halted the horse at the edge of a
sidewalk near an alleyway. He tied the animal to a ring at the curb and
proceeded down the dark lane near by.

Frank had gained the shelter of an open hallway directly opposite the point
where the vehicle had halted. He stood there pondering as to his next move,
when the sharp clatter of running footsteps attracted his attention.

The next minute a boy about his own size darted around the corner, running
at full speed. As he rounded into view, he seemed to see some one ahead
blocking his way. With an utterance of dismay and excitement he veered from
his course, and sprang directly into the hallway that sheltered Frank.

"Hold on, I say!" cried Frank, fairly swept off his footing.

"Don't say a word," panted the strange lad. "Some one is after me! Show
yourself, fool them, or I'm a goner. Is there any way out of this?"

Frank heard the boy run down the hall, try a locked door at the rear, and
utter a cry of sharp disappointment and concern.

"They've trapped me!" he gasped.

Frank stepped toward the sidewalk and peered out, not quite able to figure
out what had happened or was happening. He did not want to become mixed up
in any trouble, especially just now when all his energies were centered on
keeping track of the man Jem.

Frank saw one man coming running around the corner which the refugee had
just turned. Almost in front of the open driveway he met a man who came
running from the opposite direction.

"They're constables," murmured Frank,

"Did you see him?" began the first officer.

"A boy?" queried the man.

"Yes."

"Run into that hallway."

"Ah, there he is! Out with you--aha! I've caught you at last, have I?"
cried the first officer triumphantly.

He seized Frank by the arm and pulled him out on to the sidewalk. The way
he whirled him around amid his wild glee made Frank's teeth chatter.

"Hold on!" our hero demanded, struggling to free himself. "What's all this
about?"

"What's it about, eh?" chuckled his captor. "Mighty innocent, aren't you?
Don't remember me a bit, do you? Look sharp at me, now," rallied the
officer. "I guess you'll recognize me, my soft and downy young bird, if
you'll look hard enough."

"I never saw you before, and you never saw me before," declared Frank,
getting nettled at his rough treatment.

"Thunder! that's so."

The officer, peering closely at Frank, staggered back as though he was
about to collapse. He goggled at Frank, choking with stupefaction and
disappointment.

"What's the matter, Hawkes?" asked the other officer.

"This isn't the boy I was chasing."

"It must be."

"But it isn't."

"Well, anyhow, it's the fellow who shot around that street corner a few
minutes ago and dodged into the doorway, for I saw him."

"Then I must have been chasing the wrong boy."

"I reckon that's so."

Both officers looked Frank over speculatively and suspiciously.

"No, he ain't the fellow," observed the officer who had grabbed Frank.
"But, say, who are you?"

"I'm Frank Jordan, a student at the Bellwood Academy," answered our hero
promptly.

"We don't know that," observed the second officer.

"I can easily prove it to you," asserted Frank.

"All right, fetch him up to the station, Hawkes, and let him explain to the
captain how he comes to be snooking around people's houses at this
unearthly hour of the morning."

Frank was very much cut up at this decision. To leave that spot meant
possibly to lose all track of Jem and the stolen bracelet.

"I'm in this town on business," he said boldly, "and I don't see what right
you have to interfere with me."

"The captain will explain all that to you," observed the officer. "Here,
you come right along with us."

There was no use of resisting. Each of the officers seized an arm of Frank
and marched him down the street. He uttered an anxious sigh as he cast a
last look back at the horse and buggy Jem had left at the curb.

When they got to the little police station of the town, Frank was
confronted by the captain. He proved to be a bright, intelligent man, and
looked over some letters Frank showed him.

"This boy's all right, Hawkes," declared the officer at once. "I should
have thought you would have known that from a look at his honest face. Get
to school, though, lad," he added in a kindly tone to Frank. "I was a boy
once myself, but I know from experience that these student larks don't pay
in the end. Who did you think the lad was, anyway, Hawkes?"

"A young escaped convict," explained Hawkes. "Nice little fifty dollars
reward out for his apprehension, too."

"Well, it seems you started up the wrong covey this time. Good morning,
lad," nodded the officer to Frank, who promptly left the station.

Frank got back to the place where he had been arrested on a run. As he
turned into the street a single anxious glance made his heart sink.

"Too bad--all for a boy criminal!" he exclaimed. "The buggy is gone."

It seemed certain that during the time the officers had taken Frank to the
station, Jem had transacted his business with the mysterious Staggers and
had left town.

Frank came across an early riser opening up a cheap restaurant, and
inquired if he had ever heard of a man named Staggers.

"Nickname, I guess, that," responded the eating-house man. "Fellows here,
shady characters, especially, have all kinds of flash names among their
friends. No, don't know Staggers."

Frank was disappointed and wearied. He had the idea of saying something to
the police about the bracelet. Then he made up his mind that he would get
back to Bellwood and take Professor Eliott into his confidence.

Somewhat dejected and a good deal tired out, our hero turned his face in
the direction of Bellwood Academy.




CHAPTER XXII

A STARTLING MESSAGE


"Wake up, Frank!"

Frank, roughly shaken by Bob Upton, sat up in bed. He rubbed his eyes
drowsily, and for a moment all the strange happenings of the previous night
seemed like some dream.

Then Frank recalled reaching the school about ten o'clock in the morning,
when all the students were in their classes, of reaching his room
unobserved, lying down on his bed in his clothes to rest and collect his
thoughts, and of dropping into a nap.

"I say," hailed Bob excitedly, "where in the world have you been?"

"It's a long story," explained Frank with a prodigious yawn and stretching
himself. "You wouldn't believe it if I told it to you. Have I been missed?"

"Missed?" echoed Bob, almost in a shout. "The head monitor sat up for you
all night. The gardener and the steward have been searching the creek and
hunting for you everywhere. Our tutor had arranged to send a party of the
class to hunt for you after dinner, and there's been all kinds of
excitement and fuss about you."

"I'm sorry," said Frank, "but I couldn't help it. I've been kidnaped, Bob."

"What!"

"Don't blurt it out. I want to see Ned Foreman first. He's interested."

"Gill Mace was around with his sneering meanness," said Bob. "He said the
boys had better see that none of their jewelry was missing."

"Did, eh?" said Frank. "He and his uncle will be interested, too, if things
come out as I think."

"Frank, I must tell Professor Drake that you've come back."

"All right," assented Frank, who proceeded to take a refreshing wash as Bob
flew from the room.

He returned just as our hero finished brushing his hair.

"You're to come down to the office at once," he said.

"All right," assented Frank.

He proceeded down the stairs without meeting any of his friends. Frank
knocked at the office door and was admitted by Professor Drake.

"So you have returned, Jordan?" spoke the teacher in a somewhat severe
tone.

"Yes, Mr. Drake," replied Frank.

"I hope you have some satisfactory explanation to offer in regard to your
absence against the rules of this school."

"I certainly have, Mr. Drake," said Frank. "There is considerable to tell,
and it is very important. I would like to see the president before I say
anything, though."

"Professor Elliott is absent until to-morrow," said the tutor. "I am in
charge here, and you must explain to me."

"I hope you will excuse me," replied Frank, "but there is a very good
reason why I must tell the president before any one else."

"You are pretty mysterious, Jordan."

"I hope you believe that I am doing just what is right until Mr. Elliott
returns," said Frank earnestly.

The teacher studied Frank's manly face for a moment.

"I must at least believe that you think you are right," he said after a
thoughtful pause. "We will have it that way, if you insist, Jordan."

"Thank you, Mr. Drake," said Frank. "You will find that I am not deceiving
you."

Frank was greeted at dinner with a babel of questions as to his mysterious
absence. He told his friends that he had been away on business; that he
could explain only to the president of the academy.

He attended his classes that afternoon, and joined the crowd on the campus
after study hours. A baseball game was on. Frank was right-fielder, and he
knew he was on his record in this, his first game, and did some pretty good
work.

The game was running pretty close. Two of Banbury's men were on bases, when
Frank noticed a ragged urchin run up to a crowd of spectators.

The strange boy asked some questions, and the lad he addressed pointed to
Frank.

"Are you--are you Mr. Jordan?" the youngster panted, running up to Frank.

"Yes," nodded Frank.

"Please, sir, quick--there's a man in the old cabin on Greenlee's farm. He
wants Ned Foreman to come right straight to him. He's all cut up and
bleeding. He's dying. The boy yonder said you'd get Ned Foreman for me."

"Who is he?" demanded Frank, interested and startled.

"I don't know, only he said he must see Ned Foreman, because he won't last
long. He's in an awful state. He's in an awful state. He just hollers and
yells, and he's smashing a great big bracelet with shining stones in it."

"Jordan!"

"Hi--don't miss it!" Whiz!

Just past Frank's head flew a fly from the bat Frank had not turned in
time. But he heeded not the yells, "Deserted his colors!" "Run away again!"
or the fact that his neglect had sent two of Banbury's cohorts home.

Frank knew at once that the man the excited boy spoke of was either Jem or
Dan. The allusion to a bracelet had started him on a vivid run, the boy
keeping breathlessly by his side, panting:

"I was passing the old cabin, when I heard some one groaning on the inside.
Then the man told me to get Ned Foreman."

The little messenger led Frank straight to the hut and slipped down to the
doorstep almost exhausted, while his companion rushed through the open
doorway.

The man Dan lay on a heap of straw, silent and helpless. His clothing was
stained with blood. Frank at once ascertained that he was still alive, but
he had fainted from weakness.

He went out to the little fellow on the doorstep.

"What's your name?" asked Frank.

"It's Lem."

"Well, you're a grand little fellow," said Frank. "You've done a good deal
already, but I want you to run to the nearest farmhouse and tell the farmer
that he must get here right away to move a dying man to a doctor at
Bellwood."

"Yes, sir," nodded the obliging little fellow eagerly.

"Tell him I'll pay all the expenses, and yours, too, Lem, as soon as we get
through with this business."

The boy darted away. Frank re-entered the hut. As he did so his foot kicked
some object, and it jangled across the rough board floor.

Frank picked it up with some eagerness and satisfaction. It was the
bracelet that Lem had described--"with shining stones in it."

Our hero was a good deal excited as he examined the object in his hand. He
thrust it into his pocket with quite a thrill of satisfaction. He then went
closer to the suffering Dan.

The man seemed to have dropped into a deep daze or sleep. Frank realized
that he could do nothing for him until he was removed to some place where
skilled surgical aid could be summoned.

"It's wonderful," mused Frank, as he went outside, impatient and anxious
for the return of his messenger. "This is certainly the bracelet that I've
had so much worry about. I never saw it before, but it must be the one
stolen from Lemuel Mace. How does it happen, though, that Dan has it here?
Why is it all battered up? Where is Jem? Why wasn't it sold to the man,
Staggers? Say, here's a big puzzle, but I've got the bracelet, and this man
Dan can be made to explain all about it when he gets his senses back."

Frank certainly had some perplexing thoughts as to the peculiar situation
of the moment. He could only theorize what had happened.

The way he figured it out was that Jem had been unable to make any bargain
with the man Staggers and dispose of the bracelet. He had come back to the
hut to report this fact to Dan. They must have had a quarrel over it, Frank
decided. Jem had probably been beaten off. Not, however, until he had
pretty badly bruised up his opponent. The bracelet must have got battered
in the struggle for its possession, or Dan, in the delirium which the
farmer boy had described to Frank, had banged it about, not knowing what he
was doing.

Frank paced up and down in front of the hut, turning all these thoughts
over in his mind, and really anxious about the condition of Dan, counting
the minutes and hoping for the speedy return of his messenger with aid. He
was walking slowly on his tiresome patrol, when he heard a rustle in the
bushes. He turned, somewhat startled. Before he could get fully around a
brisk hand slapped him sharply on the shoulder, with the words:

"Hello, you--glad I've found you!"

Frank drew suspiciously away from a lad about his own age, and a total
stranger to him. He was well dressed, and had a keen pair of eyes and a
pleasant, rather quizzical expression of face.

Frank was on nettles for fear Jem might return, and at first feared that
the boy might be some emissary of Brady or his recent kidnapers.

"Don't know me?" questioned the lad, smiling boldly and in an extremely
friendly way into Frank's face.

"Well, I know you," retorted the other. "Here, Frank Jordan, of Bellwood
Academy, shake," and he extended his hand.

"Who are you?" inquired Frank, only feebly returning the hearty handshake
of the stranger.

"I am your everlasting debtor--friend, slave!" declared the lad vehemently.
"See here; that night, or, rather, morning, dark hallway--two
officers--nabbed you, took you for me, and I got away."

"O--oh!" exclaimed Frank slowly, and with a decided shock. "I remember you
now."

"Thought you would," nodded the lad briskly. "You don't seem a bit glad to
see me, but I am to see you."

Frank did not say anything in reply to this. In fact, the boy who had just
revealed his identity was not exactly welcome to Frank just at that moment.
The latter remembered what the policeman, Hawkes, had said about him--that
he was an escaped convict, with a reward out for his arrest. That did not
speak well for the fellow. Then, too, Frank did not fancy the proximity of
such a person, with a diamond bracelet in his possession presumably worth a
great deal of money.

"How did you come to find me here?" demanded our hero with blunt suspicion.

"Didn't--just ran across you. But I was on my way to find you."

"Where?"

"At the academy."

"How did you know I belonged to the academy?" challenged Frank.

"Why, didn't I hear you mention the place and tell your name to the
policeman?"

"Yes, that's so," admitted Frank. "But why did you want to see me?"

"To thank you."

"For what?"

"For saving me from arrest."

"Oh, then you admit that you are what the policeman said?"

"What was that?"

"A convict."

"Yes," answered the boy promptly.

"And an escaped convict."

"That's right, too."

"I don't know, then," said Frank, "that I did right in shielding you."

"Oh, yes, you did," declared the lad buoyantly. "See here, you're a good
fellow, a staving good fellow. You've just about made my future for me.
Isn't that a big thing to do?"

"It is, if it's true," said Frank.

"Well, you'll think so when I tell you something. See here: I was an orphan
boy down at the town where you saved me. Five years ago a crowd of fellows
started out one Hallowe'en night for fun. We had a mean fellow named
Tompkins for a leader. He got us to obey his orders. I had to set fire to a
heap of brush at one farmhouse. The others were to do certain stunts in the
same neighborhood. We found out later that Tompkins was using us as tools
to cover some real spite work of his. I set fire to the brush heap to scare
the farmer. The wind blew the sparks into a two-ton haystack near by, and
it burned down. I was scared and sorry. I was worse scared and sorry the
next day, when I was arrested. Tompkins and his crowd had burned down some
barns and an old mill. Their folks were rich, and they could hire good
lawyers. I was a homeless orphan boy, and was made the scapegoat. They sent
me to the reform school till I was of age."

Frank's mind, of course, was full of anxiety for the wounded man in the hut
and impatient for the return of his messenger, but he could not help but be
interested in the story of his companion.

"My name is Dave Starr," proceeded the lad. "I went to the reform school. I
soon became a good-conduct trusty, but the life nearly killed me. I escaped
one day, and if you go into any of the towns around Rockton you'll find my
picture in the police stations, with a fifty-dollar reward offered for my
arrest."

"What have you done since you escaped?" inquired Frank.
