be punished for her idleness. So she hurried off to the palace of
the fairy, and confided all her woes to her. The fairy embraced her
tenderly, and gave her a sack full of spun flax, in order that she
might show it to the king, and let him see what a good worker she was.
Renzolla took the sack without one word of thanks, and returned to
the palace, leaving the kind fairy very indignant over her want of
gratitude.

When the king saw the flax all spun, he gave Renzolla and the
waiting-maid each a little dog, and told them to look after the animals
and train them carefully.

The waiting-maid brought hers up with the greatest possible care, and
treated it almost as if it were her son. But Renzolla said: 'I don't
know what to think. Have I come among a lot of lunatics? Does the king
imagine that I am going to comb and feed a dog with my own hands?' With
these words she opened the window and threw the poor little beast out,
and he fell on the ground as dead as a stone.

When a few months had passed the king sent a message to say he would
like to see how the dogs were getting on. Renzolla, who felt very
uncomfortable in her mind at this request, hurried off once more to the
fairy. This time she found an old man at the door of the fairy's palace,
who said to her: 'Who are you, and what do you want?'

When Renzolla heard his question she answered angrily: 'Don't you know
me, old Goat-beard? And how dare you address me in such a way?'

'The pot can't call the kettle black,' answered the old man, 'for it
is not I, but you who have a goat's head. Just wait a moment, you
ungrateful wretch, and I will show you to what a pass your want of
gratitude has brought you.'

With these words he hurried away, and returned with a mirror, which he
held up before Renzolla. At the sight of her ugly, hairy face, the girl
nearly fainted with horror, and she broke into loud sobs at seeing her
countenance so changed.

Then the old man said: 'You must remember, Renzolla, that you are a
peasant's daughter, and that the fairy turned you into a queen; but you
were ungrateful, and never as much as thanked her for all she had done
for you. Therefore she has determined to punish you. But if you wish
to lose your long white beard, throw yourself at the fairy's feet and
implore her to forgive you. She has a tender heart, and will, perhaps,
take pity on you.'

Renzolla, who was really sorry for her conduct, took the old man's
advice, and the fairy not only gave her back her former face, but she
dressed her in a gold embroidered dress, presented her with a beautiful
carriage, and brought her back, accompanied by a host of servants, to
her husband. When the king saw her looking as beautiful as ever, he fell
in love with her once more, and bitterly repented having caused her so
much suffering.

So Renzolla lived happily ever afterwards, for she loved her husband,
honoured the fairy, and was grateful to the old man for having told her
the truth.

[From the Italian. Kletke.]




What Came of Picking Flowers


There was once a woman who had three daughters whom she loved very much.
One day the eldest was walking in a water-meadow, when she saw a pink
growing in the stream. She stooped to pick the flower, but her hand had
scarcely touched it, when she vanished altogether. The next morning the
second sister went out into the meadow, to see if she could find any
traces of the lost girl, and as a branch of lovely roses lay trailing
across her path, she bent down to move it away, and in so doing,
could not resist plucking one of the roses. In a moment she too had
disappeared. Wondering what could have become of her two sisters, the
youngest followed in their footsteps, and fell a victim to a branch
of delicious white jessamine. So the old woman was left without any
daughters at all.

She wept, and wept, and wept, all day and all night, and went on weeping
so long, that her son, who had been a little boy when his sisters
disappeared, grew up to be a tall youth. Then one night he asked his
mother to tell him what was the matter.

When he had heard the whole story, he said, 'Give me your blessing,
mother, and I will go and search the world till I find them.'

So he set forth, and after he had travelled several miles without any
adventures, he came upon three big boys fighting in the road. He stopped
and inquired what they were fighting about, and one of them answered:

'My lord! our father left to us, when he died, a pair of boots, a key,
and a cap. Whoever puts on the boots and wishes himself in any place,
will find himself there. The key will open every door in the world, and
with the cap on your head no one can see you. Now our eldest brother
wants to have all three things for himself, and we wish to draw lots for
them.'

'Oh, that is easily settled,' said the youth. 'I will throw this stone
as far as I can, and the one who picks it up first, shall have the three
things.' So he took the stone and flung it, and while the three brothers
were running after it, he drew hastily on the boots, and said, 'Boots,
take me to the place where I shall find my eldest sister.'

The next moment the young man was standing on a steep mountain before
the gates of a strong castle guarded by bolts and bars and iron chains.
The key, which he had not forgotten to put in his pocket, opened the
doors one by one, and he walked through a number of halls and corridors,
till he met a beautiful and richly-dressed young lady who started back
in surprise at the sight of him, and exclaimed, 'Oh, sir, how did
you contrive _to_ get in here?' The young man replied that he was her
brother, and told her by what means he had been able to pass through the
doors. In return, she told him how happy she was, except for one thing,
and that was, her husband lay under a spell, and could never break it
till there should be put to death a man who could not die.

They talked together for a long time, and then the lady said he had
better leave her as she expected her husband back at any moment, and he
might not like him to be there; but the young man assured her she need
not be afraid, as he had with him a cap which would make him invisible.
They were still deep in conversation when the door suddenly opened, and
a bird flew in, but he saw nothing unusual, for, at the first noise, the
youth had put on his cap. The lady jumped up and brought a large
golden basin, into which the bird flew, reappearing directly after as
a handsome man. Turning to his wife, he cried, 'I am sure someone is in
the room!' She got frightened, and declared that she was quite alone,
but her husband persisted, and in the end she had to confess the truth.

'But if he is really your brother, why did you hide him?' asked he.
'I believe you are telling me a lie, and if he comes back I shall kill
him!'

At this the youth took off his cap, and came forward. Then the husband
saw that he was indeed so like his wife that he doubted her word no
longer, and embraced his brother-in-law with delight. Drawing a feather
from his bird's skin, he said, 'If you are in danger and cry, "Come and
help me, King of the Birds," everything will go well with you.'

The young man thanked him and went away, and after he had left the
castle he told the boots that they must take him to the place where his
second sister was living. As before, he found himself at the gates of
a huge castle, and within was his second sister, very happy with her
husband, who loved her dearly, but longing for the moment when he should
be set free from the spell that kept him half his life a fish. When he
arrived and had been introduced by his wife to her brother, he welcomed
him warmly, and gave him a fish-scale, saying, 'If you are in danger,
call to me, "Come and help me, King of the Fishes," and everything will
go well with you.'

The young man thanked him and took his leave, and when he was outside
the gates he told the boots to take him to the place where his youngest
sister lived. The boots carried him to a dark cavern, with steps of iron
leading up to it. Inside she sat, weeping and sobbing, and as she had
done nothing else the whole time she had been there, the poor girl had
grown very thin. When she saw a man standing before her, she sprang to
her feet and exclaimed, 'Oh, whoever you are, save me and take me from
this horrible place!' Then he told her who he was, and how he had seen
her sisters, whose happiness was spoilt by the spell under which both
their husbands lay, and she, in turn, related her story. She had been
carried off in the water-meadow by a horrible monster, who wanted to
make her marry him by force, and had kept her a prisoner all these years
because she would not submit to his will. Every day he came to beg her
to consent to his wishes, and to remind her that there was no hope of
her being set free, as he was the most constant man in the world, and
besides that he could never die. At these words the youth remembered his
two enchanted brothers-in-law, and he advised his sister to promise to
marry the old man, if he would tell her why he could never die. Suddenly
everything began to tremble, as if it was shaken by a whirlwind, and the
old man entered, and flinging himself at the feet of the girl, he said:
'Are you still determined never to marry me? If so you will have to sit
there weeping till the end of the world, for I shall always be faithful
to my wish to marry you!' 'Well, I will marry you,' she said, 'if you
will tell me why it is that you can never die.'

Then the old man burst into peals of laughter. 'Ah, ah, ah! You are
thinking how you would be able to kill me? Well, to do that, you would
have to find an iron casket which lies at the bottom of the sea, and has
a white dove inside, and then you would have to find the egg which
the dove laid, and bring it here, and dash it against my head.' And
he laughed again in his certainty that no one had ever got down to
the bottom of the sea, and that if they did, they would never find the
casket, or be able to open it. When he could speak once more, he said,
'Now you will be obliged to marry me, as you know my secret.' But she
begged so hard that the wedding might be put off for three days, that
he consented, and went away rejoicing at his victory. When he had
disappeared, the brother took off the cap which had kept him invisible
all this time, and told his sister not to lose heart as he hoped in
three days she would be free. Then he drew on his boots, and wished
himself at the seashore, and there he was directly. Drawing out the
fish-scale, he cried, 'Come and help me, King of the Fishes!' and
his brother-in-law swam up, and asked what he could do. The young man
related the story, and when he had finished his listener summoned all
the fishes to his presence. The last to arrive was a little sardine, who
apologised for being so late, but said she had hurt herself by knocking
her head against an iron casket that lay in the bottom of the sea. The
king ordered several of the largest and strongest of his subjects to
take the little sardine as a guide, and bring him the iron casket. They
soon returned with the box placed across their backs and laid it down
before him. Then the youth produced the key and said 'Key, open that
box!' and the key opened it, and though they were all crowding round,
ready to catch it, the white dove within flew away.

It was useless to go after it, and for a moment the young man's heart
sank. The next minute, however, he remembered that he had still his
feather, and drew it out crying, 'Come to me, King of the Birds!' and
a rushing noise was heard, and the King of the Birds perched on his
shoulder, and asked what he could do to help him. His brother-in-law
told him the whole story, and when he had finished the King of the Birds
commanded all his subjects to hasten to his presence. In an instant
the air was dark with birds of all sizes, and at the very last came the
white dove, apologising for being so late by saying that an old friend
had arrived at his nest, and he had been obliged to give him some
dinner. The King of the Birds ordered some of them to show the young man
the white dove's nest, and when they reached it, there lay the egg which
was to break the spell and set them all free. When it was safely in his
pocket, he told the boots to carry him straight to the cavern where his
youngest sister sat awaiting him.

Now it was already far on into the third day, which the old man had
fixed for the wedding, and when the youth reached the cavern with his
cap on his head, he found the monster there, urging the girl to keep her
word and let the marriage take place at once. At a sign from her brother
she sat down and invited the old monster to lay his head on her lap. He
did so with delight, and her brother standing behind her back passed
her the egg unseen. She took it, and dashed it straight at the horrible
head, and the monster started, and with a groan that people took for the
rumblings of an earthquake, he turned over and died.

As the breath went out of his body the husbands of the two eldest
daughters resumed their proper shapes, and, sending for their
mother-in-law, whose sorrow was so unexpectedly turned into joy, they
had a great feast, and the youngest sister was rich to the end of her
days with the treasures she found in the cave, collected by the monster.

[From the Portuguese.]




The Story of Bensurdatu


There was once a king and a queen who had three wonderfully beautiful
daughters, and their one thought, from morning till night, was how they
could make the girls happy.

One day the princesses said to the king, 'Dear father, we want so much
to have a picnic, and eat our dinner in the country.'

'Very well, dear children, let us have a picnic by all means,' answered
he, and gave orders that everything should be got ready.

When luncheon was prepared it was put into a cart, and the royal family
stepped into a carriage and drove right away into the country. After
a few miles they reached a house and garden belonging to the king, and
close by was their favourite place for lunch. The drive had made them
very hungry, and they ate with a hearty appetite, till almost all the
food had disappeared.

When they had quite done, they said to their parents: 'Now we should
like to wander about the garden a little, but when you want to go home,
just call to us.' And they ran off, laughing, down a green glade, which
led to the garden.

But no sooner had they stepped across the fence, than a dark cloud
came down and covered them, and prevented them seeing whither they were
going.

Meanwhile the king and queen sat lazily among the heather, and an hour
or two slipped away. The sun was dropping towards the horizon, and they
began to think it was time to go home. So they called to their daughters
and called again, but no one answered them.

Frightened at the silence, they searched every corner of the garden, the
house, and the neighbouring wood, but no trace of the girls was to be
found anywhere. The earth seemed to have swallowed them up. The poor
parents were in despair. The queen wept all the way home, and for many
days after, and the king issued a proclamation that whoever should bring
back his lost daughters should have one of them to wife, and should,
after his death, reign in his stead.

Now two young generals were at that time living at the court, and when
they heard the king's declaration, they said one to the other: 'Let us
go in search of them; perhaps we shall be the lucky persons.'

And they set out, each mounted on a strong horse, taking with them a
change of raiment and some money.

But though they inquired at every village they rode through, they could
hear nothing of the princesses, and by-and-by their money was all spent,
and they were forced to sell their horses, or give up the search. Even
this money only lasted a little while longer, and nothing but their
clothes lay between them and starvation. They sold the spare garments
that were bound on their saddles, and went in the coats they stood up
in to the inn, to beg for some food, as they were really starving. When,
however, they had to pay for what they had eaten and drank, they said to
the host: 'We have no money, and naught but the clothes we stand up in.
Take these, and give us instead some old rags, and let us stay here
and serve you.' And the innkeeper was content with the bargain, and the
generals remained, and were his servants.

All this time the king and queen remained in their palace hungering for
their children, but not a word was heard of either of them or of the
generals who had gone to seek for them.

Now there was living in the palace a faithful servant of the king's
called Bensurdatu, who had served him for many years, and when
Bensurdatu saw how grieved the king was, he lifted up his voice and said
to him: 'Your majesty, let me go and seek your daughters.'

'No, no, Bensurdatu,' replied the king. 'Three daughters have I lost,
and two generals, and shall I lose you also?'

But Bensurdatu said again: 'Let me now go, your majesty; trust me, and I
will bring you back your daughters.'

Then the king gave way, and Bensurdatu set forth, and rode on till he
came to the inn, where he dismounted and asked for food. It was brought
by the two generals, whom he knew at once in spite of their miserable
clothes, and, much astonished, asked them how in the world they came
there.

They told him all their adventures, and he sent for the innkeeper, and
said to him: 'Give them back their garments, and I will pay everything
that they owe you.'

And the innkeeper did as he was bid, and when the two generals
were dressed in their proper clothes, they declared they would join
Bensurdatu, and with him seek for the king's daughters.

The three companions rode on for many miles, and at length they came to
a wild place, without sign of a human being. It was getting dark, and
fearing to be lost on this desolate spot they pushed on their horses,
and at last saw a light in the window of a tiny hut.

'Who comes there?' asked a voice, as they knocked at the door.

'Oh! have pity on us, and give us a night's shelter,' replied
Bensurdatu; 'we are three tired travellers who have lost our way.'

Then the door was opened by a very old woman who stood back, and
beckoned them to enter. 'Whence do you come, and whither do you go?'
said she.

'Ah, good woman, we have a heavy task before us,' answered Bensurdatu,
'we are bound to carry the king's daughters back to the palace!'

'Oh, unhappy creatures,' cried she, 'you know not what you are doing!
The king's daughters were covered by a thick cloud, and no one knows
where they may now be.'

'Oh, tell us, if you know, my good woman,' entreated Bensurdatu, 'for
with them lies all our happiness.'

'Even if I were to tell you,' answered she, 'you could not rescue them.
To do that you would have to go to the very bottom of a deep river, and
though certainly you would find the king's daughters there, yet the
two eldest are guarded by two giants, and the youngest is watched by a
serpent with seven heads.'

The two generals, who stood by listening, were filled with terror at her
words, and wished to return immediately; but Bensurdatu stood firm, and
said: 'Now we have got so far we must carry the thing through. Tell us
where the river is, so that we may get there as soon as possible.' And
the old woman told them, and gave them some cheese, wine, and bread,
so that they should not set forth starving; and when they had eaten and
drunk they laid themselves down to sleep.

The sun had only just risen above the hills next morning before they all
woke, and, taking leave of the wise woman who had helped them, they rode
