
"'Quite sure, sir.'

"'They answer to your description certainly,' the captain said. 'Keep
her away, master, I don't want them to think we are steering for the
island.'

"The ship's course was altered, and she sailed along parallel with the
coast.

"'I beg your pardon, sir,' I said, touching my hat, 'but they have got
some wonderful good glasses up at the lookout, and if I might make so
bold I should say that they will make out that we have got a lot more
men on deck than a merchant ship would carry.'

"'You are right, lad,' the captain said, and he at once gave orders that
all hands with the exception of half a dozen should sit down under the
bulwarks or go below. The captain and first lieutenant kept a sharp
lookout through their glasses until we had passed the end of the island.
I pointed out to them the exact position of the cove, but it was so shut
in that even when I showed where it was, it was as much as they could do
to make it out.

"'Now, lad, do you know of any other landing places on the other side of
the island?'

"'No, sir, and I don't believe there is any,' says I. I know the captain
said to me the first day I was on shore, 'It's no use your thinking of
making a bolt, for there ain't no other place but this where you could
get to sea--not though you had twenty boats waiting to take you off.' I
expect that's why they chose it. Anyhow, there never was any watch kept
up on shore, though. I have no doubt there was many a one who had been
pressed into pirating just as I was, to save their lives, would have
made off had they seen ever such a little chance of getting away.

"'Just come into the cabin with me,' says he; 'I want you to show me
exactly where are these batteries, and the position of the village on
shore.'

"The first lieutenant came too, and I drew them out a chart as well as
I could, showing them the position of things, and told them that every
evening a boom was floated across the entrance.

"'What sentries are there on at night?'

"'Four, sir; two close down to the water, one each side of the cove, and
two in the batteries at the top. That's the watch, but besides there
are six men sleep in each of the other batteries, and six in each of the
batteries inside.'

"'Tell me more about the place and the life you led there,' the captain
said, 'and then I shall understand the position of things better.'

"So I spun him a regular yarn about the place and the people. I told him
about the captain's wife, and she being an English woman, and how she
was taken, which indeed was the way of most of the women there.

"'I suppose that a good many of the men were pressed too,' the captain
said.

"'I expects so, sir; but when we were together on guard or on board a
ship I noticed we never talked of such things. It seemed to me as if
every one was trying to forget the past, and I think that made them more
brutal and bloody minded than they would have been. Every one was afraid
of every one else guessing as he wasn't contented, and was wanting to
get away, and so each carried on as bad as he could.'

"'I dare say you are right, lad; it must be a terrible position for a
man to be in; but you see the law can make no distinctions. If it
wasn't thoroughly understood that if a man took up the life of a pirate,
whether willingly or unwillingly, he would assuredly be executed if he
was caught, we should have the sea swarming with pirates. Now, lad, you
know how this boom was fastened; can you suggest any way that we could
get over it or loosen it without giving the alarm?'

"'There is no way, sir. One end is fastened by a big chain which is
fixed to a great shackle which is let into a hole in the rock and
fastened in there with lead; that's the fixed end of the boom. The other
end, which is swung backward and forward when the ships go in port, has
got a big chain too. It goes under an iron bar which is bent, and the
two ends fastened in a rock. When they want to fix the boom the end
of the chain is passed under this iron loop and then fastened to some
blocks and ropes worked from the battery above, and the end of the chain
is drawn up tight there, so that there is no loosing the chain till that
battery is taken.'

"'And you say the guns of the lower batteries at the inner point sweep
the entrance?'

"'They do, sir. There are ten of them on each side, twelve pounder
carronades, which are always charged, and crammed up to the muzzle with
bullets and nails and bits of iron. The batteries on the top of the
cliff at the entrance are the heaviest metal. They have got twenty guns
in each of them. They are loaded with round shot to keep a vessel from
approaching, though of course they could fire grape into any boats they
saw coming in.'

"'This does not seem an easy business by any means, Mr. Earnshaw,' the
captain said.

"'It does not, sir,' the lieutenant agreed in a dubisome sort of way;
'but no doubt it can be done, sir--no doubt it can be done.'

"'Yes, but how?' the captain asked. 'You will be in command of the
boats, Mr. Earnshaw, and it will never do to attack such a place as that
without some sort of plan.'

"'What is the boom like, my lad?' the lieutenant asked; 'is it lashed
together?'

"'No, it is a solid spar,' I said. 'The entrance is not more than forty
feet wide, and the boom is part of the mainmast of a big ship.'

"'It seems to me,' said the lieutenant, 'that the only way to get at it
would be to go straight at the boom, the two lightest boats to go first.
The men must get on the spar and pull the boats over, and then make a
dash for the batteries; the heavy boats can follow them.'

"'It would never do, Mr. Earnshaw,' the captain said. 'You forget there
are twelve guns loaded to the muzzle with grape and musketballs all
trained upon a point only forty feet across. Would it be possible to
land just outside the boom, lad, on one or both sides, and to keep along
the edge, or wade in the water to the batteries?'

"'No, sir, the rock goes straight up from the water both sides.'

"'Well, the two sentries, how do they get down to the water's edge?'

"'They are let down by rope from above, sir, and the rope is hauled up
as soon as they are down.'

"'This is a deuce of a place, Mr. Earnshaw,' the captain said. 'We must
do nothing hastily in this matter, or we shall only be throwing away
the lives of a lot of men, and failing in our object. I was intending to
sail on and not return for a week, for no doubt they will be specially
vigilant for a time after seeing a large ship pass them. As it is, I
will return tonight to the back of the island, and will there leave the
cutter and my gig. You will be in charge of the cutter, and Mr. Escombe
will take the gig. I shall then sail away again before daylight; for
although from what the lad said there is no watch kept on that side of
the island, it cannot be more than three miles across, and any of the
men or women might stroll across or might from any high point in the
island obtain a view that way. You will make a thorough survey of all
that side. The cliffs certainly seem, so far as we could see them as we
left the island, as perpendicular as they are on the side we passed;
but there may be some place easier than another--some place where, by
setting our wits to work, we may make a shift to climb up. Get into the
island I will, if I have to blast a flight of steps up the cliff.'

"'I will do my best to find a place, sir,' the lieutenant said; 'and, if
there isn't one, I will make one.'

"The lieutenant told me that I was to accompany him in the cutter, and
all was got ready for the trip. Water and a week's rations of food were
placed on board the boats; for in that climate there was no saying when
a gale might spring up, or how long the vessel might be before she got
back to pick up the boats.

"When we were fairly out of sight of the island we lay to till it got
dusk, and then her head was pointed back again. There was scarce a
breath of wind stirring, and the vessel went through the water so
slowly that a couple of hours later the captain ordered the boats to be
lowered, for he saw that if the wind didn't freshen the ship could not
get to the island, much less get away again, before daylight. The oars
were got out and off we started, and after four hours' steady rowing,
the lieutenant, who was steering by compass, made out the land looming
high above us. Another quarter of an hour's row and we dropped our
grapnels close to the foot of the cliffs, and the men were told to get a
sleep as well as they could till morning.

"As soon as it was daylight we were off again and rowed to the end of
the island; for, as Mr. Earnshaw said to the third lieutenant, we had
best begin at the end and do the work thoroughly. When we got to the
point we turned and rowed back, keeping about two hundred yards from
the cliff, so that we could see well up. They were about a hundred feet
high--sometimes a little less, sometimes a good bit more, and they went
as straight up from the water's edge as the cliffs at Dover, only there
weren't no beach. It was deep water right up to the foot.

"We went along very slowly, the men only just dipping their oars into
the water, and all of us watching every foot of the cliffs. Sometimes we
would stop altogether while the officers talked over the possibility of
any one climbing up at some place where the water trickling down from
the top had eaten away the face a little; but not a goat in the world
could have climbed up them, not to say men. So we kept on till we got to
the other end of the island, which must have been five miles long. Not a
place could we see.

"'Unless we are going to do as the captain said--blast steps up the face
of that rock--I don't believe it's to be done,' Lieutenant Earnshaw said
to Mr. Escombe. 'Well, there's nothing to do, lads, but to row in
and drop your grapnels again and wait till we see the ship's lights
tonight.'

"Although we rowed in to within an oar's length of the cliff, there was
eight fathoms of water when we dropped the grapnels. We had been lying
there an hour when the third lieutenant said:

"'I should think, Mr. Earnshaw, that if we were to bring the pinnace
with that four pounder gun in the bow and up end it, and with a small
charge fire a ball with a rope fastened to it up into that clump of
trees we saw just about the middle of the island, it might get caught.'

"'So it might, Escombe, and the idea is a good one; but I doubt whether
there's a man on board ship could climb a rope swinging like that
against the face of those cliffs.'

"'He might if we used a knotted rope,' Mr. Escombe said.

"'I wouldn't mind making a try, yer honor,' one of the sailors said, and
half a dozen others volunteered their readiness to make the attempt.

"'I will put it to the captain,' Mr. Earnshaw said; 'if he agrees, as
you were the first to volunteer, Jones, you shall have the chance.'

"The day was dead calm, so was the night that followed it; and although
we rowed back to the end of the island from which we had come, no lights
were to be seen that night.

"The next day passed slowly. The sun was hot; but toward evening the
lieutenant gave permission for the men to bathe; but warned us that no
man must go far from the boats, because there might be sharks about.
However, we didn't see none, and we enjoyed the dip, and were in better
humor still when we found that a light breeze was springing up. It
might have been about midnight when the men on watch made out a light to
seaward, and we weren't long in getting up our grapnels and sitting our
oars. In half an hour we were on board, and were soon sailing away from
the island again.

"The next night in we came again, and I saw that the third lieutenant's
plan was going to be adopted; in fact, I guessed so before; for the sail
makers had been at work with two light ropes making a rope ladder, and
the ship's smith had got some empty shells on deck, and had made a shift
to screw some iron eyes into them for fixing ropes to. The gun was taken
out of the pinnace and a little mortar fixed in her, and half a dozen
ropes, each a hundred fathoms long, had knots put in them every two
feet.

"The launch and the two cutters were lowered as well as the pinnace this
time, and the crews were armed with cutlass and pistol. I went with them
as before, as I should be wanted to guide them when they got near the
village. It was a bright starlight night without haze, so that when we
got close we could make out the outline of the cliffs, and could see the
thick wood growing on the top. When we got within about a hundred yards
of the cliffs the boat stopped rowing.

"'Don't use more powder than you can help, gunner,' Mr. Earnshaw said.
'In the first place, we don't want to do more than carry out the rope
to its full length; in the next place, we don't want to make more noise
than we can help. What wind there is is fortunately blowing seaward,
and being so close under the cliff the sound will be echoed back. At the
same time the less noise the better.'

"'I will begin with very little, sir. If the ball don't go to the top of
the cliff I shall put a trifle more into the gun next time; it's better
to make a mistake on the right side.'

"A small quantity of powder was put in the mortar, which was only a four
inch one. Then a wad was put in, and a shell with one of the knotted
ropes fastened to it dropped in the top. The rope had been coiled in a
tub so as to run out easily. The gunner applied the match. There was a
dull report, and every man held his breath to listen. There was a thud
high up on the cliff and then a splash.

"'A few feet short of the top, I should say, gunner. You must put in
more next time, for the shell must go well up over the trees and drop
among them; otherwise it won't catch.'

"The gunner by the light of the lantern measured out half as much powder
again as he had used before, and then fired. This time we heard no sound
till there was a faint splash in the water.

"'The rope's gone, sir,' the gunner said, looking into the tub. 'There
was a little too much this time.'

"'I don't think so,' Mr. Escombe said. 'I think that splash was the end
of the rope touching the water. In that case it will be just right, a
hundred feet up the cliffs, and five hundred feet among the trees. No
fear of the rope coming back to us.'

"It took us a quarter of an hour's search in the dark to find the rope;
but at last we came upon it, and sure enough there was only four or five
fathoms in the water.

"'Now, Jones,' Mr. Earnshaw said, 'it's your turn. Put that light line
over your shoulders, and when you get to the top haul on it till you
get up the rope ladder, and fasten that to a stout trunk and give a low
hail. We will hold the rope as steady as we can below while you mount.'

"'Ay, ay, sir,' said the man, who was an active young chap; 'I will be
up there in a jiffy.'

"We fastened the lower end round one of the thwarts of the boat, and
then he began to climb. It was near five minutes before he got to the
top, for there were some nasty places where the cliff jutted out, and
the rope was hard against it; but presently the shaking ceased, and a
minute later the light line was hauled tight. There was a low cheer in
the boats, and then up went the rope ladder. A minute or two later there
was a hail from the top.

"'All taut, sir.'

"'I will go first,' Mr. Earnshaw said.

"Accordingly up he went, and one by one we followed, each waiting for
the signal that the one before him had got up, till all had gone except
the two told off as boat watch. Then the men of the launch and cutters
followed, and in about two hours they were all at the top, and a lantern
was shown to tell the ship we were there.
