risk of being hit, but, to say the least of it, it is very unpleasant.
There, a shell has just burst over the camp. So it is shell that they
are firing."

Indeed, the Boers had been using these missiles only, but owing to some
fault in the loading, or the badness of the fuses, they fell for the
most part without bursting. It was soon evident to the lads that the
range of the British guns was shorter than that of the heavier pieces
from Talana. The distance was five thousand yards, and the elevated
position of the Boer guns added to the advantage given by their
superior weight.

"I will ride in now," Chris said as he got up from breakfast, "and tell
the staff what we have gathered as to the Boers' strength." He had on
his way down the hill exchanged his hat for his forage-cap, and taking
Horrocks with him he galloped to the camp. Sir Penn Symons was standing
on a small elevation watching the fire. Chris rode up and saluted.

"I have no orders for you, Mr. King, except that when the fighting is
over you will join the cavalry in pursuit."

"Thank you, sir; I have not come for orders, but to report to you that
with Mr. Horrocks and two others, and one of our Kaffir servants, I
entered the Boer camp last night in order to ascertain their strength."

"You did!" the general exclaimed in surprise. "You hear that,
gentlemen?" he said, turning round to three or four of his staff
standing but a short distance behind him. "Mr. King and three of his
party absolutely entered the Boer camp last night to discover their
force. Well, sir, what was the result?"

"There are about four thousand of them, sir, over rather than under,
and they have six guns, all of heavy calibre. When I was there they
were at work building a thick wall some five feet high of rough stones
along the edge of the hill. It will scarcely shelter the guns, but it
will provide cover for the riflemen at the edge of the hill. There is
an immense gathering of waggons and carts--there are certainly not less
than a thousand of them--in a confused mass behind the hill. Arriving
in the dark, each seems to have gone on until it could get no farther.
The fighting men are all on the top of the hill, and between them and
the waggons are their ponies. They certainly could not ride away till
the waggons have been passed through, but possibly a passage may have
been left on each side of these for them to get through, in order, as
is their intention, to charge your army when their guns have silenced
your artillery. I gathered that expected commandos had not come up.
They were disappointed at hearing nothing of the Free Staters, who they
expected would have attacked Glencoe from the other side. They are
absolutely confident of success, and expect to overwhelm General White
at Ladysmith in three days from now, and to be in Pietermaritzburg in a
week, and are talking of driving the last rooinek on board the ships at
Durban shortly after."

The general smiled. "I am much obliged to you for your information, Mr.
King, and am much pleased at the courage with which you and your
companions entered the Boer camp to obtain it. It is satisfactory to
learn that their force is not much greater than our own. It is also
useful to know that their ponies are gathered so close to them, for
shells that go over the hill may burst among them; and I believe that
one of the Boers' most vulnerable points is their horses, for without
them they would feel absolutely lost. I am sure, Mr. King, that you
would wish to be in the thick of the fighting, but I would rather that
you curbed your impetuosity, for after the manner in which you obtained
this news for me, I can see that your party will do far greater service
in scouting and in gaining intelligence than they could afford in
action. I should advise you to shift your camp, as the troops are about
to advance into the town, and the enemy's shot will soon be falling
there."

A few minutes later two field batteries moved forward and took up their
position south of Dundee, escorted by the mounted infantry and the
rifles. The third battalion of the Lancashire regiment remained to
protect the camp should it be attacked by the Free Staters, while the
Dublin Fusiliers and the Royal Irish Fusiliers were to march through
the town to a donga or river-bed half a mile to the east. Beyond this
the long ascent to Talana begins. The King's Royal Rifles were to take
up a position under cover to the east of the town.

Chris had ridden back fast to Dundee. The work of taking down the tents
and packing their materials and all the stores on to the spare horses
took but a few minutes, and two of the lads went with the two natives
and saw the horses safely placed in a sharp depression half a mile
away, in which they would be safe from Boer shells. Chris had told his
companions what the general had said. They all looked disappointed.

"We shall have plenty of opportunities afterwards, and it is a
compliment that he considers we had better reserve ourselves for
scouting, which, after all, is the work we always intended to carry
out. Still, though, after what he has said, we cannot absolutely join
the cavalry, we will manage somehow to see some of the fighting without
getting into the thick of it. Besides, I should say that in any case
the whole brunt of the affair must fall upon the infantry and
artillery. If they silence the Boer guns and capture the hill, the
battle is won, and the cavalry will have to wait for their chance till
they can get the Boers to fight on ground where they can act."

Drizzling rain had now set in, but this and the fact that they had
started without breakfast in no way abated the spirits of the troops
who soon came along, marching with light step and eager faces which
showed that they were delighted at the prospect of action. The
batteries to the right had already come into play, and a vigorous
cannonade was being directed at the crest of the hill, from which the
Boer guns kept up a slower though steady fire in return.

"While nothing else is doing we may just as well ride over and see how
things are getting on there," Chris said. And as soon as the two Irish
regiments had passed, the little troop trotted across to the rising
ground and dismounted a few hundred yards from the guns. They soon saw
with satisfaction that the fire of the Boers was far from effective,
their aim was not good, and a very small proportion of the shells
burst; while on the other hand the shrapnel from the British batteries
burst with splendid accuracy over the crest of the hill. For two hours
the artillery duel continued, then the Boer guns gradually ceased their
fire. The mist that had partly shrouded the summit of Talana, eight
hundred feet above the plain, and the smoke that still hung thickly
there, rendered it impossible to say whether they had all been put out
of action or simply withdrawn, but when it cleared off they could no
longer be seen. It was now the turn of the infantry. Beyond the donga
in which they were lying the rise of the ground was gradual, up to a
plantation which surrounded Smith's farm. Beyond this the ground was
rocky. The men advanced at the double in open order, and the moment
they were seen by the Boers a continuous fire of musketry was opened.
The distance was about a mile, but the Mauser rifles had a much greater
range than this and the bullets pattered thickly on the ground. Only
four men, however, fell. The two regiments halted in the plantation and
farm buildings, and the advanced line at the edge of the trees opened
fire in answer to that to which they were exposed. The general at first
had taken up his position with the guns, but as soon as the men
advanced from the donga he joined them and accompanied them as far as
the plantation. Then he returned to the battery, which continued its
fire with greater activity to prepare the way for the further advance
of the infantry.

The Rifles had joined the two Irish regiments, and at half-past nine
General Symons galloped up to the farm and gave the order for the
advance. This was received with a cheer by the men, who had been
impatiently awaiting it. Scarcely had the cheer died away when the
general was mortally wounded by a bullet that struck him in the
stomach. Unconscious that the wound was so severe he retained his seat
a minute or two, and was then carried by the Indian bearer company into
the town. The troops, ignorant of the misfortune that had befallen
them, were now working their way up the hill, taking advantage of every
stone and boulder, and although exposed to a terrific fire, gradually
pushing on until they reached a stone wall which ran round the face of
the hill. Beyond this the ground was much rougher and very much
steeper--so steep, indeed, that it was almost impossible to climb it.
The fire of the enemy was now terrific. The troops were some three
hundred yards from the crest, and it was certain death to show a head
above the wall. An officer placed his helmet on the end of his sword,
and the moment he raised it, it was riddled by five balls.

For a time it was impossible to advance farther, but when the Boer fire
moderated a little the order ran along the line for the men to storm
the position. A signal was made to the artillery to cease fire, and as
it did so the men leapt over the wall and rushed forward. There was now
no thought of taking shelter or returning the Boers' fire, every effort
was needed for surmounting the difficulties in their way. In some
places the rock was so steep that the men had to climb on their hands
and knees, sometimes those below pushed their comrades up and were in
turn assisted by them to climb. The roar of musketry was unceasing. It
seemed to be an impossibility for any man to reach the top unscathed,
and yet there was no hesitation or wavering. Numbers fell, but panting
and determined the rest pressed on. The Rifles suffered most heavily,
and out of the seventeen officers who advanced with them five were
killed and seven wounded. At last the steepest part of the ascent was
surmounted. Those who first reached this point waited until joined by
others, and then fixing bayonets they rushed up the slope to the edge
of the plateau cheering loudly.

The Boers did not await the onset; the great body had already fled.
They had believed it impossible for mortal men to scale the hill under
their continuous fire, and our steady advance through the hail of
bullets had astounded them and shaken their courage. The artillery,
after ceasing fire, had galloped off at full speed and taken up their
position on the ridge known as Smith's Nek, overlooking the plain
behind the hill. For a distance of three miles this was covered with
waggons and galloping men. The guns were about to open fire upon them
when a white flag was hoisted, and, believing that the Boers had
surrendered, the gunners abstained from firing. It was, however, but
the first of numerous similar acts of treachery, and the Boers were
thus enabled to make their escape.

The appearance of the plateau gained by the troops was appalling. Some
five hundred of the Boers lay dead or wounded, and many had doubtless
been carried off. Three of the guns lay dismounted, the others had been
removed; for as they could not be sufficiently depressed to bear upon
the stormers, they had been taken off as soon as the advance began in
earnest. Beyond the plateau smashed waggons and dead animals lay
thickly. Great numbers of the Boer ponies had been killed; many were
still standing quietly waiting for their masters, lying dead above.

Pursuit was out of the question. The men were exhausted by their
efforts; they were wet to the skin by the rain that had for nine hours
come down unceasingly; they had had no food since the previous day, and
the tremendous climb had taxed their powers to the utmost. For a time
they cheered vociferously, the first joy of victory overcoming the
thought of their dead and wounded comrades, who had to be collected and
carried down. The loss had been severe, ten officers and thirty men had
been killed, twenty officers and a hundred and sixty-five men wounded;
and nine officers and two hundred and eleven men did not answer to the
roll-call. This loss was unaccountable.

Chris, as soon as the infantry advance began, had, after talking with
the others, agreed to set out in the direction in which the three
squadrons of cavalry had started in the morning with instructions to
work round, and be prepared to cut off the enemy's retreat. They had
with them some of the mounted infantry and a machine-gun.

As the whole Boer force would be concentrated on the hill, Chris
thought that there would be no danger in riding round, especially as,
even had the Boers posted a force to protect their line of retreat, he
was confident that the speed of his horses would prevent any chance of
capture. From some natives he learned the direction that the cavalry
had taken, and presently on rising ground, saw two parties halted in
hollows some two miles apart. The farthest out on the plain appeared to
be the largest, and to this he rode. The officer in command had seen
him in camp, and as he saluted on riding up, said:

"So you have come to lend us a hand, sir? Can you tell me how matters
are going on at Dundee?"

"At the time we rode off, sir, the advance of the infantry had just
begun, the Boer guns had been silenced, and our men were advancing from
Smith's farm under a very heavy fire of the enemy, which continued
without intermission as long as we were within hearing distance."

"Did you see the other squadron as you came along?"

"They are in a hollow two miles away."

"Ah! that is where we left them."

The troopers were all dismounted, and the scouts followed the example.
The boom of the British guns was continuing unabated. "They can be
getting on but slowly," the officer said. "I am afraid we shall find it
a very tough job. I suppose there is a strong force up there?"

"Over four thousand."

"How do you know?"

"I was up there last night," Chris said, "with three of the others. We
did not go up in these caps, as you may suppose, but in wide-brimmed
hats. We were able to get about without exciting any suspicion
whatever. We found they had six guns and over four thousand men. As we
all speak Dutch fluently there was really no chance of our being
detected."

The other officers of the squadron had all gathered round.

"Danger or no danger, it was a very plucky action," their leader said.
"I suppose that was the news you brought in just before the troops
marched off. Well, I wish that we had got our breakfast and the horses
a feed before we started. It is more important for the horses than it
is for us, though I should not be sorry for breakfast myself."

"We have some food in our haversacks, sir. We breakfasted before we
started, and we filled our haversacks with biscuits, thinking that
perhaps they would be welcome, for we knew that none of the troops had
anything to eat before leaving."

"You are very good to offer it," the colonel said. "But we could not
eat while the men have nothing."

"It will go round, sir, though it will be but a small portion for each.
We each put about ten pounds of biscuits in our haversacks, and shall
not be sorry to get rid of the weight. It will make something like
three-quarters of a pound per man all round."

"More than that," the officer said. "I am indeed greatly obliged to
you."

The haversacks were emptied and divided into four heaps of equal size,
with a proportionate heap for the ten officers. Four men were called up
from each troop, and in a short time the soldiers were all munching
biscuits, every man dividing his rations with his horse. The sight of
the rough-looking troop had at first excited some amusement and a
little derision among the soldiers, but this feeling was now exchanged
for gratitude, and it was unanimously agreed that these young farmers
were a capital set of fellows. The hours passed slowly until the
officers, through their glasses, saw a great movement in the encampment
on the hill. The waggons standing lowest separated from the others, and
gradually a general movement set in.

"Our men must be gaining ground," the colonel said, "and the Boers are
beginning to funk."

The bits were put into the horses' mouths again, the saddles buckled up
tightly, and an expression of satisfaction succeeded that of disgust at
the long hours standing in the pouring rain. Presently, when the
leading waggons were abreast of them, at a distance of about a mile,
the order was given to mount, and the two squadrons dashed across the
plain and were soon among the fugitives. There were many mounted men
among them, these being the first to steal away from the fight. They
opened fire as the cavalry approached, but were soon overthrown or
driven away in headlong flight. Many of the waggons were seized, but
each moment their defenders became stronger. The Boers were now
flocking down in great numbers, and seeing their teams and property in
danger they dismounted, formed some of the waggons up in a square, and
from them opened a heavy fire upon the troopers. Chris dismounted his
party, and returned the fire, but the officer in command, seeing that
with so small a force of infantry he could do nothing, and that the
numbers of their enemies were increasing, drew off. He would have
continued the fight, but he supposed that the artillery would soon be
at work, and knew they could not open fire as long as he was engaging
the Boers, he therefore retired with the long train of captured
waggons, and late in the afternoon reached camp.

Nothing was seen of the other squadron and mounted infantry, nor was
any news received of them until the following day, when a medical
officer with some wounded men came in. Like the larger force, they too
had ridden in among the waggons, but had taken a more northerly line,
and had come on a point where the Boers were thickest. They had charged
and taken several prisoners, and inflicted severe loss on the enemy.
These, however, had swarmed round them, keeping up an incessant fire
and barring their retreat. They took up a defensive position in a farm,
and for three hours repelled all the attacks of the Boers, until their
horses were all killed or had broken away and the ammunition exhausted,
while the Boers had just brought up the three guns they had withdrawn
from the hill. Further resistance would have ended in the extermination
of the whole party, and Lieutenant-Colonel Moeller was therefore obliged
to surrender.




CHAPTER VI

ELANDSLAAGTE


The scouts erected their tents again on their former ground. The
remaining inhabitants of Dundee were jubilant over the victory that had
been won, and did their best, by hanging out flags from the windows, to
decorate the town. Jack and his companion had returned to the camp with
the spare horses as soon as the hill was carried, and had the fires
lighted by the time the party came in. In spite of having worn their
blankets as cloaks, all were wet through, but after changing their
clothes, they went into the town to gather the news of how the hill had
been won, and by the time they returned their meal was ready.

"What do you think of affairs, Chris?"

"I think that the officer at Ladysmith was right, and that it was a
frightful mistake to divide the force and send four thousand men up
here. They have thrashed the Boers today, but they may be back again on
the top of that hill tomorrow. Besides, we know that Joubert's force
was not engaged to-day, and they and the Free Staters will be gathering
round. We might win another victory, but we are certain to be obliged
to fall back soon, and my opinion is that we shall be very lucky if we
get through safely."

"Why not start to-morrow morning, Chris?" Peters said. "We shall be of
no use scouting here, and not much use if there is hard fighting. I
hear that some natives have brought in the news that there was some
firing to-day at Elandslaagte. If that is the case, we must have troops
there, and the chances are that they will be there to-morrow."

"Yes, that is very likely," Chris agreed. "General White will be sure
to hold the line there if he can, for he must feel sure that the force
here will have to retreat now that it is attacked in earnest. When we
were talking to-day to the cavalry, one of the officers mentioned that
we had still telegraphic communication with Ladysmith, for although the
wires by the railway are cut, it is possible to communicate through
Helpmakaar. The Boers seem to have forgotten that, for it is quite out
of the direct line, and nearly double as far round. Well, as we had no
orders to come here, I suppose there is no occasion to get orders to go
back. I think Peters's proposal is a very good one, but on a point like
this everyone ought to give an opinion. My view is that we might be a
great deal more useful there than here, and that if we stop we shall
run a great chance of being captured. I think that it would be a fair
thing to put it to the vote."

He took two or three leaves out of his pocket-book, and tore them up
into narrow slips of paper.

"Now," he said, "write 'Yes' if you are in favour of going back, 'No'
if you are for stopping here. Drop them into my cap and the majority
shall decide."

When the strips of paper were examined, it was found that only two out
of the twenty-one were in favour of remaining.

"That settles it," Chris said. "It is thirty miles down to Elandslaagte
by road, and as from here to Glencoe is five miles, and we are no
nearer there than we are here, by cutting across to Waschbrank we shall
have only five-and-twenty miles to ride. It is well that we should get
there as early as possible, so we will settle to start at five o'clock,
which will take us there by eight, in time to see anything that is
going on. No doubt we shall be able to hear from natives as we go along
whether the troops are still there; at any rate if they are, we are
sure to hear firing before we get there, unless, of course, the Boers
have retired."

