'This is a day of very wondrous happenings,' he said. 'I have no more
room in me to be astonished. Our maiden said there was peace between you
and us. But for this coming of a foe we should have made sure.'

The children shuddered.

'Now speak. Are you upon our side?'

'YES. Don't I keep telling you we are?' Robert said. 'Look here. I will
give you a sign. You see this.' He held out the toy pistol. 'I shall
speak to it, and if it answers me you will know that I and the others
are come to guard your sacred thing--that we've just made the offerings
to.'

'Will that god whose image you hold in your hand speak to you alone, or
shall I also hear it?' asked the man cautiously.

'You'll be surprised when you DO hear it,' said Robert. 'Now, then.' He
looked at the pistol and said--

'If we are to guard the sacred treasure within'--he pointed to the
hedged-in space--'speak with thy loud voice, and we shall obey.'

He pulled the trigger, and the cap went off. The noise was loud, for it
was a two-shilling pistol, and the caps were excellent.

Every man, woman, and child in the village fell on its face on the sand.
The headman who had accepted the test rose first.

'The voice has spoken,' he said. 'Lead them into the ante-room of the
sacred thing.'

So now the four children were led in through the opening of the hedge
and round the lane till they came to an opening in the inner hedge, and
they went through an opening in that, and so passed into another lane.

The thing was built something like this, and all the hedges were of
brushwood and thorns: [Drawing of maze omitted.]

'It's like the maze at Hampton Court,' whispered Anthea.

The lanes were all open to the sky, but the little hut in the middle of
the maze was round-roofed, and a curtain of skins hung over the doorway.

'Here you may wait,' said their guide, 'but do not dare to pass the
curtain.' He himself passed it and disappeared.

'But look here,' whispered Cyril, 'some of us ought to be outside in
case the Psammead turns up.'

'Don't let's get separated from each other, whatever we do,' said
Anthea. 'It's quite bad enough to be separated from the Psammead. We
can't do anything while that man is in there. Let's all go out into
the village again. We can come back later now we know the way in.
That man'll have to fight like the rest, most likely, if it comes to
fighting. If we find the Psammead we'll go straight home.

It must be getting late, and I don't much like this mazy place.'

They went out and told the headman that they would protect the treasure
when the fighting began. And now they looked about them and were able
to see exactly how a first-class worker in flint flakes and notches an
arrow-head or the edge of an axe--an advantage which no other person now
alive has ever enjoyed. The boys found the weapons most interesting.
The arrow-heads were not on arrows such as you shoot from a bow, but
on javelins, for throwing from the hand. The chief weapon was a stone
fastened to a rather short stick something like the things gentlemen
used to carry about and call life-preservers in the days of the
garrotters.

Then there were long things like spears or lances, with flint
knives--horribly sharp--and flint battle-axes.

Everyone in the village was so busy that the place was like an ant-heap
when you have walked into it by accident. The women were busy and even
the children.

Quite suddenly all the air seemed to glow and grow red--it was like
the sudden opening of a furnace door, such as you may see at Woolwich
Arsenal if you ever have the luck to be taken there--and then almost as
suddenly it was as though the furnace doors had been shut. For the sun
had set, and it was night.

The sun had that abrupt way of setting in Egypt eight thousand years
ago, and I believe it has never been able to break itself of the habit,
and sets in exactly the same manner to the present day. The girl brought
the skins of wild deer and led the children to a heap of dry sedge.

'My father says they will not attack yet. Sleep!' she said, and it
really seemed a good idea. You may think that in the midst of all these
dangers the children would not have been able to sleep--but somehow,
though they were rather frightened now and then, the feeling was growing
in them--deep down and almost hidden away, but still growing--that the
Psammead was to be trusted, and that they were really and truly safe.
This did not prevent their being quite as much frightened as they could
bear to be without being perfectly miserable.

'I suppose we'd better go to sleep,' said Robert. 'I don't know what on
earth poor old Nurse will do with us out all night; set the police on
our tracks, I expect. I only wish they could find us! A dozen policemen
would be rather welcome just now. But it's no use getting into a stew
over it,' he added soothingly. 'Good night.'

And they all fell asleep.

They were awakened by long, loud, terrible sounds that seemed to come
from everywhere at once--horrible threatening shouts and shrieks
and howls that sounded, as Cyril said later, like the voices of men
thirsting for their enemies' blood.

'It is the voice of the strange men,' said the girl, coming to them
trembling through the dark. 'They have attacked the walls, and the
thorns have driven them back. My father says they will not try again
till daylight. But they are shouting to frighten us. As though we were
savages! Dwellers in the swamps!' she cried indignantly.

All night the terrible noise went on, but when the sun rose, as abruptly
as he had set, the sound suddenly ceased.

The children had hardly time to be glad of this before a shower
of javelins came hurtling over the great thorn-hedge, and everyone
sheltered behind the huts. But next moment another shower of weapons
came from the opposite side, and the crowd rushed to other shelter.
Cyril pulled out a javelin that had stuck in the roof of the hut beside
him. Its head was of brightly burnished copper.

Then the sound of shouting arose again and the crackle of dried thorns.
The enemy was breaking down the hedge. All the villagers swarmed to the
point whence the crackling and the shouting came; they hurled stones
over the hedges, and short arrows with flint heads. The children had
never before seen men with the fighting light in their eyes. It was very
strange and terrible, and gave you a queer thick feeling in your throat;
it was quite different from the pictures of fights in the illustrated
papers at home.

It seemed that the shower of stones had driven back the besiegers. The
besieged drew breath, but at that moment the shouting and the crackling
arose on the opposite side of the village and the crowd hastened
to defend that point, and so the fight swayed to and fro across the
village, for the besieged had not the sense to divide their forces as
their enemies had done.

Cyril noticed that every now and then certain of the fighting-men would
enter the maze, and come out with brighter faces, a braver aspect, and a
more upright carriage.

'I believe they go and touch the Amulet,' he said. 'You know the
Psammead said it could make people brave.'

They crept through the maze, and watching they saw that Cyril was right.
A headman was standing in front of the skin curtain, and as the warriors
came before him he murmured a word they could not hear, and touched
their foreheads with something that they could not see. And this
something he held in his hands. And through his fingers they saw the
gleam of a red stone that they knew.

The fight raged across the thorn-hedge outside. Suddenly there was a
loud and bitter cry.

'They're in! They're in! The hedge is down!'

The headman disappeared behind the deer-skin curtain.

'He's gone to hide it,' said Anthea. 'Oh, Psammead dear, how could you
leave us!'

Suddenly there was a shriek from inside the hut, and the headman
staggered out white with fear and fled out through the maze. The
children were as white as he.

'Oh! What is it? What is it?' moaned Anthea. 'Oh, Psammead, how could
you! How could you!'

And the sound of the fight sank breathlessly, and swelled fiercely all
around. It was like the rising and falling of the waves of the sea.

Anthea shuddered and said again, 'Oh, Psammead, Psammead!'

'Well?' said a brisk voice, and the curtain of skins was lifted at one
corner by a furry hand, and out peeped the bat's ears and snail's eyes
of the Psammead.

Anthea caught it in her arms and a sigh of desperate relief was breathed
by each of the four.

'Oh! which IS the East!' Anthea said, and she spoke hurriedly, for the
noise of wild fighting drew nearer and nearer.

'Don't choke me,' said the Psammead, 'come inside.'

The inside of the hut was pitch dark.

'I've got a match,' said Cyril, and struck it. The floor of the hut was
of soft, loose sand.

'I've been asleep here,' said the Psammead; 'most comfortable it's been,
the best sand I've had for a month. It's all right. Everything's all
right. I knew your only chance would be while the fight was going on.
That man won't come back. I bit him, and he thinks I'm an Evil Spirit.
Now you've only got to take the thing and go.'

The hut was hung with skins. Heaped in the middle were the offerings
that had been given the night before, Anthea's roses fading on the top
of the heap. At one side of the hut stood a large square stone block,
and on it an oblong box of earthenware with strange figures of men and
beasts on it.

'Is the thing in there?' asked Cyril, as the Psammead pointed a skinny
finger at it.

'You must judge of that,' said the Psammead. 'The man was just going to
bury the box in the sand when I jumped out at him and bit him.'

'Light another match, Robert,' said Anthea. 'Now, then quick! which is
the East?'

'Why, where the sun rises, of course!'

'But someone told us--'

'Oh! they'll tell you anything!' said the Psammead impatiently, getting
into its bass-bag and wrapping itself in its waterproof sheet.

'But we can't see the sun in here, and it isn't rising anyhow,' said
Jane.

'How you do waste time!' the Psammead said. 'Why, the East's where the
shrine is, of course. THERE!'

It pointed to the great stone.

And still the shouting and the clash of stone on metal sounded nearer
and nearer. The children could hear that the headmen had surrounded the
hut to protect their treasure as long as might be from the enemy. But
none dare to come in after the Psammead's sudden fierce biting of the
headman.

'Now, Jane,' said Cyril, very quickly. 'I'll take the Amulet, you stand
ready to hold up the charm, and be sure you don't let it go as you come
through.'

He made a step forward, but at that instant a great crackling overhead
ended in a blaze of sunlight. The roof had been broken in at one side,
and great slabs of it were being lifted off by two spears. As the
children trembled and winked in the new light, large dark hands tore
down the wall, and a dark face, with a blobby fat nose, looked over the
gap. Even at that awful moment Anthea had time to think that it was very
like the face of Mr Jacob Absalom, who had sold them the charm in the
shop near Charing Cross.

'Here is their Amulet,' cried a harsh, strange voice; 'it is this that
makes them strong to fight and brave to die. And what else have we
here--gods or demons?'

He glared fiercely at the children, and the whites of his eyes were very
white indeed. He had a wet, red copper knife in his teeth. There was not
a moment to lose.

'Jane, JANE, QUICK!' cried everyone passionately.

Jane with trembling hands held up the charm towards the East, and Cyril
spoke the word of power. The Amulet grew to a great arch. Out beyond
it was the glaring Egyptian sky, the broken wall, the cruel, dark,
big-nosed face with the red, wet knife in its gleaming teeth. Within the
arch was the dull, faint, greeny-brown of London grass and trees.

'Hold tight, Jane!' Cyril cried, and he dashed through the arch,
dragging Anthea and the Psammead after him. Robert followed, clutching
Jane. And in the ears of each, as they passed through the arch of the
charm, the sound and fury of battle died out suddenly and utterly, and
they heard only the low, dull, discontented hum of vast London, and the
peeking and patting of the sparrows on the gravel and the voices of the
ragged baby children playing Ring-o'-Roses on the yellow trampled grass.
And the charm was a little charm again in Jane's hand, and there was the
basket with their dinner and the bathbuns lying just where they had left
it.

'My hat!' said Cyril, drawing a long breath; 'that was something like an
adventure.'

'It was rather like one, certainly,' said the Psammead.

They all lay still, breathing in the safe, quiet air of Regent's Park.

'We'd better go home at once,' said Anthea presently. 'Old Nurse will be
most frightfully anxious. The sun looks about the same as it did when
we started yesterday. We've been away twenty-four hours.' 'The buns are
quite soft still,' said Cyril, feeling one; 'I suppose the dew kept them
fresh.'

They were not hungry, curiously enough.

They picked up the dinner-basket and the Psammead-basket, and went
straight home.

Old Nurse met them with amazement.

'Well, if ever I did!' she said. 'What's gone wrong? You've soon tired
of your picnic.'

The children took this to be bitter irony, which means saying the exact
opposite of what you mean in order to make yourself disagreeable; as
when you happen to have a dirty face, and someone says, 'How nice and
clean you look!'

'We're very sorry,' began Anthea, but old Nurse said--

'Oh, bless me, child, I don't care! Please yourselves and you'll please
me. Come in and get your dinners comf'table. I've got a potato on
