"It will be three days come midnight," Wulf said.

"And how did you live by the way?"

"We took a piece of bread with us, and once obtained food at a
shepherd's hut, and this morning we were well entertained at the
convent of Forges."

"You have proved yourselves good and trusty messengers," the duke
said. "Would I were always as well served. As you are the earl's
pages you are of course of gentle blood?"

"We are both his wards, my lord, and shall be thanes when we come
of age."

"And how is it that you, young sir, who seem to be younger than
your companion, are the spokesman?"

"It happened thus," Wulf said modestly. "Some fishermen came up
just after we had gained the shore with the loss of many of our
company. I marked that one of them started on seeing Earl Harold,
and whispered to a companion, and feeling sure that he had recognized
my lord, I told the earl of it as we walked towards St. Valery. He
then charged me if he was taken prisoner by the count to endeavour
to bear the news to you, and to give the same orders to my comrade
Beorn, saying it was likely that we might not be so strictly watched
as the men of the company, and might therefore succeed in slipping
away, as indeed turned out to be the case. I was desirous that Beorn
should tell you the tale, being older and more accustomed to the
speech of the court than I was, but he held that the message, being
first given to me, it was I who should deliver it."

"He judged rightly," the duke said, "and deserves credit for thus
standing aside."

At this moment two knights entered. "Fitz-Osberne, Warren," the
duke said, "a foul wrong has been done by Conrad of Ponthieu to
Earl Harold of Wessex, the foremost of Englishmen next to the king
himself, who has, with a company of his thanes, been cast ashore
near St. Valery. Instead of receiving honourable treatment, as was
his due, he has been most foully seized, chained, and with his
friends thrown into prison by the count, who has sent no intimation
of what has taken place to me, his lord, and had it not been for
these two brave and faithful youths, who effected their escape over
the battlements of Beaurain in order to bring me the news, the earl
might have lingered in shameful captivity. I pray you take horse
at once, with twenty chosen spears, and ride at the top of your
speed to Beaurain. There express in fitting terms to Conrad my
indignation at his foul treatment of one who should have been
received as a most honoured guest. Say that the earl and his company
must at once be released, and be accorded the treatment due not
only to themselves, but to them as my guests, and bid the count
mount with them and ride to my fortress of Eu, to which I myself
will at once journey to receive them. Tell Conrad that I will account
to him for any fair ransom he may claim, and if he demur to obey
my orders warn him that the whole force of Normandy shall at once
be set on foot against him. After having been for two years my
prisoner, methinks he will not care to run the risk of again being
shut up within my walls."

"We will use all haste," Fitz-Osberne said. "Conrad's conduct is a
disgrace to every Norman noble, for all Europe will cry shame when
the news of the earl's treatment gets abroad. That Conrad should
hold him to ransom is only in accordance with his strict rights,
but that he should imprison and chain him is, by the saints, almost
beyond belief."

As soon as the knights had left, the duke sent for his chamberlain,
and ordered him to conduct Beorn and Wulf to an apartment and to
see that they were at once furnished with garments befitting young
nobles, together with a purse of money for their immediate wants.
Then taking a long and heavy gold chain from his neck he placed it
on the table, and with a blow with his dagger cut it in sunder, and
handed half to each of the lads.

"Take this," he said, "in token of my thanks for having brought me
this news, and remember, that if at any time you should have a boon
to ask that it is within my power to grant, I swear to you upon my
ducal honour that it shall be yours. Never have I received more
joyful news than that the great Earl of Wessex will shortly be my
guest."

The lads bowed deeply, and then followed the chamberlain from the
apartment.

"Well, what think you of it, Beorn?" Wulf said, when they found
themselves alone in a handsome chamber.

"So far as rescuing Harold from the power of the Count of Ponthieu
we have surely succeeded even beyond our hopes. As to the rest, I
know not. As you were speaking I marked the satisfaction and joy
on the duke's face, and I said to myself that it was greater than
need have been caused by the thought that Earl Harold was to be his
guest."

"So I thought myself, Beorn. There can be no doubt that, as he said,
he deemed it the best news he had ever received, and I fear greatly
that Harold will but exchange one captivity for another. It will
doubtless be a more pleasant one, but methinks Harold will find
himself as much a prisoner, although treated as an honoured guest
by William, as he was while lying in the dungeon of Conrad. It is
a bad business, and I greatly fear indeed that Harold will long rue
the unfortunate scheme of hunting along the coast that has brought
him to this pass."

In a short time an attendant arrived with ewers, water, and four
suits of handsome garments, belts embroidered with gold thread, and
daggers, together with two plumed caps and purses, each containing
ten gold pieces; he informed them that two horses had been provided
for their use, and that they were to take their meals with the
duke's household, and to consider themselves in all respects as his
guests.

"We look finer birds than we did when we rode in with brother
Philip," Beorn laughed when they had attired themselves in their
new garments. "The more sober of these suits are a good deal gayer
than those we wore at home even at court ceremonies."

"King Edward objects to show," Wulf said, "and his own pages are
so sober in their attire that the earl likes not that we should
outshine them, and we usually cut a poor figure beside those of
William of London and the other Normans of his court."

In a short time the chamberlain came in and informed them that
supper was served, and conducted them to the hall, where he presented
them to the duke's gentlemen and pages as William's guests, and
wards and pages of the Earl of Wessex. The news of Harold's shipwreck
and imprisonment travelled quickly, for orders had already been
issued for the court to prepare to start early the next morning to
accompany the duke to Eu, in order to receive with due honour
William's guest and friend, Harold of England; and while the meal
went on many questions were asked as to the shipwreck and prisonment
of the earl, and the liveliest indignation was expressed at the
conduct of Conrad of Ponthieu.

"Truly all Normans will be reckoned churls," one of the gentlemen
exclaimed indignantly. "The fame of Harold's bravery, wisdom, and
courtesy to all men is known in every court in Europe, and that the
duke's vassal should have dared to imprison and chain him will
excite universal indignation. Why, the rudest of our own Norse
ancestors would not have so foully treated one so noble whom fate
had cast into his hands. Had we been at war with England it would
be shameful, but being at peace there are no words that can fitly
describe the outrage."

When the meal was over, one of the duke's pages who was about the
same age as Beorn asked him what they were going to do with themselves.

"If you have nothing better," he said, "will you ride with me to
my father's castle, it is but five miles away? My name is De Burg.
I can promise you a hearty welcome. My father was one of the knights
who accompanied the duke when he paid his visit to England some
fifteen years ago, and he liked the country much, and has ever since
spoken of the princely hospitality with which they were received
by your king. He did not meet Earl Harold then."

"No, the earl with his father and brothers was away in exile," Wulf
said rather shortly, for that visit had been a most unpleasant one
to Englishmen. It had happened when the Norman influence was
altogether in the ascendant. The king was filling the chief places
at court and in the church with Normans, had bestowed wide domains
upon them, and their castles were everywhere rising to dominate the
land. Englishmen then regarded with hostility this visit of the
young Norman duke with his great train of knights, and although at
the return of Godwin and his sons the greater portion of the intruders
had been driven out, their influence still remained at court, and
it was even said that Edward had promised the duke that he should
be his successor.

It was true that Englishmen laughed at the promise. The King of
England was chosen by the nation, and Edward had no shadow of right
to bequeath the throne even to one of his sons much less to a foreign
prince, who, although related to himself by marriage, had no drop
of English blood in his veins. Still, that the promise should ever
have been made rankled in the minds of the English people, the more
so as the power of Normandy increased, and the ambition as well as
the valour of its duke became more and more manifest According to
English law the promise was but an empty breath, absolutely without
effect or value. According to Norman law it constituted a powerful
claim, and Duke William was assuredly not a man to let such a claim
drop unpressed.

Wulf had heard all this again and again, and the prior of Bramber
had explained it to him in all its bearings, showing him that little
as Englishmen might think of the promise given by Edward so long
ago, it would be likely to bring grievous trouble on the land at
his death. He might perhaps have said more in reference to William's
visit had not Beorn at once accepted the invitation to ride with
young De Burg to his father's castle.




CHAPTER VI


RELEASE OF THE EARL

In a few minutes the three horses were brought out. Wulf and Beorn
were much pleased with the animals that had been placed at their
service. They were powerful horses, which could carry a knight in
his full armour with ease, and seemed full of spirit and fire. They
were handsomely caparisoned, and the lads felt as they sprang on
to their backs that they had never been so well mounted before.

"You would have made the journey more quickly and easily if you had
had these horses three days ago," young De Burg laughed.

"Yes, indeed. There would have been no occasion to hide in the woods
then. With our light weight on their backs they would have made
nothing of the journey."

"You must not expect to see a castle," De Burg said presently,
"though I call it one. In his early days the duke set himself to
destroy the great majority of castles throughout Normandy, for as
you know he had no little trouble with his nobles, and held that
while the strength of these fortresses disposes men to engage either
in civil war or in private feuds with each other, they were of no
avail against the enemies of the country. My father, who is just
the age of the duke, was his loyal follower from the first, and of
his free will levelled his walls as did many others of the duke's
friends, in the first place because it gave the duke pleasure, and
in the second because, had only the castles of those opposed to the
duke been destroyed, there would have been such jealousy and animosity
on the part of their owners that matters would never have quieted
down in the country. Thus it is that throughout the land you will
find but few castles remaining. The nobles felt it strange at first
to be thus dwelling in houses undefended against attack, but they
soon learnt that it was far more convenient than to be shut up
within massive walls, and the present dwellings are much larger and
more comfortable than those of former days. The duke said rightly
that the abolition of fortresses well-nigh doubled his fighting
power, for that so many men were required to garrison them as to
greatly diminish the number their lords could take with them into
the field. You do not have castles in England, do you?"

"No, we live in open houses, and hold that it is far better and
more pleasant to do so. There is no fighting between neighbours
with us. The great earls may quarrel and lead their forces into the
field, or may gather them against Danish and Norwegian pirates, but
except on these occasions, which are rare, all dwell peaceably in
their homes."

The horses were fresh, and the five miles quickly passed over.

"There is the house," De Burg said, pointing to a large building
standing on an eminence. It was castellated in form, and much of
the old building had been incorporated with the additions, but the
outer wall had been pulled down and the moat filled up. Broad
casements had replaced the narrow loopholes, and though the flag
of the De Burgs still waved over the keep, which stood a little
apart from the rest, the family no longer dwelt in it.

"It is chiefly used as a storehouse now," Guy De Burg explained;
"but there, as you see, the old loopholes still remain, and in case
of trouble it might be held for a time. But of that, however, there
is little chance; the duke's hand is a heavy one, and he has shown
himself a great leader. He has raised Normandy well-nigh level with
France, and so long as he lives and reigns there is no fear of
domestic trouble."

The gate stood open and they rode into a courtyard, when several
men came out and took the horses. Guy de Burg ran up a broad staircase
to the entrance of the house itself, and passed beneath a noble
entrance with a lofty pointed arch supported by clustered pillars.
Inside was a spacious hall paved with stone, and from this De Burg
turned into an apartment whose walls were covered with rich hangings.
Here a lady was at work embroidering, surrounded by several of her
maids similarly engaged. A girl some fourteen years old was reading
a missal, while the master of the castle was sitting in a chair
with low arms, and was playing with the ears of a hound whose head
was lying on his knee.

"Well, Guy, what is your news?" he asked as his son entered. "Half
an hour since I received a message from the duke desiring me to
appear with ten men-at-arms in their best trappings to ride with
him to Eu. Is Conrad of Ponthieu giving trouble again, and who are
these young gentlemen with you?"

Guy went down on one knee to kiss his father's hand, and then did
the same to his mother, then he said, "I will with your permission
answer the last question first, father. My friends are young Saxon
thanes, pages to Earl Harold, and at present guests of the duke."

"You are bearers, doubtless, of some message from the king to our
duke?"

"No, my lord," Beorn said, "we were bearers of a message from Earl
Harold."

"It is to meet him, father, that we are to ride to Eu to-morrow.
He has been wrecked on the shores of Ponthieu, and has been foully
imprisoned and even fettered by Count Conrad. Beorn and Wulf escaped
from the prison and brought the news to the duke, who this afternoon
dispatched Fitz-Osberne and Warren at full speed to bid the count
at once free his prisoners, and deliver them over to him at Eu under
pain of his direst displeasure."

"Harold in Normandy and a prisoner! This is strange news indeed.
We shall surely make him welcome, for he is in all respects a great
man, and save our own duke has a reputation second to none in
Europe."

Wulf thought as he looked at the speaker that at least he had no
second thought in his mind. It was a frank honest face, martial in
its outline, but softened by a pleasant smile.

He had spoken in a genial tone of affection to his son, and Wulf
thought, that although no doubt he was ready to take the field at
the summons of his lord, he preferred a quiet life in this stately
home.

"This is news for you, wife," he went on. "You will have to furbish
up your gayest attire, for we shall be having grand doings in honour
of this great English earl, and our dames will have to look their
best in order that he may carry home a fair report of them to the
Saxon ladies. And how did you manage to escape, young sirs, and
when did you arrive with the news?"

Beorn, who as the elder was specially addressed, shortly related
the story of their escape and journey.

"You have done well," the baron said when he had concluded. "Guy,
you may learn from these young Saxons that even pages may be called
upon to do work of more importance than handing wine-cups and
standing behind their lord on state occasions. Had it not been for
their readiness and courage Harold might have lain weeks in prison,
maybe months, while the count was striving to wring the utmost
ransom from him. The lads would doubtless have been slain had they
been detected in making their escape or overtaken on the way, and
the attempt was therefore one that required courage as well as
devotion to their lord. I doubt not that you would exhibit both
qualities did opportunity offer, but I question whether you could
have walked the distance they did, and that on such scanty fare.
We Normans are too apt to trust wholly to our horses' legs to the
neglect of our own, and although I have no doubt that you could
ride as far as a horse could carry you, I warrant that you could
hardly have performed on foot the journey from Beaurain in twice
the time in which they did it. They must have exercised their legs
as well as their arms, and although in a campaign a Norman noble
depends upon his war horse both on the march and on the day of
battle, there may often be times when it is well that a knight
should be able to march as far as any of the footmen in the army.
Well, Agnes, and what have you to say to these Saxon youths? Methinks
your eyes are paying more attention to them than to your missal."

"I can read my missal at any hour, father, but this is the first
time that I have seen young Saxon nobles. I thought there would
have been more difference between them and us. Their hair is fairer
and more golden and their eyes bluer, but their dress differs in
no way from our own." She spoke in a matter-of-fact and serious
air, as if it were a horse or a dog that she was commenting upon,
and both Beorn and Wulf smiled, while Guy laughed outright.

"It is little wonder that their attire is like ours, Agnes," he
said, "seeing that they were furnished with it by the duke's orders.
You do not suppose that after being tossed about on the sea and
well-nigh drowned in landing, and being made prisoners, and then
travelling through the country and sleeping in the woods, Beorn and
Wulf would arrive here with their garments new and spotless. That
would indeed have been a miracle."

"But, indeed," Beorn said, "our garments differ not greatly from
those we now have on, for Norman fashions are prevalent at King
Edward's court, and we had no choice but to conform to them. Your
language is always spoken there, and methinks that were you to visit
Westminster you would see but little difference between King Edward's
court and that of your own duke."

"And your sisters, do they too dress like us?"

"Queen Edith's ladies dress like her in Norman fashion, but away
from the court the attire is different and more simple. Sisters,
Wulf and I have none; we are orphans both, and wards of Earl Harold,
who holds our estates until we are of age to take the oaths to him
and to lead our men in battle."

"And will you be barons like my father, or counts, or simple knights?"

"We shall be none of these things, Lady Agnes. We have our great
earls as in France you have your great dukes, but below that we
have no titles. We are thanes, that is land owners, who hold their
land direct from our earls. Some have wider lands than others, but
as free thanes we are all equal. As to knights, we have not in
England the titles and ceremonies which are so much thought of in
France and in other courts."

"That is a pity," the girl said gravely, "for the vows of knighthood
make a knight courteous and gentle to enemies and friends alike."

"Or rather, Agnes," her mother put in, "they should do so; but in
truth, looking round at the cruel wars we have had in Normandy, I
do not see that men have been more gentle or courteous than they
would have been had they never taken the vows or had knightly spurs
buckled on; and in truth it seems to me from the news of what has
taken place beyond the sea, that in the civil troubles they have
had in England men are much more gentle with each other, and foes
are far more easily reconciled than with us in Normandy, who are
supposed to be bound by the laws of chivalry. Had our duke been
cast upon the shores of England as Harold has been cast upon that
of Ponthieu, I think that he would not have been so dishonourably
treated by one of the English thanes as Harold has been by Count
Conrad. When Godwin and his sons returned from the exile into which
they had been driven, and again became all powerful, there was not,
as I have heard from your father, a single drop of blood shed, nor
any vengeance taken upon the men who had brought about their exile.
It would have been very different had such things happened here."

"You speak rightly, wife. The English are of a more gentle disposition
than we are, though nowise backward in battle. But now, Guy, it
is time that you were returning. You have already made a longer
stay than usual. I shall see you again to-morrow when we start for
Eu. Young sirs, I hope that on your return you will often ride over
here when your lord does not require you. We shall always be pleased
to see you, and although the forest lies some miles away, Guy can
show you good hunting, though not so good as that which, as I hear,
you can get in England, where the population is not so thick as it
is in this part of Normandy."

The horses were brought round, and the three lads rode into Rouen
just as night was falling.

Long before daybreak there was a stir in the streets of the city,
as parties of knights and nobles rode in with bodies of their
retainers in obedience to the orders of the duke. All in the palace
were awake early. A hasty breakfast was eaten, while just as the
sun rose the duke mounted his horse, and at the head of an array,
composed of some twenty barons and knights and four hundred
men-at-arms, rode out of the city.

