"And alive?"

"Yes," said Ojo; "she has pink brains. And there's a Woozy--"

"What's a Woozy?" inquired the Shaggy Man.

"Why, I--I--can't describe it," answered the boy, greatly perplexed.
"But it's a queer animal with three hairs on the tip of its tail that
won't come out and--"

"What won't come out?" asked the Shaggy Man; "the tail?"

"The hairs won't come out. But you'll see the Woozy, if you'll please
rescue it, and then you'll know just what it is."

"Of course," said the Shaggy Man, nodding his shaggy head. And then he
walked back among the plants, still whistling, and found the three
leaves which were curled around Ojo's traveling companions. The first
leaf he cut down released Scraps, and on seeing her the Shaggy Man
threw back his shaggy head, opened wide his mouth and laughed so
shaggily and yet so merrily that Scraps liked him at once. Then he took
off his hat and made her a low bow, saying:

"My dear, you're a wonder. I must introduce you to my friend the
Scarecrow."

When he cut down the second leaf he rescued the Glass Cat, and Bungle
was so frightened that she scampered away like a streak and soon had
joined Ojo, when she sat beside him panting and trembling. The last
plant of all the row had captured the Woozy, and a big bunch in the
center of the curled leaf showed plainly where he was. With his sharp
knife the Shaggy Man sliced off the stem of the leaf and as it fell and
unfolded out trotted the Woozy and escaped beyond the reach of any more
of the dangerous plants.




Chapter Eleven

A Good Friend


Soon the entire party was gathered on the road of yellow bricks, quite
beyond the reach of the beautiful but treacherous plants. The Shaggy
Man, staring first at one and then at the other, seemed greatly pleased
and interested.

"I've seen queer things since I came to the Land of Oz," said he, "but
never anything queerer than this band of adventurers. Let us sit down a
while, and have a talk and get acquainted."

"Haven't you always lived in the Land of Oz?" asked the Munchkin boy.

"No; I used to live in the big, outside world. But I came here once
with Dorothy, and Ozma let me stay."

"How do you like Oz?" asked Scraps. "Isn't the country and the climate
grand?"

"It's the finest country in all the world, even if it is a fairyland,
and I'm happy every minute I live in it," said the Shaggy Man. "But
tell me something about yourselves."

So Ojo related the story of his visit to the house of the Crooked
Magician, and how he met there the Glass Cat, and how the Patchwork
Girl was brought to life and of the terrible accident to Unc Nunkie and
Margolotte. Then he told how he had set out to find the five different
things which the Magician needed to make a charm that would restore the
marble figures to life, one requirement being three hairs from a
Woozy's tail.

"We found the Woozy," explained the boy, "and he agreed to give us the
three hairs; but we couldn't pull them out. So we had to bring the
Woozy along with us."

"I see," returned the Shaggy Man, who had listened with interest to the
story. "But perhaps I, who am big and strong, can pull those three
hairs from the Woozy's tail."

"Try it, if you like," said the Woozy.

So the Shaggy Man tried it, but pull as hard as he could he failed to
get the hairs out of the Woozy's tail. So he sat down again and wiped
his shaggy face with a shaggy silk handkerchief and said:

"It doesn't matter. If you can keep the Woozy until you get the rest of
the things you need, you can take the beast and his three hairs to the
Crooked Magician and let him find a way to extract 'em. What are the
other things you are to find?"

"One," said Ojo, "is a six-leaved clover."

"You ought to find that in the fields around the Emerald City," said
the Shaggy Man. "There is a Law against picking six-leaved clovers, but
I think I can get Ozma to let you have one."

"Thank you," replied Ojo. "The next thing is the left wing of a yellow
butterfly."

"For that you must go to the Winkie Country," the Shaggy Man declared.
"I've never noticed any butterflies there, but that is the yellow
country of Oz and it's ruled by a good friend of mine, the Tin Woodman."

"Oh, I've heard of him!" exclaimed Ojo. "He must be a wonderful man."

"So he is, and his heart is wonderfully kind. I'm sure the Tin Woodman
will do all in his power to help you to save your Unc Nunkie and poor
Margolotte."

"The next thing I must find," said the Munchkin boy, "is a gill of
water from a dark well."

"Indeed! Well, that is more difficult," said the Shaggy Man, scratching
his left ear in a puzzled way. "I've never heard of a dark well; have
you?"

"No," said Ojo.

"Do you know where one may be found?" inquired the Shaggy Man.

"I can't imagine," said Ojo.

"Then we must ask the Scarecrow."

"The Scarecrow! But surely, sir, a scarecrow can't know anything."

"Most scarecrows don't, I admit," answered the Shaggy Man. "But this
Scarecrow of whom I speak is very intelligent. He claims to possess the
best brains in all Oz."

"Better than mine?" asked Scraps.

"Better than mine?" echoed the Glass Cat. "Mine are pink, and you can
see 'em work."

"Well, you can't see the Scarecrow's brains work, but they do a lot of
clever thinking," asserted the Shaggy Man. "If anyone knows where a
dark well is, it's my friend the Scarecrow."

"Where does he live?" inquired Ojo.

"He has a splendid castle in the Winkie Country, near to the palace of
his friend the Tin Woodman, and he is often to be found in the Emerald
City, where he visits Dorothy at the royal palace."

"Then we will ask him about the dark well," said Ojo.

"But what else does this Crooked Magician want?" asked the Shaggy Man.

"A drop of oil from a live man's body."

"Oh; but there isn't such a thing."

"That is what I thought," replied Ojo; "but the Crooked Magician said
it wouldn't be called for by the recipe if it couldn't be found, and
therefore I must search until I find it."

"I wish you good luck," said the Shaggy Man, shaking his head
doubtfully; "but I imagine you'll have a hard job getting a drop of oil
from a live man's body. There's blood in a body, but no oil."

"There's cotton in mine," said Scraps, dancing a little jig.

"I don't doubt it," returned the Shaggy Man admiringly. "You're a
regular comforter and as sweet as patchwork can be. All you lack is
dignity."

"I hate dignity," cried Scraps, kicking a pebble high in the air and
then trying to catch it as it fell. "Half the fools and all the wise
folks are dignified, and I'm neither the one nor the other."

"She's just crazy," explained the Glass Cat.

The Shaggy Man laughed.

"She's delightful, in her way," he said. "I'm sure Dorothy will be
pleased with her, and the Scarecrow will dote on her. Did you say you
were traveling toward the Emerald City?"

"Yes," replied Ojo. "I thought that the best place to go, at first,
because the six-leaved clover may be found there."

"I'll go with you," said the Shaggy Man, "and show you the way."

"Thank you," exclaimed Ojo. "I hope it won't put you out any."

"No," said the other, "I wasn't going anywhere in particular. I've been
a rover all my life, and although Ozma has given me a suite of
beautiful rooms in her palace I still get the wandering fever once in a
while and start out to roam the country over. I've been away from the
Emerald City several weeks, this time, and now that I've met you and
your friends I'm sure it will interest me to accompany you to the great
city of Oz and introduce you to my friends."

"That will be very nice," said the boy, gratefully.

"I hope your friends are not dignified," observed Scraps.

"Some are, and some are not," he answered; "but I never criticise my
friends. If they are really true friends, they may be anything they
like, for all of me."

"There's some sense in that," said Scraps, nodding her queer head in
approval. "Come on, and let's get to the Emerald City as soon as
possible." With this she ran up the path, skipping and dancing, and
then turned to await them.

"It is quite a distance from here to the Emerald City," remarked the
Shaggy Man, "so we shall not get there to-day, nor to-morrow. Therefore
let us take the jaunt in an easy manner. I'm an old traveler and have
found that I never gain anything by being in a hurry. 'Take it easy' is
my motto. If you can't take it easy, take it as easy as you can."

After walking some distance over the road of yellow bricks Ojo said he
was hungry and would stop to eat some bread and cheese. He offered a
portion of the food to the Shaggy Man, who thanked him but refused it.

"When I start out on my travels," said he, "I carry along enough square
meals to last me several weeks. Think I'll indulge in one now, as long
as we're stopping anyway."

Saying this, he took a bottle from his pocket and shook from it a
tablet about the size of one of Ojo's finger-nails.

"That," announced the Shaggy Man, "is a square meal, in condensed form.
Invention of the great Professor Woggle-Bug, of the Royal College of
Athletics. It contains soup, fish, roast meat, salad, apple-dumplings,
ice cream and chocolate-drops, all boiled down to this small size, so
it can be conveniently carried and swallowed when you are hungry and
need a square meal."

"I'm square," said the Woozy. "Give me one, please."

So the Shaggy Man gave the Woozy a tablet from his bottle and the beast
ate it in a twinkling.

"You have now had a six course dinner," declared the Shaggy Man.

"Pshaw!" said the Woozy, ungratefully, "I want to taste something.
There's no fun in that sort of eating."

"One should only eat to sustain life," replied the Shaggy Man, "and
that tablet is equal to a peck of other food."

"I don't care for it. I want something I can chew and taste," grumbled
the Woozy.

"You are quite wrong, my poor beast," said the Shaggy Man in a tone of
pity. "Think how tired your jaws would get chewing a square meal like
this, if it were not condensed to the size of a small tablet--which you
can swallow in a jiffy."

"Chewing isn't tiresome; it's fun," maintained the Woozy. "I always
chew the honey-bees when I catch them. Give me some bread and cheese,
Ojo."

"No, no! You've already eaten a big dinner!" protested the Shaggy Man.

"May be," answered the Woozy; "but I guess I'll fool myself by munching
some bread and cheese. I may not be hungry, having eaten all those
things you gave me, but I consider this eating business a matter of
taste, and I like to realize what's going into me."

Ojo gave the beast what he wanted, but the Shaggy Man shook his shaggy
head reproachfully and said there was no animal so obstinate or hard to
convince as a Woozy.

At this moment a patter of footsteps was heard, and looking up they saw
the live phonograph standing before them. It seemed to have passed
through many adventures since Ojo and his comrades last saw the
machine, for the varnish of its wooden case was all marred and dented
and scratched in a way that gave it an aged and disreputable appearance.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Ojo, staring hard. "What has happened to you?"

"Nothing much," replied the phonograph in a sad and depressed voice.
"I've had enough things thrown at me, since I left you, to stock a
department store and furnish half a dozen bargain-counters."

"Are you so broken up that you can't play?" asked Scraps.

"No; I still am able to grind out delicious music. Just now I've a
record on tap that is really superb," said the phonograph, growing more
cheerful.

"That is too bad," remarked Ojo. "We've no objection to you as a
machine, you know; but as a music-maker we hate you."

"Then why was I ever invented?" demanded the machine, in a tone of
indignant protest.

They looked at one another inquiringly, but no one could answer such a
puzzling question. Finally the Shaggy Man said:

"I'd like to hear the phonograph play."

Ojo sighed. "We've been very happy since we met you, sir," he said.

"I know. But a little misery, at times, makes one appreciate happiness
more. Tell me, Phony, what is this record like, which you say you have
on tap?"

"It's a popular song, sir. In all civilized lands the common people
have gone wild over it."

"Makes civilized folks wild folks, eh? Then it's dangerous."

"Wild with joy, I mean," explained the phonograph. "Listen. This song
will prove a rare treat to you, I know. It made the author rich--for an
author. It is called 'My Lulu.'"

Then the phonograph began to play. A strain of odd, jerky sounds was
followed by these words, sung by a man through his nose with great
vigor of expression:

    "Ah wants mah Lulu, mah coal-black Lulu;
    Ah wants mah loo-loo, loo-loo, loo-loo, Lu!
    Ah loves mah Lulu, mah coal-black Lulu,
    There ain't nobody else loves loo-loo, Lu!"


"Here--shut that off!" cried the Shaggy Man, springing to his feet.
"What do you mean by such impertinence?"

"It's the latest popular song," declared the phonograph, speaking in a
sulky tone of voice.

"A popular song?"

"Yes. One that the feeble-minded can remember the words of and those
ignorant of music can whistle or sing. That makes a popular song
popular, and the time is coming when it will take the place of all
other songs."

"That time won't come to us, just yet," said the Shaggy Man, sternly:
"I'm something of a singer myself, and I don't intend to be throttled
by any Lulus like your coal-black one. I shall take you all apart, Mr.
Phony, and scatter your pieces far and wide over the country, as a
matter of kindness to the people you might meet if allowed to run
around loose. Having performed this painful duty I shall--"

But before he could say more the phonograph turned and dashed up the
road as fast as its four table-legs could carry it, and soon it had
entirely disappeared from their view.

The Shaggy Man sat down again and seemed well pleased. "Some one else
will save me the trouble of scattering that phonograph," said he; "for
it is not possible that such a music-maker can last long in the Land of
Oz. When you are rested, friends, let us go on our way."

During the afternoon the travelers found themselves in a lonely and
uninhabited part of the country. Even the fields were no longer
cultivated and the country began to resemble a wilderness. The road of
yellow bricks seemed to have been neglected and became uneven and more
difficult to walk upon. Scrubby under-brush grew on either side of the
way, while huge rocks were scattered around in abundance.

But this did not deter Ojo and his friends from trudging on, and they
beguiled the journey with jokes and cheerful conversation. Toward
evening they reached a crystal spring which gushed from a tall rock by
the roadside and near this spring stood a deserted cabin. Said the
Shaggy Man, halting here:

"We may as well pass the night here, where there is shelter for our
heads and good water to drink. Road beyond here is pretty bad; worst we
shall have to travel; so let's wait until morning before we tackle it."

They agreed to this and Ojo found some brushwood in the cabin and made
a fire on the hearth. The fire delighted Scraps, who danced before it
until Ojo warned her she might set fire to herself and burn up. After
that the Patchwork Girl kept at a respectful distance from the darting
flames, but the Woozy lay down before the fire like a big dog and
seemed to enjoy its warmth.

For supper the Shaggy Man ate one of his tablets, but Ojo stuck to his
bread and cheese as the most satisfying food. He also gave a portion to
the Woozy.

When darkness came on and they sat in a circle on the cabin floor,
facing the firelight--there being no furniture of any sort in the
place--Ojo said to the Shaggy Man:

"Won't you tell us a story?"

"I'm not good at stories," was the reply; "but I sing like a bird."

"Raven, or crow?" asked the Glass Cat.

