fast," insisted James.

"So I say, too," retorted Maggie; "but while only one _bad angel_
tempted our Lord, many good angels came to minister unto Him."

"Very well, indeed," said Father Kennedy. "But let's hurry over some
other points about the angels. Your turn; Master James, and give only
the place and person in each case."

"Well, let me see; there were Abraham and the three angels who went to
Sodom, and the angels who beat the man that wanted to steal money from
the temple, and the angel who took Tobias on a long journey."

"Please, Father Kennedy, wasn't it an _Archangel?_" inquired Maggie,
still determined to surpass her brother.

"Never mind that," said the priest. "Go on, James; 'twill be Maggie's
turn soon."

"Well, there was an angel in the Garden of Olives, and angels at the
Resurrection of our Lord, and angels at His Ascension."

Here Maggie exclaimed, "Please, Father Kennedy, may I have till next
Sunday to search out some angels? James has taken all mine."

"No," mildly said the delighted clergyman, "_your _angel is always with
you, and James has his, too."

"Father Kennedy, there's a man dying in the block behind the church,"
said the servant from the half-open parlor door. "Excuse my coming in
without knocking. They're in a great hurry."

"Good night, children," said the devoted priest, "till next Sunday. May
your angels watch over you in the meantime."


       *       *       *       *       *


ARCHANGEL ([:a]rk [=a]n' j[)e]l), a chief angel.

ARCHBISHOP ([:a]rch bish' [)u]p), a chief bishop.

ARCH, as a prefix, means _chief_, and in nearly every case
the _ch_ is soft, as in archbishop. In archangel, architect, and in
one or two other words, the _ch = k._

ARCH, as a suffix, is pronounced _[:a]rk_, and means _ruler;
_ as monarch, a _sole ruler;_ one who _rules alone._

Make a list of all the words of the Lesson that are contractions. Write
after each what it is a contraction of.

EARTHWARD = earth + ward (w[~e]rd). _ward_ is here a suffix
meaning _course, direction to, motion towards._ Add this SUFFIX
to the end of each of the following words, and tell the meaning of
each new word formed:

up, sea, back, down, east, west, land, earth.

WHAT word is the opposite in meaning of each of these new words?

Memory Gem:


                            The generous heart
       Should scorn a pleasure which gives others pain.


_Tennyson_.


       *       *       *       *       *




_27_


ebb' ing
spon' sor
judg' ments
el' e ments
tu' te lage



MY GUARDIAN ANGEL.


       My oldest friend, mine from the hour
         When first I drew my breath;
       My faithful friend, that shall be mine,
         Unfailing, till my death.

       Thou hast been ever at my side;
         My Maker to thy trust
       Consign'd my soul, what time He framed
         The infant child of dust.

       No beating heart in holy prayer,
         No faith, inform'd aright,
       Gave me to Joseph's tutelage,
         Or Michael's conquering might.

       Nor patron saint, nor Mary's love,--
         The dearest and the best,--
       Has known my being as thou hast known,
         And blest as thou hast blest.

       Thou wast my sponsor at the font;
         And thou, each budding year,
       Didst whisper elements of truth
         Into my childish ear.

       And when, ere boyhood yet was gone,
         My rebel spirit fell,
       Ah! thou didst see, and shudder too,
         Yet bear each deed of Hell.

       And then in turn, when judgments came.
         And scared me back again,
       Thy quick soft breath was near to soothe
         And hallow every pain.

       Oh! who of all thy toils and cares
         Can tell the tale complete,
       To place me under Mary's smile,
         And Peter's royal feet!

       And thou wilt hang above my bed,
         When life is ebbing low;
       Of doubt, impatience, and of gloom,
         The jealous, sleepless foe.

       Mine, when I stand before my Judge;
         And mine, if spared to stay
       Within the golden furnace till
         My sin is burn'd away.

       And mine, O Brother of my soul,
         When my release shall come;
       Thy gentle arms shall lift me then,
         Thy wings shall waft me home.


_Cardinal Newman._


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE GUARDIAN ANGEL]


Explain the following expressions:

Joseph's tutelage; Michael's conquering might; my sponsor at the font;
each budding year; my rebel spirit fell; Peter's royal feet. Describe
the picture.


       *       *       *       *       *




_28_


quoth
crooned
frisked
beech'-wood
twain
se'rene
frol'icked
wan'dering



LITTLE BELL.


       Piped the blackbird on the beech-wood spray:
       "Pretty maid, slow wandering this way,
           What's your name?" quoth he,--
       "What's your name? Oh, stop, and straight unfold,
       Pretty maid, with showery curls of gold!"
           "Little Bell," said she.

       Little Bell sat down beneath the rocks,
       Tossed aside her gleaming, golden locks.
           "Bonny bird," quoth she,
       "Sing me your best song before I go,"
       "Here's the very finest song I know,
           Little Bell," said he.

       And the blackbird piped: you never heard
       Half so gay a song from any bird,--
           Full of quips and wiles,
       Now so round and rich, now soft and slow,
       All for love of that sweet face below,
           Dimpled o'er with smiles.

       And the while the bonny bird did pour
       His full heart out freely, o'er and o'er,
           'Neath the morning skies,
       In the little childish heart below
       All the sweetness seemed to grow and grow,
       And shine forth in happy overflow
           From the blue, bright eyes.

       Down the dell she tripped; and through the glade
       Peeped the squirrel from the hazel shade,
           And from out the tree
       Swung, and leaped, and frolicked, void of fear,
       While bold blackbird piped, that all might hear:
           "Little Bell!" piped he.

       Little Bell sat down amid the fern:
       "Squirrel, squirrel, to your task return;
           Bring me nuts," quoth she.
       Up, away, the frisky squirrel hies,--
       Golden woodlights glancing in his eyes,--
           And adown the tree
       Great ripe nuts, kissed brown by July sun,
       In the little lap dropped, one by one.
       Hark! how blackbird pipes to see the fun!
           "Happy Bell!" pipes he.

       Little Bell looked up and down the glade:
       "Squirrel, squirrel, if you're not afraid,
           Come and share with me!"
       Down came squirrel, eager for his fare,
       Down came bonny blackbird, I declare!
       Little Bell gave each his honest share;
           Ah! the merry three!

       And the while these woodland playmates twain
       Piped and frisked from bough to bough again,
           'Neath the morning skies,
       In the little childish heart below
       All the sweetness seemed to grow and grow,
       And shine out in happy overflow
           From her blue, bright eyes.

       By her snow-white cot at close of day
       Knelt sweet Bell, with folded palms, to pray:
           Very calm and clear
       Rose the praying voice to where, unseen,
       In blue heaven, an angel shape serene
           Paused awhile to hear.

       "What good child is this," the angel said,
       "That, with happy heart, beside her bed
           Prays so lovingly?"
       Low and soft, oh! very low and soft,
       Crooned the blackbird in the orchard croft,
           "Bell, _dear_ Bell!" crooned he.

       "Whom God's creatures love," the angel fair
       Whispered, "God doth bless with angels' care;
           Child, thy bed shall be
       Folded safe from harm. Love, deep and kind,
       Shall watch around, and leave good gifts behind,
           Little Bell, for thee."


_Thomas Westwood_.


[Illustration:]


A STUDY OF LITTLE BELL

croft, a small inclosed field, near a house.

croon, to sing in a low tone.

quips, quick, smart turns.

piping, making a shrill sound like that of a pipe or flute.

In the first stanza what are the marks called that enclose _Little
Bell?_ Why are these marks used here?

Name the words of the poem in which the apostrophe is used. Tell what it
denotes in each case.

Where does the poem first take us? What do we see there?

In what words does the blackbird address the "pretty maid, slowly
wandering" his way? Who is she?

Seated beneath the rocks, what does Little Bell ask the blackbird to do?

Read the lines that describe the blackbird's song. Why did the bird sing
so sweetly? What were the effects of his song on "the little childish
heart below?"

Seated amid the fern, what did Little Bell ask the squirrel to do? Read
the lines that tell what the squirrel did. What invitation did the
squirrel receive from Little Bell?

Where does the poem bring us "at the close of day?" Tell what you see
there.

Read the lines that tell what the angel asked.

Read the angel's words in the first two lines of the last stanza. What
is their meaning?

What promises did the angel make to this good child? Why did he make
such beautiful promises?

Tell what the following words and expressions of the poem mean: quoth
he; straight unfold; dell; glade; hies; showery curls of gold; bonny
bird; hazel shade; void of fear; golden woodlights; adown the tree;
playmates twain; with folded palms; an angel shape; with angels' care;
the bird did pour his full heart out freely; the sweetness did shine
forth in happy overflow.

Select a stanza of the poem, and express in your own words the thought
it contains.

Describe some of the pictures the poem brings to mind.

What is the lesson the poet wishes us to learn from this poem?

Show how the couplet of the English poet, Coleridge,--

       "He prayeth best who loveth best,
       All things both great and small,"--

is illustrated in the story of Little Bell.

