
Before the tall savage could regain his balance Bob bounded on him,
clasping him round the body.

But if our hero was strong, the native was stronger.

Dropping his club, he seized his adversary's throat, and, forcing back
his head, made him relinquish his hold.

Then, seizing him round the waist, he flung him at the captain, whom he
upset, at the same instant springing into the sea and swimming after his
companions.

The whole affair did not last a minute.

Jack, who had reloaded, fired upon the overcrowded canoe.

Two paddles fell into the water and drifted away.

No sooner did they clamber on board than they were saluted with a score
of spears, which stuck in the masts and deck, one passing through the
fleshy part of a sailor's arm.

"Here, man, go below and bathe it in brandy," cried the captain. "Drink
some, too. The rest of you get under shelter of the bulwarks.

"I have heard that these fellows poison their spears and arrowheads," he
continued to our hero.

"Will they come back, do you think?" questioned Bob.

"Perhaps--we must remain on guard."

The next few hours were very anxious ones on board of the _Dart_.




Chapter XII.--Bob's Discovery.


Night came, and the hostile natives showed no sign of returning.

A strict watch was kept until morning, but nothing out of the ordinary
happened.

In the meantime Captain Sumner and Bob examined the map with great care
and also read and reread the papers Ruel Gross had left behind him.

"Let us go on another tour of exploration," said the captain, on the
following day. "If those natives come back Bok can fire a gun to warn
us."

The boy readily agreed and they set off without delay.

Once under the dead cedar tree they looked around them curiously.

A short distance further inland they saw a hollow, which had evidently
at one time been a camp.

Tin cans were strewn around, along with a number of fish and animal
bones.

"I wonder if father and Ruel Gross once encamped here?" thought Bob.

Hardly had the idea occurred to him than Captain Sumner set up a shout.

He was pointing to a post set up in the ice. To the top of the post was
attached a rude sign, which read:

"To the Svlachkys' Camp--One Mile."

"Hurrah! here's a discovery!" cried Bob. "Shall we go on?"

"Yes; but let us advance with extreme caution. These Svlachkys may be
very bad people."

"Undoubtedly there are, or they wouldn't keep my father a prisoner,"
rejoined Bob.

"That signpost must be the work of Ruel Gross," went on the captain.
"The savages haven't dared to touch it, thinking there was something
supernatural attached to it--something to injure them."

On went the captain and Bob, down one hill of ice and up another. It was
extremely cold, but neither minded that.

At last they reached a portion of the island that was very uneven. Great
chasms yawned to the right and left of them. It was with difficulty that
they pushed forward.

But they were bound to go on, and go they did, until at the mouth of
what looked like a cave of ice the captain called a halt.

"Listen!" he whispered. "I hear voices."

Bob listened. Captain Sumner was right. From the cavern came the sounds
of several human tongues.

"They are not speaking Russian," said the captain. "Perhaps we have
stumbled upon more savages."

Hardly had he spoken when three human beings came into view.

They were bundled up in furs, in strong contrast to the other natives,
who had scarcely any body-covering.

The new-comers were jabbering among themselves at a great rate.
Presently they came to a halt before a large slab of ice.

They tugged and pounded on this until the slab fell to one side,
revealing a strange-looking opening.

"What are they up to now?" whispered Bob.

"I don't know--wait."

They waited. Presently the three men disappeared within the opening.
Soon a smoke came out, and they saw that firebrands had been lit to
light up the scene.

"That may be the place where the stone chest is kept," said Bob.

"More likely it is a burial place," replied Captain Sumner. "I've seen
such spots before. Maybe they're preparing for a funeral."

"Can't we get a little closer to them?"

"It would not be safe. Hark!"

From a distance they heard the mournful toot of a large horn.

"That's a funeral horn, I'm sure," said the captain. "If they are coming
this way we had better--Hullo! look!"

The captain pointed to an opening to their left.

A band of men were advancing.

They were guarding a prisoner--a white man, who walked in their midst.

Bob gave the white man one swift look, and then shrieked out at the top
of his voice:

"It's my father!"




Chapter XIII.--The Big Polar Bear.


"Your father!" cried Captain Sumner.

"Yes, my father," repeated Bob, in high excitement. "What shall we do?"

He felt like rushing forward, but the captain restrained him.

"We can do nothing against such a force of men," he said. "Wait--or--"
He hesitated.

"What?"

"You or I might go back to the _Dart_ for help. Every man on board can
come heavily armed. When these people see our number they may be willing
to talk reasonably to us."

"That's so, but I hate to leave," returned Bob. "They may do some harm
to my father in the meantime."

"Then I will go, Bob. But mind, keep shady, unless they do something
very bad."

Bob promised, and without delay Captain Sumner started on the return to
the _Dart_.

With a wildly beating heart Bob watched the people who held his father a
captive.

They were marching along silently now and did not stop until the center
of the cave of ice was reached.

Here the party assembled in a circle at a point where there was a slight
elevation.

Two of the men had axes, and with these they began to chop at the
elevation, causing the pieces of ice to fly in all directions.

"Now what are they going to do?" thought our hero.

Presently he heard a slight noise behind him. Somewhat startled, he
turned around to find himself face to face with a monstrous polar bear!

The beast had just discovered Bob. For a moment he stood still.

Then with a growl he leaped directly for the astonished youth.

Had Bob not sprung out of the way the bear would have landed on his
head.

But Bob moved with the quickness of lightning, and this saved his life.

The bear, however, came down so close to the boy's side that our hero
had no time left to fire at him.

He struck the bear one hasty blow with his gun stock and then ran for
dear life.

Recovering, the huge beast came after him.

Although a heavyweight, the bear managed to cover the ground with
incredible swiftness.

Down the side of the icy hill went Bob, with the bear less than a dozen
feet in the rear.

The plain below reached, Bob scarcely knew which way to turn.

The bear uttered growl after growl, showing that he was working himself
up to a perfect fury.

"I must get to the yacht, if possible," thought Bob, and headed in the
direction without delay.

On and on came the polar bear.

He did not seem to gain, neither did he lose.

So far the race had been about even, but Bob felt he could not keep up
that terrific strain much longer.

As he ran he fingered his gun nervously.

Should he risk a shot?

"I must do something," he said to himself desperately.

And wheeling about he took hasty aim and blazed away.

The shot was not a bad one. The bullet struck the polar bear in the side
of the head, causing him to stagger back and halt.

On went Bob again, and by the time the bear recovered sufficiently to
continue the pursuit he was nearly fifty yards in advance.

But the bear was undaunted, and on he came as swiftly as before.

Once Bob stumbled and almost gave himself up for lost.

But he scrambled up quickly, and was relieved to see the bear stop, not
being able to make out what was about to happen.

Then on went again, until, with a cry of terror, Bob leaped back.

He had reached the edge of a swiftly flowing stream, which ran between
smooth banks of ice.

To attempt to leap that body of water would be highly dangerous, and to
enter it might cost him his life.

And now the polar bear was at his very heels.




Chapter XIV.--The Finding Of The Stone Chest.


"Help! help!"

Why he uttered the cry Bob could scarcely tell.

He did not imagine that any human beings were within sound of his voice.

Yet it is natural for a person in mortal peril to cry for assistance.

Luckily his cries were heard.

Captain Sumner was returning from the _Dart_, having hastily summoned
Bok, Leeks, and the others.

Glancing in the direction, he saw the polar bear and then Bob.

He did not stop to think, but, taking hasty aim, fired.

Bok also discharged his weapon, and, hit twice in the neck, the beast
staggered back.

Bob now saw his friends, and, running up the stream, joined them.

With so many against him the bear tried to flee, but a second bullet
from the captain's gun finished him.

"Oh, how thankful I am that you have come," cried Bob gratefully. "I
thought I was a goner."

"Don't waste time here," exclaimed Captain Sumner. "These shots will
alarm those people we left at the ice cave."

"That is true," said Bob. "Come on--we must rescue my father!"

And he led the way, with the captain at his side.

It was a rough journey up the side of the hill again, and more than once
they had to stop to catch their breath.

At the top a surprise awaited them.

The band of strange people had disappeared!

At first Bob could scarcely believe his eyes.

"Where are they?"

"Gone!"

"But to where? I can't see them anywhere."

Captain Sumner shook his head.

A telescope was brought into play, but it did no good.

Captors and captive had alike gone, no one could tell where.

A consultation was held, and it was decided to explore the cave before
going back to the _Dart_.

The descent into the cold spot was not easy, and more than once a member
of the party was in danger of breaking a leg.

The bottom reached they made their way to the place where the men had
been at work with their axes.

They had cut out a square hole two by three feet and six feet deep.

Gazing down into the bottom of the hole, Bob gave a shout:

"The stone chest, as sure as I live!"

"What!" cried the captain.

He too looked into the opening.

There rested what at first looked to the a square stone of a
whitish-blue color.

But a closer examination proved that it was really a stone chest, having
two immense hinges of iron. How had the object come there?

"I believe those people were going to dig it out when our firing
frightened them off," said Captain Sumner.

"Let us see what the chest contains," returned Bob, in high curiosity.

The others were willing, and by the united efforts of the sailors the
top of the chest was pried back.

A murmur of astonishment went up.

The chest contained three iron pots, one filled with silver and the
others filled with gold!

"The treasure, sure enough!" ejaculated Jack, who had come along with
the sailors.

"There are thousands of dollars there!" said Captain Sumner.

"We ought to take the stuff on board of the _Dart_," put in Bok. "'Taint
no use to leave it out here."

The others agreed with him.

In the chest were two fur-covered sacks, and these the party used,
filling them up to the top.

In the midst of the work a far-away shot was heard. Two more followed in
quick succession.

"'Tis an alarm from the yacht," cried the captain. "I told my daughter
and Mrs. Cromwell to fire in case anything turned up."

Without delay the sailors were sent off in advance.

Captain Sumner, Bob, and Jack started to follow with the treasure sacks,
when a shout went up and a band of the hostile savages appeared at the
far end of the ice cave.

"We must run for it!" yelled Bob. "Come on--for the ship!"

"Give them a volley first!" shouted the captain.

Six shots, poured into the advancing troop, threw them into confusion.

As the treasure-seekers turned to run a spear glanced over our hero's
shoulder and stuck quivering in the ground a dozen yards beyond.

At the top of their speed they rushed toward the shore.

At first they fancied they were not pursued.

After going a hundred yards, however, a wild yell and the patter of feet
told them they would have to do their best.

Encumbered as they were, with both the lads partly disabled and the
captain no speedy runner, the savages soon gained on them.

"We must give them another volley!" panted the captain.

Though the guns chosen were breech-loaders, it took some little time to
reload them whilst at a run.

Suddenly Bob felt a shock, which nearly made him fall.

However, he recovered himself with a stagger.

"The sack saved you," gasped Captain Sumner. "But for that the spear
would have pierced your back. Now wheel round and fire!"

As they fronted the natives they found that not thirty yards divided
them.

At that short range every bullet told.

Three men fell dead, and as many were wounded.

The captain gave them a couple of shots from his revolver before he once
more turned and ran for his life.

"That accounts for about half them," exclaimed our hero.

As they gained the head of the beach Jack stopped short.

"Go on!" he gasped. "My side! I am stuck!"

Bob put his arm through that of his friend, who had dropped his gun, and
dragged him onward.

The captain turned and fired the remaining chambers of his revolver
among the crowd, now within a score of yards.

The small boat was in waiting, and into it they tumbled, amid a storm of
spears.

Both the captain and Bok, who rowed, were stuck.

Our hero seized the oars from the hands of the latter and pulled with
all his strength for the yacht.

The gunwale of the little boat was almost level with the water.

It was slow work.

Luckily, nearly all the enemies' spears were exhausted.

An arrow pierced Bob's cap, and the last spear which was thrown again
wounded the captain, piercing his leg.

Fortunately the distance was so far that it only entered about an inch
and fell out from its own weight.

Our hero and the captain clambered on board the schooner.

Jack was exhausted, but still clung to his bag of silver.

Scarcely had they gained the deck when a yell broke from the dark waters
around them, and spears and arrows fell on all sides.

Every gun on board was now fired at the savages.

Yet they came on as if determined to kill every white person in sight.




Chapter XV.--Bob Rescues His Father--Conclusion.


The savages were pressing close upon the _Dart_. Something must be done.

"Slip the cable!" shouted the captain. "Up with the jib, topgallant
sails, and gaff!"

"We must trust to weathering the point," he added to the mate. "If we
do, we are safe. The current will carry us to sea."

His orders were executed.

The wind fortunately blew from the southward, and, filling the light
sails, carried the _Dart_ off the shore.

The yacht's head paid off, and, answering her helm, she, with the tide
in her favor, bore seaward.

A few parting shots, and the _Dart_, now feeling the full force of the
wind, left the fleet of canoes far behind.

The next few hours were employed in the dressing of wounds and making
things a little ship-shape.

It had been a hard-fought fight, and everyone was tired out.

Fortunately, neither Mrs. Cromwell nor Viola had suffered from the
attack.

Long before the crew were able to do anything more darkness set in.

Bob was very impatient to trace up his father, but just now that was
impossible.

Anxiously the boy waited for dawn, while his mother wept in silence,
thinking of her beloved husband.

Would they save him?

At the first signs of morning Bob was up and ready for the search.

