     and ran that, with the forecastle gun, an eighteen pounder, out at
     the ports on the quarter deck, and cleared the ship for action,
     being determined they should not get her without resistance on our
     part, notwithstanding their force and the situation we were placed
     in.

     At about seven, in the morning, the ship nearest us approaching
     within gunshot, and directly astern, I ordered one of the stern
     guns fired, to see if we could reach her, to endeavor to disable
     her masts; found the shot fell a little short, would not fire any
     more.

     [Illustration: ESCAPE OF THE CONSTITUTION.]

     At eight, four of the enemy's ships nearly within gunshot, some of
     them having six or eight boats ahead towing, with all their oars
     and sweeps out, to row them up with us, which they were fast
     doing. It now appeared that we must be taken, and that our escape
     was impossible--four heavy ships nearly within gunshot, and coming
     up fast, and not the least hope of a breeze to give us a chance of
     getting off by out sailing them.

     In this situation, finding ourselves in only twenty-four fathoms
     water, by the suggestion of that valuable officer, Lieutenant
     Morris, I determined to try and warp the ship ahead, by carrying
     out anchors and warping her up to them; three or four hundred
     fathoms of rope was instantly got up, and two anchors got ready and
     sent ahead, by which means we began to gain ahead of the enemy;
     they, however, soon saw our boats carrying out the anchors, and
     adopted the same plan, under very advantageous circumstances, as
     all the boats from the ships furthermost off were sent to tow and
     warp up those nearest to us, by which means they again came up, so
     that at nine, the ship nearest us began to fire her bow guns, which
     we instantly returned by our stern guns in the cabin and on the
     quarter deck. All the shot from the enemy fell short; but we have
     reason to believe that some of ours went on board her, as we could
     not see them strike the water. Soon after nine, a second frigate
     passed under our lee, and opened her broadside, but finding her
     shot fall short, discontinued her fire; but continued, as did all
     the rest of them, to make all possible exertion to get up with us.
     From nine to twelve, all hands were employed in warping the ship
     ahead, and in starting some of the water in the main hold to
     lighten her, which, with the help of a light air, we rather gained
     of the enemy, or, at least, held our own. About two, in the
     afternoon, all the boats from the line of battle ship and some of
     the frigates were sent to the frigate nearest us, to endeavor to
     tow her up, but a light breeze sprung up, which enabled us to hold
     way with her, notwithstanding they had eight or ten boats ahead,
     and all her sails furled to tow her to windward. The wind continued
     light until eleven at night, and the boats were kept ahead towing
     and warping to keep out of reach of the enemy, three of the
     frigates being very near us; at eleven, we got a light breeze from
     the southward, the boats came along side and were hoisted up, the
     ship having too much way to keep them ahead, the enemy still in
     chase and very near.

     On the 19th, at daylight, passed within gunshot of one of the
     frigates, but she did not fire on us, perhaps, for fear of
     becalming her, as the wind was light; soon after passing us she
     tacked, and stood after us--at this time six sail were in sight,
     under all sail after us. At nine in the morning, saw a strange
     sail, on our weather beam, supposed to be an American merchant
     ship; the instant the frigate nearest us saw her, she hoisted
     American colors, as did all the squadron, in hopes to decoy her
     down; I immediately hoisted the English colors, that she might not
     be deceived; she soon hauled her wind, and, as is to be hoped, made
     her escape. All this day the wind increased gradually, and we
     gained on the enemy, in the course of the day, six or eight miles;
     they, however, continued chasing all night under a press of sail.

     On the 20th, at daylight in the morning, only three of them could
     be seen from the masthead, the nearest of which was about twelve
     miles off, directly astern. All hands were set at work wetting the
     sails, from the royals down, with the engines and fire buckets, and
     we soon found that we left the enemy very fast. At a quarter past
     eight, the enemy finding that they were fast dropping astern, gave
     over chase, and hauled their wind to the northward, probably for
     the station off New York. At half past eight, saw a sail ahead,
     gave chase after her under all sail. At nine, saw another strange
     sail under our lee bow, we soon spoke the first sail discovered,
     and found her to be an American brig from St. Domingo, bound to
     Portland; I directed the captain how to steer to avoid the enemy,
     and made sail for the vessel to leeward; on coming up with her, she
     proved to be an American brig from St. Bartholomew's, bound to
     Philadelphia; but, on being informed of war, he bore up for
     Charleston, South Carolina. Finding the ship so far to the
     southward and eastward, and the enemy's squadron stationed off New
     York, which would make it impossible to get in there, I determined
     to make for Boston, to receive your farther orders, and I hope my
     having done so will meet your approbation. My wish to explain to
     you as clearly as possible why your orders have not been executed,
     and the length of time the enemy were in chase of us, with various
     other circumstances, have caused me to make this communication much
     longer than I could have wished, yet I cannot in justice to the
     brave officers and crew under my command, close it without
     expressing to you the confidence I have in them, and assuring you
     that their conduct while under the guns of the enemy was such as
     might have been expected from American officers and seamen. I have
     the honor to be, with very great respect, sir, your obedient humble
     servant,

     ISAAC HULL."

[Illustration: Hull's Victory]

Such is Captain Hull's modest account of this truly brilliant exploit.
Sailing on a cruise immediately after this, with the same frigate,
officers, and crew, on the 19th of August he fell in with His Britannic
Majesty's ship Guerriere, rated at thirty-eight guns, and carrying
fifty, commanded by Captain Dacres, who, sometime before, had politely
endorsed on the register of an American ship an invitation to Captain
Hull to give him a meeting of this kind.

[Illustration: DACRES DELIVERING UP HIS SWORD.]


At half past three, P.M., Captain Hull made out his antagonist to be a
frigate, and continued the chase till he was within about three miles,
when he cleared for action; the chase backed her main-topsail and waited
for him to come down. As soon as the Constitution was ready, Hull bore
down to bring the enemy to close action immediately; but, on coming
within gunshot, the Guerriere gave a broadside and filled away and wore,
giving a broadside on the other tack; but without effect, her shot
falling short. She then continued wearing and manoeuvring for about
three quarters of an hour to get a raking position,--but, finding she
could not, she bore up and ran under her topsails and jib, with the wind
on the quarter. During this time, the Constitution, not having fired a
single broadside, the impatience of the officers and men to engage was
excessive. Nothing but the most rigid discipline could have restrained
them. Hull, however, was preparing to decide the contest in a summary
method of his own. He now made sail to bring the Constitution up with
her antagonist, and at five minutes before six P.M., _being alongside
within half pistol shot_, he commenced a heavy fire from all his guns,
_double shotted with round and grape_; and so well directed, and so well
kept up was the fire, that in sixteen minutes the mizzenmast of the
Guerriere went by the board, and her mainyard in the slings, and the
hull, rigging, and sails were completely torn to pieces. The fire was
kept up for fifteen minutes longer, when the main and foremast went,
taking with them every spar except the bowsprit, and leaving the
Guerriere a complete wreck. On seeing this Hull ordered the firing to
cease, having brought his enemy in thirty minutes after he was fairly
alongside to such a condition, that a few more broadsides must have
carried her down.

The prize being so shattered that she was not worth bringing into port,
after removing the prisoners to the Constitution, she was set on fire
and blown up. In the action, the Constitution lost seven killed, and
seven wounded; the Guerriere, fifteen killed, sixty-two
wounded--including the captain and several officers, and twenty-four
missing.

The news of this victory was received in the United States with the
greatest joy and exultation. All parties united in celebrating it, and
the citizens and public authorities vied with each other in bestowing
marks of approbation upon Captain Hull and his gallant officers and
crew.

[Illustration: HYDER ALLY AND GENERAL MONK]




EXPLOITS OF COMMODORE BARNEY.


This gentleman was one of the old fashioned commodores, a capital
sailor, an intrepid warrior, and a thorough going patriot. He was born
in Baltimore, in 1759. He entered the marine early in life. At the age
of sixteen he served in the expedition of Commodore Hopkins to the
Bahama Islands, and continued in active service through the whole
revolutionary war.

In 1780 he was captured by a British seventy-four, when taking a prize
into port and sent with other prisoners to England. On the passage, the
prisoners--amounting to about sixty--were confined in the most loathsome
of dungeons, without light or pure air, and with a scanty supply of
provisions.

They thought when they arrived at Plymouth, that their privations were
at an end; but they were only removed to another prison-ship, which,
although dirty and crowded, was, in some measure, better than the one
they had left. From this, contrary to expectation, as soon as they were
so much recovered as to be able to walk, they were brought on shore and
confined in Mill prison, where they met the anxious faces of several
hundred American prisoners, who had undergone the same privations as
themselves.

This prison was surrounded by two strong walls, twenty feet apart, and
was guarded by numerous sentries. There were small gates in the walls,
and these were placed opposite each other, the inner one generally
remaining open. The prisoners were allowed the privilege of the yard
nearly all day, and this set the inventive mind of Barney upon the
scheme, which, in the end, terminated in his liberty; not, however,
without infinite danger and trouble. He set about finding out some small
chance which might afford the least hope of release; and having
discovered one of the sentries that had served in the United States, and
remembered the kindness with which he had been there treated, Barney and
he formed the means of escape. It was arranged that Barney should affect
to have hurt his foot and obtain a pair of crutches, and thus lull
suspicion.

On the 18th of May, 1781, he habited himself in the undress uniform of a
British officer, the whole covered with a old greatcoat, and, by the aid
of the sentinel, cleared the prison; when he threw off the coat, and
soon arrived at the house of a well known friend to the American cause,
in Plymouth. That he might not be soon missed, he got a lad, who, after
answering to his own name, was to get out, and answer to Barney's, in
the yard, which little stratagem succeeded admirably. When Barney
arrived at the friend's house, he made preparations to leave as soon as
possible, well knowing that if any of the British were detected
harboring him, they would be convicted of high treason. In the evening,
therefore, he departed to the house of his friend's father, at a
considerable distance, where he would be safer. On arriving there, he
was surprised to find two of his old friends--Americans--who had been,
for some time, anxiously waiting for an opportunity of returning home,
and now thought that the time had arrived.

Lieutenant Barney determined to sail for the French coast, and, for this
purpose, he and the two gentlemen purchased a small fishing vessel, and
habiting themselves in some fishermen's old apparel, they set sail on
their intended voyage. Admiral Digby's fleet lay at the mouth of the
river, and our adventurers had to pass through the midst of them, and
then run the chance of capture by the numerous British cruisers, which
continually ply about the channel. This was a daring undertaking, as the
fleet, he thought, had doubtless received notice of his escape, and the
enemy would be rigid in their search. He, therefore, determined to act
with coolness, and, if intercepted, to give such answers to the
questions put to him, as might best lull suspicion. If he was detected,
he would pay for the attempt with his life.

He knew that if his escape was detected, it would be immediately
communicated to the fleet, and thus lessen his chances; especially as
the least unusual appearance in his assumed character, would excite
immediate suspicion. Even should he be able to pass through the fleet,
the British channel abounded with the English cruisers, which were quite
adept in the art of picking up stragglers. With these dangers painted in
lively colors before his eyes, he preserved his usual self-possession,
and inspired with confidence his companions, who had never handled a
rope, and relied exclusively upon his daring.

By sunrise, the next morning, they were "under way," the two gentlemen
remaining below, and Lieutenant Barney and the servant being the only
ones on deck, to avoid suspicion. With a good breeze, and a favorable
tide, it was not long before they were in the midst of the hostile
fleet, which seemed to take no notice of them. Their hearts beat quick
when they were thus hanging between life and death; but as soon as the
last of the enemy was passed, they declared themselves safe through
_that_ portion of the ordeal.

But what attempt ever ended to the satisfaction of the undertaker?
Before the enemy were clear out of sight, the practised eye of Barney
caught a sail which he knew to be bearing down upon him. He saw that
resistance was out of the question; but that if he managed the affair
adroitly he _might_ escape. It was now that he was called upon to
exercise that firmness of mind, coolness and contempt of danger, and
quickness of resource in time of need, that ever distinguished his
character, and showed him to be a man of no ordinary talents. In less
than an hour the privateer--for such she was--came alongside, and sent
an officer to see "what he wanted steering for a hostile coast." The
first questions that were put, and answered unhesitatingly, were--what
he had on board? and where he was bound? Of course he had nothing on
board, and his destination was France--on business of importance from
the ministry; at the same time untying the rope that bound the old coat
around him, and displaying the British half uniform. The officer touched
his hat, begged pardon, and said he would go on board and report to the
commanding officer.

The result of the interview was that Barney was made a prisoner once
more, and ordered with a prize-master to Plymouth. But being forced by
stress of weather into a small bay, near Plymouth, he contrived to
escape from his captors, and find his way to the mansion of the
venerable clergyman, at Plymouth. Deeming it unsafe to remain there,
lest he might be discovered, after a few days he set out at midnight in
a postchaise for Exeter, and from thence by stages to Bristol, where he
had a letter of credit to an American gentleman.

Here he remained for three weeks, and from thence he went to London,
directed to a countryman, who received him kindly, and offered his
services towards effecting his final escape. After remaining here for
six weeks, he found an opportunity of sailing for France; and after an
extremely boisterous and squally passage, reached Ostend, from whence he
soon found his way to Amsterdam, where he seized the opportunity of
paying his respects to Mr. John Adams, then Minister Plenipotentiary
from the United States to Holland. Through the courtesy of this
gentleman, he obtained a passage to his own country, and, after some
adventures, reached Philadelphia, on the 21st of March, 1782.

But he was not long allowed to enjoy the pleasure which he expected,
after such a trial of danger and fatigue. In less than a week after he
arrived at Philadelphia, he was offered the command of the Hyder Ally,
of sixteen guns, fitted out by the state authorities of Pennsylvania, to
repress the enemy's privateers, with which the Delaware river abounded.

On the 8th of April, 1782, he entered upon his destined service, which
was to convoy a fleet of merchantmen to the capes, and to protect them
from the "refugee boats," with which the river abounded. While waiting
at the capes, he was assailed by two ships and a brig belong to the
enemy, who, finding him unsupported, commenced a furious attack, which
he sustained with great coolness, while his convoy were safely retiring
up the river. The brig came up first, and gave him a broadside as she
was passing; but kept her course up the bay after the convoy, while
Barney waited for the ship, which was coming up rapidly. Having
approached within pistol shot, the Hyder Ally poured a broadside into
her, which somewhat staggered the enemy, who thought Barney would
"strike his colors." The enemy seemed disposed to board, and was ranging
alongside of him, when he ordered the quarter-master, in a loud voice,
to "port the helm!"--having previously given him secret instructions to
put the helm hard a-starboard, which latter order was obeyed; by this
manoeuvre the enemy's jib-boom caught in the fore-rigging of the Hyder
Ally, thus giving her a raking position, which Captain Barney knew how
to improve. The firing on both sides was tremendous;--an idea of it may
be obtained from the fact, that more than twenty broadsides were fired
in twenty-six minutes! In the mizzen staystail of the General Monk there
were afterwards counted, three hundred and sixty-five shot-holes. During
the whole of this short but glorious battle, Captain Barney was
stationed upon the quarterdeck, exposed to the fire of the enemy's
musketry, which was excessively annoying, and began to be felt by the
men, insomuch that Captain Barney ordered a body of riflemen, whom he
had on board, to direct their fire into the enemy's top, which
immediately had the desired effect.

The capture of the General Monk was one of the most brilliant
achievements in naval history. The General Monk mounted eighteen guns,
and had one hundred and thirty-six men, and lost twenty men killed, and
thirty-three wounded. The Hyder Ally had sixteen guns, and one hundred
and ten men, and lost four men killed, and eleven wounded.

All the officers of the General Monk were wounded except one. The
captain himself was severely wounded. The brig which accompanied the
enemy ran ashore to avoid capture. Captain Barney now followed his
convoy up to Philadelphia. After a short visit to his family, he
returned to his command, where he soon captured the "Hook-'em-snivy"--a
refugee schooner, which had done a great deal of mischief on the
Delaware river.

These captures struck such terror among the privateers, that they began
to disperse to more profitable grounds. In consequence of the glorious
actions, Captain Barney was presented with a gold-hilted sword, in the
name of the state.




A

CATALOGUE

OF

ENTERTAINING AND INSTRUCTIVE

JUVENILE BOOKS,

PUBLISHED AND FOR SALE BY

C.G. HENDERSON & CO.

AT THEIR

Central Book & Stationary Warehouse,

No. 164 CHESTNUT STREET

_Corner of Seventh_

UNDER BARNUM'S MUSEUM.

PHILADELPHIA.


       *       *       *       *       *

Nut Cracker and Sugar Dolly

A PARTY TALE.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN.

BY CHARLES A. DANA

SQUARE 16mo. CLOTH AND CLOTH GILT

       *       *       *       *       *

This New Fairy Tale is one of the liveliest, most readable, and most
unexceptionable for Children which has ever appeared.

THRILLING STORIES

of the

OCEAN.

for the Entertainment and Instruction of Young.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is a neat Volume of 300 pages, with numerous Embellishments. It is
written in a familiar, popular style, and is well suited to the
Juvenile, Family or School library.

CLOTH BINDING, PLAIN AND GILT EXTRA.




COSTUMES OF EUROPE.

Beautifully Embellished with 24 Engravings of Original Costumes. One
vol. Square 16mo. Fine Cloth binding, 50 cts; with Col'd Engravings, 75
cts.

This is a Companion volume to the COSTUMES OF AMERICA, and is equally
instructive as well as pleasing for young readers.

Every intelligent Boy should possess a Copy of the Book of Costumes of
Europe and America.





