difficult as the step that placed him in his unparalleled position.
Furthermore, he is rendered obstinate by a sulkiness occasionally
incident to his temper and brought on at present by the inadequate
sensation which he conceives to have been produced in the bosom of
Mrs. Wakefield. He will not go back until she be frightened half to
death. Well, twice or thrice has she passed before his sight, each
time with a heavier step, a paler cheek and more anxious brow, and in
the third week of his non-appearance he detects a portent of evil
entering the house in the guise of an apothecary. Next day the knocker
is muffled. Toward nightfall comes the chariot of a physician and
deposits its big-wigged and solemn burden at Wakefield's door, whence
after a quarter of an hour's visit he emerges, perchance the herald of
a funeral. Dear woman! will she die?

By this time Wakefield is excited to something like energy of feeling,
but still lingers away from his wife's bedside, pleading with his
conscience that she must not be disturbed at such a juncture. If aught
else restrains him, he does not know it. In the course of a few weeks
she gradually recovers. The crisis is over; her heart is sad, perhaps,
but quiet, and, let him return soon or late, it will never be feverish
for him again. Such ideas glimmer through the mist of Wakefield's mind
and render him indistinctly conscious that an almost impassable gulf
divides his hired apartment from his former home. "It is but in the
next street," he sometimes says. Fool! it is in another world.
Hitherto he has put off' his return from one particular day to
another; henceforward he leaves the precise time undetermined--not
to-morrow; probably next week; pretty soon. Poor man! The dead have
nearly as much chance of revisiting their earthly homes as the
self-banished Wakefield.

Would that I had a folio to write, instead of an article of a dozen
pages! Then might I exemplify how an influence beyond our control lays
its strong hand on every deed which we do and weaves its consequences
into an iron tissue of necessity.

Wakefield is spellbound. We must leave him for ten years or so to
haunt around his house without once crossing the threshold, and to be
faithful to his wife with all the affection of which his heart is
capable, while he is slowly fading out of hers. Long since, it must be
remarked, he has lost the perception of singularity in his conduct.

Now for a scene. Amid the throng of a London street we distinguish a
man, now waxing elderly, with few characteristics to attract careless
observers, yet bearing in his whole aspect the handwriting of no
common fate for such as have the skill to read it. He is meagre; his
low and narrow forehead is deeply wrinkled; his eyes, small and
lustreless, sometimes wander apprehensively about him, but oftener
seem to look inward. He bends his head and moves with an indescribable
obliquity of gait, as if unwilling to display his full front to the
world. Watch him long enough to see what we have described, and you
will allow that circumstances--which often produce remarkable men from
Nature's ordinary handiwork--have produced one such here. Next,
leaving him to sidle along the footwalk, cast your eyes in the
opposite direction, where a portly female considerably in the wane of
life, with a prayer-book in her hand, is proceeding to yonder church.
She has the placid mien of settled widowhood. Her regrets have either
died away or have become so essential to her heart that they would be
poorly exchanged for joy. Just as the lean man and well-conditioned
woman are passing a slight obstruction occurs and brings these two
figures directly in contact. Their hands touch; the pressure of the
crowd forces her bosom against his shoulder; they stand face to face,
staring into each other's eyes. After a ten years' separation thus
Wakefield meets his wife. The throng eddies away and carries them
asunder. The sober widow, resuming her former pace, proceeds to
church, but pauses in the portal and throws a perplexed glance along
the street. She passes in, however, opening her prayer-book as she
goes.

And the man? With so wild a face that busy and selfish London stands
to gaze after him he hurries to his lodgings, bolts the door and
throws himself upon the bed. The latent feelings of years break out;
his feeble mind acquires a brief energy from their strength; all the
miserable strangeness of his life is revealed to him at a glance, and
he cries out passionately, "Wakefield, Wakefield! You are mad!"
Perhaps he was so. The singularity of his situation must have so
moulded him to itself that, considered in regard to his
fellow-creatures and the business of life, he could not be said to
possess his right mind. He had contrived--or, rather, he had
happened--to dissever himself from the world, to vanish, to give up
his place and privileges with living men without being admitted among
the dead. The life of a hermit is nowise parallel to his. He was in
the bustle of the city as of old, but the crowd swept by and saw him
not; he was, we may figuratively say, always beside his wife and at
his hearth, yet must never feel the warmth of the one nor the
affection of the other. It was Wakefield's unprecedented fate to
retain his original share of human sympathies and to be still involved
in human interests, while he had lost his reciprocal influence on
them. It would be a most curious speculation to trace out the effect
of such circumstances on his heart and intellect separately and in
unison. Yet, changed as he was, he would seldom be conscious of it,
but deem himself the same man as ever; glimpses of the truth, indeed,
would come, but only for the moment, and still he would keep saying,
"I shall soon go back," nor reflect that he had been saying so for
twenty years.

I conceive, also, that these twenty years would appear in the
retrospect scarcely longer than the week to which Wakefield had at
first limited his absence. He would look on the affair as no more than
an interlude in the main business of his life. When, after a little
while more, he should deem it time to re-enter his parlor, his wife
would clap her hands for joy on beholding the middle-aged Mr.
Wakefield. Alas, what a mistake! Would Time but await the close of our
favorite follies, we should be young men--all of us--and till
Doomsday.

One evening, in the twentieth year since he vanished, Wakefield is
taking his customary walk toward the dwelling which he still calls his
own. It is a gusty night of autumn, with frequent showers that patter
down upon the pavement and are gone before a man can put up his
umbrella. Pausing near the house, Wakefield discerns through the
parlor-windows of the second floor the red glow and the glimmer and
fitful flash of a comfortable fire. On the ceiling appears a grotesque
shadow of good Mrs. Wakefield. The cap, the nose and chin and the
broad waist form an admirable caricature, which dances, moreover, with
the up-flickering and down-sinking blaze almost too merrily for the
shade of an elderly widow. At this instant a shower chances to fall,
and is driven by the unmannerly gust full into Wakefield's face and
bosom. He is quite penetrated with its autumnal chill. Shall he stand
wet and shivering here, when his own hearth has a good fire to warm
him and his own wife will run to fetch the gray coat and small-clothes
which doubtless she has kept carefully in the closet of their
bedchamber? No; Wakefield is no such fool. He ascends the
steps--heavily, for twenty years have stiffened his legs since he came
down, but he knows it not.--Stay, Wakefield! Would you go to the sole
home that is left you? Then step into your grave.--The door opens. As
he passes in we have a parting glimpse of his visage, and recognize
the crafty smile which was the precursor of the little joke that he
has ever since been playing off at his wife's expense. How
unmercifully has he quizzed the poor woman! Well, a good night's rest
to Wakefield!

This happy event--supposing it to be such--could only have occurred at
an unpremeditated moment. We will not follow our friend across the
threshold. He has left us much food for thought, a portion of which
shall lend its wisdom to a moral and be shaped into a figure. Amid the
seeming confusion of our mysterious world individuals are so nicely
adjusted to a system, and systems to one another and to a whole, that
by stepping aside for a moment a man exposes himself to a fearful risk
of losing his place for ever. Like Wakefield, he may become, as it
were, the outcast of the universe.




A RILL FROM THE TOWN-PUMP.


(SCENE, _the corner of two principal streets_,[1] _the_ TOWN-PUMP
_talking through its nose_.)


Noon by the north clock! Noon by the east! High noon, too, by these
hot sunbeams, which full, scarcely aslope, upon my head and almost
make the water bubble and smoke in the trough under my nose. Truly,
we public characters have a tough time of it! And among all the
town-officers chosen at March meeting, where is he that sustains for a
single year the burden of such manifold duties as are imposed in
perpetuity upon the town-pump? The title of "town-treasurer" is
rightfully mine, as guardian of the best treasure that the town has.
The overseers of the poor ought to make me their chairman, since I
provide bountifully for the pauper without expense to him that pays
taxes. I am at the head of the fire department and one of the
physicians to the board of health. As a keeper of the peace all
water-drinkers will confess me equal to the constable. I perform some
of the duties of the town-clerk by promulgating public notices when
they are posted on my front. To speak within bounds, I am the chief
person of the municipality, and exhibit, moreover, an admirable
pattern to my brother-officers by the cool, steady, upright, downright
and impartial discharge of my business and the constancy with which I
stand to my post. Summer or winter, nobody seeks me in vain, for all
day long I am seen at the busiest corner, just above the market,
stretching out my arms to rich and poor alike, and at night I hold a
lantern over my head both to show where I am and keep people out of
the gutters. At this sultry noontide I am cupbearer to the parched
populace, for whose benefit an iron goblet is chained to my waist.
Like a dramseller on the mall at muster-day, I cry aloud to all and
sundry in my plainest accents and at the very tiptop of my voice.

[Footnote 1: Essex and Washington streets, Salem.]

Here it is, gentlemen! Here is the good liquor! Walk up, walk up,
gentlemen! Walk up, walk up! Here is the superior stuff! Here is the
unadulterated ale of Father Adam--better than Cognac, Hollands,
Jamaica, strong beer or wine of any price; here it is by the hogshead
or the single glass, and not a cent to pay! Walk up, gentlemen, walk
up, and help yourselves!

It were a pity if all this outcry should draw no customers. Here they
come.--A hot day, gentlemen! Quaff and away again, so as to keep
yourselves in a nice cool sweat.--You, my friend, will need another
cupful to wash the dust out of your throat, if it be as thick there as
it is on your cowhide shoes. I see that you have trudged half a score
of miles to-day, and like a wise man have passed by the taverns and
stopped at the running brooks and well-curbs. Otherwise, betwixt heat
without and fire within, you would have been burnt to a cinder or
melted down to nothing at all, in the fashion of a jelly-fish. Drink
and make room for that other fellow, who seeks my aid to quench the
fiery fever of last night's potations, which he drained from no cup of
mine.--Welcome, most rubicund sir! You and I have been great strangers
hitherto; nor, to confess the truth, will my nose be anxious for a
closer intimacy till the fumes of your breath be a little less potent.
Mercy on you, man! the water absolutely hisses down your red-hot
gullet and is converted quite to steam in the miniature Tophet which
you mistake for a stomach. Fill again, and tell me, on the word of an
honest toper, did you ever, in cellar, tavern, or any kind of a
dram-shop, spend the price of your children's food for a swig half so
delicious? Now, for the first time these ten years, you know the
flavor of cold water. Good-bye; and whenever you are thirsty, remember
that I keep a constant supply at the old stand.--Who next?--Oh, my
little friend, you are let loose from school and come hither to scrub
your blooming face and drown the memory of certain taps of the ferule,
and other schoolboy troubles, in a draught from the town-pump? Take
it, pure as the current of your young life. Take it, and may your
heart and tongue never be scorched with a fiercer thirst than now!
There, my dear child! put down the cup and yield your place to this
elderly gentleman who treads so tenderly over the paving-stones that I
suspect he is afraid of breaking them. What! he limps by without so
much as thanking me, as if my hospitable offers were meant only for
people who have no wine-cellars.--Well, well, sir, no harm done, I
hope? Go draw the cork, tip the decanter; but when your great toe
shall set you a-roaring, it will be no affair of mine. If gentlemen
love the pleasant titillation of the gout, it is all one to the
town-pump. This thirsty dog with his red tongue lolling out does not
scorn my hospitality, but stands on his hind legs and laps eagerly out
of the trough. See how lightly he capers away again!--Jowler, did your
worship ever have the gout?

Are you all satisfied? Then wipe your mouths, my good friends, and
while my spout has a moment's leisure I will delight the town with a
few historical remniscences. In far antiquity, beneath a darksome
shadow of venerable boughs, a spring bubbled out of the leaf-strewn
earth in the very spot where you now behold me on the sunny pavement.
The water was as bright and clear and deemed as precious as liquid
diamonds. The Indian sagamores drank of it from time immemorial till
the fatal deluge of the firewater burst upon the red men and swept
their whole race away from the cold fountains. Endicott and his
followers came next, and often knelt down to drink, dipping their long
beards in the spring. The richest goblet then was of birch-bark.
Governor Winthrop, after a journey afoot from Boston, drank here out
of the hollow of his hand. The elder Higginson here wet his palm and
laid it on the brow of the first town-born child. For many years it
was the watering-place, and, as it were, the washbowl, of the
vicinity, whither all decent folks resorted to purify their visages
and gaze at them afterward--at least, the pretty maidens did--in the
mirror which it made. On Sabbath-days, whenever a babe was to be
baptized, the sexton filled his basin here and placed it on the
communion-table of the humble meeting-house, which partly covered the
site of yonder stately brick one. Thus one generation after another
was consecrated to Heaven by its waters, and cast their waxing and
waning shadows into its glassy bosom, and vanished from the earth, as
if mortal life were but a flitting image in a fountain. Finally the
fountain vanished also. Cellars were dug on all sides and cart-loads
of gravel flung upon its source, whence oozed a turbid stream, forming
a mud-puddle at the corner of two streets. In the hot months, when its
refreshment was most needed, the dust flew in clouds over the
forgotten birthplace of the waters, now their grave. But in the course
of time a town-pump was sunk into the source of the ancient spring;
and when the first decayed, another took its place, and then another,
and still another, till here stand I, gentlemen and ladies, to serve
you with my iron goblet. Drink and be refreshed. The water is as pure
and cold as that which slaked the thirst of the red sagamore beneath
the aged boughs, though now the gem of the wilderness is treasured
under these hot stones, where no shadow falls but from the brick
buildings. And be it the moral of my story that, as this wasted and
long-lost fountain is now known and prized again, so shall the virtues
of cold water--too little valued since your fathers' days--be
recognized by all.

Your pardon, good people! I must interrupt my stream of eloquence and
spout forth a stream of water to replenish the trough for this
teamster and his two yoke of oxen, who have come from Topsfield, or
somewhere along that way. No part of my business is pleasanter than
the watering of cattle. Look! how rapidly they lower the water-mark on
the sides of the trough, till their capacious stomachs are moistened
with a gallon or two apiece and they can afford time to breathe it in
with sighs of calm enjoyment. Now they roll their quiet eyes around
the brim of their monstrous drinking-vessel. An ox is your true toper.

But I perceive, my dear auditors, that you are impatient for the
remainder of my discourse. Impute it, I beseech you, to no defect of
modesty if I insist a little longer on so fruitful a topic as my own
multifarious merits. It is altogether for your good. The better you
think of me, the better men and women you will find yourselves. I
shall say nothing of my all-important aid on washing-days, though on
that account alone I might call myself the household god of a hundred
families. Far be it from me, also, to hint, my respectable friends, at
the show of dirty faces which you would present without my pains to
keep you clean. Nor will I remind you how often, when the midnight
bells make you tremble for your combustible town, you have fled to the
town-pump and found me always at my post firm amid the confusion and
ready to drain my vital current in your behalf. Neither is it worth
while to lay much stress on my claims to a medical diploma as the
physician whose simple rule of practice is preferable to all the
nauseous lore which has found men sick, or left them so, since the
days of Hippocrates. Let us take a broader view of my beneficial
influence on mankind.

No; these are trifles, compared with the merits which wise men concede
to me--if not in my single self, yet as the representative of a
class--of being the grand reformer of the age. From my spout, and such
spouts as mine, must flow the stream that shall cleanse our earth of
the vast portion of its crime and anguish which has gushed from the
fiery fountains of the still. In this mighty enterprise the cow shall
be my great confederate. Milk and water--the TOWN-PUMP and the Cow!
Such is the glorious copartnership that shall tear down the
distilleries and brewhouses, uproot the vineyards, shatter the
cider-presses, ruin the tea and coffee trade, and finally monopolize
the whole business of quenching thirst. Blessed consummation! Then
Poverty shall pass away from the land, finding no hovel so wretched
where her squalid form may shelter herself. Then Disease, for lack of
other victims, shall gnaw its own heart and die. Then Sin, if she do
not die, shall lose half her strength. Until now the frenzy of
hereditary fever has raged in the human blood, transmitted from sire
to son and rekindled in every generation by fresh draughts of liquid
flame. When that inward fire shall be extinguished, the heat of
passion cannot but grow cool, and war--the drunkenness of
nations--perhaps will cease. At least, there will be no war of
households. The husband and wife, drinking deep of peaceful joy--a
calm bliss of temperate affections--shall pass hand in hand through
life and lie down not reluctantly at its protracted close. To them the
past will be no turmoil of mad dreams, nor the future an eternity of
such moments as follow the delirium of the drunkard. Their dead faces
shall express what their spirits were and are to be by a lingering
smile of memory and hope.

Ahem! Dry work, this speechifying, especially to an unpractised
orator. I never conceived till now what toil the temperance lecturers
undergo for my sake; hereafter they shall have the business to
themselves.--Do, some kind Christian, pump a stroke or two, just to
wet my whistle.--Thank you, sir!--My dear hearers, when the world
shall have been regenerated by my instrumentality, you will collect
your useless vats and liquor-casks into one great pile and make a
bonfire in honor of the town-pump. And when I shall have decayed like
my predecessors, then, if you revere my memory, let a marble fountain
richly sculptured take my place upon this spot. Such monuments should
be erected everywhere and inscribed with the names of the
distinguished champions of my cause. Now, listen, for something very
important is to come next.

There are two or three honest friends of mine--and true friends I know
they are--who nevertheless by their fiery pugnacity in my behalf do
put me in fearful hazard of a broken nose, or even a total overthrow
upon the pavement and the loss of the treasure which I guard.--I pray
you, gentlemen, let this fault be amended. Is it decent, think you, to
get tipsy with zeal for temperance and take up the honorable cause of
the town-pump in the style of a toper fighting for his brandy-bottle?
Or can the excellent qualities of cold water be no otherwise
exemplified than by plunging slapdash into hot water and woefully
scalding yourselves and other people? Trust me, they may. In the moral
warfare which you are to wage--and, indeed, in the whole conduct of
your lives--you cannot choose a better example than myself, who have
never permitted the dust and sultry atmosphere, the turbulence and
manifold disquietudes, of the world around me to reach that deep, calm
well of purity which may be called my soul. And whenever I pour out
that soul, it is to cool earth's fever or cleanse its stains.

One o'clock! Nay, then, if the dinner-bell begins to speak, I may as
well hold my peace. Here comes a pretty young girl of my acquaintance
with a large stone pitcher for me to fill. May she draw a husband
while drawing her water, as Rachel did of old!--Hold out your vessel,
my dear! There it is, full to the brim; so now run home, peeping at
your sweet image in the pitcher as you go, and forget not in a glass
of my own liquor to drink "SUCCESS TO THE TOWN-PUMP."




THE GREAT CARBUNCLE.[1]

A MYSTERY OF THE WHITE MOUNTAINS.


At nightfall once in the olden time, on the rugged side of one of the
Crystal Hills, a party of adventurers were refreshing themselves after
a toilsome and fruitless quest for the Great Carbuncle. They had come
thither, not as friends nor partners in the enterprise, but each, save
one youthful pair, impelled by his own selfish and solitary longing
for this wondrous gem. Their feeling of brotherhood, however, was
strong enough to induce them to contribute a mutual aid in building a
rude hut of branches and kindling a great fire of shattered pines that
had drifted down the headlong current of the Amonoosuck, on the lower
bank of which they were to pass the night. There was but one of their
number, perhaps, who had become so estranged from natural sympathies
by the absorbing spell of the pursuit as to acknowledge no
satisfaction at the sight of human faces in the remote and solitary
region whither they had ascended. A vast extent of wilderness lay
between them and the nearest settlement, while scant a mile above
their heads was that bleak verge where the hills throw off their
shaggy mantle of forest-trees and either robe themselves in clouds or
tower naked into the sky. The roar of the Amonoosuck would have been
too awful for endurance if only a solitary man had listened while the
mountain-stream talked with the wind.

[Footnote 1: The Indian tradition on which this somewhat extravagant
tale is founded is both too wild and too beautiful to be adequately
wrought up in prose. Sullivan, in his history of Maine, written since
the Revolution, remarks that even then the existence of the Great
Carbuncle was not entirely discredited.]

The adventurers, therefore, exchanged hospitable greetings and
welcomed one another to the hut where each man was the host and all
were the guests of the whole company. They spread their individual
supplies of food on the flat surface of a rock and partook of a
general repast; at the close of which a sentiment of good-fellowship
was perceptible among the party, though repressed by the idea that the
renewed search for the Great Carbuncle must make them strangers again
in the morning. Seven men and one young woman, they warmed themselves
together at the fire, which extended its bright wall along the whole
front of their wigwam. As they observed the various and contrasted
figures that made up the assemblage, each man looking like a
caricature of himself in the unsteady light that flickered over him,
they came mutually to the conclusion that an odder society had never
met in city or wilderness, on mountain or plain.

The eldest of the group--a tall, lean, weatherbeaten man some sixty
years of age--was clad in the skins of wild animals whose fashion of
dress he did well to imitate, since the deer, the wolf and the bear
had long been his most intimate companions. He was one of those
ill-fated mortals, such as the Indians told of, whom in their early
youth the Great Carbuncle smote with a peculiar madness and became the
passionate dream of their existence. All who visited that region knew
him as "the Seeker," and by no other name. As none could remember when
he first took up the search, there went a fable in the valley of the
Saco that for his inordinate lust after the Great Carbuncle he had
been condemned to wander among the mountains till the end of time,
still with the same feverish hopes at sunrise, the same despair at
eve. Near this miserable Seeker sat a little elderly personage wearing
a high-crowned hat shaped somewhat like a crucible. He was from beyond
the sea--a Doctor Cacaphodel, who had wilted and dried himself into a
mummy by continually stooping over charcoal-furnaces and inhaling
unwholesome fumes during his researches in chemistry and alchemy. It
was told of him--whether truly or not--that at the commencement of his
studies he had drained his body of all its richest blood and wasted
it, with other inestimable ingredients, in an unsuccessful experiment,
and had never been a well man since. Another of the adventurers was
Master Ichabod Pigsnort, a weighty merchant and selectman of Boston,
and an elder of the famous Mr. Norton's church. His enemies had a
ridiculous story that Master Pigsnort was accustomed to spend a whole
hour after prayer-time every morning and evening in wallowing naked
among an immense quantity of pine-tree shillings, which were the
earliest silver coinage of Massachusetts. The fourth whom we shall
notice had no name that his companions knew of, and was chiefly
distinguished by a sneer that always contorted his thin visage, and by
a prodigious pair of spectacles which were supposed to deform and
discolor the whole face of nature to this gentleman's perception. The
fifth adventurer likewise lacked a name, which was the greater pity,
as he appeared to be a poet. He was a bright-eyed man, but woefully
pined away, which was no more than natural if, as some people
affirmed, his ordinary diet was fog, morning mist and a slice of the
densest cloud within his reach, sauced with moonshine whenever he
could get it. Certain it is that the poetry which flowed from him had
a smack of all these dainties. The sixth of the party was a young man
of haughty mien and sat somewhat apart from the rest, wearing his
plumed hat loftily among his elders, while the fire glittered on the
rich embroidery of his dress and gleamed intensely on the jewelled
pommel of his sword. This was the lord De Vere, who when at home was
said to spend much of his time in the burial-vault of his dead
progenitors rummaging their mouldy coffins in search of all the
earthly pride and vainglory that was hidden among bones and dust; so
that, besides his own share, he had the collected haughtiness of his
whole line of ancestry. Lastly, there was a handsome youth in rustic
garb, and by his side a blooming little person in whom a delicate
shade of maiden reserve was just melting into the rich glow of a young
wife's affection. Her name was Hannah, and her husband's Matthew--two
homely names, yet well enough adapted to the simple pair who seemed
strangely out of place among the whimsical fraternity whose wits had
been set agog by the Great Carbuncle.

Beneath the shelter of one hut, in the bright blaze of the same fire,
sat this varied group of adventurers, all so intent upon a single
object that of whatever else they began to speak their closing words
were sure to be illuminated with the Great Carbuncle. Several related
the circumstances that brought them thither. One had listened to a
traveller's tale of this marvellous stone in his own distant country,
and had immediately been seized with such a thirst for beholding it as
could only be quenched in its intensest lustre. Another, so long ago
as when the famous Captain Smith visited these coasts, had seen it
blazing far at sea, and had felt no rest in all the intervening years
till now that he took up the search. A third, being encamped on a
hunting-expedition full forty miles south of the White Mountains,
awoke at midnight and beheld the Great Carbuncle gleaming like a
meteor, so that the shadows of the trees fell backward from it. They
spoke of the innumerable attempts which had been made to reach the
spot, and of the singular fatality which had hitherto withheld success
from all adventurers, though it might seem so easy to follow to its
source a light that overpowered the moon and almost matched the sun.
It was observable that each smiled scornfully at the madness of every
other in anticipating better fortune than the past, yet nourished a
scarcely-hidden conviction that he would himself be the favored one.
As if to allay their too sanguine hopes, they recurred to the Indian
traditions that a spirit kept watch about the gem and bewildered those
who sought it either by removing it from peak to peak of the higher
hills or by calling up a mist from the enchanted lake over which it
hung. But these tales were deemed unworthy of credit, all professing
to believe that the search had been baffled by want of sagacity or
perseverance in the adventurers, or such other causes as might
naturally obstruct the passage to any given point among the
intricacies of forest, valley and mountain.

In a pause of the conversation the wearer of the prodigious spectacles
