this dramatic moment.

"Well, I never!" she exclaimed. "Where, and how under the canopy, did
you ever?"

"I was working on the dam at Union Falls yesterday," chuckled Abijah,
with a pleased glance at each of the trio in turn, "an' I seen this
little bunnit skippin' over the water jest as Becky does over the road.
It's shaped kind o' like a boat, an' gorry, ef it wa'nt sailin' jest
like a boat! Where hev I seen that kind of a bristlin' plume?' thinks
I."

("Where indeed!" thought Rebecca stormily.)

"Then it come to me that I'd drove that plume to school and drove it to
meetin' and drove it to the Fair an'drove it most everywheres on Becky.
So I reached out a pole an' ketched it fore it got in amongst the logs
an' come to any damage, an' here it is! The hat's passed in its checks,
I guess; looks kind as if a wet elephant had stepped on it; but the
plume's bout's good as new! I reely fetched the hat beck for the sake o'
the plume."

"It was real good of you, 'Bijah, an' we're all of us obliged to you,"
said Miranda, as she poised the hat on one hand and turned it slowly
with the other.

"Well, I do say," she exclaimed, "and I guess I've said it before, that
of all the wearing' plumes that ever I see, that one's the wearin'est!
Seems though it just wouldn't give up. Look at the way it's held Mis'
Cobb's dye; it's about as brown's when it went int' the water."

"Dyed, but not a mite dead," grinned Abijah, who was somewhat celebrated
for his puns.

"And I declare," Miranda continued, "when you think o' the fuss they
make about ostriches, killin' em off by hundreds for the sake o' their
feathers that'll string out and spoil in one hard rainstorm,--an' all
the time lettin' useful porcupines run round with their quills on, why
I can't hardly understand it, without milliners have found out jest
how good they do last, an' so they won't use em for trimmin'. 'Bijah's
right; the hat ain't no more use, Rebecca, but you can buy you another
this mornin'--any color or shape you fancy--an' have Miss Morton sew
these brown quills on to it with some kind of a buckle or a bow, jest
to hide the roots. Then you'll be fixed for another season, thanks to
'Bijah."

Uncle Jerry and Aunt Sarah Cobb were made acquainted before very long
with the part that destiny, or Abijah Flagg, had played in Rebecca's
affairs, for, accompanied by the teacher, she walked to the old stage
driver's that same afternoon. Taking off her new hat with the venerable
trimming, she laid it somewhat ostentatiously upside down on the kitchen
table and left the room, dimpling a little more than usual.

Uncle Jerry rose from his seat, and, crossing the room, looked curiously
into the hat and found that a circular paper lining was neatly pinned
in the crown, and that it bore these lines, which were read aloud with
great effect by Miss Dearborn, and with her approval were copied in the
Thought Book for the benefit of posterity:

"It was the bristling porcupine, As he stood on his native heath, He
said, 'I'll pluck me some immortelles And make me up a wreath. For tho'
I may not live myself To more than a hundred and ten, My quills will
last till crack of doom, And maybe after then. They can be colored blue
or green Or orange, brown, or red, But often as they may be dyed They
never will be dead.' And so the bristling porcupine As he stood on his
native heath, Said, I think I'll pluck me some immmortelles And make me
up a wreath.'

"R.R.R."




Fifth Chronicle. THE SAVING OF THE COLORS


I

Even when Rebecca had left school, having attained the great age of
seventeen and therefore able to look back over a past incredibly long
and full, she still reckoned time not by years, but by certain important
occurrences.

There was the year her father died; the year she left Sunnybrook Farm to
come to her aunts in Riverboro; the year Sister Hannah became engaged;
the year little Mira died; the year Abijah Flagg ceased to be Squire
Bean's chore-boy, and astounded Riverboro by departing for Limerick
Academy in search of an education; and finally the year of her
graduation, which, to the mind of seventeen, seems rather the
culmination than the beginning of existence.

Between these epoch-making events certain other happenings stood out in
bold relief against the gray of dull daily life.

There was the day she first met her friend of friends, "Mr. Aladdin,"
and the later, even more radiant one when he gave her the coral
necklace. There was the day the Simpson family moved away from Riverboro
under a cloud, and she kissed Clara Belle fervently at the cross-roads,
telling her that she would always be faithful. There was the visit of
the Syrian missionaries to the brick house. That was a bright, romantic
memory, as strange and brilliant as the wonderful little birds' wings
and breasts that the strangers brought from the Far East. She remembered
the moment they asked her to choose some for herself, and the rapture
with which she stroked the beautiful things as they lay on the black
haircloth sofa. Then there was the coming of the new minister, for
though many were tried only one was chosen; and finally there was the
flag-raising, a festivity that thrilled Riverboro and Edgewood society
from centre to circumference, a festivity that took place just before
she entered the Female Seminary at Wareham and said good-by to kind Miss
Dearborn and the village school.

There must have been other flag-raisings in history,--even the persons
most interested in this particular one would grudgingly have allowed
that much,--but it would have seemed to them improbable that any such
flag-raising as theirs, either in magnitude of conception or brilliancy
of actual performance, could twice glorify the same century. Of some
pageants it is tacitly admitted that there can be no duplicates, and the
flag-raising at Riverboro Centre was one of these; so that it is small
wonder if Rebecca chose it as one of the important dates in her personal
almanac.

The new minister's wife was the being, under Providence, who had
conceived the germinal idea of the flag.

At this time the parish had almost settled down to the trembling belief
that they were united on a pastor. In the earlier time a minister was
chosen for life, and if he had faults, which was a probably enough
contingency, and if his congregation had any, which is within the bounds
of possibility, each bore with the other (not quite without friction),
as old-fashioned husbands and wives once did, before the easy way out of
the difficulty was discovered, or at least before it was popularized.

The faithful old parson had died after thirty years' preaching,
and perhaps the newer methods had begun to creep in, for it seemed
impossible to suit the two communities most interested in the choice.

The Rev. Mr. Davis, for example, was a spirited preacher, but persisted
in keeping two horses in the parsonage stable, and in exchanging
them whenever he could get faster ones. As a parochial visitor he was
incomparable, dashing from house to house with such speed that he could
cover the parish in a single afternoon. This sporting tendency, which
would never have been remarked in a British parson, was frowned upon in
a New England village, and Deacon Milliken told Mr. Davis, when giving
him what he alluded to as his "walking papers," that they didn't want
the Edgewood church run by hoss power!

The next candidate pleased Edgewood, where morning preaching was held,
but the other parish, which had afternoon service, declined to accept
him because he wore a wig--an ill-matched, crookedly applied wig.

Number three was eloquent but given to gesticulation, and Mrs. Jere
Burbank, the president of the Dorcas Society, who sat in a front pew,
said she couldn't bear to see a preacher scramble round the pulpit hot
Sundays.

Number four, a genial, handsome man, gifted in prayer, was found to be
a Democrat. The congregation was overwhelmingly Republican in its
politics, and perceived something ludicrous, if not positively
blasphemous, in a Democrat preaching the gospel. ("Ananias and
Beelzebub'll be candidatin' here, first thing we know!" exclaimed the
outraged Republican nominee for district attorney.)

Number five had a feeble-minded child, which the hiring committee
prophesied, would always be standing in the parsonage front yard, making
talk for the other denominations.

Number six was the Rev. Judson Baxter, the present incumbent; and he
was voted to be as near perfection as a minister can be in this finite
world. His young wife had a small income of her own, a distinct and
unusual advantage, and the subscription committee hoped that they might
not be eternally driving over the country to get somebody's fifty cents
that had been over-due for eight months, but might take their onerous
duties a little more easily.

"It does seem as if our ministers were the poorest lot!" complained Mrs.
Robinson. "If their salary is two months behindhand they begin to be
nervous! Seems as though they might lay up a little before they come
here, and not live from hand to mouth so! The Baxters seem quite
different, and I only hope they won't get wasteful and run into debt.
They say she keeps the parlor blinds open bout half the time, and the
room is lit up so often evenin's that the neighbors think her and Mr.
Baxter must set in there. It don't seem hardly as if it could be so, but
Mrs. Buzzell says tis, and she says we might as well say good-by to the
parlor carpet, which is church property, for the Baxters are living all
over it!"

This criticism was the only discordant note in the chorus of praise, and
the people gradually grew accustomed to the open blinds and the overused
parlor carpet, which was just completing its twenty-fifth year of honest
service.

Mrs. Baxter communicated her patriotic idea of a new flag to the Dorcas
Society, proposing that the women should cut and make it themselves.

"It may not be quite as good as those manufactured in the large cities,"
she said, "but we shall be proud to see our home-made flag flying in the
breeze, and it will mean all the more to the young voters growing up, to
remember that their mothers made it with their own hands."

"How would it do to let some of the girls help?" modestly asked Miss
Dearborn, the Riverboro teacher. "We might choose the best sewers and
let them put in at least a few stitches, so that they can feel they have
a share in it."

"Just the thing!" exclaimed Mrs. Baxter. "We can cut the stripes and sew
them together, and after we have basted on the white stars the girls can
apply them to the blue ground. We must have it ready for the campaign
rally, and we couldn't christen it at a better time than in this
presidential year."

II

In this way the great enterprise was started, and day by day the
preparations went forward in the two villages.

The boys, as future voters and fighters, demanded an active share in
the proceedings, and were organized by Squire Bean into a fife and drum
corps, so that by day and night martial but most inharmonious music woke
the echoes, and deafened mothers felt their patriotism oozing out at the
soles of their shoes.

Dick Carter was made captain, for his grandfather had a gold medal
given him by Queen Victoria for rescuing three hundred and twenty-six
passengers from a sinking British vessel. Riverboro thought it high time
to pay some graceful tribute to Great Britain in return for her handsome
conduct to Captain Nahum Carter, and human imagination could contrive
nothing more impressive than a vicarious share in the flag raising.

Living Perkins tried to be happy in the ranks, for he was offered no
official position, principally, Mrs. Smellie observed, because "his
father's war record wa'nt clean." "Oh, yes! Jim Perkins went to the
war," she continued. "He hid out behind the hencoop when they was
draftin', but they found him and took him along. He got into one battle,
too, somehow or nother, but he run away from it. He was allers cautious,
Jim was; if he ever see trouble of any kind comin' towards him, he was
out o' sight fore it got a chance to light. He said eight dollars a
month, without bounty, wouldn't pay HIM to stop bullets for. He wouldn't
fight a skeeter, Jim wouldn't, but land! we ain't to war all the time,
and he's a good neighbor and a good blacksmith."

Miss Dearborn was to be Columbia and the older girls of the two schools
were to be the States. Such trade in muslins and red, white, and blue
ribbons had never been known since "Watson kep' store," and the number
of brief white petticoats hanging out to bleach would have caused the
passing stranger to imagine Riverboro a continual dancing school.

Juvenile virtue, both male and female, reached an almost impossible
height, for parents had only to lift a finger and say, "you shan't go
to the flag raising!" and the refractory spirit at once armed itself for
new struggles toward the perfect life.

Mr. Jeremiah Cobb had consented to impersonate Uncle Sam, and was to
drive Columbia and the States to the "raising" on the top of his own
stage. Meantime the boys were drilling, the ladies were cutting and
basting and stitching, and the girls were sewing on stars; for the
starry part of the spangled banner was to remain with each of them in
turn until she had performed her share of the work.

It was felt by one and all a fine and splendid service indeed to help
in the making of the flag, and if Rebecca was proud to be of the chosen
ones, so was her Aunt Jane Sawyer, who had taught her all her delicate
stitches.

On a long-looked-for afternoon in August the minister's wife drove up
to the brick house door, and handed out the great piece of bunting to
Rebecca, who received it in her arms with as much solemnity as if it had
been a child awaiting baptismal rites.

"I'm so glad!" she sighed happily. "I thought it would never come my
turn!"

"You should have had it a week ago, but Huldah Meserve upset the ink
bottle over her star, and we had to baste on another one. You are the
last, though, and then we shall sew the stars and stripes together, and
Seth Strout will get the top ready for hanging. Just think, it won't
be many days before you children will be pulling the rope with all your
strength, the band will be playing, the men will be cheering, and the
new flag will go higher and higher, till the red, white, and blue shows
against the sky!"

Rebecca's eyes fairly blazed. "Shall I fell on' my star, or buttonhole
it?" she asked.

"Look at all the others and make the most beautiful stitches you can,
that's all. It is your star, you know, and you can even imagine it is
your state, and try and have it the best of all. If everybody else
is trying to do the same thing with her state, that will make a great
country, won't it?"

Rebecca's eyes spoke glad confirmation of the idea. "My star, my state!"
she repeated joyously. "Oh, Mrs. Baxter, I'll make such fine stitches
you'll think the white grew out of the blue!"

The new minister's wife looked pleased to see her spark kindle a flame
in the young heart. "You can sew so much of yourself into your star,"
she went on in the glad voice that made her so winsome, "that when you
are an old lady you can put on your specs and find it among all the
others. Good-by! Come up to the parsonage Saturday afternoon; Mr. Baxter
wants to see you."

"Judson, help that dear little genius of a Rebecca all you can!" she
said that night, when they were cosily talking in their parlor and
living "all over" the parish carpet. "I don't know what she may, or may
not, come to, some day; I only wish she were ours! If you could have
seen her clasp the flag tight in her arms and put her cheek against it,
and watched the tears of feeling start in her eyes when I told her
that her star was her state! I kept whispering to myself, Covet not thy
neighbor's child!'"

Daily at four o'clock Rebecca scrubbed her hands almost to the bone,
brushed her hair, and otherwise prepared herself in body, mind, and
spirit for the consecrated labor of sewing on her star. All the time
that her needle cautiously, conscientiously formed the tiny stitches she
was making rhymes "in her head," her favorite achievement being this:

"Your star, my star, all our stars together, They make the dear old
banner proud To float in the bright fall weather."

There was much discussion as to which of the girls should impersonate
the State of Maine, for that was felt to be the highest honor in the
gift of the committee.

Alice Robinson was the prettiest child in the village, but she was very
shy and by no means a general favorite.

Minnie Smellie possessed the handsomest dress and a pair of white
slippers and open-work stockings that nearly carried the day. Still, as
Miss Delia Weeks well said, she was so stupid that if she should
suck her thumb in the very middle of the exercises nobody'd be a dite
surprised!

Huldah Meserve was next voted upon, and the fact that if she were not
chosen her father might withdraw his subscription to the brass band fund
was a matter for grave consideration.

"I kind o' hate to have such a giggler for the State of Maine; let her
be the Goddess of Liberty," proposed Mrs. Burbank, whose patriotism was
more local than national.

"How would Rebecca Randall do for Maine, and let her speak some of her
verses?" suggested the new minister's wife, who, could she have had her
way, would have given all the prominent parts to Rebecca, from Uncle Sam
down.

So, beauty, fashion, and wealth having been tried and found wanting, the
committee discussed the claims of talent, and it transpired that to
the awe-stricken Rebecca fell the chief plum in the pudding. It was a
tribute to her gifts that there was no jealousy or envy among the other
girls; they readily conceded her special fitness for the role.

Her life had not been pressed down full to the brim of pleasures, and
she had a sort of distrust of joy in the bud. Not until she saw it in
full radiance of bloom did she dare embrace it. She had never read
any verse but Byron, Felicia Hemans, bits of "Paradise Lost," and the
selections in the school readers, but she would have agreed heartily
with the poet who said:

"Not by appointment do we meet delight And joy; they heed not our
