                                Mary Mapes Dodge.



LESSON LXIV.

late     straw      Jen'ny      snort'ed     Tem'plar

aunt     rogue      re port'    graz'ing     di rect'ly

ditch    act'ed     ser'vice    sup pose'    ca ressed'

hired    e rect'    pricked     mo'ment      gro'cer ies



JENNY'S CALL.

1. "It's of no use, Mrs. Templar; I have been trying the greater part of
an hour to catch that rogue of a horse. She won't be caught."

[Illustration: Man and boy chasing horse.]

2. Such was the report the hired man brought in to Mrs. Templar one
pleasant May morning, when she had been planning a ride.

3. "I suppose it can not be helped, but I wanted her very much," she said,
as she turned away.

4. "What was it you wanted, mother?" asked Jenny Templar, a bright,
brown-haired, brown-eyed girl of twelve, who had just come into the room.

5. "Fanny," said the mother. "It is such a beautiful morning, I meant to
drive down to the village, get some groceries, then call for your Aunt
Ann, have a nice ride up the river road, and bring her home to dinner.

6. "But father is away for all day, and the men have been trying nearly an
hour to catch Fanny; one of the men says she can't be caught."

7. "Maybe she can't by him," said Jenny, with a merry laugh. "But, get
ready, mother; you shall go if you like. I'll catch Fanny, and harness
her, too."

8. "Why, my child, they say she jumped the ditch three or four times, and
acted like a wild creature. You'll only be late at school, and tire
yourself for nothing."

9. "It won't take me long, mother. Fanny will come to me," said Jenny,
cheerily. She put on her wide straw hat, and was off in a moment, down the
hill, to the field where the horse was grazing.

10. The moment Fanny heard the rustle of Jenny's dress, she pricked up her
ears, snorted, and, with head erect, seemed ready to bound away again.

[Illustration: Girl leading horse.]

11. "Fanny! O Fanny!" called Jenny, and the beautiful creature turned her
head. That gentle tone she well knew, and, glad to see her friend, she
carne directly to the fence, and rubbed her head on the girl's shoulder.
As soon as the gate was opened, she followed Jenny to the barn.

12. The men had treated her roughly, and she remembered it. But she knew
and loved the voice that was always kind, and the hand that often fed and
caressed her. She gave love for love, and willing service for kindness.

LESSON LXV.

rung     Da'vy     vi'o let    re cess'    ar range'

ferns    ma'ple    dain'ty    lin'gered    pret'ti est


POOR DAVY.

1. It was recess time at the village school. The bell had rung, and the
children had run out into the bright sunshine, wild with laughter and fun.


2. All but poor Davy. He came out last and very slowly, but he did not
laugh. He was in trouble, and the bright, golden sunlight did not make him
glad.

3. He walked across the yard, and sat down on a stone behind the old
maple. A little bird on the highest branch sang just to make him laugh.

4. But Davy did not notice it. He was thinking of the cruel words that had
been said about his ragged clothes. The tears stole out of his eyes, and
ran down his cheeks.

[Illustration: Boy sitting alone under tree in schoolyard. Other children
playing in background.]

5. Poor Davy had no father, and his mother had to work hard to keep him at
school.

6. That night, he went home by the path that led across the fields and
through the woods. He still felt sad.

7. Davy did not wish to trouble his mother; so he lingered a while among
the trees, and at last threw himself on the green moss under them.

[Illustration: Woman talking to boy.]

8. Just then his teacher came along. She saw who it was, and stopped,
saying kindly, "What is the matter, Davy?"

9. He did not speak, but the tears began again to start.

10. "Won't you tell me? Perhaps I can help you."

11. Then he told her all his trouble.  When he ended, she said, cheerily,
"I have a plan, Davy, that I think will help you."

12. "Oh, what is it?" he said, sitting up with a look of hope, while a
tear fell upon a blue violet.

l3. "Well, how would you like to be a little flower merchant?"

14. "And earn money?" said Davy. "That would be jolly. But where shall I
get my flowers?"

15. "Right in these woods, and in the fields," said his teacher. " Here
are lovely blue violets, down by the brook are white ones, and among the
rocks are ferns and mosses. Bring them all to my house, and I will help
you arrange them."

16. So, day after day, Davy hunted the woods for the prettiest flowers,
and the most dainty ferns and mosses. After his teacher had helped to
arrange them, he took them to the city that was near, and sold them.

17. He soon earned money enough to buy new clothes. Now the sunshine and
the bird's songs make him glad.



LESSON LXVI.

deep    flour     dough      mill'er     wheth'er

cook    a far'    dust'y     cra'dles    grind'ing

glow    doth      val'ley    reap'ers    a-knead'ing


ALICE'S SUPPER.
                   1.
Far down in the valley the wheat grows deep,
And the reapers are making the cradles sweep;
And this is the song that I hear them sing,
While cheery and loud their voices ring:
"'Tis the finest wheat that ever did grow!
And it is for Alice's supper--ho! ho!"

                   2.
Far down by the river the old mill stands,
And the miller is rubbing his dusty hands;
And these are the words of the miller's lay,
As he watches the millstones grinding away:
"'Tis the finest flour that money can buy,
And it is for Alice's supper--hi! hi!"

                   3.
Downstairs in the kitchen the fire doth glow,
And cook is a-kneading the soft, white dough;
And this is the song she is singing to-day,
As merry and busy she's working away:
"'Tis the finest dough, whether near or afar,
And it is for Alice's supper--ha! ha!"

[Illustration: Mother serving supper to small girl seated at table.]

                   4.
To the nursery now comes mother, at last,
And what in her hand is she bringing so fast?
'Tis a plateful of something, all yellow and white,
And she sings as she comes, with her smile so bright:
"'Tis the best bread and butter I ever did see,
And it is for Alice's supper--he! he!"



LESSON LXVII.

tall    hung      storm       pick'et

firs    north     gowns       spar'ked

roof    flakes    fair'ies    cap'tains


A SNOWSTORM.

1. Last night, the cold north wind blew great snow clouds over the sky.
Not a star, not a bit of blue sky could be seen.

2. Soon the tiny flakes floated softly down, like flocks of little white
birds. Faster and faster they came, till they filled the air. They made no
noise, but they were busy all night long.

3. They covered all the ground with a soft, white carpet. They hung
beautiful plumes on the tall, green firs. The little bushes, they put to
sleep in warm nightgowns and caps.

[Illustration: Snow covering house, shed, and road. Children playing.]

4. They hid the paths so that the boys might have the fun of digging new
ones. They turned the old picket fence into a row of soldiers, and the
gate posts into captains, with tall white hats on.

5. The old corn basket that was left out by the barn, upside down, they
made into a cunning little snow house with a round roof.

6. When the busy little flakes had done their work, the sun came up to see
what they had been about.

7. He must have been pleased with what he saw, for he smiled such a
bright, sweet smile, that the whole white world sparkled as if it were
made of little stars.

8. Who would have thought that the black clouds could hide the little
fairies that made the earth so beautiful!

LESSON LXVIII.

dug      roots     thump       of fense'

toad     spool     heaped      smoothed

forth    a'pron    clos'ets    dan'de li ons


BESSIE.

1. One day, Bessie thought how nice it would be to have a garden with only
wild flowers in it. So into the house she ran to find her Aunt Annie, and
ask her leave to go over on the shady hillside, across the brook, where
the wild flowers grew thickest.

[Illustration: Girl planting small garden. Toad sitting in garden.]

2. " Yes, indeed, you may go," said Aunt Annie; "but what will you put the
roots and earth in while you are making the garden?"

3. "Oh," said Bessie, "I can take my apron."

4. Her aunt laughed, and said, "A basket will be better, I think." So they
looked in the closets and the attic, everywhere; but some of the baskets
were full, and some broken; not one could they find that would do.

5. Then Aunt Annie turned out the spools and the bags from a nice large
workbasket, and gave that to Bessie. "You may have this for your own," she
said, "to fill with earth, or flowers, or anything you like."

6. "Oh I thank you," said Bessie, and she danced away through the garden.
She slipped through the gate, out into the field all starred with
dandelions, down in the hollow by the brook, then up on the hillside out
of sight among the shady trees.

7. How she worked that afternoon! She heaped up the dark, rich earth, and
smoothed it over with her hands. Then she dug up violets, and
spring-beauties, and other flowers,--running back and forth, singing all
the while.

8. The squirrels peeped out of their holes at Bessie. The birds sang in
the branches overhead. Thump, came something all at once into the middle
of the bed. Bessie jumped and upset the basket, and away it rolled down
the hill.

9. How Bessie laughed when she saw a big, brown toad winking his bright
eyes at her, as if he would say, "No offense, I hope."

10. Just then Bessie heard a bell ringing loudly. She knew it was calling
her home; but how could she leave her basket? She must look for that
first.

11. "Waiting, waiting, waiting," all at once sang a bird out of sight
among the branches; "waiting, Bessie."

12. "Sure enough," said Bessie; "perhaps I'm making dear mother or auntie
wait; and they are so good to me. I'd better let the basket wait. Take
care of it, birdie; and don't jump on my flowers, Mr. Toad."



LESSON LXIX.

visit    soaked    o be'di ent    ru'ined

[Illustration: Girl on couch looking out window.]


BESSIE.
(CONCLUDED.)

1. She was back at the house in a few minutes, calling, "Mother! mother!
auntie! Who wants me?"

2. "I, dear," said her mother. "I am going away for a long visit, and if
you had not come at once, I could not have said good-by to my little
girl."

3. Then Bessie's mother kissed her, and told her to obey her kind aunt
while she was gone.

4. The next morning, Bessie waked to find it raining hard. She went into
her aunt's room with a very sad face. "O auntie! this old rain!"

5, "This new, fresh, beautiful rain, Bessie! How it will make our flowers
grow, and what a good time we can have together in the house!"

6. "I know it, auntie; but you will think me so careless!"

7. "To let it rain?"

8. "No; don't laugh, Aunt Annie; to leave your nice basket out of doors
all night; and now it will be soaked and ruined in this--this--beautiful
rain." Bessie did not look as if the beautiful rain made her very happy.

9. "You must be more careful, dear, another time," said her aunt, gently.
"But come, tell me all about it."

10. So Bessie crept very close to her auntie's side, and told her of her
happy time the day before; of the squirrel, and the toad, and how the
basket rolled away down the hill; and then how the bell rang, and she
could not stop to find the basket.

11. "And you did quite right," said her aunt. "If you had stopped, your
mother must have waited a whole day, or else gone without seeing you. When
I write, I will tell her how obedient you were, and that will please her
more than anything else I can say."



LESSON LXX.

sought    sure'ly (shu)    wel'come      light'some

loft'y    maid'en          cher'ished    in tro duce'


CHEERFULNESS.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

There is a little maiden--
  Who is she? Do you know?
Who always has a welcome,
  Wherever she may go.

Her face is like the May time,
  Her voice is like the bird's;
The sweetest of all music
  Is in her lightsome words.

Each spot she makes the brighter,
  As if she were the sun;
And she is sought and cherished
  And loved by everyone;

By old folks and by children,
  By loft and by low;
Who is this little maiden?
  Does anybody know?

You surely must have met her.
  You certainly can guess;
What! I must introduce her?
  Her name is Cheeerfulness.
                              Marian Douglas
]



LESSON LXXI.

west'ern    breathe    dy'ing    moon    babe    sails

LULLABY.

1. Sweet and low, sweet and low,
     Wind of the western sea,
