sleep had rested him thoroughly. The overtaxed muscles were easy again,
and with the vast green forest about him and the dim blue mountains
showing on the horizon, he felt all the keen zest of living.

He was glad to be there. He was glad to be with Tayoga. He was glad to
be with Willet and he was glad to be going on the important mission
which the three hoped to carry out, according to promise, no matter what
dangers surrounded them, and that there would be many they already had
proof. But, for the present, at least, there was nothing but peace.

He lay on his back and stared up at the blue sky, in which clouds fleecy
and tiny were drifting. All were going toward the northeast and that way
the course of himself and his comrades lay. If Manitou prospered them,
they would come to the Quebec of the French, which beforetime had been
the Stadacona of old Indian tribes. That name, Quebec, was full of
significance to him. Standing upon its mighty rock, it was another
Gibraltar. It told him of the French power in North America, and he
associated it vaguely with young officers in brilliant uniforms,
powdered ladies, and all the splendor of an Old World court reproduced
in the New World. St. Luc had come from there, and with his handsome
face and figure and his gay and graceful manner he had typified the
Quebec of the chevaliers, which the grave and solid burghers of Albany
regarded with dread and aversion and yet with a strange sort of
attraction.

He did not deny to himself that he too felt the attraction. An unknown
kinship with Quebec, either in blood or imagination, was calling. He
wondered if he would see St. Luc there, but on reflection he decided
that it was impossible. The mission of the chevalier to the Hodenosaunee
would require a long absence. He might arrive in the vale of Onondaga
and have to wait many days before the fifty sachems should decide to
meet in council and hear him.

But Robert believed that if St. Luc should appear before the fifty he
would prove to be eloquent, and he would neglect no artifice of word and
manner to make the Hodenosaunee think the French power at Quebec
invincible. He would describe the great deeds of the French officers and
soldiers. He would tell them of that glittering court of Versailles, and
perhaps he would make them think their salvation depended upon an
alliance with France.

Robert was sorry for the moment that his mission was taking him to
Quebec and not to the vale of Onondaga, where Willet and he--and Tayoga
too--could appear before the sachems as friends true and tested, and
prove to them that the English were their good and natural allies. They
would recall again what Frontenac had done. They would dwell upon the
manner in which he had carried sword and fire among the Six Nations,
then the Five, and they would keep open the old wound that yet rankled.

It was a passing wish. The Iroquois would remain faithful to their
ancient allies, the English. The blood that Frontenac had shed would be
forever a barrier between the Long House and the Stadacona that was.
Once more Quebec filled his eye, and he gazed into the northeast where
the French capital lay upon its mighty and frowning rock. His curiosity
concerning it increased. He wanted to see what kind of city it was, and
he wanted to see what kind of a man the Marquis Duquesne, the
Governor-General of Canada, was. Well, he would be there before many
days and he would see for himself. He and his comrades already had been
triumphant over a danger so great that nothing could stop them now. He
felt all the elation and certainty that came from a victory over odds.

He rose, parted the bushes and made another tour of the region about
their covert. When he was at a point about a hundred yards away he
fancied that he heard a sound in a thicket a considerable distance
ahead. Promptly taking shelter behind a large tree, he used both eyes
and ears, watching the thicket closely, and listening for any other
sound that might come.

He heard nothing else but his keen eyes noted a bush swaying directly
into the teeth of the wind, a movement that could not occur unless
something alive in the thicket caused it. He slid his rifle forward and
still watched. Now the bush shook violently, and an awkward black
figure, shooting out, ran across the open. It was only a bear, and he
was about to resume his circling walk, but second thought told him that
the bear was running as if he ran away from an object of which he was
afraid, and there was nothing in the northern forests except human
beings to scare a bear.

He settled back in his shelter and resumed his watch in the thicket,
leaving the bear to run where he pleased, which he did, disappearing
with a snort in another thicket. A full ten minutes passed. Robert had
not stirred. He was crouched behind the tree, blending with the grass,
and he held his rifle ready to be fired in an instant, should the need
arise.

The bush that had moved against the wind had ceased stirring long since,
but now he saw another shaking and it, too, paid no attention to the
laws of nature, defying the wind as the first had done. Robert
concentrated his gaze upon it, thankful that he had not made the black
bear the original cause of things, and presently he saw the feathered
head of an Indian appear among the leaves. It was only a glimpse, he did
not see the body or even the face of the warrior, but it was enough.
Where one warrior was another was likely to be in those northern
marches, the most dangerous kind of neutral ground.

He began to slide away, keeping the big tree trunk between him and the
thicket, using all the arts of the forest trailer that he had learned by
natural aptitude and long practice. He went back slowly, but the grass
stems moved only a little as he went, and he was confident that he not
only had not been seen, but would not be seen. Yet he scarcely dared to
breathe--until he reached the bushes inclosing the opening in which his
comrades lay.

He paused a few moments before waking the others and filled his lungs
with air. He was surprised to find that the hands holding his rifle were
damp with perspiration, and he realized then how great the brief strain
had been. Suppose he had not seen the Indian in the bush, and had been
ambushed while on his scouting round! Or suppose he had stayed with his
comrades and had been ambushed there! But neither had happened, and,
taking Willet by the shoulder, he shook him, at the same time whispering
in his ear to make no noise. The hunter, his trained faculties at once
awake and on guard, sat up quietly, and Tayoga, who seemed to awake
instinctively at the same time, also, sat up.

"What is it, Robert?" whispered Willet.

"An Indian in the bush about two hundred yards away," replied the youth.
"I merely saw his hair and the feather in it, but it's safe to assume
that he's not the only one."

"That is so," said Tayoga. "A warrior does not come here alone."

"It can't be the band we beat off when we were in the hollow," said
Willet confidently. "They must be far south of us, even if they haven't
given up the chase."

"It is so, Great Bear," said Tayoga. "Was the warrior's head bare,
Lennox, or did he have the headdress, gustoweh, like mine?"

"I think," replied Robert, "that the feather projected something like
yours, perhaps from a cross-splint."

"Could you tell from what bird the feather came?"

"Yes, I saw that much. It was the plume of an eagle."

Tayoga mused a moment or two. Then he put two fingers to his mouth and
blew between them a mellow, peculiar whistle, much like the notes of a
deep-throated forest bird. He waited half a minute and a reply exactly
similar came.

"These," said Tayoga, "are our people," and rising and parting the
bushes, he walked, upright and fearless, toward the thicket in which
Robert had seen the warrior. Robert and Willet, influenced by boldness
as people always are, followed him with confidence, their rifles not
thrust forward, but lying in the hollows of their arms.

A dozen warriors issued from the thicket, at their head a tall man of
middle age, open and noble in countenance and dignified in bearing.

"These be Mohawks, Ganeagaono, the Keepers of the Eastern Gate," said
Tayoga, "and the sachem Dayohogo, which in English means, At the Forks,
leads them. He is a great man, valiant in battle and wise in council.
His words have great weight when the fifty sachems meet in the vale of
Onondaga to decide the questions of life and death."

He paused and bent his head respectfully before the man of superior
age, and, as yet, of superior rank. A look of pleasure appeared upon the
face of the Mohawk chief when he saw the young Onondaga.

"It is Tayoga of the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onundagaono
(Onondaga)," he said.

"It is so, Dayohogo of the clan of the Wolf, of the nation Ganeagaono
(Mohawk)," replied Tayoga. "Thou of the Keepers of the Eastern Gate and
my father, Daatgadose, of the Keepers of the Council Fire, have been
friends since they stood at the knees of their mothers, and we too are
friends, Dayohogo."

"You speak true words, Tayoga," said the chief, looking with an
appraising eye upon the handsome face and athletic figure of the young
Onondaga. "And the white people with you? One I know to be the Great
Bear who calls himself Willet, but the boy I know not."

"His name is Lennox, O Dayohogo. He is the true friend of the Great
Bear, of Tayoga and of the Hodenosaunee. He has within the last two
days, standing beside us, fought a valiant battle against the Abenakis,
the Hurons, the St. Regis and warriors of the other savage tribes that
call themselves the allies of Onontio."

Robert felt the penetrating eye of the Mohawk chief upon him. But the
gaze of the Indian was friendly, and while he felt admiration for Tayoga
he felt equal approval of Lennox.

"You have fought against odds and you have come away safe," he said.

"None of us received any hurt," replied Tayoga, modestly, "but we slew
more than one of those who attacked. It was in a gorge of the river far
back, and we escaped in the night, swimming with our canoe. Now we rest
here, and truly, Dayohogo, we are glad to see you and your warriors. The
forest has become safe for us. We have part of a deer left, and we ask
you to share it with us."

"Gladly," said Dayohogo. "We bring venison and corn meal, and we will
have food together."

His warriors were stalwart men, armed well, and they had no fear of any
foe, lighting a fire in the open, warming their deer meat and making
bread of their corn meal. The three ate with them, and Robert felt that
they were among friends. The Mohawks not only had Frontenac to remember,
but further back Champlain, the French soldier and explorer, who had
defeated them before they knew the use of firearms. He felt that
Duquesne at Quebec would have great difficulty in overcoming the enmity
of this warlike and powerful red nation, and he resolved to do what he
could to keep them attached to the British cause. It might be only a
little, but a little many times amounted to much.

Dayohogo and his warriors had been on a scout toward the north to the
very borders of the French settlements, and the chief told the three
that an unusual movement was going on there. Regular soldiers were
expected soon from France. War belts and splendid presents had been sent
to the tribes about the Great Lakes, both to the north and to the south,
and Onontio was addressing messages of uncommon politeness to his
brethren, the valiant Ganeagaono, otherwise the Mohawks, the Keepers of
the Eastern Gate.

"And do the Mohawk chiefs listen to the words of Onontio?" asked Robert
anxiously.

Dayohogo did not reply at once. He looked at the green woods. Birds,
blue or gray or brown, were darting here and there in the foliage, and
his eye rested for a moment on a tiny wren.

"The voice of Onontio is the voice of a bird chattering in a tree," he
said. "In the day of my father's father's father the children of
Onontio, under Champlain, came with guns, which were strange to us, and
with presents they induced the Adirondack warriors to help them. They
came up the great lake which the white people call Champlain, then they
crossed to Ticonderoga, near the outlet of the lake, Saint Sacrement,
and fell upon two hundred warriors of the Ganeagaono, who then knew only
the bow and arrow and the war club, and slew many of them. It was four
generations ago, but we do not forget. Then when my father was a young
warrior Frontenac came with a host of white soldiers and the Canadian
Indians and killed the warriors and laid waste with fire the lands of
the Five Nations, now the Six. Can the Hodenosaunee forget?"

The chief gloomed into the fire, and his eyes flashed with the memory of
ancient wrongs.

"Onontio has sent belts to the Ganeagaono also, has he not?" asked
Robert.

The eyes of the chief flashed again.

"He has tried to do so," he replied, "but the Ganeagaono are loyal to
their brethren of the Hodenosaunee since Tododahoe first found the
sacred wampum on the shore of the lake, Chautauqua. Our three clans, the
Turtle, the Wolf and the Bear, met in our largest village south of the
river, Ganeagaono (Mohawk), and listened to the bearers of the belts.
Then we sent them back to Onontio, telling them if they wished to be
heard further they must bring the belt to the council of all the sachems
of the Hodenosaunee in the vale of Onondaga."

"The other nations of the Hodenosaunee," said Tayoga, "have always known
that the Ganeagaono would do no less. The Keepers of the Eastern Gate
have never departed by the width of a single hair from their
obligations."

Dayohogo turned his gloomy face upon the Onondaga youth, and it was
lighted up suddenly by a smile of appreciation and pleasure.

"Tayoga of the Onundagaono," he said in measured tones, "you have spoken
well. The Onundagaono, the Keepers of the Council Fire, and the
Ganeagaono, the Keepers of the Eastern Gate, be the first tribes of the
Hodenosaunee, and better it be for a warrior of either to burn two days
and two nights in the fire than to violate in the least the ancient
customs and laws of the Hodenosaunee."

"Before we had the fight with the savage band," said Robert, "we met a
Frenchman, the Chevalier Raymond Louis de St. Luc, who was going to the
vale of Onondaga with belts from Onontio. St. Luc is a brave man, a
great orator, and his words will fall, golden and sweet like honey, on
the ears of the fifty chiefs. He will say that Champlain and Frontenac
belonged to an ancient day, that the forests have turned green and then
turned red a hundred and fifty times since Champlain and sixty times
since Frontenac. He will say that what they did was due to a false wind
that blew between the French and the Hodenosaunee, hiding the truth, and
making friends see in the faces of friends the faces of enemies. He will
say that a true wind blows now, and that it has blown away all the
falsehoods. He will say that Onontio is a better friend than Corlear to
the Hodenosaunee, and far more powerful."

The veteran Mohawk chief looked at young Lennox, and again his gaze was
one of approval, also of comprehension.

"My young white friend is already a great warrior," he said. "What he
did with Tayoga and the Great Bear proves it, but great as he is he is
even greater in the council. The words of the son of Onontio, St. Luc,
may drip from his lips like honey, but the speech of Lennox is the voice
of the south wind singing among the reeds. Lennox will be a great orator
among his people."

Robert blushed, and yet his heart was beating at the praise of Dayohogo,
obviously so sincere. He felt with a sudden instinctive rush of
conviction that the Mohawk was telling him the truth. It was an early
and partial display of the liquid and powerful speech, which afterward
gave him renown in New York and far beyond, and which caused people
everywhere to call him the "Golden Mouthed." And he was always eager to
acknowledge that much of its strength came from the lofty thought and
brilliant imagery shown by many of the orators of the nations of the
Hodenosaunee, with whom so much of his youth was spent.

"I only spoke the thought that was in my mind, Dayohogo," he said
modestly.

"Wherein is the beginning of great speech," said the sachem sagely.
"When Lennox returns from the journey on which he is now going it would
be fit for him to go to the vale of Onondaga and meet St. Luc in debate
before the fifty sachems."

Robert's heart leaped again. It was like a call to battle, and now he
knew what his great aim in life should be. He would strive with study
and practice to make himself first in it, but, for the present, he had
other thoughts and purpose. Willet, however, took fire too from the
words of the Mohawk chief.

"I've noticed before, Robert," he said, "that you had the gift of
tongues, and we'll make a great orator of you. In times such as ours a
man of that kind is needed bad. Maybe what Dayohogo thinks ought to be,
will be, and you will yet oppose St. Luc before the fifty sachems in the
vale of Onondaga."

"It would be well," said Dayohogo thoughtfully, "because the men at
Albany still give the Hodenosaunee trouble, making a promise seem one
thing when it is given, and another when the time to keep it comes."

"I know, Dayohogo!" exclaimed Willet, vehemently. "I know how those
sleek traders who are appointed to deal with you cheat you out of your
furs and try to cheat you out of your lands! But be patient a little
longer, you who have been patient so long. Word has come from England
that the King will remove his commissioners, and make Sir William
Johnson his Indian agent for all North America."

The eyes of Dayohogo and his warriors glistened.

"Is it true?" he asked. "Is Waraiyageh (Johnson) to be the one who will
talk with us and make the treaties with us?"

"I know it to be a fact, Dayohogo."

"Then it is well. We can trust Waraiyageh, and he knows that he can
trust us. Where our trail runs to Kolaneha (Johnstown) on a hill not far
from our tower castle he has built a great house, and I and my brother
chiefs of all the three clans the Wolf, the Bear and the Turtle, have
been there and have received presents from him. He is the friend of the
Ganeagaono, and he knew that he could build a house among us and live
there in peace, with our warriors to guard him."

The news that Johnson would be the King's Indian agent had an electric
effect upon the Mohawks. Whether he talked English or Iroquois he talked
a language they understood, and his acts were comprehensible by them. He
had their faith and he never lost it.

Some of the hunters went out, and, the woods being full of game, they
quickly shot another deer. Then the warriors still feeling in their
strength that they had nothing to dread from enemies, built high the
fire, cut up the deer, cooked it and made a great feast. The good
feeling that existed between the Mohawks and the two whites increased.
