classes in trying to figure out whether matter really exists or whether
he only thinks it exists.

I'm sure my sewing girl hasn't any doubt but that it exists!

Where do you think my new novel is?  In the waste-basket. I can see
myself that it's no good on earth, and when a loving author realizes
that, what WOULD be the judgment of a critical public?


                                                       Later

I address you, Daddy, from a bed of pain.  For two days I've been laid
up with swollen tonsils; I can just swallow hot milk, and that is all.
'What were your parents thinking of not to have those tonsils out when
you were a baby?' the doctor wished to know.  I'm sure I haven't an
idea, but I doubt if they were thinking much about me.

                                   Yours,
                                               J. A.




                                                   Next morning

I just read this over before sealing it.  I don't know WHY I cast such
a misty atmosphere over life.  I hasten to assure you that I am young
and happy and exuberant; and I trust you are the same.  Youth has
nothing to do with birthdays, only with ALIVEDNESS of spirit, so even
if your hair is grey, Daddy, you can still be a boy.

                           Affectionately,
                                                   Judy




                                                   12th Jan.

Dear Mr. Philanthropist,

Your cheque for my family came yesterday.  Thank you so much!  I cut
gymnasium and took it down to them right after luncheon, and you should
have seen the girl's face!  She was so surprised and happy and relieved
that she looked almost young; and she's only twenty-four. Isn't it
pitiful?

Anyway, she feels now as though all the good things were coming
together.  She has steady work ahead for two months--someone's getting
married, and there's a trousseau to make.

'Thank the good Lord!' cried the mother, when she grasped the fact that
that small piece of paper was one hundred dollars.

'It wasn't the good Lord at all,' said I, 'it was Daddy-Long-Legs.'
(Mr. Smith, I called you.)

'But it was the good Lord who put it in his mind,' said she.

'Not at all!  I put it in his mind myself,' said I.

But anyway, Daddy, I trust the good Lord will reward you suitably.  You
deserve ten thousand years out of purgatory.

                   Yours most gratefully,
                                           Judy Abbott




                                                   15th Feb.

May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty:

This morning I did eat my breakfast upon a cold turkey pie and a goose,
and I did send for a cup of tee (a china drink) of which I had never
drank before.

Don't be nervous, Daddy--I haven't lost my mind; I'm merely quoting
Sam'l Pepys.  We're reading him in connection with English History,
original sources.  Sallie and Julia and I converse now in the language
of 1660.  Listen to this:

'I went to Charing Cross to see Major Harrison hanged, drawn and
quartered:  he looking as cheerful as any man could do in that
condition.'  And this:  'Dined with my lady who is in handsome mourning
for her brother who died yesterday of spotted fever.'

Seems a little early to commence entertaining, doesn't it?  A friend of
Pepys devised a very cunning manner whereby the king might pay his
debts out of the sale to poor people of old decayed provisions.  What
do you, a reformer, think of that?  I don't believe we're so bad today
as the newspapers make out.

Samuel was as excited about his clothes as any girl; he spent five
times as much on dress as his wife--that appears to have been the
Golden Age of husbands.  Isn't this a touching entry?  You see he
really was honest.  'Today came home my fine Camlett cloak with gold
buttons, which cost me much money, and I pray God to make me able to
pay for it.'

Excuse me for being so full of Pepys; I'm writing a special topic on
him.

What do you think, Daddy?  The Self-Government Association has
abolished the ten o'clock rule.  We can keep our lights all night if we
choose, the only requirement being that we do not disturb others--we
are not supposed to entertain on a large scale.  The result is a
beautiful commentary on human nature.  Now that we may stay up as long
as we choose, we no longer choose.  Our heads begin to nod at nine
o'clock, and by nine-thirty the pen drops from our nerveless grasp.
It's nine-thirty now.  Good night.


                                                   Sunday

Just back from church--preacher from Georgia.  We must take care, he
says, not to develop our intellects at the expense of our emotional
natures--but methought it was a poor, dry sermon (Pepys again). It
doesn't matter what part of the United States or Canada they come from,
or what denomination they are, we always get the same sermon.  Why on
earth don't they go to men's colleges and urge the students not to
allow their manly natures to be crushed out by too much mental
application?

It's a beautiful day--frozen and icy and clear.  As soon as dinner is
over, Sallie and Julia and Marty Keene and Eleanor Pratt (friends of
mine, but you don't know them) and I are going to put on short skirts
and walk 'cross country to Crystal Spring Farm and have a fried chicken
and waffle supper, and then have Mr. Crystal Spring drive us home in
his buckboard.  We are supposed to be inside the campus at seven, but
we are going to stretch a point tonight and make it eight.

Farewell, kind Sir.

       I have the honour of subscribing myself,
           Your most loyall, dutifull, faithfull and obedient servant,
                                           J. Abbott




                                                   March Fifth

Dear Mr. Trustee,

Tomorrow is the first Wednesday in the month--a weary day for the John
Grier Home.  How relieved they'll be when five o'clock comes and you
pat them on the head and take yourselves off!  Did you (individually)
ever pat me on the head, Daddy?  I don't believe so--my memory seems to
be concerned only with fat Trustees.

Give the Home my love, please--my TRULY love.  I have quite a feeling
of tenderness for it as I look back through a haze of four years.  When
I first came to college I felt quite resentful because I'd been robbed
of the normal kind of childhood that the other girls had had; but now,
I don't feel that way in the least.  I regard it as a very unusual
adventure.  It gives me a sort of vantage point from which to stand
aside and look at life.  Emerging full grown, I get a perspective on
the world, that other people who have been brought up in the thick of
things entirely lack.

I know lots of girls (Julia, for instance) who never know that they are
happy.  They are so accustomed to the feeling that their senses are
deadened to it; but as for me--I am perfectly sure every moment of my
life that I am happy.  And I'm going to keep on being, no matter what
unpleasant things turn up.  I'm going to regard them (even toothaches)
as interesting experiences, and be glad to know what they feel like.
'Whatever sky's above me, I've a heart for any fate.'

However, Daddy, don't take this new affection for the J.G.H.  too
literally.  If I have five children, like Rousseau, I shan't leave them
on the steps of a foundling asylum in order to insure their being
brought up simply.

Give my kindest regards to Mrs. Lippett (that, I think, is truthful;
love would be a little strong) and don't forget to tell her what a
beautiful nature I've developed.

                               Affectionately,
                                                   Judy



                                              LOCK WILLOW,
                                                  4th April

Dear Daddy,

Do you observe the postmark?  Sallie and I are embellishing Lock Willow
with our presence during the Easter Vacation.  We decided that the best
thing we could do with our ten days was to come where it is quiet.  Our
nerves had got to the point where they wouldn't stand another meal in
Fergussen.  Dining in a room with four hundred girls is an ordeal when
you are tired.  There is so much noise that you can't hear the girls
across the table speak unless they make their hands into a megaphone
and shout.  That is the truth.

We are tramping over the hills and reading and writing, and having a
nice, restful time.  We climbed to the top of 'Sky Hill' this morning
where Master Jervie and I once cooked supper--it doesn't seem possible
that it was nearly two years ago.  I could still see the place where
the smoke of our fire blackened the rock.  It is funny how certain
places get connected with certain people, and you never go back without
thinking of them.  I was quite lonely without him--for two minutes.

What do you think is my latest activity, Daddy?  You will begin to
believe that I am incorrigible--I am writing a book.  I started it
three weeks ago and am eating it up in chunks.  I've caught the secret.
Master Jervie and that editor man were right; you are most convincing
when you write about the things you know.  And this time it is about
something that I do know--exhaustively.  Guess where it's laid?  In the
John Grier Home!  And it's good, Daddy, I actually believe it is--just
about the tiny little things that happened every day.  I'm a realist
now.  I've abandoned romanticism; I shall go back to it later though,
when my own adventurous future begins.

This new book is going to get itself finished--and published!  You see
if it doesn't. If you just want a thing hard enough and keep on trying,
you do get it in the end.  I've been trying for four years to get a
letter from you--and I haven't given up hope yet.

Goodbye, Daddy dear,

(I like to call you Daddy dear; it's so alliterative.)

                                   Affectionately,
                                                   Judy


PS.  I forgot to tell you the farm news, but it's very distressing.
Skip this postscript if you don't want your sensibilities all wrought
up.

Poor old Grove is dead.  He got so that he couldn't chew and they had
to shoot him.

Nine chickens were killed by a weasel or a skunk or a rat last week.

One of the cows is sick, and we had to have the veterinary surgeon out
from Bonnyrigg Four Corners.  Amasai stayed up all night to give her
linseed oil and whisky.  But we have an awful suspicion that the poor
sick cow got nothing but linseed oil.

Sentimental Tommy (the tortoise-shell cat) has disappeared; we are
afraid he has been caught in a trap.

There are lots of troubles in the world!




                                                   17th May

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

This is going to be extremely short because my shoulder aches at the
sight of a pen.  Lecture notes all day, immortal novel all evening,
make too much writing.

Commencement three weeks from next Wednesday.  I think you might come
and make my acquaintance--I shall hate you if you don't! Julia's
inviting Master Jervie, he being her family, and Sallie's inviting
Jimmie McB., he being her family, but who is there for me to invite?
Just you and Lippett, and I don't want her.  Please come.

Yours, with love and writer's cramp.
                                               Judy




                                                  LOCK WILLOW,
                                                     19th June

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

I'm educated!  My diploma is in the bottom bureau drawer with my two
best dresses.  Commencement was as usual, with a few showers at vital
moments.  Thank you for your rosebuds.  They were lovely.  Master
Jervie and Master Jimmie both gave me roses, too, but I left theirs in
the bath tub and carried yours in the class procession.

Here I am at Lock Willow for the summer--for ever maybe.  The board is
cheap; the surroundings quiet and conducive to a literary life.  What
more does a struggling author wish?  I am mad about my book.  I think
of it every waking moment, and dream of it at night.  All I want is
peace and quiet and lots of time to work (interspersed with nourishing
meals).

Master Jervie is coming up for a week or so in August, and Jimmie
McBride is going to drop in sometime through the summer.  He's
connected with a bond house now, and goes about the country selling
bonds to banks.  He's going to combine the 'Farmers' National' at the
Corners and me on the same trip.

You see that Lock Willow isn't entirely lacking in society.  I'd be
expecting to have you come motoring through--only I know now that that
is hopeless.  When you wouldn't come to my commencement, I tore you
from my heart and buried you for ever.

                           Judy Abbott, A.B.




                                                   24th July

Dearest Daddy-Long-Legs,

Isn't it fun to work--or don't you ever do it?  It's especially fun
when your kind of work is the thing you'd rather do more than anything
else in the world.  I've been writing as fast as my pen would go every
day this summer, and my only quarrel with life is that the days aren't
long enough to write all the beautiful and valuable and entertaining
thoughts I'm thinking.

I've finished the second draft of my book and am going to begin the
third tomorrow morning at half-past seven.  It's the sweetest book you
ever saw--it is, truly.  I think of nothing else.  I can barely wait in
the morning to dress and eat before beginning; then I write and write
and write till suddenly I'm so tired that I'm limp all over.  Then I go
out with Colin (the new sheep dog) and romp through the fields and get
a fresh supply of ideas for the next day.  It's the most beautiful book
you ever saw--Oh, pardon--I said that before.

You don't think me conceited, do you, Daddy dear?

I'm not, really, only just now I'm in the enthusiastic stage.  Maybe
later on I'll get cold and critical and sniffy.  No, I'm sure I won't!
This time I've written a real book.  Just wait till you see it.

I'll try for a minute to talk about something else.  I never told you,
did I, that Amasai and Carrie got married last May?  They are still
working here, but so far as I can see it has spoiled them both.  She
used to laugh when he tramped in mud or dropped ashes on the floor, but
now--you should hear her scold!  And she doesn't curl her hair any
longer.  Amasai, who used to be so obliging about beating rugs and
carrying wood, grumbles if you suggest such a thing.  Also his neckties
are quite dingy--black and brown, where they used to be scarlet and
purple.  I've determined never to marry.  It's a deteriorating process,
evidently.

There isn't much of any farm news.  The animals are all in the best of
health.  The pigs are unusually fat, the cows seem contented and the
hens are laying well.  Are you interested in poultry?  If so, let me
recommend that invaluable little work, 200 Eggs per Hen per Year.  I am
thinking of starting an incubator next spring and raising broilers.
You see I'm settled at Lock Willow permanently.  I have decided to stay
until I've written 114 novels like Anthony Trollope's mother.  Then I
shall have completed my life work and can retire and travel.

Mr. James McBride spent last Sunday with us.  Fried chicken and
ice-cream for dinner, both of which he appeared to appreciate.  I was
awfully glad to see him; he brought a momentary reminder that the world
at large exists.  Poor Jimmie is having a hard time peddling his bonds.
The 'Farmers' National' at the Corners wouldn't have anything to do
with them in spite of the fact that they pay six per cent.  interest
and sometimes seven.  I think he'll end up by going home to Worcester
and taking a job in his father's factory.  He's too open and confiding
and kind-hearted ever to make a successful financier.  But to be the
manager of a flourishing overall factory is a very desirable position,
don't you think?  Just now he turns up his nose at overalls, but he'll
come to them.

I hope you appreciate the fact that this is a long letter from a person
with writer's cramp.  But I still love you, Daddy dear, and I'm very
happy.  With beautiful scenery all about, and lots to eat and a
comfortable four-post bed and a ream of blank paper and a pint of
ink--what more does one want in the world?

                           Yours as always,
                                               Judy

PS.  The postman arrives with some more news.  We are to expect Master
Jervie on Friday next to spend a week.  That's a very pleasant
prospect--only I am afraid my poor book will suffer.  Master Jervie is
very demanding.




                                               27th August

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Where are you, I wonder?

I never know what part of the world you are in, but I hope you're not
in New York during this awful weather.  I hope you're on a mountain
peak (but not in Switzerland; somewhere nearer) looking at the snow and
thinking about me.  Please be thinking about me.  I'm quite lonely and
I want to be thought about.  Oh, Daddy, I wish I knew you!  Then when
we were unhappy we could cheer each other up.

I don't think I can stand much more of Lock Willow.  I'm thinking of
moving.  Sallie is going to do settlement work in Boston next winter.
Don't you think it would be nice for me to go with her, then we could
have a studio together?  I would write while she SETTLED and we could
be together in the evenings.  Evenings are very long when there's no
one but the Semples and Carrie and Amasai to talk to.  I know in
advance that you won't like my studio idea.  I can read your
secretary's letter now:


'Miss Jerusha Abbott.
       'DEAR MADAM,

'Mr. Smith prefers that you remain at Lock Willow.
               'Yours truly,
                           'ELMER H. GRIGGS.'


I hate your secretary.  I am certain that a man named Elmer H. Griggs
must be horrid.  But truly, Daddy, I think I shall have to go to
Boston.  I can't stay here.  If something doesn't happen soon, I shall
throw myself into the silo pit out of sheer desperation.

Mercy! but it's hot.  All the grass is burnt up and the brooks are dry
and the roads are dusty.  It hasn't rained for weeks and weeks.

This letter sounds as though I had hydrophobia, but I haven't. I just
want some family.

Goodbye, my dearest Daddy.

                           I wish I knew you.
                                               Judy




                                         LOCK WILLOW,
                                           19th September

Dear Daddy,

Something has happened and I need advice.  I need it from you, and from
nobody else in the world.  Wouldn't it be possible for me to see you?
It's so much easier to talk than to write; and I'm afraid your
secretary might open the letter.
                                           Judy

PS.  I'm very unhappy.




                                   LOCK WILLOW,
                                               3rd October

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Your note written in your own hand--and a pretty wobbly hand!--came
this morning.  I am so sorry that you have been ill; I wouldn't have
bothered you with my affairs if I had known.  Yes, I will tell you the
trouble, but it's sort of complicated to write, and VERY PRIVATE.
Please don't keep this letter, but burn it.

Before I begin--here's a cheque for one thousand dollars.  It seems
funny, doesn't it, for me to be sending a cheque to you?  Where do you
think I got it?

I've sold my story, Daddy.  It's going to be published serially in
seven parts, and then in a book!  You might think I'd be wild with joy,
but I'm not.  I'm entirely apathetic.  Of course I'm glad to begin
paying you--I owe you over two thousand more.  It's coming in
instalments.  Now don't be horrid, please, about taking it, because it
makes me happy to return it.  I owe you a great deal more than the mere
money, and the rest I will continue to pay all my life in gratitude and
affection.

And now, Daddy, about the other thing; please give me your most worldly
advice, whether you think I'll like it or not.

You know that I've always had a very special feeling towards you; you
sort of represented my whole family; but you won't mind, will you, if I
tell you that I have a very much more special feeling for another man?
You can probably guess without much trouble who he is.  I suspect that
my letters have been very full of Master Jervie for a very long time.

I wish I could make you understand what he is like and how entirely
companionable we are.  We think the same about everything--I am afraid
I have a tendency to make over my ideas to match his!  But he is almost
always right; he ought to be, you know, for he has fourteen years'
start of me.  In other ways, though, he's just an overgrown boy, and he
does need looking after--he hasn't any sense about wearing rubbers when
it rains.  He and I always think the same things are funny, and that is
such a lot; it's dreadful when two people's senses of humour are
antagonistic.  I don't believe there's any bridging that gulf!

And he is--Oh, well!  He is just himself, and I miss him, and miss him,
and miss him.  The whole world seems empty and aching.  I hate the
moonlight because it's beautiful and he isn't here to see it with me.
But maybe you've loved somebody, too, and you know?  If you have, I
don't need to explain; if you haven't, I can't explain.

Anyway, that's the way I feel--and I've refused to marry him.

I didn't tell him why; I was just dumb and miserable.  I couldn't think
of anything to say.  And now he has gone away imagining that I want to
marry Jimmie McBride--I don't in the least, I wouldn't think of
marrying Jimmie; he isn't grown up enough.  But Master Jervie and I got
into a dreadful muddle of misunderstanding and we both hurt each
other's feelings.  The reason I sent him away was not because I didn't
care for him, but because I cared for him so much.  I was afraid he
would regret it in the future--and I couldn't stand that!  It didn't
seem right for a person of my lack of antecedents to marry into any
such family as his.  I never told him about the orphan asylum, and I
hated to explain that I didn't know who I was.  I may be DREADFUL, you
know.  And his family are proud--and I'm proud, too!

Also, I felt sort of bound to you.  After having been educated to be a
writer, I must at least try to be one; it would scarcely be fair to
accept your education and then go off and not use it.  But now that I
am going to be able to pay back the money, I feel that I have partially
discharged that debt--besides, I suppose I could keep on being a writer
even if I did marry.  The two professions are not necessarily exclusive.

I've been thinking very hard about it.  Of course he is a Socialist,
and he has unconventional ideas; maybe he wouldn't mind marrying into
the proletariat so much as some men might.  Perhaps when two people are
exactly in accord, and always happy when together and lonely when
apart, they ought not to let anything in the world stand between them.
Of course I WANT to believe that!  But I'd like to get your unemotional
opinion.  You probably belong to a Family also, and will look at it
from a worldly point of view and not just a sympathetic, human point of
view--so you see how brave I am to lay it before you.

Suppose I go to him and explain that the trouble isn't Jimmie, but is
