phantom of hope, until our enemies shall have bound us hand and foot? We
are not weak, if we make a proper use of those means which the God of
nature hath placed in our power.

Three millions of people, armed in the holy cause of liberty, and in such
a country as that which we possess, are invincible by any force which our
enemy can send against us. Besides, we shall not fight our battles alone.
There is a just God who presides over the destinies of nations; and who
will raise up friends to fight our battles for us. The battle is not to
the strong alone; it is to the vigilant, the active, the brave. Besides,
we have no election. If we were base enough to desire it, it is now too
late to retire from the contest. There is no retreat but in submission and
slavery! Our chains are forged. Their clanking may be heard on the plains
of Boston! The war is inevitable; and; let it come! I repeat it, let it
come!

It is in vain to extenuate the matter. Gentlemen may cry peace, peace; but
there is no peace. The war is actually begun. The next gale that sweeps
from the north, will bring to our ears the clash of resounding arms! Our
brethren are already in the field! Why stand we here idle? What is it that
gentlemen wish? What would they have? Is life so dear, or peace so sweet,
as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty
God! I know not what course others may take; but as for me, give me
liberty, or give me death.


Notes.--Observe, in this lesson, the all-controlling power of emphasis in
determining the falling inflection. The words "see," "hear," and "my," in
the first paragraph, the word "that" in the second, and "spurned" and
"contempt" in the fourth paragraph, are examples of this. Let the reader
remember that a high degree of emphasis is sometimes expressed by a
whisper; also, that emphasis is often expressed by a pause.

It will be well to read in this connection some good history of the
opening scenes of the Revolution.



XX: THE AMERICAN FLAG. (119)

Joseph Rodman Drake. 1795-1820, was born in New York City. His father died
when he was very young, and his early life was a struggle with poverty. He
studied medicine, and took his degree when he was about twenty years old.
From a child, he showed remarkable poetical powers, having made rhymes at
the early age of five. Most of his published writings were produced during
a period of less than two years. "The Culprit Fay" and the "American Flag"
are best known. In disposition, Mr. Drake was gentle and kindly; and, on
the occasion of his death, his intimate friend, Fitz-Greene Halleck,
expressed his character in the well-known couplet:

   "None knew thee but to love thee,
   Nor named thee but to praise."
###


When Freedom, from her mountain height,
  Unfurled her standard to the air,
She tore the azure robe of night,
  And set the stars of glory there:
She mingled with its gorgeous dyes
The milky baldric of the skies,
And striped its pure, celestial white
With streakings of the morning light;
Then, from his mansion in the sun,
She called her eagle bearer down,
And gave into his mighty hand
The symbol of her chosen land.

Majestic monarch of the cloud!
  Who rear'st aloft thy regal form,
To hear the tempest trumpings loud,
And see the lightning lances driven,
  When strive the warriors of the storm,
And rolls the thunder drum of heaven;--
Child of the sun! to thee 't is given
  To guard the banner of the free,
To hover in the sulphur smoke,
To ward away the battle stroke,
And bid its blendings shine afar,
Like rainbows on the cloud of war,
   The harbingers of victory!

Flag of the brave! thy folds shall fly,
The sign of hope and triumph high!
When speaks the signal trumpet tone,
And the long line comes gleaming on,
Ere yet the lifeblood, warm and wet,
Has dimmed the glistening bayonet,
Each soldier's eye shall brightly turn
To where thy sky-born glories burn,
And, as his springing steps advance,
Catch war and vengeance from the glance.
And when the cannon mouthings loud
Heave in wild wreaths the battle shroud,
And gory sabers rise and fall,
Like shoots of flame on midnight's pall,
Then shall thy meteor glances glow,
And cowering foes shall sink beneath
Each gallant arm, that strikes below
That lovely messenger of death.

Flag of the seas! on ocean's wave
Thy stars shall glitter o'er the brave;
When death careering on the gale,
Sweeps darkly round the bellied sail,
And frighted waves rush wildly back,
Before the broadside's reeling rack,
Each dying wanderer of the sea
Shall look at once to heaven and thee,
And smile to see thy splendors fly
In triumph o'er his closing eye.

Flag of the free heart's hope and home,
  By angel hands to valor given,
Thy stars have lit the welkin dome,
  And all thy hues were born in heaven.
Forever float that standard sheet!
  Where breathes the foe but falls before us,
With Freedom's soil beneath our feet,
  And Freedom's banner streaming o'er us?



XXI. IRONICAL EULOGY ON DEBT. (121)


Debt is of the very highest antiquity. The first debt in the history of
man is the debt of nature, and the first instinct is to put off the
payment of it to the last moment. Many persons, it will be observed,
following the natural procedure, would die before they would pay their
debts.

Society is composed of two classes, debtors and creditors. The creditor
class has been erroneously supposed the more enviable. Never was there a
greater misconception; and the hold it yet maintains upon opinion is a
remarkable example of the obstinacy of error, notwithstanding the plainest
lessons of experience. The debtor has the sympathies of mankind. He is
seldom spoken of but with expressions of tenderness and compassion--"the
poor debtor!"--and "the unfortunate debtor!" On the other hand, "harsh"
and "hard-hearted" are the epithets allotted to the creditor. Who ever
heard the "poor creditor," the "unfortunate creditor" spoken of? No, the
creditor never becomes the object of pity, unless he passes into the
debtor class. A creditor may be ruined by the poor debtor, but it is not
until he becomes unable to pay his own debts, that he begins to be
compassionated.

A debtor is a man of mark. Many eyes are fixed upon him; many have
interest in his well-being; his movements are of concern; he can not
disappear unheeded; his name is in many mouths; his name is upon many
books; he is a man of note--of promissory note; he fills the speculation
of many minds; men conjecture about him, wonder about him,--wonder and
conjecture whether he will pay. He is a man of consequence, for many are
running after him. His door is thronged with duns. He is inquired after
every hour of the day. Judges hear of him and know him. Every meal he
swallows, every coat he puts upon his back, every dollar he borrows,
appears before the country in some formal document. Compare his notoriety
with the obscure lot of the creditor,--of the man who has nothing but
claims on the world; a landlord, or fundholder, or some such disagreeable,
hard character.

The man who pays his way is unknown in his neighborhood. You ask the
milkman at his door, and he can not tell his name. You ask the butcher
where Mr. Payall lives, and he tells you he knows no such name, for it is
not in his books. You shall ask the baker, and he will tell you there is
no such person in the neighborhood. People that have his money fast in
their pockets, have no thought of his person or appellation. His house
only is known. No. 31 is good pay. No. 31 is ready money. Not a scrap of
paper is ever made out for No. 31. It is an anonymous house; its owner
pays his way to obscurity. No one knows anything about him, or heeds his
movements. If a carriage be seen at his door, the neighborhood is not full
of concern lest he be going to run away. If a package be removed from his
house, a score of boys are not employed to watch whether it be carried to
the pawnbroker. Mr. Payall fills no place in the public mind; no one has
any hopes or fears about him.

The creditor always figures in the fancy as a sour, single man, with
grizzled hair, a scowling countenance, and a peremptory air, who lives in
a dark apartment, with musty deeds about him, and an iron safe, as
impenetrable as his heart, grabbing together what he does not enjoy, and
what there is no one about him to enjoy. The debtor, on the other hand, is
always pictured with a wife and six fair-haired daughters, bound together
in affection and misery, full of sensibility, and suffering without a
fault. The creditor, it is never doubted, thrives without a merit. He has
no wife and children to pity. No one ever thinks it desirable that he
should have the means of living. He is a brute for insisting that he must
receive, in order to pay. It is not in the imagination of man to conceive
that his creditor has demands upon him which must be satisfied, and that
he must do to others as others must do to him. A creditor is a
personification of exaction. He is supposed to be always taking in, and
never giving out.

People idly fancy that the possession of riches is desirable. What
blindness! Spend and regale. Save a shilling and you lay it by for a
thief. The prudent men are the men that live beyond their means. Happen
what may, they are safe. They have taken time by the forelock. They have
anticipated fortune. "The wealthy fool, with gold in store," has only
denied himself so much enjoyment, which another will seize at his expense.
Look at these people in a panic. See who are the fools then. You know them
by their long faces. You may say, as one of them goes by in an agony of
apprehension, "There is a stupid fellow who fancied himself rich, because
he had fifty thousand dollars in bank." The history of the last ten years
has taught the moral, "spend and regale." Whatever is laid up beyond the
present hour, is put in jeopardy. There is no certainty but in instant
enjoyment. Look at schoolboys sharing a plum cake. The knowing ones eat,
as for a race; but a stupid fellow saves his portion; just nibbles a bit,
and "keeps the rest for another time." Most provident blockhead! The
others, when they have gobbled up their shares, set upon him, plunder him,
and thrash him for crying out.

Before the terms "depreciation," "suspension," and "going into
liquidation," were heard, there might have been some reason in the
practice of "laying up;" but now it denotes the darkest blindness. The
prudent men of the present time, are the men in debt. The tendency being
to sacrifice creditors to debtors, and the debtor party acquiring daily
new strength, everyone is in haste to get into the favored class. In any
case, the debtor is safe. He has put his enjoyments behind him; they are
safe; no turns of fortune can disturb them. The substance he has eaten up,
is irrecoverable. The future can not trouble his past. He has nothing to
apprehend. He has anticipated more than fortune would ever have granted
him. He has tricked fortune; and his creditors--bah! who feels for
creditors? What are creditors? Landlords; a pitiless and unpitiable tribe;
all griping extortioners! What would become of the world of debtors, if it
did not steal a march upon this rapacious class?



XXII. THE THREE WARNINGS. (124)

Hester Lynch Thrale. 1739--1821, owes her celebrity almost wholly to her
long intimacy with Dr. Samuel Johnson. This continued for twenty years,
during which Johnson spent much time in her family. She was born in
Caernarvonshire, Wales; her first husband was a wealthy brewer, by whom
she had several children. In 1784, she married an Italian teacher of music
named Piozzi. Her writings are quite numerous; the best known of her books
is the "Anecdotes of Dr. Johnson;" but nothing she ever wrote is so well
known as the "Three Warnings."
###


The tree of deepest root is found
Least willing still to quit the ground;
'T was therefore said by ancient sages,
  That love of life increased with years
So much, that in our latter stages,
When pains grow sharp, and sickness rages,
  The greatest love of life appears.

This great affection to believe,
Which all confess, but few perceive,
If old assertions can't prevail,
Be pleased to hear a modern tale.

When sports went round, and all were gay,
On neighbor Dodson's wedding day,
Death called aside the jocund groom
With him into another room;
And looking grave, "You must," says he,
"Quit your sweet bride, and come with me."
"With you! and quit my Susan's side?
With you!" the hapless bridegroom cried:
"Young as I am, 't is monstrous hard!
Besides, in truth, I'm not prepared."

What more he urged, I have not heard;
  His reasons could not well be stronger:
So Death the poor delinquent spared,
  And left to live a little longer.
Yet, calling up a serious look,
His hourglass trembled while he spoke:
"Neighbor," he said, "farewell! no more
Shall Death disturb your mirthful hour;
And further, to avoid all blame
Of cruelty upon my name,
To give you time for preparation,
And fit you for your future station,
Three several warnings you shall have
Before you're summoned to the grave;
Willing for once I'll quit my prey,
  And grant a kind reprieve;
In hopes you'll have no more to say,
But, when I call again this way,
  Well pleased the world will leave."
To these conditions both consented,
And parted perfectly contented.

What next the hero of our tale befell,
How long he lived, how wisely, and how well,
It boots not that the Muse should tell;
He plowed, he sowed, he bought, he sold,
Nor once perceived his growing old,
  Nor thought of Death as near;
His friends not false, his wife no shrew,
Many his gains, his children few,
He passed his hours in peace.
But, while he viewed his wealth increase,
While thus along life's dusty road,
The beaten track, content he trod,
Old Time, whose haste no mortal spares,
Uncalled, unheeded, unawares,
  Brought on his eightieth year.

And now, one night, in musing mood,
  As all alone he sate,
  The unwelcome messenger of Fate
Once more before him stood.
Half-killed with wonder and surprise,
"So soon returned!" old Dodson cries.
"So soon d' ye call it?" Death replies:
"Surely! my friend, you're but in jest;
  Since I was here before,
'T is six and thirty years at least,
  And you are now fourscore."
"So much the worse!" the clown rejoined;
"To spare the aged would be kind:
Besides, you promised me three warnings,
Which I have looked for nights and mornings!"

"I know," cries Death, "that at the best,
I seldom am a welcome guest;
But do n't be captious, friend; at least,
I little thought that you'd be able
To stump about your farm and stable;
Your years have run to a great length,
Yet still you seem to have your strength."

"Hold!" says the farmer, "not so fast!
I have been lame, these four years past."
"And no great wonder," Death replies,
"However, you still keep your eyes;
And surely, sir, to see one's friends,
For legs and arms would make amends."
"Perhaps," says Dodson, "so it might,
But latterly I've lost my sight."
"This is a shocking story, faith;
But there's some comfort still," says Death;
"Each strives your sadness to amuse;
I warrant you hear all the news."
"There's none," cries he, "and if there were,
I've grown so deaf, I could not hear."

"Nay, then," the specter stern rejoined,
  "These are unpardonable yearnings;
If you are lame, and deaf, and blind,
  You've had your three sufficient warnings,
So, come along; no more we'll part."
He said, and touched him with his dart:
And now old Dodson, turning pale,
Yields to his fate--so ends my tale.



XXIII. THE MEMORY OF OUR FATHERS. (128)

Lyman Beecher, 1775-1863, a famous congregational minister of New England,
was born in New Haven, graduated from Yale College in 1797, and studied
theology with Dr. Timothy Dwight. His first settlement was at East
Hampton, L. I., at a salary of three hundred dollars per year. He was
pastor of the church in Litchfield, Ct., from 1810 till 1826, when he
removed to Boston, and took charge of the Hanover Street Church. In the
religious controversies of the time, Dr. Beecher was one of the most
prominent characters. From 1832 to 1842, he was President of Lane
Theological Seminary, in the suburbs of Cincinnati. He then returned to
Boston, where he spent most of the closing years of his long and active
life. His death occurred in Brooklyn, N. Y. As a theologian, preacher, and
advocate of education, temperance, and missions, Dr. Beecher occupied a
very prominent place for nearly half a century. He left a large family of
sons and two daughters, who are well known as among the most eminent
preachers and authors in America.
###


We are called upon to cherish with high veneration and grateful
recollections, the memory of our fathers. Both the ties of nature and the
dictates of policy demand this. And surely no nation had ever less
occasion to be ashamed of its ancestry, or more occasion for gratulation
in that respect; for while most nations trace their origin to barbarians,
the foundations of our nation were laid by civilized men, by Christians.
Many of them were men of distinguished families, of powerful talents, of
great learning and of preeminent wisdom, of decision of character, and of
most inflexible integrity. And yet not unfrequently they have been treated
as if they had no virtues; while their sins and follies have been
sedulously immortalized in satirical anecdote.

The influence of such treatment of our fathers is too manifest. It creates
and lets loose upon their institutions, the vandal spirit of innovation
and overthrow; for after the memory of our father shall have been rendered
contemptible, who will appreciate and sustain their institutions? "The
memory of our fathers" should be the watchword of liberty throughout the
land; for, imperfect as they were, the world before had not seen their
like, nor will it soon, we fear, behold their like again. Such models of
moral excellence, such apostles of civil and religious liberty, such
shades of the illustrious dead looking down upon their descendants with
approbation or reproof, according as they follow or depart from the good
way, constitute a censorship inferior only to the eye of God; and to
ridicule them is national suicide.

The doctrines of our fathers have been represented as gloomy,
superstitious, severe, irrational, and of a licentious tendency. But when
other systems shall have produced a piety as devoted, a morality as pure,
a patriotism as disinterested, and a state of society as happy, as have
prevailed where their doctrines have been most prevalent, it may be in
season to seek an answer to this objection.

The persecutions instituted by our fathers have been the occasion of
ceaseless obloquy upon their fair fame. And truly, it was a fault of no
ordinary magnitude, that sometimes they did persecute. But let him whose
ancestors were not ten times more guilty, cast the first stone, and the
ashes of our fathers will no more be disturbed. Theirs was the fault of
the age, and it will be easy to show that no class of men had, at that
time, approximated so nearly to just apprehensions of religious liberty;
and that it is to them that the world is now indebted for the more just
and definite views which now prevail.

The superstition and bigotry of our fathers are themes on which some of
their descendants, themselves far enough from superstition, if not from
bigotry, have delighted to dwell. But when we look abroad, and behold the
condition of the world, compared with the condition of New England, we may
justly exclaim, "Would to God that the ancestors of all the nations had
been not only almost, but altogether such bigots as our fathers were."



XXIV. SHORT SELECTIONS IN PROSE. (130)

I. DRYDEN AND POPE.

Dryden knew more of man in his general nature, and Pope in his local
manners. The notions of Dryden were formed by comprehensive speculation,
those of Pope by minute attention. There is more dignity in the knowledge
of Dryden, more certainty in that of Pope. The style of Dryden is
capricious and varied, that of Pope cautious and uniform. Dryden obeys the
motions of his own mind; Pope constrains his mind to his own rules of
composition. Dryden's page is a natural field, rising into inequalities,
and diversified by the varied exuberance of abundant vegetation; Pope's is
the velvet lawn, shaven by the scythe, and leveled by the roller. If the
flights of Dryden are higher, Pope continues longer on the wing. If, of
Dryden's fire, the blaze is brighter, of Pope's the heat is more regular
and constant. Dryden often surpasses expectation, and Pope never falls
below it. Dryden is read with frequent astonishment, and Pope with
perpetual delight.
                                                --Samuel Johnson.

Note.--A fine example of antithesis. See p. 26.



II. LAS CASAS DISSUADING FROM BATTLE. (130)

Is then the dreadful measure of your cruelty not yet complete? Battle!
against whom? Against a king, in whose mild bosom your atrocious injuries,
even yet, have not excited hate; but who, insulted or victorious, still
sues for peace. Against a people, who never wronged the living being their
Creator formed; a people, who received you as cherished guests, with eager
hospitality and confiding kindness. Generously and freely did they share
with you their comforts, their treasures, and their homes; you repaid them
by fraud, oppression, and dishonor.

Pizarro, hear me! Hear me, chieftains! And thou, All-powerful! whose
thunder can shiver into sand the adamantine rock, whose lightnings can
pierce the core of the riven and quaking earth, oh let thy power give
effect to thy servant's words, as thy Spirit gives courage to his will! Do
not, I implore you, chieftains,--do not, I implore, you, renew the foul
barbarities your insatiate avarice has inflicted on this wretched,
unoffending race. But hush, my sighs! fall not, ye drops of useless
sorrow! heart-breaking anguish, choke not my utterance.
                                                     --E. B. Sheridan.

Note.--Examples of series. See p. 28.



III. ACTION AND REPOSE. (131)

John Ruskin, 1819 ---, is a distinguished English art critic and author.
From 1869 to 1884, he was Professor of the Fine Arts at Oxford University.
His writings are very numerous, and are noted for their eloquent and
brilliant style.
###


About the river of human life there is a wintry wind, though a heavenly
sunshine; the iris colors its agitation, the frost fixes upon its repose.
Let us beware that our rest become not the rest of stones, which, so long
as they are tempest-tossed and thunderstricken, maintain their majesty;
but when the stream is silent and the storm passed, suffer the grass to
cover them, and are plowed into the dust.



IV. TIME AND CHANGE. (131)

Sir Humphry Davy, 1778-1829, was an eminent chemist of England. He made
many important chemical discoveries, and was the inventor of the miner's
safety lamp.
###


Time is almost a human word, and Change entirely a human idea; in the
system of nature, we should rather say progress than change. The sun
appears to sink in the ocean in darkness, but it rises in another
hemisphere; the ruins of a city fall, but they are often used to form more
magnificent structures: even when they are destroyed so as to produce only
dust, Nature asserts her empire over them; and the vegetable world rises
in constant youth, in a period of annual successions, by the labors of
man--providing food, vitality, and beauty--upon the wrecks of monuments
which were raised for the purposes of glory, but which are now applied to
objects of utility.



V. THE POET. (132)

William Ellery Channing, 1780-1842, was a distinguished clergyman and
orator. He took a leading part in the public affairs of his day, and wrote
and lectured eloquently on several topics.
###


It is not true that the poet paints a life which does not exist. He only
extracts and concentrates, as it were, life's ethereal essence, arrests
and condenses its volatile fragrance, brings together its scattered
beauties, and prolongs its more refined but evanescent joys; and in this
he does well, for it is good to feel that life is not wholly usurped by
cares for subsistence and physical gratifications, but admits, in measures
which may be indefinitely enlarged, sentiments and delights worthy of a
higher being.



VI. MOUNTAINS. (132)

William Howitt, 1795-1879, was an English author. He published many books,
and was associated with his wife, Mary Howitt, in the publication of many
others.
###


There is a charm connected with mountains, so powerful that the merest
mention of them, the merest sketch of their magnificent features, kindles
the imagination, and carries the spirit at once into the bosom of their
enchanted regions. How the mind is filled with their vast solitude! How
the inward eye is fixed on their silent, their sublime, their everlasting
peaks! How our hearts bound to the music of their solitary cries, to the
tinkle of their gushing rills, to the sound of their cataracts! How
inspiriting are the odors that breathe from the upland turf, from the
rock-hung flower, from the hoary and solemn pine! How beautiful are those
lights and shadows thrown abroad, and that fine, transparent haze which is
diffused over the valleys and lower slopes, as over a vast, inimitable
picture!



XXV. THE JOLLY OLD PEDAGOGUE. (133)

George Arnold, 1834--1865, was born in New York City. He never attended
school, but was educated at home, by his parents. His literary career
occupied a period of about twelve years. In this time he wrote stories,
essays, criticisms in art and literature, poems, sketches, etc., for
several periodicals. Two volumes of his poems have been published since
his death.
###


'T was a jolly old pedagogue, long ago,
  Tall, and slender, and sallow, and dry;
His form was bent, and his gait was slow,
And his long, thin hair was white as snow,
  But a wonderful twinkle shone in his eye:
And he sang every night as he went to bed,
  "Let us be happy down here below;
The living should live, though the dead be dead,"
  Said the jolly old pedagogue, long ago.

He taught the scholars the Rule of Three,
  Reading, and writing, and history too;
He took the little ones on his knee,
For a kind old heart in his breast had he,
  And the wants of the littlest child he knew.
"Learn while you're young," he often said,
  "There is much to enjoy down here below;
Life for the living, and rest for the dead!"
  Said the jolly old pedagogue, long ago.

With the stupidest boys, he was kind and cool,
  Speaking only in gentlest tones;
