looking like a twin brother of Tom, was in the act of lighting the pipe
that his relative had probably left for his use.  He was alone, not
even the hound being present.

Jack had partly risen to his feet to reach the pouch of tobacco on the
short mantel above the fireplace.  He paused and looked over his
shoulder with a startled expression at the visitor who made such an
emphatic entrance.

"Why--why, Mr. Bradley," he stammered, "I didn't know it was you; will
you take a seat?"

"Where are Hugh and Tom?"

"They went out some time ago."

"Where did they go?" demanded Harvey in an angry voice.

"Down to--the--that is, I don't know."

"Yes, you do know.  I want no trifling; I will not stand it."

The fellow, though flustered at first, quickly regained his
self-possession.  He had evidently checked himself just in time to keep
back some important knowledge.

"Where have they gone?" repeated the superintendent, bursting with
impatience.

But Jack Hansell was himself again--sullen and insolent as ever.  He
had an intense dislike of his employer--a dislike that had deepened
within the past few days.  He slowly sat down and smoked a full minute
before making reply to Harvey, who felt like throttling him.

"I told you I didn't know," he finally said, looking into the embers
and speaking as if to the glowing coals.

"But you do know."

"So I do, but I know another thing as well, and that is that there
ain't any reason why I should tell you if I don't choose to."

It took a great effort of the will for Harvey to hold himself from
doing violence to the man who said he was not bound to tell what he
preferred to keep to himself: but the superintendent saw that nothing
could be gained by violence.  The man who can keep cool during a
dispute has ten-fold the advantage over one who does not restrain
himself.

After all, Jack Hansell was of small account.  It was O'Hara, his
master, and mayhap his companion, whom Harvey Bradley must see.  If Tom
chose to tell the truth he could do so, but if he would not, no one
could force him to say the words.

All this was clear to the young man, who, checking his anger, added in
a lower tone:

"You are not bound to answer any question I ask you, even when you have
no reason for your refusal, but you cannot decline to say when they are
likely to be back."

"Yes, I can, for I don't know."

"I wish to see O'Hara on a matter of the first importance."

"But he may not want to see you, and I ain't the man to make things
unpleasant for a friend."

"You certainly expect them back to-night, do you not?"

Jack smoked his pipe a few seconds before giving heed to this simple
question.  Then, turning slowly toward Harvey, who was still standing
in the middle of the room, he said:

"You had better sit down, for you won't find Hugh and Tom any sooner by
keeping your feet.  What do you want to see 'em for?"

"That I can explain only to them, though it is Hugh whom I particularly
want to meet."

The superintendent took the seat to which he was invited.  It was the
stool on which he sat when in the cabin before.  It cost him a greater
effort than can be explained to defer to this defiant fellow, who a few
weeks or even days before would have cringed at his feet like a dog.

"That being the case," added Jack, between the puffs at his pipe, "why
you'll have to wait till they come back.  That may be inside of five
minutes, and not for an hour; maybe," added Jack in the game
exasperating manner, "that nothing will be seen of 'em till daylight.
You see that since they have been cheated out of their work they have
plenty of time to loaf through the country."

"Any man who is too lazy to work can find time to turn his hand to
dishonest tricks," said the superintendent, meaning that the words
should not be misunderstood.

"Sometimes the tricks that you call dishonest pay better than working
for a superintendent who wants all the wages himself," was the impudent
reply of Jack Hansell.

"That is the excuse of the man who is bad at heart and who prefers
wrong to right.  Our state prisons are full of that sort of people."

"Yes--and there are a good many people that ought to be in prison that
ain't there."

"I am sure no one is better qualified than you to speak on that matter."

"Except yourself."

It struck Harvey just then that he was doing an unworthy thing in
holding such a conversation with any man.  If he had anything of the
kind to say, he ought to speak it openly.  He now did so.

"There is not a particle of doubt, Jack Hansell, that you and your
brother and Hugh O'Hara are engaged in business that ought to place you
all behind the bars."

"If you think it safe to talk that way before Tom and Hugh you will now
have the chance."

"I will be glad to tell them to their faces what I have told you."

"All right; there they come."

Footsteps and voices in such low tones were heard outside that it was
clear the men brought important news with them.  And such indeed proved
to be the case.




CHAPTER IV.

THE SEARCH BY HUGH AND TOM.

Never did one person do another a greater injustice than did Harvey
Bradley when he believed that either Hugh O'Hara or any one else had
aught to do with the absence of his little sister Dollie.  No men had a
hand in the sad business, nor could any one have been led to harm a
hair of her head.  Had Harvey asked for help, no one in the village
would have held back from doing all that could be done to restore the
child to her friends.

The first news that came to Hugh O'Hara's cabin of the loss of the
child was brought by Jack Hansell, who went thither on a far different
errand.  After a long talk on business, he gave the tidings, adding:

"I met him at the creek, but thought I wouldn't tell him, for it would
do no good.  I kept my eyes open for the gal, but seen nothing of her."

Hugh jerked the pipe from his mouth.

"What's that you are saying?  The little girl lost?"

"That's it; she's been missing since noon; they think she come up the
path and got lost in the mountains."

"Good gracious!" gasped Hugh, starting to his feet, "that is bad; do
you know," he added, turning to Tom and speaking with a slight tremor,
"that that little girl Dollie is about the age my Jennie was when she
died?"

"I hadn't thought of that," replied Tom.

"And," continued Hugh, swallowing a lump in his throat, "she looks so
much like Jennie that I've often felt as if I would give all I
have--which ain't much--to hold the little one on my knee as I used to
hold my baby.  She is a sweet child and likes me; we've had many a talk
together that no one beside us knows about.  She's so gentle, so
innocent, so good that it seems to me I see my own darling before me
when she looks up in my face.  Come, boys," he added, decisively, as he
walked to the farther end of the room, picked up a lantern and lit the
candle inside.

"Come where?" asked Tom, in amazement.

Hugh turned half angrily toward him.

"Do you think that I could rest while that child is lost in the
mountains?  Mr. Bradley hasn't acted right toward us and I bear him no
good will, but this isn't _he_--it's a little child--she looks and acts
like my Jennie, that's dead and gone."

"But, Hugh, you forget--what about the place?"

"Let it go to the dogs for all I care!  What does it amount to against
the life of the little one?  But we'll let Jack stay; if any of the
boys come, send them out to help in the hunt; it'll do them more good
than to break the law."

"Suppose some that are strangers come?" said Jack with a grin.

Hugh O'Hara gave a hollow laugh.

"Send them out, too, to help in the search; we'll be sure to find her
when the whole country gets to work.  If I was down in the village I
would have every man, woman and child in the woods, and wouldn't let
them eat or drink or sleep till she's found.  Tom, there's no one that
knows the woods better than we and Nero.  Let's be off!"

The door was drawn inward, and Jack Hansell was left alone.  He lit his
pipe, smoked it out, refilled it and was in the act of refilling it,
when Harvey Bradley came in--as has been made known in another place.
While the man sat smoking and alone in the cabin, he fell to brooding
over the troubles at the mills.  Thus it came to pass that his feelings
were so bitter at the time the superintendent entered that he kept back
every hint that the absent men were engaged in the most "honest"
business in the world--that is, they were looking for the missing child.

Meanwhile Hugh and Tom went at the task not only with zeal, but with a
sagacity that gave promise of good results.  As Hugh had said, they
knew every foot of the mountains for miles, they were free from the
flurry that at first ran away with the judgment of the superintendent,
and they were used to prowling through the woods.  Still further Nero
had been trained to follow the faintest footprints.

"Now, Tom," said the leader, when they had walked a short ways, "we
can't do anything till we get on the trail of the little one."

"What do you think has become of her?"

"She's somewhere in the woods asleep or dead, with the chances about
even for either."

"Jack says she was seen coming up the mountain path early this
afternoon."

"Well, she has kept to it till she has either slipped out of the path
without knowing it or she has done it on purpose.  She has strolled
along until it became dark or she was tired.  Then she has lain down on
the leaves and gone to sleep.  Nero, find the trail of the little girl."

"But," said Tom, "the night is so cold."

"So it is, but if the girl went out to play she was well clad, and, if
she knew enough, she has crept under the lee of a rock or into the
bushes, where the wind can't reach her.  If she did the same, she
hasn't frozen to death."

"But there are wild animals in these parts."

"I know that, and she would make a meal that any of them would be glad
to get; we can only hope they didn't find her."

Just then Nero, who had been nosing the path in front, uttered a whine
and turned aside.  Hugh held up the lantern and saw that he had gone to
the right.  He was following a trail of some kind; whether it was that
of the one whom they were seeking was to be learned.  It would take a
fine scent to trace the tiny footsteps under the carpet of snow, but
such an exploit is not one-tenth as wonderful as that of the trained
dogs in Georgia, which will stick to the track of a convict when it has
been trampled upon by hundreds of others wearing similar dress and
shoes, and will keep to it for miles by running parallel to the trail
and at a distance of a hundred feet.

But in the latter case the canines have an advantage at the start; they
are put upon the track or directed to hunt for it where it is known to
exist; they are given a clew in some form.

The hound Nero was skilful in taking a scent, but his ability was not
to be compared to that of the dogs to which I have referred, nor indeed
was it necessary that it should be.  But he had great intelligence, and
acted as if he understood every word said to him by his master.  He had
saved Hugh and his friends many a time by giving warning from afar of
the approach of strange parties.  It may seem incredible that he should
know what was wanted of him, but there is the best reason for saying he
understood it all.  Having no part of the little one's clothing to
help, he was without the clew which would appear to be indispensable.
His master, however, was satisfied the dog had struck the right trail.

"Stick to it, Nero," said Hugh, encouragingly, "not too fast, but be
sure you're right."

Without pause, the two followed the dog, Hugh in front with lantern in
hand.  The woods were so cluttered with undergrowth that they could not
go fast, seeing which Nero suited his pace to theirs.  Now and then he
ran ahead, as if impatient with the slow progress of the couple, and
then he calmly awaited their approach.

"Hark!"

The single word "_Dollie_!" rang through the arches of the woods.  They
recognized the voice as that of the superintendent, who was hurrying
over the path they had left, and who was not far away.  In fact, Hugh
held the lantern in front of him so as to hide its rays.

"I am sorry for him," he said, "but we don't want him with us."

"It cannot be," remarked Tom, after they had struggled further, "that
she has gone as far as this; Nero must be off the track."

At this moment the dog emitted a low, baying whine that would have
startled any one had he not known its meaning.  It was the signal which
the remarkable animal always gave when close to the end of a trail.

"We shall soon know the worst," said Hugh, crashing through the wood
with such haste that Tom had to hurry almost into a trot to save
himself from dropping behind.

The singular call of the dog was heard again.  He wanted his friends to
move faster.  It came from a point slightly to the left.

"Here he is!" exclaimed Hugh, making a sharp turn and showing more
excitement than at any time during the evening.

"I see him!  There he stands!" added Tom, stumbling forward.

With his right hand Hugh raised the lantern above his head, so that its
glare was taken from their eyes.  The hound was close to a rock that
rose some six or eight feet above the ground, and his nose was pointed
toward the base of the black mass.  At the same moment the men saw
something dark and light mixed together, like a bundle of clothing.
One bound and Hugh was on his knees, the lamp held even with his
forehead while he peered downward and softly drew the clothing aside.
Tom was also stooping low and leaning forward with bated breath.

There lay little Dollie Bradley, sleeping as sweetly as if nestling
beside her big brother in the warm bed at home.  She must have wandered
through the woods until, worn out, she reached this spot.  Then she had
thrown herself on the earth beside the rock and had fallen asleep.
Having lost her hood, her head was without any covering, except her own
native hair, which was abundant.  Besides, rugged people do not need to
cover their heads while asleep, even in cold weather.

It was fortunate for Dollie that she was so warmly wrapped.  One arm
was doubled under her head, and the cheek that rested on it was pushed
just enough out of shape to add to her picturesqueness.  Her heavy coat
having been buttoned around her body, kept its form and could not have
been better arranged.  The chubby legs were covered by thick stockings,
and the feet were protected by heavy shoes.  True, she ran much risk in
lying upon the cold earth, with nothing between her and the ground, but
there was hope that no serious harm would follow.

The rock not only kept off the wind, but screened her from the snow.
It was almost certain that the little one had been asleep several hours.

Hugh gently examined the limbs and body to see whether there was any
hurt.  Her peaceful sleep ought to have satisfied him, but he was not
content.  Not a scratch, however, was found, though her clothing had
suffered a good deal.

"Take the lantern," said he in a husky voice to his companion.  Then,
softly pushing his brawny arms under the dimpled form, he lifted it as
tenderly as its mother could have done.  Tom smoothed the clothing so
as to cover the body as fully as possible.  Hugh doffed his coarse cap
and covered the mass of silken tresses that streamed over his shoulder.

Dollie muttered as a child will do when disturbed in its slumber, but,
fitting her head to the changed position, she slept on as sweetly as
ever.

"Now lead the way," added Hugh, "and be careful where you step."

Tom was only too glad to do his part.  Nero, as happy as the others,
walked in advance, in his dignified manner, now and then wagging his
tail and whining with delight.  None knew better than he the noble work
he had done.

Tom used great care.  When the bushes could not be avoided, Hugh shoved
them aside with one hand, that they might not brush against the face
resting so close to his own.  Perhaps he held the velvety cheek nearer
his shaggy beard than was needed, but who can chide him when his heart
glowed with the sorrowful pleasure that came from the fancy that his
own Jennie, whom he had so often pressed to his breast, was resting
there again?

A tear dropped on the cheek of the little one.  In that hour new
resolves entered the heart of O'Hara.  He had been sullen,
discontented, and had long led a life that grieved his conscience.

By and by when they came back to the path they found the walking easier
than before.

"Hugh," said Tom, stopping short and facing about, "ain't you tired of
carryin' the kid? 'cause if you are, I'm ready to give you a lift."

"No; I wish I could carry her forever!"

All too soon the glimmer from the cabin window fell upon them, and they
paused at the door to make sure the clothing of the child was arranged.
They acted as if they were getting ready to go into the presence of
company.

"I don't know as I've done right in not carrying her home," said Hugh,
"but she has been out too long already in the night air; we'll take her
in and keep her while you run down to the village and let the folks
know she is safe."

"Is she still asleep?"

"Yes, hark! some of the boys seem to be inside," added Hugh, as the
sound of voices came to them from within.

The door was pushed open and the two men and dog entered.

Harvey Bradley had risen to his feet, and for one second he stared
angrily at the newcomers.  You will recall that hot words had just
passed between him and Jack Hansell, and both were in an ugly mood.
Then Harvey quickly recognized the form in the arms of Hugh and rushed
forward.

"Is she alive?"

"Aye, alive and without a scratch," replied Hugh, deftly taking the hat
from the head of the little sleeper and placing her in the outstretched
arms.

"How thankful I am," exclaimed Harvey, kissing the cold red cheeks over
and over again, and pressing her to his heart; "yes--she is well--she
was lost and is found--she was dead and is alive again."

"What are you laughing at?" demanded Hugh, wiping his eyes and glaring
savagely at Jack Hansell, who, with open mouth, was looking on in a
bewildered way; "haven't you manners enough to know when gentlemen are
present?"

Jack seemed to think that the only way to behave was by keeping his
mouth closed.  He shut his jaws with a click like that of a steel trap
and never said a word.

Harvey Bradley sat down on the stool from which he had arisen, first
drawing it closer to the fire, and unfastened the outer clothing of the
little one.  He saw that all was well with her.  Then he looked up with
moistened eyes and said in a tremulous voice:

"Hugh, tell me all about it."

The short story was soon told.  The hardy fellow made light of what he
had done, but the superintendent, who kept his eyes fixed on his face,
saw the sparkle of tears that the speaker could not keep back.  It was
hard for any one of the three to believe that only a brief while before
