the bank, as near as possible to the rapids, so as to lessen the
distance that was to be passed on the morrow.  There could be no
objection to this, and adjusting themselves in the usual manner in the
large canoe, they began the ascent of the river.

Naturally they would have kept close to the shore to escape, so far as
they could, the force of the current, and the main object now was to
prevent their movements being seen by the vigilant Aryks across the
stream, who might resume hostilities before Ziffak could make his
wishes known to them.

Our friends did not forget that a large body of these warriors had
passed the Xingu above the rapids to reach the bank along which the
craft was now stealing its way; but they had received such treatment
that the survivors hurried from the vicinity.

Still there was a probability that after rallying from their repulse,
more of them had swam across and were at that moment on the western
shore, on the watch for just such a movement as was under way.

If this should prove the case, it could not be expected that Ziffak
could interfere in time to prevent another sanguinary conflict; but
that might come about, even if the explorers remained where they had
stopped until daylight.  If the Aryks were prepared to attack them
while on the move, they could do so with equal effect while they were
not in motion.

The increasing roar of the rapids was a great disadvantage, for it
drowned all inferior noises and compelled our friends to depend on
their eyesight alone to discover the approach of danger.

There was an involuntary shudder on the part of all, when they came
opposite the scene of the desperate fight, and they hastened past
without exchanging a word.

They had not much further to go when they found themselves, for the
time, at the end of their voyage.  It was impossible to ascend further,
because of the rapids, which tossed the canoe about as though it were
an eggshell.

A halt was therefore made, and, at the moment this took place, all
observed that day was breaking, the light rapidly increasing in the
direction of the Aryk village.

"_Just what I told you_!" exclaimed Jared Long, as the simultaneous
discovery was made by all, that the forest around them was swarming
with the vengeful savages, eager for another and bloodier joust at arms.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE NICK OF TIME.

The peril which menaced the explorers was more frightful than any that
they had been called upon to face since entering that mysterious land
known by the name of the Matto Grosso.

The Aryks numbered more than half a hundred, all active, vigilant and
armed with their fearful poisoned javelins.  They had taken position
among the trees on the western bank of the Xingu, at the base of the
rapids, at the very point where the white men intended to shoulder
their canoe and make their last portage.

Instead of being in the open, where they were in plain sight of the
defenders, and fair targets for their unerring Winchesters, they were
stationed behind the numerous trunks or lying on the ground, where
little could be seen of them except their bushy heads and gleaming
black eyes, as they glared with inextinguishable hate at the white men
who had slain so many of their number.

The suspicious Long was looking in the direction, with the thought that
if any ambush was attempted, that would be the very spot, when he
caught sight of a dusky figure, as it whisked from behind a narrow
trunk to another that afforded better cover.

That hasty glance in the dim morning light revealed an alarming number
of heads glaring around the trees and from among the undergrowth like
so many wild beasts, aflame with fury and the exultation of savages who
knew that their enemies were at last forced inextricably into their
grasp.

So assured were the Aryks in fact that they showed a disposition to toy
for a moment with their victims, as a cat does with a mouse before
craunching it in her jaws.  They brandished their weapons, danced
grotesquely and uttered shrill shrieks audible above the deafening roar
of the angry Xingu as it foamed through the rapids.

It was a fearful trap in which our friends found themselves, for it was
impossible to advance or retreat, and it was madness to hope that they
could again escape the shower of spears that were already poised in the
air and ready to be launched.

Bippo and Pedros, with wild shrieks of terror bounded into the canoe,
and wrapping the blankets around them, cowered in abject helpless dread
of impending death.  They were only an incumbrance, as they had proven
in more than one crisis before.

But not one of the Caucasians showed the white feather.  Disdaining to
seek impossible shelter, they coolly prepared to die fighting, while
exposed to the hurtling javelins, whose appalling effectiveness they
knew too well.

But at this appalling juncture, when life hung on the passing moment, a
piercing shout rang out above the roar of the waters.

It came from a point behind them, and, despite the imminent peril all
three looked around.

A small canoe was darting across the Xingu toward them, so close to the
foot of the rapids, that it danced about like a cork and seemed certain
to be submerged every minute.

In this frail craft sat the giant Ziffak, propelling it across the
furious swirl with such prodigious power that though the spume dashed
over it, the boat was driven by the sheer power of his mighty arms
under, above, and through the waters.

It was he who uttered the resounding cry which caused the wondering
explorers to turn their heads, and stayed the uplifted arms of the
venomous Aryks.

All saw the giant head chieftain of the Murhapas who repeated the shout
and added an exclamation that was a command, forbidding his allies to
hurl a single weapon.

They must have deemed him mad, but if so he was ten times more to be
dreaded than if sane.  Not a javelin was launched, but all stood
motionless awaiting his arrival, and doubtless believing he meant them
to pause only long enough to place himself at their head as the leader.

They must have thought, too, that his appearance so filled the whites
with fear that their arms were paralyzed, for, though he was in direct
range, not a hand of the foreigners was raised to do him hurt.

Coming with such tremendous speed, Ziffak occupied but a moment in
passing the remaining distance.  Before the prow of his boat could
touch land, he flung the paddle aside, spurned the canoe with his foot,
caught up his huge spear, and with one bound placed himself opposite
the wondering trio of white men, while two more leaps landed him among
the Aryks.

Grimcke, Ashman and Long had read aright the meaning of the amazing
demonstration and calmly awaited the issue.

Pausing in the very middle of the dusky force, he addressed them in
their native tongue, with savage gestures and a fierceness of tones
which rendered every word audible amid the roaring tumult.

Only a second or two was required for him to finish his harangue, when
he made a final command for them to fall back, emphasized by the swing
of his tremendous arms.

No more striking proof could have been given of the sway of this mighty
warrior over his vassals, than was shown by their instant obedience to
the order, which fell upon them like the bursting of a thunderbolt from
the clear summer sky.

They did not scatter and flee, for they had not been directed to do so,
but skurried several rods back among the trees, so as to leave the way
open for the explorers to pass around the rapids to the calmer waters
above.

Ziffak did not remove his eyes from the natives, until he saw that his
commands were not only obeyed, but that it was understood by them that
the white men were not to be molested.

This extraordinary person had hastened to the other shore, in
accordance with his pledge, only to learn from a couple of Aryks whom
he met that the main body of warriors had again crossed the Xingu above
the rapids, and were gathered in the wood waiting for the whites to
walk into the trap set for them.

Had our friends remained where he left them, no danger would have been
encountered, but, as we have shown, they moved up stream and came
within a hair's-breadth of being wiped from the face of the earth
before their powerful ally could interfere.

The breaking morning gave Ziffak his first knowledge of the mistake
they had made, and, leaping into his canoe, he drove it across the
stream with resistless speed, reaching the spot in the nick of time,
and barely doing that, since he was forced to raise his voice while yet
on the river, in order to hold the battle in suspense.

Having satisfied himself that everything was adjusted, Ziffak now
turned around, and, without the least appearance of agitation on his
swarthy countenance, signified that the path was open for them to
continue their journey.

Reaching into the canoe, Ashman seized Bippo by the nape of the neck
and hoisted him out on land.  He did the same with Pedros, both of them
howling in the extremity of mortal terror.  Tearing the blankets from
their bodies, he shouted for them to give their help in carrying the
canoe and luggage around the rapids.

It was some minutes before they could comprehend in their blind way the
situation.  Finally, when they saw that their deaths were postponed,
they lent their aid as eagerly as a couple of obedient dogs.

The sturdy whites were equally helpful, and the boat was quickly raised
aloft and so adjusted that its well apportioned weight bore lightly
upon the shoulders of all.

The sidelong glances which Bippo and Pedros cast at the Aryks as they
moved up the bank, brought a smile to the whites who witnessed them.
The poor fellows were ready to let go and drop down dead the moment
they felt the puncture of the whizzing javelins.

The Professor was at the head of the strange procession bearing the
boat on their shoulders.  Like his companions, he moved with a springy,
elastic step, for he had received the most striking proof possible of
the friendship of Ziffak, and he foresaw the dazzling results that were
to flow from such an alliance.

Had this remarkable savage been disposed to play them false, no better
opportunity could have been given than that which occurred a few
minutes before.  All he had to do was to arrive on the spot a minute
later: the Aryks would have left nothing for him except to view the
dead bodies of the whites and their servants.

As for Jared Long, the doubter, he was willing to admit that he had
made a grevious error of judgment.  Had he thought that Ziffak
suspected his misgivings, he would have taken the fellow's hand, and
humbly begged his pardon.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE JOURNEY'S END.

The explorers, bearing the canoe with the luggage upon their shoulders,
ascended at a steady gait the western bank of the Xingu.  The cleared
space which they had noticed on both sides of the river, caused by the
furious overflow, continued, so that the progress was comparatively
easy.

The din of the rapids was so loud that they could not have heard each
other, except by shouting at the top of their voices, for which there
was no call, since even Bippo and Pedros were now able to read the full
meaning of the extraordinary incidents of the night.

Ashman looked around and ascertained that Ziffak was not bearing them
company.  None of the savages were in sight, though all would have been
as eager as tigers to rend the white men to shreds had such permission
been given.

The absence of the great leader caused no uneasiness on the part of any
one of our friends.  Strange indeed, would it have been had they felt
any distrust of him after his late interference.

The sun appeared while the party were still pushing forward.  The sky
was as clear as on the preceding day, and, though the temperature was
quite warm, it was not unpleasantly so.  Several causes contributed to
the delightful coolness which renders the Matto Grosso one of the most
attractive regions on the globe.  The abundance of water, the endless
stretch of forest, with few llanos of any extent, and, above all, the
elevation of the plateau produce a moderation of temperature not met
with in the lowlands, less than twenty degrees further south.

But the explorers were weary and in need of rest.  It will be recalled
that they found precious little opportunity for sleep during the
preceding night, which marked the close of an unusually hard day's
labor.  They would have rested could they have done so, and now that
the chance seemed to present itself, they wisely decided to wait a few
hours before beginning the last stretch of water which lay between them
and the villages of the Murhapas.

The halt was made at the top of the rapids, where the boat was
carefully replaced in the river, the fracture made by Ziffak's javelin
repaired, and everything adjusted for the resumption of their voyage.
Then, with only the Professor on guard, the others lay down on their
blankets and almost immediately sank into a deep, refreshing slumber.

Professor Grimcke, finding the care of the camp on his hands, took a
careful survey of his surroundings, which were quite similar to those
that had enclosed him many times before.

On both sides, stretched the almost endless Brazilian forest, within
which a traveller might wander for weeks and months without coming upon
any openings.  In front was the Xingu, smooth, swift, and winding
through the wilderness in such form that he could see only a short
distance up stream.  Looking in the opposite direction, the agitation
of the water was noticeable before breaking into rapids, similar,
though in a less degree, to the rapids above Niagara Falls.  The volume
still preserved its remarkable purity and clearness, which enabled him
to trace the shelving bottom a long way from where he stood.

Grimcke was somewhat of a philosopher, and always eager to make the
best use of the time at his command.  There was nothing more to be
feared from the Aryks, and his situation, therefore, of guardian of his
sleeping friends might be considered a sinecure.

His fishing line was soon arranged, and with some of the dried meat he
had brought along serving for bait, he began piscatorial operations.

It will strike the reader as incredible, but in Borne portions of the
Orinoco and other tropical rivers of South America, the fish are so
abundant that they have been known to impede the progress of large
vessels moving through the waters.  While no such overflowing supply is
found in the Xingu, yet they were so numerous that it required but a
few minutes for the Professor to haul in more than enough to furnish
the entire party with all they could eat at a single meal.

His next step was to start a fire, and prepare the coals for broiling.
This was a simple task, and was completed before his friends finished
their naps.

No pleasanter awakening could have come to them than that of opening
their eyes and finding their breakfast awaiting their keen appetites.
They fell to with a will, and, though saddened by the loss of two of
their number, were filled with a strange delight at the prospect of
their visit to the enchanted land.

The boat was launched, but there was not enough wind to make it worth
while to spread the sail, which had often proven of such assistance,
but the four pairs of arms swung the paddles with a vigor that sent the
craft swiftly against the current.  The Professor disposed of himself
in the boat so that he slept while the others were at work.

Naturally the craft was kept as close to the bank as possible, so as to
gain the benefit of the sluggish current.  The trees having been swept
from the margin of the Xingu, an open space was before the explorers
throughout the entire distance.

Despite the glowing expectations of the party, there was enough in the
prospect before them to cause serious thought.  Long and Ashman
consulted continually and saw that it would not do to felicitate
themselves with the belief that all danger was at an end.

Two facts must be well weighed.  Waggaman and Burkhardt were inimical
to them.  Whether they could be won over even to neutrality could not
be determined until they were seen.  For the present they must be
classed as dangerous enemies.

Was it unreasonable to suspect that their influence with the terrible
King Haffgo would prove superior to that of Ziffak?  If so, what hope
was there of the escape of the explorers after once intrusting
themselves within the power of the tyrant?

But the immediate question which faced our friends was, whether it
would do for them to reveal themselves to the Murhapas without again
seeing their native friend.  They deemed it probable that he had pushed
on to the village, with the expectation of reaching it ahead of them
and thus preparing the way for their reception.

This, however, was but a pretty theory which was as liable to be wrong
as right.  At any rate, Ziffak must reach his home ahead of or
simultaneously with the whites.  The latter continued using their
paddles with steady vigor, until near noon, when they knew that
considerably more than half the distance was passed.

They now began swaying their paddles less powerfully, for the feeling
was strong upon them that they had approached as close as was prudent
to the Murhapa village.

It was about this time, that they rounded a bend in the Xingu which
gave them sight of the river for fully half a mile before another
change in its course shut out all view.  Naturally, they scanned the
stream in quest of enemies, who were now likely to be quite close.

The first survey showed them a canoe coming down stream.  It was near
the middle and was approaching at a rapid rate.

Fred Ashman laid down his paddle and took up his binocular.

"It is Ziffak!" he exclaimed, passing the glass to Long.

"So it is and he is alone," was the reply of the astonished New
Englander, who added an exclamation of surprise that he should be
approaching from that direction.  The only explanation was, that since
last seeing him, he had made a journey to his home and was now
returning to meet and convoy his friends to his own people.

Such proved to be the case, as he explained on joining them.

After the affair at the foot of the rapids, he paused long enough to
make clear to the Aryks that not one of them was to make another
offensive movement against the whites under penalty of the most fearful
punishment.  He explained that these particular white men were the
friends of all natives, and that they never would have harmed an Aryk
had they not been forced to do so to save their own lives.

The cunning Ziffak dropped a hint that the newcomers were much better
persons than the couple that had made their homes among the Murhapas
for so many years.  Then, having completed his business in that line,
he struck through the forest at a high rate of speed and soon reached
his own people.

He expected to find Waggaman and Burkhardt there, but they had not yet
arrived.  He explained to his brother the king what had taken place at
the rapids of the Xingu and succeeded in gaining his promise of the
king that he would allow the white men to enter the village without the
sacrifice of their lives; but he was not willing that they should
remain more than a couple of days.  Indeed he gave such assent
grudgingly and probably would have refused it altogether, but for the
earnest pleading of his beloved Ariel, who insisted that it would be a
partial recompense of the crime of three years previous.

