powerful interest wherever he went.

9. Pocahontas had such a deep attachment for him, that, in 1609, when
only fourteen years old, she stole away from her tribe, and, during a
most dreary night, walked to Jamestown, to tell him that her father had
formed the design of cutting off the whole English settlement.

10. Thus she a second time saved his life, at the hazard of her own.
This charming Indian girl did not meet with all the gratitude she
deserved.

11. Before 1612, Captain Smith received a wound, which made it necessary
for him to go to England, for surgical aid; and after his departure a
copper kettle was offered to any Indian who would bring Pocahontas to
the English settlement.

12. She was, accordingly, stolen from her father, and carried prisoner
to Jamestown. Powhatan offered five hundred bushels of corn as a ransom
for his darling child.

13. Before the negotiation was finished, an Englishman of good
character, by the name of Thomas Rolfe, became attached to Pocahontas,
and they were soon after married, with the king's consent.

14. This event secured peace to the English for many years. The Indian
bride became a Christian, and was baptized.




LESSON LII.

_The same subject, concluded._


1. In 1616, Pocahontas went to England with her husband,--was introduced
at court, and received great attention.

2. King James is said to have been very indignant that any of his
subjects should have dared to marry a princess; but Captain Smith has
been accused, perhaps falsely, of being sufficiently cold and selfish to
blush for his acquaintance with the generous North American savage.

3. Pocahontas never returned to her native country. She died at
Gravesend, in 1617, just as she was about to embark for America.

4. She left one son, Thomas Rolfe; and from his daughter are descended
several people of high rank in Virginia, among whom was the celebrated
John Randolph of Roanoke.

5. Smith had many adventures, after his wound obliged him to leave
Jamestown. He visited this country again; made a voyage to the Summer
Isles; fought with pirates; joined the French against the Spaniards; and
was adrift, in a little boat, alone, on the stormy sea, during a night
so tempestuous that thirteen French ships were wrecked, near the Isle
of Re; yet he was saved.

6. He died in London, in 1631, in the fifty-second year of his age,
after having published his singular adventures in Europe, Asia, Africa,
and America.




LESSON LIII.

_John Ledyard._--JUVENILE MISCELLANY.


1. Few men have done so much, in a short life, as John Ledyard. When he
was a mere boy, he built a canoe with his own hands, and descended
Connecticut river alone and unassisted.

2. He enlisted as a soldier, at Gibraltar; and afterwards, in the humble
character of corporal of the marines, he sailed round the world with the
celebrated Captain Cook.

3. After his return to England, he formed the bold design of traversing
the northern parts of Europe and Asia, crossing Behring's Straits, and
examining the whole of North America, from east to west.

4. Sir Joseph Banks, famous for his generosity to men of enterprise,
furnished him with money for the undertaking. He expended nearly all of
it in purchasing sea stores; and these, most unluckily, were all seized
by a custom-house officer, on account of some articles which the English
law forbade to be exported.

5. Poor Ledyard was now left in utter poverty; but he was a resolute
man, and he would not be discouraged. With only ten guineas in his
purse, he attempted to _walk_ over the greater part of three continents.

6. He walked through Denmark and Sweden, and attempted to cross the
great Gulf of Bothnia, on his way to Siberia; but when he reached the
middle of that inland sea, he found the water was not frozen, and he was
obliged to foot it back to Stockholm.

7. He then traveled round the head of the gulf, and descended to St.
Petersburg. Here he was soon discovered to be a man of talents and
activity; and though he was without money, and absolutely destitute of
stockings and shoes, he was treated with great attention.

8. The Portuguese ambassador invited him to dine, and was so much
pleased with him, that he used his influence to obtain for him a free
passage in the government wagons, then going to Irkutsk, in Siberia, at
the command of the Empress Katharine.

9. He went from this place to Yakutz, and there awaited the opening of
the spring, full of the animating hope of soon completing his wearisome
journey. But misfortune seemed to follow him wherever he went.

10. The empress could not believe that any man in his senses was
traveling through the ice and snows of uncivilized Siberia, merely for
the sake of seeing the country and the people.

11. She imagined that he was an English spy, sent there merely for the
purpose of prying into the state of her empire and her government. She
therefore employed two Russian soldiers to seize him, and convey him out
of her dominions.

12. Taken, he knew not why, and obliged to go off without his clothes,
his money, or his papers, he was seated in one of the strange-looking
sledges used in those northern deserts, and carried through Tartary and
White Russia, to the frontiers of Poland.

13. Covered with dirty rags, worn out with hardships, sick almost unto
death, without friends and without money, he begged his way to
Konigsberg, in Prussia.




LESSON LIV.

_The same subject, concluded._


1. In this hour of deep distress, he found a person willing to take his
draft for five guineas on the Royal Society of England. With this
assistance, he arrived in the land of our forefathers.

2. He immediately applied to his ever-ready friend, Sir Joseph Banks,
for employment. Sir Joseph, knowing that nothing suited him better than
perilous adventures, told him that a company had just been formed, for
the purpose of penetrating into the interior of Africa, and discovering
the source of the river Niger.

3. Burning sands, savage negroes, venomous serpents, all the frightful
animals of the torrid zone, could not alarm the intrepid soul of
Ledyard. He immediately expressed his desire to go.

4. When the map was spread before him, and his dangerous journey pointed
out, he promptly exclaimed, "I will go to-morrow morning."

5. The gentleman smiled at his eagerness, and gladly intrusted him with
an expedition in which suffering and peril were certain, and success
extremely doubtful. He left London on the 30th of June, 1788, and
arrived in Grand Cairo on the 19th of August.

6. There he spent his time to great advantage, in searching for and
deciphering the various wonders of that ancient and once learned land.

7. His letters from Egypt were delightful. They showed much enthusiasm,
united with the most patient and laborious exertion. The company formed
great hopes concerning his discoveries in Senaar, and awaited letters
from that country with much anxiety.

8. But, alas! he never reached there. He was seized with a violent
illness at Cairo; died, and was decently buried beside the English who
had ended their days in that celebrated city.

9. We should never read accounts of great or good men without learning
some profitable lesson. If we cannot, like Ledyard, defend Gibraltar,
sail round the world with Captain Cook, project trading voyages to the
north-west coast, study Egyptian hieroglyph'ics, and traverse the dreary
northern zone on foot,--we can, at least, learn from him the important
lesson of _perseverance_.

10. The boy who perseveringly pores over a hard lesson, and who will not
give up an intricate problem until he has studied it out, forms a
habit, which, in after life, will make him a great man; and he who
resolutely struggles against his own indolence, violent temper, or any
other bad propensity, will most assuredly be a good one.




LESSON LV.

_Learning to Work._--ORIGINAL.


1. A few years ago, several little volumes were published, called "_The
Rollo Books_," which are full of interesting stories about a little boy
of that name. They were written by a gentleman whose name is Abbott.

2. They are not only interesting, but also very instructive books; and
no little boy or girl can read them, without learning many very useful
lessons from them. They are not only useful to young persons, but their
parents, also, have derived many useful hints from them, in the
management of their children.

3. The following little story is taken from one of them, called "_Rollo
at Work_;" and I hope that my little friends who read this story at
school will also read it at home to their parents, because it will be
both interesting and useful to them.

4. The story begins, by telling us that Rollo's father had set him at
work in the barn, with a box full of nails, directing him to pick them
all over, and to put all those that were alike by themselves.

5. Rollo began very willingly at first, but soon grew tired of the work,
and left it unfinished. The remainder of the story will be found in the
following lessons, in Mr. Abbott's own words.




LESSON LVI.

_The same subject, continued._--ABBOTT.


1. That evening, when Rollo was just going to bed, his father took him
up in his lap, and told him he had concluded what to do.

2. "You see it is very necessary," said he, "that you should have the
power of confining yourself steadily and patiently to a single
employment, even if it does not amuse you.

3. "I have to do that, and all people have to do it; and you must learn
to do it, or you will grow up indolent and useless. You cannot do it
now, it is very plain.

4. "If I set you to doing anything, you go on as long as the novelty and
the amusement last; and then your patience is gone, and you contrive
every possible excuse for getting away from your task.

5. "Now, I am going to give you one hour's work to do, every forenoon
and afternoon. I shall give you such things to do as are perfectly plain
and easy, so that you will have no excuse for neglecting your work, or
leaving it.

6. "But yet I shall choose such things as will afford you no amusement;
for my wish is that you should learn to work, not play."

7. "But, father," said Rollo, "you told me there was pleasure in work,
the other day. But how can there be any pleasure in it, if you choose
such things as have no amusement in them, at all?"

8. "The pleasure of working," said his father, "is not the fun of doing
amusing things, but the satisfaction and solid happiness of being
faithful in duty, and accomplishing some useful purpose.

9. "For example, if I were to lose my pocket-book on the road, and
should tell you to walk back a mile, and look carefully all the way,
until you found it, and if you did it faithfully and carefully, you
would find a kind of satisfaction in doing it; and when you found the
pocket-book, and brought it back to me, you would enjoy a high degree
of happiness. Should not you?"

10. "Why, yes, sir, I should," said Rollo.--"And, yet, there would be no
amusement in it. You might, perhaps, the next day, go over the same
road, catching butterflies; that would be amusement. Now, the pleasure
you would enjoy in looking for the pocket-book would be the solid
satisfaction of useful work.

11. "The pleasure of catching butterflies would be the amusement of
play. Now, the difficulty is, with you, that you have scarcely any idea,
yet, of the first.

12. "You are all the time looking for the other; that is, the amusement.
You begin to work, when I give you anything to do; but if you do not
find amusement in it, you soon give it up. But if you would only
persevere, you would find, at length, a solid satisfaction, that would
be worth a great deal more."

13. Rollo sat still, and listened; but his father saw, from his looks,
that he was not much interested in what he was saying; and he perceived
that it was not at all probable that so small a boy could be reasoned
into liking work.

14. In fact, it was rather hard for Rollo to understand all that his
father said; and still harder for him to feel the force of it. He began
to grow sleepy, and so his father let him go to bed.




LESSON LVII.

_The same subject, concluded._


[Illustration]

1. The next day, his father gave him his work. He was to begin at ten
o'clock, and work till eleven, gathering beans in the garden.

2. His father went out with him, and waited to see how long it took him
to gather half a pint, and then calculated how many he could gather in
an hour, if he was industrious. Rollo knew that if he failed now he
should be punished in some way, although his father did not say anything
about punishment.

3. When he was set at work, the day before, about the nails, he was
making an experiment, as it were, and he did not expect to be actually
punished, if he failed; but now he knew that he was under orders, and
must obey.

4. So he worked very diligently, and when his father came out, at the
end of the hour, he found that Rollo had got rather more beans than he
had expected. Rollo was much gratified to see his father pleased; and he
carried in his large basket full of beans to show his mother, with great
pleasure.

5. Then he went to play, and enjoyed himself very highly. The next
morning, his father said to him,--"Well, Rollo, you did very well
yesterday; but doing right once is a very different thing from forming a
habit of doing right. I can hardly expect you will succeed as well
to-day; or, if you should to-day, that you will to-morrow."

6. Rollo thought he should. His work was to pick up all the loose stones
in the road, and carry them, in a basket, to a great heap of stones
behind the barn.

7. But he was not quite faithful. His father observed him playing
several times. He did not speak to him, however, until the hour was
over; and then he called him in.

8. "Rollo," said he, "you have failed to-day. You have not been very
idle, but have not been industrious; and the punishment which I have
concluded to try first is, to give you only bread and water for dinner."

9. So, when dinner-time came, and the family sat down to the good
beef-steak and apple-pie which was upon the table, Rollo knew that he
was not to come. He felt very unhappy, but he did not cry.

10. His father called him, and cut off a good slice of bread, and put
into his hands, and told him he might go and eat it on the steps of the
back door. "If you should be thirsty," he added, "you may ask Mary to
give you some water."

11. Rollo took the bread, and went out, and took his solitary seat on
the stone step leading into the back yard; and, in spite of all his
efforts to prevent it, the tears would come into his eyes.

12. He thought of his guilt in disobeying his father, and he felt
unhappy to think that his father and mother were seated together at
their pleasant table, and that he could not come, because he had been an
undutiful son. He determined that he would never be unfaithful in his
work again.

13. He went on, after this, several days, very well. His father gave him
various kinds of work to do, and he began, at last, to find a
considerable degree of satisfaction in doing it.

14. He found, particularly, that he enjoyed himself a great deal more
after his work than before; and, whenever he saw what he had done, it
gave him pleasure.

15. After he had picked up the loose stones before the house, for
instance, he drove his hoop about there with unusual satisfaction;
enjoying the neat and tidy appearance of the road much more than he
would have done, if Jonas had cleared it. In fact, in the course of a
month, Rollo became quite a faithful and efficient little workman.

[Illustration]




LESSON LVIII.

_The Comma._


THE COMMA is a mark like this =,=

When you come to a comma in reading, you must generally make a short
pause. Sometimes you must use the falling inflection of the voice, when
you come to a comma; and sometimes you must keep your voice suspended,
as if some one had stopped you before you had read all that you
intended. The general rule, when you come to a comma, is, to stop just
long enough to count one.


EXAMPLES.

Diligence, industry, and proper improvement of time, are material duties
of the young.

He is generous, just, charitable, and humane.

By wisdom, by art, by the united strength of a civil community, men have
been enabled to subdue the whole race of lions, bears, and serpents.

     [Sometimes a comma must be read like a question.]

Do you pretend to sit as high in school as Anthony? Did you read as
correctly, articulate as distinctly, speak as loudly, or behave as
well, as he?

Did he recite his lesson correctly, read audibly, and appear to
understand what he read?

Was his copy written neatly, his letters made handsomely, and did no
blot appear on his book?

Was his wealth stored fraudfully, the spoil of orphans wronged, and
widows who had none to plead their rights?

Have not you, too, gone about the earth like an evil genius, blasting
the fair fruits of peace and industry?

Is that a map which you have before you, with the leaves blotted with
ink?

Will you say that your time is your own, and that you have a right to
employ it in the manner you please?

     [Sometimes a comma is to be read like a period, with
     the falling inflection of the voice.]

The teacher directed him to take his seat, to study his lesson, and to
pass no more time in idleness.

It is said by unbelievers that religion is dull, unsocial, uncharitable,
enthusiastic, a damper of human joy, a morose intruder upon human
pleasure.

Charles has brought his pen instead of his pencil, his paper instead of
his slate, his grammar instead of his arithmetic.

Perhaps you have mistaken sobriety for dullness, equanimity for
moroseness, disinclination to bad company for aversion to society,
abhorrence of vice for uncharitableness, and piety for enthusiasm.

Henry was careless, thoughtless, heedless, and inattentive.

     [Sometimes the comma is to be read like an
     exclamation.]

O, how can you destroy those beautiful things which your father procured
for you! that beautiful top, those polished marbles, that excellent
ball, and that beautiful painted kite,--oh, how can you destroy them,
and expect that he will buy you new ones!

O, how canst thou renounce the boundless store of charms that Nature to
her votary yields! the warbling woodland, the resounding shore, the pomp
of groves, the garniture of fields, all that the genial ray of morning
gilds, and all that echoes to the song of even, all that the mountain's
sheltering bosom shields, and all the dread magnificence of heaven, oh,
how canst thou renounce, and hope to be forgiven!

     [Sometimes the comma, and other marks, are to be read
     without any pause or inflection of the voice.]

You see, boys, what a fine school-room we have, in which you can pursue
your studies.

You see, my son, this wide and large firmament over our heads, where the
sun and moon, and all the stars, appear in their turns.

Therefore, my child, fear, and worship, and love God.

He that can read as well as you can, James, need not be ashamed to read
aloud.

He that can make the multitude laugh and weep as you can, Mr.
Shakspeare, need not fear scholars.

     [Sometimes the pause of a comma must be made where
     there is no pause in your book. Spaces are left, in the
     following sentences, where the pause is proper.]

    James was very much delighted     with
    the picture which he saw.

    The Europeans were hardly less amazed
        at the scene now before them.

    The inhabitants     were entirely naked.
    Their black hair, long and curled, floated
    upon their shoulders, or was bound in tresses
        around their head.

    Persons of reflection and sensibility
        contemplate with interest the scenes of
    nature.

    The succession and contrast of the seasons
        give scope to that care and foresight,
    diligence and industry, which are
    essential to the dignity     and enjoyment
    of human beings.


     [The pupil may read the following sentences; but before
     reading them, he may tell after what word the pause
     should be made. The pause is not printed in the
     sentences, but it must be made when reading them. And
     here it may be observed, that the comma is more
     frequently used to point out the grammatical divisions
     of a sentence than to indicate a rest or cessation of
     the voice. Good reading depends much upon skill and
     judgment in making those pauses which the sense of the
     sentence dictates, but which are not noted in the book;
     and the sooner the pupil is taught to make them, with
     proper discrimination, the surer and the more rapid
     will be his progress in the art of reading.]

While they were at their silent meal a horseman came galloping to the
door, and, with a loud voice, called out that he had been sent express
with a letter to Gilbert Ainslee.

The golden head that was wont to rise at that part of the table was now
wanting.

For even though absent from school I shall get the lesson.

For even though dead I will control the trophies of the capitol.

It is now two hundred years since attempts have been made to civilize
the North American savage.

Doing well has something more in it than the fulfilling of a duty.

You will expect me to say something of the lonely records of the former
races that inhabited this country.

There is no virtue without a characteristic beauty to make it
particularly loved by the good, and to make the bad ashamed of their
neglect of it.

A sacrifice was never yet offered to a principle, that was not made up
to us by self-approval, and the consideration of what our degradation
would have been had we done otherwise.

The following story has been handed down by family tradition for more
than a century.

The succession and contrast of the seasons give scope to that care and
foresight, diligence and industry, which are essential to the dignity
and enjoyment of human beings, whose happiness is connected with the
exertion of their faculties.

A lion of the largest size measures from eight to nine feet from the
muzzle to the origin of the tail, which last is of itself about four
feet long. The height of the larger specimens is four or five feet.

The following anecdote will show with what obstinate perseverance
pack-horses have been known to preserve the line of their order.

Good-morning to you, Charles! Whose book is that which you have under
your arm?

A benison upon thee, gentle huntsman! Whose towers are these that
