
"My word! that's riches," said Martha. "Tha' can buy anything in th'
world tha' wants. Th' rent of our cottage is only one an' threepence an'
it's like pullin' eye-teeth to get it. Now I've just thought of
somethin'," putting her hands on her hips.

"What?" said Mary eagerly.

"In the shop at Thwaite they sell packages o' flower-seeds for a penny
each, and our Dickon he knows which is th' prettiest ones an' how to
make 'em grow. He walks over to Thwaite many a day just for th' fun of
it. Does tha' know how to print letters?" suddenly.

"I know how to write," Mary answered.

Martha shook her head.

"Our Dickon can only read printin'. If tha' could print we could write a
letter to him an' ask him to go an' buy th' garden tools an' th' seeds
at th' same time."

"Oh! you're a good girl!" Mary cried. "You are, really! I didn't know
you were so nice. I know I can print letters if I try. Let's ask Mrs.
Medlock for a pen and ink and some paper."

"I've got some of my own," said Martha. "I bought 'em so I could print a
bit of a letter to mother of a Sunday. I'll go and get it."

She ran out of the room, and Mary stood by the fire and twisted her thin
little hands together with sheer pleasure.

"If I have a spade," she whispered, "I can make the earth nice and soft
and dig up weeds. If I have seeds and can make flowers grow the garden
won't be dead at all--it will come alive."

She did not go out again that afternoon because when Martha returned
with her pen and ink and paper she was obliged to clear the table and
carry the plates and dishes down-stairs and when she got into the
kitchen Mrs. Medlock was there and told her to do something, so Mary
waited for what seemed to her a long time before she came back. Then it
was a serious piece of work to write to Dickon. Mary had been taught
very little because her governesses had disliked her too much to stay
with her. She could not spell particularly well but she found that she
could print letters when she tried. This was the letter Martha dictated
to her:

          "_My Dear Dickon:_

          This comes hoping to find you well as it leaves me
          at present. Miss Mary has plenty of money and will
          you go to Thwaite and buy her some flower seeds
          and a set of garden tools to make a flower-bed.
          Pick the prettiest ones and easy to grow because
          she has never done it before and lived in India
          which is different. Give my love to mother and
          every one of you. Miss Mary is going to tell me a
          lot more so that on my next day out you can hear
          about elephants and camels and gentlemen going
          hunting lions and tigers.

                       "Your loving sister,
                                     "MARTHA PHOEBE SOWERBY."

"We'll put the money in th' envelope an' I'll get th' butcher's boy to
take it in his cart. He's a great friend o' Dickon's," said Martha.

"How shall I get the things when Dickon buys them?" asked Mary.

"He'll bring 'em to you himself. He'll like to walk over this way."

"Oh!" exclaimed Mary, "then I shall see him! I never thought I should
see Dickon."

"Does tha' want to see him?" asked Martha suddenly, she had looked so
pleased.

"Yes, I do. I never saw a boy foxes and crows loved. I want to see him
very much."

Martha gave a little start, as if she suddenly remembered something.

"Now to think," she broke out, "to think o' me forgettin' that there;
an' I thought I was goin' to tell you first thing this mornin'. I asked
mother--and she said she'd ask Mrs. Medlock her own self."

"Do you mean--" Mary began.

"What I said Tuesday. Ask her if you might be driven over to our cottage
some day and have a bit o' mother's hot oat cake, an' butter, an' a
glass o' milk."

It seemed as if all the interesting things were happening in one day. To
think of going over the moor in the daylight and when the sky was blue!
To think of going into the cottage which held twelve children!

"Does she think Mrs. Medlock would let me go?" she asked, quite
anxiously.

"Aye, she thinks she would. She knows what a tidy woman mother is and
how clean she keeps the cottage."

"If I went I should see your mother as well as Dickon," said Mary,
thinking it over and liking the idea very much. "She doesn't seem to be
like the mothers in India."

Her work in the garden and the excitement of the afternoon ended by
making her feel quiet and thoughtful. Martha stayed with her until
tea-time, but they sat in comfortable quiet and talked very little. But
just before Martha went down-stairs for the tea-tray, Mary asked a
question.

"Martha," she said, "has the scullery-maid had the toothache again
to-day?"

Martha certainly started slightly.

"What makes thee ask that?" she said.

"Because when I waited so long for you to come back I opened the door
and walked down the corridor to see if you were coming. And I heard that
far-off crying again, just as we heard it the other night. There isn't a
wind to-day, so you see it couldn't have been the wind."

"Eh!" said Martha restlessly. "Tha' mustn't go walkin' about in
corridors an' listenin'. Mr. Craven would be that there angry there's no
knowin' what he'd do."

"I wasn't listening," said Mary. "I was just waiting for you--and I
heard it. That's three times."

"My word! There's Mrs. Medlock's bell," said Martha, and she almost ran
out of the room.

"It's the strangest house any one ever lived in," said Mary drowsily, as
she dropped her head on the cushioned seat of the armchair near her.
Fresh air, and digging, and skipping-rope had made her feel so
comfortably tired that she fell asleep.




CHAPTER X

DICKON


The sun shone down for nearly a week on the secret garden. The Secret
Garden was what Mary called it when she was thinking of it. She liked
the name, and she liked still more the feeling that when its beautiful
old walls shut her in no one knew where she was. It seemed almost like
being shut out of the world in some fairy place. The few books she had
read and liked had been fairy-story books, and she had read of secret
gardens in some of the stories. Sometimes people went to sleep in them
for a hundred years, which she had thought must be rather stupid. She
had no intention of going to sleep, and, in fact, she was becoming wider
awake every day which passed at Misselthwaite. She was beginning to like
to be out of doors; she no longer hated the wind, but enjoyed it. She
could run faster, and longer, and she could skip up to a hundred. The
bulbs in the secret garden must have been much astonished. Such nice
clear places were made round them that they had all the breathing space
they wanted, and really, if Mistress Mary had known it, they began to
cheer up under the dark earth and work tremendously. The sun could get
at them and warm them, and when the rain came down it could reach them
at once, so they began to feel very much alive.

Mary was an odd, determined little person, and now she had something
interesting to be determined about, she was very much absorbed, indeed.
She worked and dug and pulled up weeds steadily, only becoming more
pleased with her work every hour instead of tiring of it. It seemed to
her like a fascinating sort of play. She found many more of the
sprouting pale green points than she had ever hoped to find. They seemed
to be starting up everywhere and each day she was sure she found tiny
new ones, some so tiny that they barely peeped above the earth. There
were so many that she remembered what Martha had said about the
"snowdrops by the thousands," and about bulbs spreading and making new
ones. These had been left to themselves for ten years and perhaps they
had spread, like the snowdrops, into thousands. She wondered how long it
would be before they showed that they were flowers. Sometimes she
stopped digging to look at the garden and try to imagine what it would
be like when it was covered with thousands of lovely things in bloom.

During that week of sunshine, she became more intimate with Ben
Weatherstaff. She surprised him several times by seeming to start up
beside him as if she sprang out of the earth. The truth was that she was
afraid that he would pick up his tools and go away if he saw her coming,
so she always walked toward him as silently as possible. But, in fact,
he did not object to her as strongly as he had at first. Perhaps he was
secretly rather flattered by her evident desire for his elderly company.
Then, also, she was more civil than she had been. He did not know that
when she first saw him she spoke to him as she would have spoken to a
native, and had not known that a cross, sturdy old Yorkshire man was not
accustomed to salaam to his masters, and be merely commanded by them to
do things.

"Tha'rt like th' robin," he said to her one morning when he lifted his
head and saw her standing by him. "I never knows when I shall see thee
or which side tha'll come from."

"He's friends with me now," said Mary.

"That's like him," snapped Ben Weatherstaff. "Makin' up to th' women
folk just for vanity an' flightiness. There's nothin' he wouldn't do for
th' sake o' showin' off an' flirtin' his tail-feathers. He's as full o'
pride as an egg's full o' meat."

He very seldom talked much and sometimes did not even answer Mary's
questions except by a grunt, but this morning he said more than usual.
He stood up and rested one hobnailed boot on the top of his spade while
he looked her over.

"How long has tha' been here?" he jerked out.

"I think it's about a month," she answered.

"Tha's beginnin' to do Misselthwaite credit," he said. "Tha's a bit
fatter than tha' was an' tha's not quite so yeller. Tha' looked like a
young plucked crow when tha' first came into this garden. Thinks I to
myself I never set eyes on an uglier, sourer faced young 'un."

Mary was not vain and as she had never thought much of her looks she was
not greatly disturbed.

"I know I'm fatter," she said. "My stockings are getting tighter. They
used to make wrinkles. There's the robin, Ben Weatherstaff."

There, indeed, was the robin, and she thought he looked nicer than ever.
His red waistcoat was as glossy as satin and he flirted his wings and
tail and tilted his head and hopped about with all sorts of lively
graces. He seemed determined to make Ben Weatherstaff admire him. But
Ben was sarcastic.

"Aye, there tha' art!" he said. "Tha' can put up with me for a bit
sometimes when tha's got no one better. Tha's been reddinin' up thy
waistcoat an' polishin' thy feathers this two weeks. I know what tha's
up to. Tha's courtin' some bold young madam somewhere, tellin' thy lies
to her about bein' th' finest cock robin on Missel Moor an' ready to
fight all th' rest of 'em."

"Oh! look at him!" exclaimed Mary.

The robin was evidently in a fascinating, bold mood. He hopped closer
and closer and looked at Ben Weatherstaff more and more engagingly. He
flew on to the nearest currant bush and tilted his head and sang a
little song right at him.

"Tha' thinks tha'll get over me by doin' that," said Ben, wrinkling his
face up in such a way that Mary felt sure he was trying not to look
pleased. "Tha' thinks no one can stand out against thee--that's what
tha' thinks."

The robin spread his wings--Mary could scarcely believe her eyes. He
flew right up to the handle of Ben Weatherstaff's spade and alighted on
the top of it. Then the old man's face wrinkled itself slowly into a new
expression. He stood still as if he were afraid to breathe--as if he
would not have stirred for the world, lest his robin should start away.
He spoke quite in a whisper.

"Well, I'm danged!" he said as softly as if he were saying something
quite different. "Tha' does know how to get at a chap--tha' does! Tha's
fair unearthly, tha's so knowin'."

And he stood without stirring--almost without drawing his breath--until
the robin gave another flirt to his wings and flew away. Then he stood
looking at the handle of the spade as if there might be Magic in it, and
then he began to dig again and said nothing for several minutes.

But because he kept breaking into a slow grin now and then, Mary was not
afraid to talk to him.

"Have you a garden of your own?" she asked.

"No. I'm bachelder an' lodge with Martin at th' gate."

"If you had one," said Mary, "what would you plant?"

"Cabbages an' 'taters an' onions."

"But if you wanted to make a flower garden," persisted Mary, "what would
you plant?"

"Bulbs an' sweet-smellin' things--but mostly roses."

Mary's face lighted up.

"Do you like roses?" she said.

Ben Weatherstaff rooted up a weed and threw it aside before he answered.

"Well, yes, I do. I was learned that by a young lady I was gardener to.
She had a lot in a place she was fond of, an' she loved 'em like they
was children--or robins. I've seen her bend over an' kiss 'em." He
dragged out another weed and scowled at it. "That were as much as ten
year' ago."

"Where is she now?" asked Mary, much interested.

"Heaven," he answered, and drove his spade deep into the soil, "'cording
to what parson says."

"What happened to the roses?" Mary asked again, more interested than
ever.

"They was left to themselves."

Mary was becoming quite excited.

"Did they quite die? Do roses quite die when they are left to
themselves?" she ventured.

"Well, I'd got to like 'em--an' I liked her--an' she liked 'em," Ben
Weatherstaff admitted reluctantly. "Once or twice a year I'd go an' work
at 'em a bit--prune 'em an' dig about th' roots. They run wild, but they
was in rich soil, so some of 'em lived."

"When they have no leaves and look gray and brown and dry, how can you
tell whether they are dead or alive?" inquired Mary.

"Wait till th' spring gets at 'em--wait till th' sun shines on th' rain
an' th' rain falls on th' sunshine an' then tha'll find out."

"How--how?" cried Mary, forgetting to be careful.

"Look along th' twigs an' branches an' if tha' sees a bit of a brown
lump swelling here an' there, watch it after th' warm rain an' see what
happens." He stopped suddenly and looked curiously at her eager face.
"Why does tha' care so much about roses an' such, all of a sudden?" he
demanded.

Mistress Mary felt her face grow red. She was almost afraid to answer.

