She has plenty of common sense, is tolerant of tobacco, and a
thorough woman of the world, though her headquarters have for years
been in the country. With her is her daughter."

"Well, what about her? I have heard of her as having made quite a
sensation this season, and between ourselves I had some idea that
this party was specially planned on her account."

"To some extent perhaps it was," Frank Mallett laughed. "Bertha
Greendale is an old chum of mine. I knew her in very short frocks,
for they were near neighbours of ours in the country; and her
father, Sir John, was always one of my kindest friends. She was a
slip of a girl when I went out to India, and though I thought that
she would turn out pretty, I certainly did not expect she would be
anything like as good looking as she is. She was always a nice
girl, and success so far has not spoiled her.

"Then there is a Miss Sinclair, a great friend of Bertha's; and
Jack Hawley of the Guards. I knew him out in the Crimea. The other
two are Wilson, who is a clever young barrister, and a particularly
pleasant fellow; and his wife, who is a sister of Miss Sinclair; so
I think there are the elements of a pleasant party. All the ladies
are broken into smoke, for Sir John smoked, and so does Wilson; so
that you won't be expected to go forward, as they do on the P and
O, whenever you want to enjoy your favourite pipe."

"That is a comfort, anyhow, Mallett. If there is one thing in the
world I hate, it is having to go and hunt about for some place to
smoke in; and I never accept an invitation to any shooting party
unless I know beforehand that smoking is allowed. At what time do
you expect the others?"

"They will be down at half-past twelve; they are all coming by the
same train, and it was because I knew that you would want to be in
a smoking carriage that I told you to come down by the earlier one.
And, besides, I thought it well to get you here first. You are the
only stranger, as it were. The others are all intimate with each
other, and it was as well to post you as to their various
relationships."

"One thing, Mallett. I hope Lady Greendale is not in any way a
marrying woman. I am not like Mr. Pickwick, afraid of widows, and
have perfect confidence in my power to resist temptation; but at
the same time it makes all the difference in the world to one's
comfort. I am not ass enough to suppose that Lady Greendale would
even dream for a moment of setting her cap at a Colonel on half
pay, but if a woman is in the marrying line she always expects a
certain amount of what you may call delicate attention. It is her
daily bread, for she considers that unless every man she comes
across evinces a certain amount of admiration, it is a sign that
her charms are on the wane, and her chances growing more and more
remote."

Mallett laughed. "You can set your mind at ease, for nothing is
further from the thoughts of Lady Greendale than re-marriage. She
was very happy with her husband."

"The more reason for her marrying again," the Colonel said. "A
woman who has been happy with her husband is apt to get the idea
into her head that every man will make a good husband; and a
confoundedly mistaken idea it is. She is much more likely to marry
again than the woman who has had a hard time of it."

"Well, you may be right there, Colonel, but putting aside my
conviction that Lady Greendale has no idea of marrying again, is
the fact that at present all her thoughts are occupied by her
daughter. She is not at all what you would call a managing mother,
but I am sure that she has set her heart on Bertha's making a good
match, and that the fear that she will succumb to some penniless
younger son or other unsuitable partner is at present the dominant
feeling in her mind. I don't think she would have agreed to Jack
Hawley being of the party, had not Bertha entertained a conviction
that he was rather gone on Miss Sinclair, who by the way has, like
her sister, money enough to disregard the fact that Jack is hardly
in that respect well endowed.

"However, it is time for me to be off; I see the skipper is getting
the gig lowered. I suppose you will be content to sit here and
smoke your pipe until we come back; and, indeed, seven is as many
as the gig will carry with any degree of comfort. The cutter will
go ashore to fetch off the luggage, which will probably be of
somewhat portentous dimensions."

Two minutes later Mallett took his place in the gig, and was rowed
to the shore. He was delighted, with his new purchase. She was an
excellent sea boat, and, as he had learned from a short spin with
another craft, decidedly fast. He had not, however, entered her for
any race.

"There is no hurry," he said to his skipper, when the latter
suggested that they should try her at Cowes. "I should like to win
my first race, and in the first place we don't know that she is in
her best trim. In the next place we must get the crew accustomed to
each other and to the craft. I bought her as a cruiser rather than
a racer, and don't want to have her full of men, as are most of the
racers. It is a heavy expense, and fewer hands accustomed to work
well together do just as much work, and more smartly than a crowd.
We found, when we sailed round the islands with the Royal Victoria
race, that, considering we went under reduced canvas, we held our
own very fairly; and I have no doubt that when we get all our light
canvas up, the Osprey will give a good account of herself. Our gear
is scarcely stretched yet.

"No; I will wait until next season, and then we will make a bold
bid for a Queen's Cup."

Frank Mallett reached the platform at Southampton a few minutes
before the train came in. The party were on the lookout for him,
and alighted in the highest spirits.

"Now, ladies," he said, "the first thing is to point out the
luggage. My man here will get it all together, and stand guard over
it till two others arrive to get it on board. They will be here in
a few minutes. In fact, they ought to be here now."

He looked on with something like dismay while the boxes were picked
out and piled together.

"My dear Lady Greendale," he said, "I am afraid you must all have
very vague ideas as to the amount of accommodation in a 120-ton
yacht. She is not a Cunarder or a P and O. Why, two or three of
those trunks would absolutely fill one of her cabins."

"You did not expect, Major Mallett," Bertha said demurely, "that we
were coming for a month's cruise with only handbags; especially
after telling us that very likely we might not get a chance of
getting any washing done all that time."

"Well, I dare say we shall stow them away somewhere. Now, as you
have got them all together, we will go down to the boat.

"Now, lads, you had better get a hand cart, and get these things on
board as soon as you can."

"Which is the Osprey?" Amy Sinclair asked Bertha, as they took
their places in the boat.

Bertha looked with a rather puzzled face at the fleet of yachts.

"That is," she said, confidently, after a moment's hesitation,
pointing to one towards which the boat was at the moment heading.

Frank Mallett laughed.

"Really I should have thought, Miss Greendale, that, although
making every allowance for feminine vagueness as to boats, you
would have known the yacht you christened a month ago; or, at any
rate, would not have mistaken a schooner for a yawl, after the
patient explanation I gave you on your last visit as to the
different rigs. That is the Osprey, a hundred yards lower down."

"Oh, yes, I remember now, that when there is a little mast standing
on the stern it is a yawl. These things seem very simple to you,
Major Mallett, but they are very puzzling to women, who know
nothing about them. Now, I venture to say, that if I were to show
you six different materials for frocks, and were to tell you all
their names, you would know nothing about them when I showed them
to you a month afterwards.

"I suppose the gentleman on board is Colonel Severn."

"Yes, he came down by the train before yours. I thought it better
that he should do so, as in the first place, he did not know any of
you, and in the next, as you see, we are pretty closely packed as
it is."

"What is that flag at the masthead?" Lady Greendale asked. "Bertha
said that your flag was going to have an eagle on it."

"That is on my racing flag. Let me impress upon you, ladies, that a
racing flag is a square flag, and that that is not a flag at all,
but a burgee. Every club has its burgee; as you see, that is a
white cross on a blue ground with a crown in the centre, and is the
burgee of the Royal Thames, of which I was elected a member last
month.

"Here we are. Properly, I ought to be on board first, but I am too
wedged in. You and Wilson had better go up first; that will give
more room for the ladies to move."

"You have got new steps," Bertha said. "When I came down with Mrs.
Wilson to christen the boat we had to climb up nasty steep steps
against the side. This is a great deal more comfortable. I was
thinking that mamma would have a difficulty in getting up those
other things, if it were at all rough."

"Yes, I have had them specially made for the present occasion.
Large cruisers always have them, and, at any rate, they are more
comfortable for any-sized boats. But they take up rather more room
to stow away, and they are really not so handy in a sea, for the
boats cannot get so close alongside. Still, no doubt they are more
comfortable for ladies. Now it is your turn."

The cruise of the Osprey was in all respects a success. The party
was well chosen and pleasant. Colonel Severn and Lady Greendale got
on well together. He liked her because she had no objection
whatever to his perpetual enjoyment of his pipe. She liked him
because he was altogether different from anyone that she had met
before; his Indian stories amused her, his views of life were
original, and his grumbling at modern ways and modern innovations
in no way concealed the fact that in spite of it all he evidently
enjoyed life thoroughly.

The Osprey had fine weather as she ran along the south coast,
anchoring under Portland for a day, while the party examined the
works of the breakwater and paid a visit to the quarries, where the
convicts were at work. She put into Torquay, Dartmouth and
Plymouth, spending a day in the two former ports and two at the
last named. They looked into Fowey, and stopped two days at
Falmouth, and then, rounding the Land's End, made for Kingstown.
From here they started for the Clyde; but meeting with very heavy
weather, went into Belfast Lough.

The Osprey proved to be a fine sea boat, and behaved so well that
even Lady Greendale declared she would not be afraid to trust
herself on board her in any weather. They sailed up the Clyde as
far as Greenock, and then returning, cruised for a fortnight among
the islands on the west coast. They had enjoyed their stay at
Kingstown so much that they put in there again on their return
voyage, shaped their course for Plymouth, and then, without looking
into any other port, returned to Southampton.

Jack Hawley and Miss Sinclair had become engaged during the voyage,
and the Colonel and Lady Greendale had become so confidential that
Frank laughingly asked him if he had changed his views on the
subject of matrimony, a suggestion which he indignantly repudiated.

"I should have thought that you knew me better," he said,
reproachfully. "I admit that Lady Greendale is a very charming
woman, but you don't think that she can imagine for a moment that I
have ever entertained any idea of such a thing? You said that I was
to amuse her if I could. I have tried my best to keep the old lady
as much to myself as possible, so as to enable all you young people
to carry out your flirtations to your heart's content. By gad, sir,
it would be a nice return for following out your instructions to
find myself in such a hole as that."

Frank had some difficulty in persuading the Colonel that his remark
was not meant as a serious one, and that there was no fear whatever
that Lady Greendale had ever had the slightest reason to suppose
that his intentions were not of a most Platonic nature.

"I am heartily glad," the Colonel said, when he was quite pacified,
"that Hawley's affair has come off all right. Even if she had not
been an heiress I should have said that he was a lucky fellow, for
she is an extremely nice and pleasant young woman, without any
nonsense about her; still there is no doubt that her fortune will
come in very handy for Hawley. As to the girl herself, I think she
has made a very good choice. She has plenty of money for both, and
as he has managed to keep up on his younger son's portion, he can
have no extravagant tastes, and will make her a very good husband.
There is no other engagement to be announced, I suppose?"

"As I am the only other unmarried man on board, Colonel, your
question is somewhat pointed. No; I hope there may be one of these
days, but I don't think that it would be fair to ask her here,
where I am her host, and she is under the glamour of the sea. I
doubt whether she has the slightest idea of what I want. That is
the worst of being very old friends; the relations get so fixed
that a woman does not recognise that they can ever be changed.
However, I shall try my luck one of these days. I don't think that
I shall meet with any serious opposition on her mother's part, if
Bertha likes me, but I know that Lady Greendale has very much more
ambitious views for her, and has quite set her mind upon her making
a good match. No doubt she has a right to expect that she will do
so. However, I think she is too fond of Bertha to thwart her,
however disappointed she might feel. At present I don't think that
she has any more suspicion than Bertha herself of my intentions."

During the voyage Bertha and Amy Sinclair had become quite adroit
helmswomen, and one or other was constantly at the tiller when the
wind was light. Bertha had learned the names of all the crew, and
often went forward to ask questions of the men tending the head
sails, becoming a prime favourite with all hands. On arriving at
Southampton the rest of the party went up at once to town, while
Frank remained behind for a day or two, going round in the yacht to
Gosport, where she was to be laid up for the winter.



Chapter 7.

"I am so sorry," Bertha Greendale said, "so awfully sorry. I had no
idea that you thought of me like that. We were such friends so long
ago, and it has been so pleasant since you came home last year, and
I like you as if you were a big brother; but I have never thought
of you in any other light, and now it seems dreadful to me to give
you pain; but I feel sure that I should never come to love you in
that way."

And she burst into tears.

"Do not think anything more about it, dear," Frank Mallett said,
gently. "I have felt sometimes when we have been together, that you
were so kindly and frank and pleasant with me that you could feel
as I wanted you to. I ought to have known it always. But I suppose
in such cases a man deceives himself and shuts his eyes to facts.
You have certainly nothing to blame yourself about. Of course, it
is a hard blow, but no doubt I shall get over it as other fellows
do. At any rate, I know that we shall always be dear friends, and
you need not fear that I shall mope over my misfortune. I shall run
up to town for a bit, and as you are going up for the season next
week, I shall no doubt often meet you. Don't fret about me. I have
been hit pretty hard several times, though not in the same way, and
I have always gone through it, and no doubt I shall do so now.

"Goodbye," and when Bertha looked up, he had left the room.

"Oh, mamma," she said, when she went into the room where her mother
was sitting, "I am so sorry, so dreadfully sorry. Frank Mallett has
asked me to be his wife. I have never thought of such a thing and
of course I had to say no."

"I have thought such a thing likely for some time, Bertha, but I
thought it best to hold my tongue about it. In such matters the
interference of a mother often does more harm than good. I felt
sure, by your manner with him, that you had no idea of it; and I
must say that much as I like Frank Mallett, I should have been
sorry. I have great hopes of your making a really first-class
match."

"I could not make a better match," Bertha said, indignantly. "No
one could be kinder or nicer than Major Mallett, and we know how
brave he is and how he has distinguished himself, and he has a good
estate and everything that anyone could wish; only unfortunately I
do not love him--at least not in that way. He has never shown me
what I should consider any particular attention, and never talked
to me in the way men do when they are making love to a girl.
Nothing could be nicer, and it was all the nicer because I never
thought of this. I suppose it is because he is so different from
some of the men I met in town last season, who always seemed to be
trying to get round me. No, I know it is not a nice expression,
mamma, but you know what I mean."

"I know, my dear," her mother smiled. "Of course you are a very
good match, and though I do not want to flatter you, you were one
of the belles of the season. Though some of the men you speak of
were by no means desirable--younger sons and barristers and that
sort of thing--still, there were two or three whom any girl might
have been pleased to see at her feet, and who, I am sure from what
I saw, only needed but little encouragement from you to be there. I
was a little vexed, dear, you see, that you did not give any of
them that encouragement; but I understand, of course, that the
novelty of your first season carried you away altogether; and that
you liked the dancing and the fetes and the opera for themselves,
and not because they brought you in contact with men of excellent
class. So far as I could see, it was a matter of indifference to
you whether the man was a peer with a splendid rent roll, or a
younger son without a farthing, so that he was a good dancer and a
pleasant companion; but of course after a season or two you will
grow wiser."

"I do hope not, mamma," Bertha said, indignantly. "I don't mean to
say that it might not be better to marry, as you say, a peer with a
good rent roll than a younger son without a penny, other things
being equal; that is to say, if one liked them equally; but I hope
that I shall never come to like anyone a bit more for being a
peer."

Lady Greendale smiled, indulgently.

"It is a natural sentiment, my dear, for a girl of your age and
inexperience; but in time you will come to see things in a
different light."

Then she changed the subject. "What is Frank going to do? It is
fortunate that we are going up to town next week."

"He is going up to town himself tomorrow, and I am sure that you
will never hear from him, or from anyone else, what has happened.
We shall meet in town as usual, and I am sure that he will be just
the same as he was before, and that I shall be a great deal more
uncomfortable than he will. It is a very silly affair altogether, I
think; and I would give anything if it had not happened."

Lady Greendale did not echo the sentiment. She liked Frank Mallett
immensely. He had always been a great favourite of hers, but since
she had guessed what Bertha herself had not dreamed of, she had
been uncomfortable. It threatened to disturb all the plans she had
formed, and she was well contented to learn that she had refused
him. Lady Greendale was a thoroughly kind-hearted woman, but she
could not forget that she herself might have made, in a worldly
sense, a better match than she had; and her ambition had, since
Bertha was a child, and still more since she had shown promise of
exceptional good looks, been centred on her making a really good
match.

Frank went up to town next day, and the Greendales followed him a
week later. They did not often meet him in society, as Frank seldom
went out; but he called occasionally in the old friendly and
unceremonious way. It would have required an acute observer to see
any difference in his manner to Bertha, but Lady Greendale noticed
it, and the girl herself felt that, although he was no less kind
and friendly, there was some impalpable change in his manner,
something that she felt, though she could not define it, even to
herself.

"Have you had a tiff with Major Mallett, Bertha?" Mrs. Wilson asked
one day, when she was alone with her in the drawing room.

Frank had just left, after spending an hour there.

"A tiff, Carrie? No! What put such an idea into your head?"

"My eyes, assisted perhaps by my ears. My dear, do you think that
after being with you on the yacht last autumn, I should not notice
any change in your manner to each other? I had expected before now
to have heard an interesting piece of news; and now I see that
things have gone wrong somehow."

"We are just as good friends as we always were," Bertha said,
shortly; "every bit."

"You don't mean to say that you have refused him, Bertha?"
