the three little girls retired to the neat bedroom which they shared
together, and put on their sun-bonnets, their white capes, and their
washing-gloves, and came back again to Miss Ramsay, equipped for their
walk. The boys, with straw hats sticking very far back on their heads,
were also waiting Miss Ramsay's pleasure in the hall downstairs. The
children and the governess went out walking solemnly two and two, Miss
Ramsay and Conrad in front, Lucy and Mary following, with Ann and
Philip behind.

It was a hot day; but Miss Ramsay never excused the morning walk on
the dusty highroads. The children came in very much flushed and tired
at one o'clock for dinner. They assembled again in the big, cool
dining room and ate their roast mutton and peas and new potatoes, and
rice pudding and stewed fruit with the propriety of children who have
been thoroughly well brought up.

At dinner French was again the only language allowed to be spoken. In
consequence there was a sad dearth of any conversation at that dinner
table.

After dinner Mr. Dolman told Miss Ramsay that he had given orders
about the wagonette, and he supposed Simpson knew about the sleeping
arrangements, as he was given to understand that she had received a
letter from Mrs. Dolman.

"I have spoken to Simpson," replied Miss Ramsay, dropping her eyes as
she made the remark, "and she fully understands what is expected of
her. The two girls are to have small rooms to themselves, and so is
the eldest boy, but the youngest will sleep in the nursery with Philip
and Conrad. Those are Mrs. Dolman's directions."

"Quite right, quite right," said Mr. Dolman. "Anything Mrs. Dolman
wishes, of course. Miss Ramsay, I shall not be home to tea this
evening. I have to go to visit a sick parishioner at the other end of
the parish. Good-by, Lucy; good-by, the rest of you children. I hope
to see you all before bedtime; if not--"

"But, father," burst from Ann, "the new children will be here about
six."

"They cannot arrive before half-past six, my dear," replied Mr.
Dolman.

"Ann, you have again spoken English," said Miss Ramsay; "I shall be
forced to punish you. You will have to stay in after the others this
afternoon, and learn ten lines of your French poetry."

Poor little Ann colored and her lips trembled. She really felt
dreadfully excited, and it was terrible to have to bottle up all her
thoughts during the long, hot day.

Immediately after dinner the children went up to the schoolroom, where
they lay down on the floor for half an hour to learn their lessons.

At three o'clock the ordinary lessons began again, and went on without
interruption until five, when there was tea. After tea the children
were supposed to have the rest of the day to do what they liked in.
But on this occasion, Ann was kept in the schoolroom to learn her
French poetry as best she could. The ten lines were difficult, and the
little girl felt sleepy, cross, and dissatisfied. Soon her small,
curly head fell upon her plump arms, and sleep took possession of her
little soul.

Miss Ramsay came in and found her in a state of heavy slumber.

"Ann!" she cried; "Ann!"

Little Ann raised herself with a start.

"Oh, please, Miss Ramsay, won't you excuse the French poetry to-day,"
she cried; "I am so--"

"So what, Ann? I am surprised at you. What can be the matter?"

"I am _so_ excited about the little Delaneys," answered Ann. "They are
coming so soon, and they are my own first cousins--I seem to see them
all the day--they come between me and--and my poetry. Please, Miss
Ramsay, if you'll only allow me I'll get up early to-morrow morning
and learn it perfectly. Do say I need not finish it this
afternoon--do, please."

Miss Ramsay was astonished and annoyed at this rebellion on the part
of Ann.

"You surprise me," she said. "You know that lessons have to be done
during lesson hours, and that rules are not to be broken. You know
what your mother would say if she heard you talking English at meals.
Twice to-day you broke through that rule. The first time I pardoned
you--the second time it was unpardonable. Now, my dear, apply yourself
to your task--get it well over, and you will doubtless be ready to
welcome your cousins when they arrive."

Miss Ramsay left the room. Ann shed a few tears, and then, seeing
there was no help for it, applied herself with all her might and main
to learning her appointed task. She got her poetry by heart after a
fashion, and, hastily replacing the book in the bookcase, ran out of
the schoolroom. She saw Lucy and Mary pacing up and down the terrace
in front of the house. They were in clean white frocks, with sashes
round their waists, and their hair was very trimly brushed and curled
over their heads. Their faces shone from soap and water, and even at
that distance Ann could perceive that their hands were painfully,
terribly clean. In her heart of hearts Ann hated clean hands; they
meant so much that was unpleasant--they meant that there must be no
grubbing in the garden, no searching for dear little weeds and small
flowers, and all kinds of delicious, unexpected things in mother
earth. In her heart of hearts Ann had a spark of originality of her
own, but it had little chance of flourishing under the treatment so
carefully pursued at Super-Ashton.

Philip and Conrad might also be seen on the terrace in their clean
linen blouses and fresh knickerbockers; their hands were also
carefully washed, their hair brushed back from their faces, the faces
themselves shining from soap and water.

"Oh, dear! there's no help for it," thought little Ann, "I must go
into the nursery and let Simpson pull me about. How she will scrub me
and tug at my hair, and put on such a horrid starched dress, and it's
so hot to-night! Well, if I hurry I may be in time to tell Philip what
I know about their names. Oh, how delicious it will be! He'll be so
excited. Yes, I'll be as quick as possible."

Ann ran down the long passage which led from the schoolroom to the
nursery, opened the door, and approached a prim old servant with a
somewhat cross face, who was busily engaged mending stockings.

"Please, Simpson, here I am. Will you dress me?" said Ann, panting as
she spoke.

Simpson laid down her work with deliberation.

"Now, I wonder, Miss Ann," she said, "why I am to be put about for
you. I have just finished dressing all the other children. Why didn't
you come with the others? There, miss, you must just dress yourself,
for I can't and won't be worried; these stockings must be finished
before the mistress comes home."

"All right," answered Ann, in a cheerful tone. "I can wash myself
beautifully. May I go into the night-nursery, please, Simpson, and do
my best?"

"Yes, my dear. You'll find a white frock hanging in the wardrobe. I'll
fasten it for you after you have washed yourself and combed out your
hair. Now, do be quick. I would help you willingly, Miss Ann, only I
really have not a minute to spare; Master Philip and Master Conrad are
dreadful with their socks, and when the mistress comes with that fresh
family, goodness knows when I shall have a moment to see to your
clothes again."

Ann dressed herself, and ran back to Simpson.

"Simpson," she said, as that good woman was fastening the hooks and
eyes at the back of her frock, "I know it is wrong to be so much
excited, but I am. My heart beats awfully fast at the thought of their
coming."

"Well, Miss Ann, it's more than my heart does. And now, miss, if
you'll take a word of advice from me, you'll keep your feelin's to
yourself, as far as your ma is concerned. Your ma don't wish any of
you to give way to excitement. She wants you to grow up steady,
well-conducted young ladies."

"I hate being a well-conducted young lady," burst from little Ann.

"Oh, dear me, miss! it's dreadful to hear you talk so unproper. Now
stand still and don't fidget."

The frock was fastened, and Ann ran off to join her brothers and
sisters on the terrace.

Lucy and Mary were little girls after their mother's own heart. They
never questioned her wishes, they never rebelled against her rules,
they were as good and well-behaved as any two little English maids of
the respective ages of twelve and ten could be. Now, as little Ann
approached, they looked at her as if they thought her quite beneath
their notice.

"Oh, do go away, Ann!" said Lucy. "Mary and I are talking secrets, and
we don't want you."

"You are always talking secrets," said Ann. "It's horrid unfair to
me."

"We have got to talk things over. We can't confide in you; you're the
youngest. Please don't be disagreeable now. We are having a most
important talk. Please run away at once."

Ann looked beseeching, but then, all of a sudden, her eyes fell upon
Philip. She turned, ran up to him, clutched him by the arm, and pulled
him away from Conrad.

"Phil," she said, "I want to have you all to myself. I have something
terribly exciting to say."

Philip looked from Conrad to Ann.

"But you are always getting into hot water, Ann," he replied, "and Con
and I were talking about our fishes. We think if we are very careful
with our pocket-money we may have enough to buy some gold and silver
fish in the holidays."

"Yes, yes," answered Ann impetuously; "buy any kind of fish you like.
Only, Con, like a dear, good boy, please go and walk at the other end
of the terrace for five minutes. I must speak to someone or I'll
burst."

"How awfully vulgar you are, Ann!" said Lucy, who happened to pass by,
with Mary leaning on her arm, at that moment.

But Philip felt flattered at Ann's evident anxiety to be alone with
him.

"Go and do as you are told, Conrad," he said, in lofty tones; "go to
the other end of the terrace at once."

"It's rather hard on me," said Conrad. "I like having secrets as well
as anybody else; the air is full of secrets to-day--why shouldn't I
have some?"

"I'll have a secret with you by and by," said Ann, "if you'll only go
away now."

The little boy looked at her, saw she was in earnest, and obeyed
somewhat unwillingly.

"Now then, Ann," said Philip, "speak out; be as quick as ever you
can."

"Philip," said Ann, in a solemn voice, "don't you want to know all
about the children who are coming to-night?"

"Is that what the secret is about?" said Philip in disgust. "Do you
know, Ann, what I heard Miss Ramsay say to Simpson to-day. She said
that the new children would be awful bothers, and that _she_ for one
does not know if she is going to stay, and Simpson said she was sure
that she would give notice too. Miss Ramsay said it was an awful shame
bringing four children to the house, and Simpson threw up her hands.
You know how she looks when she throws up her hands. And she said,
'Them's my sentiments, Miss Ramsay.' Do you know what she meant by
'Them's my sentiments,' Ann, 'cos I don't? I never heard such funny
words before. Did you, Ann?"

"No," said Ann; "but you ought not to have listened, Phil."

"Oh, I often listen!" replied Philip calmly. "I get to know all kinds
of funny things that way, and they turn out no end useful. I know lots
of things about Miss Ramsay, and since I just let her know that I did,
she is not half so hard on me. That's how I find listening useful."

"Well, it is not right," said Ann, "but I have no time to argue with
you now, Phil; I want to talk about the children. Whatever Simpson
says, and whatever Miss Ramsay says, I am delighted that they are
coming. I think it will be fun. In my heart, you know, Phil, I love
fun, and I want to be able to talk English sometimes, and Phil, would,
_would_ you like to know their names?"

"Their names?" said Philip. "I suppose they have names, although I
never thought about them."

"Well, of course they have, and I'll tell you what they are. They have
got lovely names; once I heard mother say that the whole four of them
were called after heathen idols. Isn't it awful and exciting to be
called after a heathen idol? Oh, Phil! they have such lovely names!"

Philip was not much interested in heathen idols, but Ann's excited
face and her bright blue eyes did strike him as out of the common.

"Well, you are in a state," he said. "What creatures girls are! You'll
catch it when mother comes home. You know she never can stand anybody
all jumpy, and jerky, and quivery, like you are now. Well, what are
the names? Out with them and get them over."

"Iris is the name of the eldest girl," said Ann. "Then comes
Apollo--he is a boy."

"I'll never be able to get hold of that name," said Philip. "Apollo!
how queer."

"But it is not queer, really," said Ann, delighted at having roused
his real interest at last. "Of course, Apollo is very well known
indeed. He was a sort of beautiful god long ago."

"But this boy is not a god--horrid little beggar," said Philip. "Well,
what are the names of the others?"

"There is a girl called Diana."

"Diana," repeated Philip. "There's nothing in that name. That name is
in the Bible. Miss Ramsay read the whole story aloud to us last
Sunday when the beastly rain kept dropping and dropping all day long.
'Great is Diana of the Ephesians.' I rather like the sound, but
there's nothing at all in a name of that sort, Ann."

"Well, I didn't say there was," answered Ann. "I only think it awfully
pretty."

"I don't think much of it for an ordinary girl. Well, now, what is the
other name? I'll call Conrad back, if you are not quick."

"I'll tell it to you. Look here, Phil, I bet you never heard a name
like it."

"You bet?" said Philip. "Oh, if mamma only heard you!"

"For goodness' sake, don't tell her," said Ann. "I can't help letting
out sometimes, and it does relieve me so. The name of the other boy is
Orion, and he is called after a cluster of stars. I do know that much.
And oh, Phil! Phil! Phil! they are coming! they are coming!"




CHAPTER VIII.

THE STRAW TOO MUCH.


The crunching of wheels was heard distinctly on the gravel, and the
next moment the wagonette swept into view. The horses drew up with a
nourish at the front door of the pretty Rectory, and the five little
Dolmans rushed forward.
