
"No," said Julia resolutely, every vestige of a smile leaving her face
at Eleanor's words. "It would be useless for you to attempt to be
spokesman in this matter, because you are a new girl in High School and
know nothing of past class matters except from hearsay. But you have
with you seven girls who do know all about the enmity that was buried
here last spring, and who ought to have enough good sense to know that
this afternoon's performance is liable to bring it to life again.

"If you girls carry this hatchet to school and exhibit it to the seniors
on the day of the game you are apt to start bad feeling all over again,"
she said, turning to the others. "There are sure to be some girls in the
senior class who would resent it. Neither class has played tricks on the
other since peace was declared, and we don't want to begin now.

"That's the reason I asked Grace to appoint a committee of juniors and
come out here with me. I feel sure that under the circumstances the
absent members of both classes would agree with us if they were present.
Digging up a rusty old hatchet is nothing, but digging up a rusty old
grudge is quite another matter. We didn't come here to quarrel, but I
appeal to you, as members of the junior class, to think before you do
something that is bound to cause us all annoyance and perhaps
unhappiness."

There was complete silence after Julia finished speaking. What she had
said evidently impressed them. Eleanor alone looked belligerent.

"Perhaps we'd better let the old hatchet alone," Daisy Culver said
sullenly. "The fun is all spoiled now, and everyone will know about it
before school begins to-morrow."

"Daisy, how can you say so?" exclaimed Grace, who, fearing a scene with
Eleanor, had hitherto remained silent. "You know perfectly well that
none of us will say anything about it. Why, we came out here simply to
try to prevent your doing something that might stir up trouble again
between the senior and junior classes. There isn't a girl here who would
be so contemptible as to tell any one outside about what has happened
to-day."

This was Eleanor's opportunity. Turning furiously on Grace, her eyes
flashing, she exclaimed: "Yes, there is one girl who would tell
anything, and that girl is you! You pretend to be honorable and
high-principled, but you are nothing but a hypocrite and a sneak.
I would not trust you as far as I could see you. I have no doubt Miss
Crosby obtained her information about this affair to-day from you, and
that everyone in school will hear it from the same source. You seem
determined to meddle with matters that do not concern you, and I warn
you that if you do not change your tactics you may regret it.

"You seem to think yourself the idol of your class, but there are some
of the girls who are too clever to be deceived. They do not belong among
the number who trail tamely after you, either. And now I wish to say
that I despise you and all your friends, and wish never to speak to any
of you again. Come on, girls," she said, turning to the members of her
party, who had listened in silent amazement to her attack upon Grace.
"Let us go. Let them keep their trumpery hatchet."

With these words she turned and stalked across the field to the road,
where her runabout stood. After an instant's hesitation, she was
followed by Edna, Daisy Culver and those who had come with her.
Henceforth there would again be two distinct factions in the junior
class.

"Good gracious," exclaimed Julia Crosby. "Talk about your human
whirlwinds! What on earth did you ever do to her, Grace?"

But Grace could not answer. She was winking hard to keep back the tears.
Twice she attempted to speak and failed. "Never mind her, dear," said
Julia, slipping her arm about Grace, while the other girls gathered
round with many expressions of displeasure at Eleanor's cruel speech.

"I can't help feeling badly," said Grace, with a sob. "She said such
dreadful things."

"No one who knows you would believe them," replied Julia. "By the way,
who is she? I know her name is Savell and that she's a recent arrival in
Oakdale, but considering the plain and uncomplimentary manner in which
she addressed you, you must have seriously offended her ladyship."

"I'll tell you about her as we walk along," replied Grace, wiping her
eyes and smiling a little.

"Yes, we had better be moving," said Julia. "The battle is over. No one
has been killed and only one wounded. Nevertheless, the enemy has
retired in confusion."




CHAPTER XI

WORRIES AND PLANS


Although the girls belonging to Julia's party were silent concerning
what happened at the Omnibus House, the story leaked out, creating
considerable discussion among the members of the two upper classes.
Julia Crosby had a shrewd suspicion that Edna Wright had been the
original purveyor of the news, and in this she was right. Edna had,
under pledge of secrecy, told it to a sophomore, who immediately told it
to her dearest friend, and so the tale traveled until it reached
Eleanor, with numerous additions, far from pleasing to her. She was
thoroughly angry, and at once laid the matter at Grace's door, while her
animosity toward Grace grew daily.

But Grace was not the only person that Eleanor disliked. From the day
that Miss Thompson had taken her to task for absence, she had
entertained a supreme contempt for the principal of which Miss Thompson
was wholly unaware until, encountering Eleanor one morning in the
corridor, the latter had stared at her with an expression of such open
scorn and dislike that Miss Thompson felt her color rise. A direct slap
in the face could scarcely have conveyed greater insult than did that
one insolent glance. The principal was at a loss as to its import. She
wisely decided to ignore it, but stored it up in her memory for future
reference.

The sorority that Eleanor had mentioned in her letter to the Phi Sigma
Tau, was now in full flower. The seven girls who had accompanied her to
the Omnibus House were the chosen members. They wore pins in the shape
of skulls and cross bones, and went about making mysterious signs to
each other whenever they met. The very name of the society was shrouded
in mystery, though Nora O'Malley was heard to declare that she had no
doubt it was a branch of the "Black Hand."

Eleanor was the acknowledged leader, but Edna Wright became a close
second, and between them they managed to disseminate a spirit of
mischief throughout the school that the teachers found hard to combat.

Grace Harlowe watched the trend that affairs were taking with
considerable anxiety. Like herself, there were plenty of girls in school
to whom mischief did not appeal, but Eleanor's beauty, wealth and
fascinating personality were found to dazzle some of the girls, who
would follow her about like sheep, and it was over these girls that
Grace felt worried. If Eleanor were to organize and carry out any
malicious piece of mischief and they were implicated, they would all
have to suffer for what she would be directly responsible. Grace's heart
was with her class. She wished it to be a class among classes, and felt
an almost motherly anxiety for its success.

"What does ail some of our class?" she exclaimed to Anne and Nora one
day as they left the school building. "They seem possessed with imps.
The Phi Sigma Tau girls and a few of the grinds are really the only ones
who behave lately."

"It's largely due to Eleanor, I think," replied Anne. "She seems to have
become quite a power among some of the girls in the class. She is
helping to destroy that spirit of earnestness that you have tried so
hard to cultivate. I think it's a shame, too. The upper class girls
ought to set the example for the two lower classes."

"That's just what worries me," said Grace earnestly. "Hardly a
recitation passes in my class without some kind of disturbance, and it
is always traced to one of the girls in that crowd. The juniors will get
the reputation among the teachers this year that the junior class had
last, and it seems such a pity. I overheard Miss Chester tell Miss Kane
the other day that her junior classes were the most trying of the day,
because she had to work harder to maintain discipline than to teach her
subject."

"That's a nice reputation to carry around, isn't it!" remarked Nora
indignantly. "But all we can do is to try harder than ever to make
things go smoothly. I don't believe their society will last long, at any
rate. Those girls are sure to quarrel among themselves, and that will
end the whole thing. Or they may go too far and have Miss Thompson to
reckon with, and that would probably cool their ardor."

"O girls!" exclaimed Grace. "Speaking of Miss Thompson, reminds me that
I have something to tell you. What do you suppose the latest is?"

"If you know anything new, it is your duty to tell us at once, without
making us beg for it," said Nora reprovingly.

"All right; I accept the reproof," said Grace. "Now for my news. There
is talk of giving a Shakespearian play, with Miss Tebbs to engineer it,
and the cast to be chosen from the three lower classes. The seniors, of
course, will give their own play later."

"How did you find out?" asked Anne.

"Miss Thompson herself told me about it," replied Grace. "She called on
mother yesterday afternoon, and, for a wonder, I was at home. She said
that it was not positively decided yet, but if the girls did well with
the mid-year tests, then directly after there would be a try out for
parts, and rehearsals would begin without delay."

"How splendid!" exclaimed Anne, clasping her hands. "How I would love to
take part in it!"

"You will, without doubt, if there is a try out," replied Grace. "There
is no one in school who can recite as you do; besides, you have been on
the stage."

"I shall try awfully hard for a part, even if it is only two lines,"
said Anne earnestly. "I wonder what play is to be chosen, and if it is
to be given for the school only?"

"The play hasn't been decided upon yet," replied Grace, "but the object
of it is to get some money for new books for the school library. The
plan is to charge fifty cents a piece for the tickets and to give each
girl a certain number of them to sell. However, I'm not going to bother
much about the play now, for the senior team has just sent me a
challenge to play them Saturday, December 12th. So I'll have to get the
team together and go to work."

"We're awfully late this year about starting. Don't you think so?" asked
Nora.

"Yes," admitted Grace. "I am just as enthusiastic over basketball as
ever, only I haven't had the time to devote to it that I did last year."

"Never mind, you'll make up for lost time after Thanksgiving," said Anne
soothingly. "As for me, I'm going to dream about the play."

"Anne, I believe you have more love for the stage than you will admit,"
said Grace, laughing. "You are all taken up with the idea of this play."

"If one could live in the same atmosphere as that of home, then there
could be no profession more delightful than that of the actor," replied
Anne thoughtfully. "It is wonderful to feel that one is able to forget
one's self and become some one else. But it is more wonderful to make
one's audience feel it, too. To have them forget that one is anything
except the living, breathing person whose character one is trying to
portray. I suppose it's the sense of power that one has over people's
emotions that makes acting so fascinating. It is the other side that
I hate," she added, with a slight shudder.

"I suppose theatrical people do undergo many hardships," said Grace,
who, now that the subject had been opened, wanted to hear more of Anne's
views of the stage.

"Unless any girl has remarkable talent, I should advise her to keep off
the stage," said Anne decidedly. "Of course when a girl comes of a
theatrical family for generations, like Maud Adams or Ethel Barrymore,
then that is different. She is practically born, bred and brought up in
the theatre. She is as carefully guarded as though she lived in a little
village, simply because she knows from babyhood all the unpleasant
features of the profession and how to avoid them. There is some chance
of her becoming great, too. Of course real stars do appear once in a
while, who are too talented to be kept down. However, the really great
ones are few and far between. When I compare my life before I came here
with the good times I have had since I met you girls, I hate the very
idea of the stage.

"Only," she concluded with a shame-faced air, "there are times when the
desire to act is irresistible, and it did make my heart beat a little
bit faster when I heard about the play."

"You dear little mouse," said Grace, putting her arm around Anne. "I
was only jesting when I spoke about your love for the stage. I think
I understand how you feel, and I hope you get the best part in the play.
I know you'll make good."

"She certainly will," said Nora. "But, to give the play a rest and come
down to everyday affairs, where shall we meet to go to the football
game?"

"Let me see," said Grace. "The game is to be called at three o'clock.
I suppose we shall all be through dinner by half past two. You had better
bring your girls to my house. Each of you is to have two and Jessica has
one besides Mabel. I am to have three; I found another yesterday. David
promised to get me the tickets. I wonder how he and Hippy will enjoy
chaperoning thirteen girls?"

"I won't have the slightest chance to talk to Hippy," grumbled Nora,
"and he has neglected us shamefully of late, too."

"Never mind, you can have him all to yourself at my party," consoled
Grace. "By the way, girls, do you think it would be of any use to invite
Eleanor?"

"Eleanor?" exclaimed Nora. "After what she has said to you! You might as
well throw your invitation into the fire, for it's safe to say that she
will do so when she receives it."

Nevertheless, Grace wrote a cordial little note to Eleanor that evening,
and two days later she received Eleanor's reply through the mail. On
opening the envelope the pieces of her own note fell out, with a half
sheet of paper containing the words, "Declined with thanks."




CHAPTER XII

A RECKLESS CHAUFFEUR


Thanksgiving Day dawned bright and clear, with just enough frost in the
air to make one's blood tingle. It had been a mild fall, with a late
Indian summer, and only one or two snow flurries that had lasted but a
few hours. This was unusual for Oakdale, as winter generally came with a
rush before the middle of November, and treated the inhabitants of that
northern city to a taste of zero weather long before the Christmas
holidays.

It was with a light heart that Grace Harlowe ate her breakfast and
flitted about the house, putting a final touch here and there before
receiving her guests. Before eleven o'clock everything was finished, and
as she arranged the last flower in its vase she felt a little thrill of
pride as she looked about the pretty drawing room. Before going upstairs
to dress, she ran into the reception hall for the fourth time to feast
her eyes upon a huge bunch of tall chrysanthemums in the beautiful
Japanese vase that stood in the alcove under the stairs. They had come
about an hour before with a note from Tom Gray saying that he had
arrived in Oakdale that morning, had seen the boys and would be around
to help David and Reddy at the "girl convention," as he termed it.

Grace was overjoyed at the idea of seeing Tom Gray again. They had been
firm friends since her freshman year, and had entertained a wholesome,
boy-and-girl preference for each other untinged by any trace of foolish
sentimentality.

As she dressed for dinner, Grace felt perfectly happy except for one
thing. She still smarted a little at Eleanor's rude reply to her
invitation. She was one of those tender-hearted girls who disliked being
on bad terms with any one, and she really liked Eleanor still, in spite
of the fact that Eleanor did not in the least return the sentiment.

Grace sighed a little over the rebuff, and then completely forgot her
trouble as she donned the new gown that had just come from the
dressmaker. It was of Italian cloth in a beautiful shade of dark red,
made in one piece, with a yoke of red and gold net, and trimmed with
tiny enameled buttons. It fitted her straight, slender figure perfectly
and she decided that for once she had been wise in foregoing her
favorite blue and choosing red.

The party that evening was to be a strictly informal affair. Grace had
suspected that the girls whom the members of the Phi Sigma Tau were to
entertain were not likely to possess evening gowns. In order to avoid
any possibility of hurt feelings, she had quietly requested those
invited to wear the afternoon gowns in which they would appear at the
game.

Before one o'clock her guests had arrived. They were three shy, quiet
girls who had worshiped Grace from a distance, and who had been
surprised almost to tears by her invitation. Two of them were from
Portville, a small town about seventy miles from Oakdale, and had begun
High School with Grace, who had been too busy with her own affairs up to
the present to find out much about them.

The other girl, Marie Bateman, had entered the class that year. She had
come from a little village forty miles south of Oakdale, was the oldest
of a large family, her mother being a widow of very small means. As her
mother was unable to send her away to school, she had done clerical work
for the only lawyer in the home town for the previous two years,
studying between whiles. She had entered the High School in the junior
class, determining to graduate and then to work her way through Normal
School. By dint of questioning, Grace had discovered that she lived in a
shabby little room in the suburbs, never went anywhere and did anything
honest in the way of earning money that she could find to do.

The realization of what some of these girls were willing to endure for
the sake of getting an education made Grace feel guilty at being so
comfortably situated. She determined that the holidays that year should
not find them without friends and cheer.

After a rousing Thanksgiving dinner, in which the inevitable turkey,
with all its toothsome accompaniments, played a prominent part, the
girls retired to Grace's room for a final adjustment of hair and a last
