He's run away, 'n' I don't blame him a mite 'n' I hope folks 'll be
satisfied now they've got red of the blessed angel, 'n' turned him
outdoors without a roof to his head! Read it out, 'n' see what kind of a
boy we've showed the door to!"


     Dere Miss vilder and sermanthy. i herd you say i cood not stay here
     enny longer and other peeple sed nobuddy wood have me and what you
     sed about the home but as i do not like homes i am going to run
     away if its all the same to you. Please give Jabe back his birds
     egs with my love and i am sorry i broak the humming-bird's one but
     it was a naxident. Pleas take good care of gay and i will come back
     and get her when I am ritch. I thank you very mutch for such a
     happy time and the white farm is the most butifull plase in the
     whole whirld. TIM.

     p. s. i wood not tell you if i was going to stay but billy penel
     thros stones at the white cow witch i fere will get into her milk
     so no more from TIM.

     i am sorry not to say good by but i am afrade on acount of the home
     so i put them here.

[Illustration: Kisses]

The paper fell from Miss Vilda's trembling fingers, and two salt tears
dropped into the kissing places.

"The Lord forgive me!" she said at length (and it was many a year since
any one had seen her so moved). "The Lord forgive me for a hard-hearted
old woman, and give me a chance to make it right. Not one reproachful
word does he say to us about showin' partiality,--not one! And my heart
has kind of yearned over that boy from the first, but just because he
had Marthy's eyes he kept bringin' up the past to me, and I never looked
at him without rememberin' how hard and unforgivin' I'd ben to her, and
thinkin' if I'd petted and humored her a little and made life
pleasanter, perhaps she'd never have gone away. And I've scrimped and
saved and laid up money till it comes hard to pay it out, and when I
thought of bringin' up and schoolin' two children I cal'lated I couldn't
afford it; and yet I've got ten thousand dollars in the bank and the
best farm for miles around. Samanthy, you go fetch my bonnet and
shawl,--Jabe, you go and hitch up Maria, and we'll go after that boy and
fetch him back if he's to be found anywheres above ground! And if we
come across any more o' the same family trampin' around the country,
we'll bring them along home while we're about it, and see if we can't
get some sleep and some comfort out o' life. And the Missionary Society
can look somewheres else for money. There's plenty o' folks that don't
get good works set right down in their front yards for 'em to do. I'll
look out for the individyals for a spell, and let the other folks
support the societies!"




SCENE XV.

_Wilkins's Woods._

LIKE ALL DOGS IN FICTION THE FAITHFUL RAGS GUIDES MISS VILDA TO HIS
LITTLE MASTER.


Samantha ran out to the barn to hold the lantern and see that Jabe
didn't go to sleep while he was harnessing Maria. But he seemed
unusually "spry" for him, although he was conducting himself in a
somewhat strange and unusual manner. His loose figure shook from time to
time, as with severe chills; he seemed too weak to hold up the shafts,
and so he finally dropped them and hung round Maria's neck in a sort of
mild, speechless convulsion.

"What under the canopy ails you, Jabe Slocum?" asked Samantha. "I s'pose
it's one o' them everlastin' old addled jokes o' yourn you're tryin' to
hatch out, but it's a poor time to be jokin' now. What's the matter with
you?"

"'Ask me no questions 'n' I'll tell you no lies,' is an awful good
motto," chuckled Jabe, with a new explosion of mirth that stretched his
mouth to an alarming extent. "Oh, there, I can't hold in 'nother minute.
I shall bust if I don' tell somebody! Set down on that nail kag,
Samanthy, 'n' I'll let you hev a leetle slice o' this joke--if you'll
keep it to yourself. You see I know--'bout--whar--to look--for this
here--runaway!"

"You hev n't got him stowed away anywheres, hev you? If you hev, it'll
be the last joke you'll play on Vildy Cummins, I can tell you that much,
Jabe Slocum."

"No, I hain't stowed him away, but I can tell putty nigh whar he's
stowed hisself away, and I'm ready to die a-laffin' to see how it's all
turned out jest as I suspicioned 't would. You see, Samanthy Ann, I
thought 'bout a week ago 't would be well enough to kind o' create a
demand for the young ones so 't they'd hev some kind of a market value,
and so I got Elder Southwick 'n' Aunt Hitty kind o' started on that
tack, 'n' it worked out slick as a whistle, tho' they didn't know I was
usin' of 'em as innercent instruments, and Aunt Hitty don't need much
encouragement to talk; it's a heap easier for her to drizzle 'n it is to
hold up! Well, I've ben surmisin' for a week that the boy meant to run
away, and to-day I was dead sure of it; for he come to me this
afternoon, when I was restin' a spell on account o' the hot sun, and he
was awful low-sperrited, 'n' he asked me every namable kind of a
question you ever hearn tell of, and all so simple-minded that I jest
turned him inside out 'thout his knowin' what I was doin'. Well, when I
found out what he was up to I could 'a' stopped him then 'n' there, tho'
I don' know 's I would anyhow, for I shouldn't like livin' in a 'sylum
any better 'n he doos; but thinks I to myself, thinks I, I'd better let
him run away, jest as he's a plannin',--and why? Cause it'll show what
kind o' stuff he's made of, and that he ain't no beggar layin' roun'
whar he ain't wanted, but a self-respectin' boy that's wuth lookin'
after. And thinks I, Samanthy, 'n' I know the wuth of him a'ready, but
there's them that hain't waked up to it yit, namely, Miss Vildy Trypheny
Cummins; and as Miss Vildy Trypheny Cummins is that kind o' cattle that
can't be drove, but hez to be kind o' coaxed along, mebbe this
runnin'-away bizness 'll be the thing that'll fetch her roun' to our way
o' thinkin'. Now I wouldn't deceive nobody for a farm down East with a
pig on it, but thinks I, there ain't no deceivin' 'bout this. He don'
know I know he's goin' to run away, so he's all square; and he never
told me nothin' 'bout his plans, so I'm all square; and Miss Vildy's
good as eighteen-karat gold when she gets roun' to it, so she'll be all
square; and Samanthy's got her blinders on 'n' don't see nothin' to the
right nor to the left, so she's all square. And I ain't inteferin' with
nobody. I'm jest lettin' things go the way they've started, 'n' stan'in'
to one side to see whar they'll fetch up, kind o' like Providence. I'm
leavin' Miss Vildy a free agent, but I'm shapin' circumstances so 's to
give her a chance. But, land! if I'd fixed up the thing to suit myself I
couldn't 'a' managed it as Timothy hez, 'thout knowin' that he was
managin' anything. Look at that letter bizness now! I couldn't 'a' writ
that letter better myself! And the sperrit o' the little feller, jest
takin' his dorg 'n' lightin' out with nothin' but a perlite good-bye!
Well I can't stop to talk no more 'bout it now, or we won't ketch him,
but we'll jest try Wilkins's Woods, Maria, 'n' see how that goes. The
river road leads to Edgewood 'n' Hillside, whar there's consid'able
hayin' bein' done, as I happened to mention to Timothy this afternoon;
and plenty o' blackberries 'side the road, 'specially after you pass the
wood-pile on the left-hand side, whar there's a reg'lar garding of 'em
right 'side of an old hoss-blanket that's layin' there; one that I
happened to leave there one time when I was sleepin' ou'doors for my
health, and that was this afternoon 'bout five o'clock, so I guess it
hain't changed its location sence."


Jabe and Miss Vilda drove in silence along the river road that skirted
Wilkins's Woods, a place where Jabe had taken Timothy more than once, so
he informed Miss Vilda, and a likely road for him to travel if he were
on his way to some of the near villages.

Poor Miss Vilda! Fifty years old, and in twenty summers and winters
scarcely one lovely thought had blossomed into lovelier deed and shed
its sweetness over her arid and colorless life. And now, under the magic
spell of tender little hands and innocent lips, of luminous eyes that
looked wistfully into hers for a welcome, and the touch of a groping
helplessness that fastened upon her strength, the woman in her woke into
life, and the beauty and fragrance of long-ago summers came back again
as in a dream.

After having driven three or four miles, they heard a melancholy sound
in the distance; and as they approached a huge wood-pile on the left
side of the road, they saw a small woolly form perched on a little rise
of ground, howling most melodiously at the August moon, that hung like a
ball of red fire in the cloudless sky.

"That's a sign of death in the family, ain't it, Jabe?" whispered Miss
Vilda faintly.

"So they say," he answered cheerfully; "but if 't is, I can 'count for
it, bein' as how I fertilized the pond lilies with a mess o' four white
kittens this afternoon; and as Rags was with me when I done it, he may
know what he's bayin' 'bout,--if 't is Rags, 'n' it looks enough like
him to be him,--'n' it is him, by Jiminy, 'n' Timothy's sure to be
somewheres near. I'll get out 'n' look roun' a little."

"You set right still, Jabe, I'll get out myself, for if I find that boy
I've got something to say to him that nobody can say for me."

As Jabe drew the wagon up beside the fence, Rags bounded out to meet
them. He knew Maria, bless your soul, the minute he clapped his eyes on
her, and as he approached Miss Vilda's congress boot his quivering
whiskers seemed to say, "Now, where have I smelled that boot before? If
I mistake not, it has been applied to me more than once. Ha! I have it!
Miss Vilda Cummins of the White Farm, owner of the white cat and
hash-pan, and companion of the lady with the firm hand, who wields the
broom!" whereupon he leaped up on Miss Cummins's black alpaca skirts,
and made for her flannel garters in a way that she particularly
disliked.

"Now," said she, "if he's anything like the dogs you hear tell of, he'll
take us right to Timothy."

"Wall, I don' know," said Jabe cautiously; "there's so many kinds o'
dorg in him you can't hardly tell what he will do. When dorgs is mixed
beyond a certain p'int it kind o' muddles up their instincks, 'n' you
can't rely on 'em. Still you might try him. Hold still, 'n' see what
he'll do."

Miss Vilda "held still," and Rags jumped on her skirts.

"Now, set down, 'n' see whar he'll go."

Miss Vilda sat down, and Rags went into her lap.

"Now, make believe start somewheres, 'n' mebbe he'll get ahead 'n' put
you on the right track."

Miss Vilda did as she was told, and Rags followed close at her heels.

"Gorry! I never see sech a fool!--or wait,--I'll tell you what's the
matter with him. Mebbe he ain't sech a fool as he looks. You see, he
knows Timothy wants to run away and don't want to be found 'n' clapped
into a 'sylum, 'n' nuther does he. And not bein' sure o' your
intentions, he ain't a-goin' to give hisself away; that's the way I size
Mr. Rags up!"

"Nice doggy, nice doggy!" shuddered Miss Vilda, as Rags precipitated
himself upon her again. "Show me where Timothy is, and then we'll go
back home and have some nice bones. Run and find your little master,
that's a good doggy!"

It would be a clever philosopher who could divine Rags's special method
of logic, or who could write him down either as fool or sage. Suffice it
to say that, at this moment (having run in all other possible
directions, and wishing, doubtless, to keep on moving), he ran round the
wood-pile; and Miss Vilda, following close behind, came upon a little
figure stretched on a bit of gray blanket. The pale face shone paler in
the moonlight; there were traces of tears on the cheeks; but there was a
heavenly smile on his parted lips, as if his dream-mother had rocked him
to sleep in her arms. Rags stole away to Jabe (for even mixed dogs have
some delicacy), and Miss Vilda went down on her knees beside the
sleeping boy.

"Timothy, Timothy, wake up!"

No answer.

"Timothy, wake up! I've come to take you home!"

Timothy woke with a sob and a start at that hated word, and seeing Miss
Vilda at once jumped to conclusions.

"Please, please, dear Miss Vildy, don't take me to the Home, but find me
some other place, and I'll never, never run away from it!"

"My blessed little boy, I've come to take you back to your own home at
the White Farm."

It was too good to believe all at once. "Nobody wants me there," he said
hesitatingly.

"Everybody wants you there," replied Miss Vilda, with a softer note in
her voice than anybody had ever heard there before. "Samantha wants
you, Gay wants you, and Jabe is waiting out here with Maria, for he
wants you."

"But do you want me?" faltered the boy.

"I want you more than all of 'em put together, Timothy; I want you, and
I need you most of all," cried Miss Vilda, with the tears coursing down
her withered cheeks; "and if you'll only forgive me for hurtin' your
feelin's and makin' you run away, you shall come to the White Farm and
be my own boy as long as you live."

"Oh, Miss Vildy, darling Miss Vildy! are we both of us adopted, and are
we truly going to live with you all the time and never have to go to the
Home?" Whereupon, the boy flung his loving arms round Miss Vilda's neck
in an ecstasy of gratitude; and in that sweet embrace of trust and
confidence and joy, the stone was rolled away, once and forever, from
the sepulchre of Miss Vilda's heart, and Easter morning broke there.




SCENE XVI.

_The New Homestead._

TIMOTHY'S QUEST IS ENDED, AND SAMANTHA SAYS "COME ALONG, DAVE!"


"Jabe Slocum! Do you know it's goin' on seven o'clock 'n' not a single
chore done?"

Jabe yawned, turned over, and listened to Samantha's unwelcome voice,
which (considerably louder than the voice of conscience) came from the
outside world to disturb his delicious morning slumbers.

"Jabe Slocum! Do you hear me?"

"Hear you? Gorry! you'd wake the seven sleepers if they was any whar
within ear-shot!"

"Well, will you git up?"

"Yes, I'll git up if you're goin' to hev a brash 'bout it, but I wish
you hedn't waked me so awful suddent. 'Don't ontwist the mornin' glory'
's my motto. Wait a spell 'n' the sun 'll do it, 'n' save a heap o' wear
'n' tear besides. Go 'long! I'll git up."

"I've heerd that story afore, 'n' I won't go 'long tell I hear you step
foot on the floor."

"Scoot! I tell yer I'll be out in a jiffy."

"Yes, I think I see yer. Your jiffies are consid'able like golden
opportunities, there ain't more 'n one of 'em in a lifetime!" and having
shot this Parthian arrow Samantha departed, as one having done her duty
in that humble sphere of action to which it had pleased Providence to
call her.

These were beautiful autumn days at the White Farm. The orchards were
gleaming, the grapes hung purple on the vines, and the odor of ripening
fruit was in the hazy air. The pink spirea had cast its feathery petals
by the gray stone walls, but the welcome golden-rod bloomed in royal
profusion along the brown waysides, and a crimson leaf hung here and
there in the treetops, just to give a hint of the fall styles in color.
Heaps of yellow pumpkins and squashes lay in the corners of the fields;
cornstalks bowed their heads beneath the weight of ripened ears; beans
threatened to burst through their yellow pods; the sound of the
threshing machine was heard in the land; and the "hull univarse wanted
to be waited on to once," according to Jabe Slocum; for, as he
affirmed, "Yer couldn't ketch up with your work nohow, for if yer set up
nights 'n' worked Sundays, the craps 'd ripen 'n' go to seed on yer
'fore yer could git 'em harvested!"

And if there was peace and plenty without there was quite as much within
doors.

"I can't hardly tell what's the matter with me these days," said
Samantha Ann to Miss Vilda, as they sat peeling and slicing apples for
drying. "My heart has felt like a stun these last years, and now all to
once it's so soft I'm ashamed of it. Seems to me there never was such a
summer! The hay never smelt so sweet, the birds never sang so well, the
currants never jelled so hard! Why I can't kick the cat, though she's
more everlastin'ly under foot 'n ever, 'n' pretty soon I sha'n't even
have sprawl enough to jaw Jabe Slocum. I b'lieve it's nothin' in the
world but them children! They keep a runnin' after me, 'n' it's dear
Samanthy here, 'n' dear Samanthy there, jest as if I warn't a hombly old
maid; 'n' they take holt o' my hands on both sides o' me, 'n' won't stir
a step tell I go to see the chickens with 'em, 'n' the pig, 'n' one
thing 'n' 'nother, 'n' clappin' their hands when I make 'em gingerbread
men! And that reminds me, I see the school-teacher goin' down along this
mornin', 'n' I run out to see how Timothy was gittin' along in his
studies. She says he's the most ex-tra-ordi-nary scholar in this
deestrick. She says he takes holt of every book she gives him jest as if
't was reviewin' 'stid o' the first time over. She says when he speaks
pieces, Friday afternoons, all the rest o' the young ones set there with
their jaws hanging 'n' some of 'em laughin' 'n' cryin' 't the same time.
She says we'd oughter see some of his comp'sitions, 'n' she'll show us
some as soon as she gits 'em back from her beau that works at the
Waterbury Watch Factory, and they're goin' to be married 's quick as she
gits money enough saved up to buy her weddin' close; 'n' I told her not
to put it off too long or she'd hev her close on her hands, 'stid of her
back. She says Timothy's at the head of the hull class, but, land! there
ain't a boy in it that knows enough to git his close on right sid' out.
She's a splendid teacher, Miss Boothby is! She tells me the seeleck men
hev raised her pay to four dollars a week 'n' she to board herself, 'n'
she's wuth every cent of it. I like to see folks well paid that's got
the patience to set in doors 'n' cram information inter young ones that
don't care no more 'bout learn in' 'n' a skunk-blackbird. She give me
Timothy's writin' book, for you to see what he writ in it yesterday, 'n'
she hed to keep him in 't recess 'cause he didn't copy 'Go to the ant
thou sluggard and be wise,' as he'd oughter. Now let's see what 't is.
My grief! it's poetry sure 's you're born. I can tell it in a minute
'cause it don't come out to the aidge o' the book one side or the other.
Read it out loud, Vildy."

  "'Oh! the White Farm and the White Farm!
  I love it with all my heart;
  And I'm to live at the White Farm,
  Till death it do us part.'"

Miss Vilda lifted her head, intoxicated with the melody she had evoked.
"Did you ever hear anything like that," she exclaimed proudly.

  "'Oh! the White Farm and the White Farm!
  I love it with all my heart;
  And I'm to live at the White Farm,
  Till death it do us part.'"

"Just hear the sent'ment of it, and the way it sings along like a tune.
I'm goin' to show that to the minister this very night, and that boy's
got to have the best education there is to be had if we have to
mortgage the farm."

Samantha Ann was right. The old homestead wore a new aspect these days,
and a love of all things seemed to have crept into the hearts of its
inmates, as if some beneficent fairy of a spider were spinning a web of
tenderness all about the house, or as if a soft light had dawned in the
midst of great darkness and was gradually brightening into the perfect
day.

In the midst of this new-found gladness and the sweet cares that grew
and multiplied as the busy days went on, Samantha's appetite for
happiness grew by what it fed upon, so that before long she was a little
unhappy that other people (some more than others) were not as happy as
she; and Aunt Hitty was heard to say at the sewing-circle (which had
facilities for gathering and disseminating news infinitely superior to
those of the Associated Press), that Samantha Ann Ripley looked so peart
and young this summer, Dave Milliken had better spunk up and try again.

But, alas! the younger and fresher and happier Samantha looked, the
older and sadder and meeker David appeared, till all hopes of his
"spunking up" died out of the village heart; and, it might as well be
stated, out of Samantha's also. She always thought about it at sun-down,
for it was at sun-down that all their quarrels and reconciliations had
taken place, inasmuch as it was the only leisure time for week-day
courting at Pleasant River.

It was sun-down now; Miss Vilda and Jabez Slocum had gone to Wednesday
evening prayer-meeting, and Samantha was looking for Timothy to go to
the store with her on some household errands. She had seen the children
go into the garden a half hour before, Timothy walking gravely, with his
book before him, Gay blowing over the grass like a feather, and so she
walked towards the summer-house.

Timothy was not there, but little Lady Gay was having a party all to
herself, and the scene was such a pretty one that Samantha stooped
behind the lattice and listened.

There was a table spread for four, with bits of broken china and shells
for dishes, and pieces of apple and gingerbread for the feast. There
were several dolls present (notably one without any head, who was not
likely to shine at a dinner party), but Gay's first-born sat in her lap;
and only a mother could have gazed upon such a battered thing and loved
it. For Gay took her pleasures madly, and this faithful creature had
shared them all; but not having inherited her mother's somewhat rare
recuperative powers, she was now fit only for a free bed in a
hospital,--a state of mind and body which she did not in the least
endeavor to conceal. One of her shoe-button eyes dangled by a linen
thread in a blood-curdling sort of way; her nose, which had been a pink
glass bead, was now a mere spot, ambiguously located. Her red worsted
lips were sadly raveled, but that she did not regret, "for it was
kissin' as done it." Her yarn hair was attached to her head with
safety-pins, and her internal organs intruded themselves on the public
through a gaping wound in the side. Never mind! if you have any
curiosity to measure the strength of the ideal, watch a child with her
oldest doll. Rags sat at the head of the dinner-table, and had taken the
precaution to get the headless doll on his right, with a view to eating
her gingerbread as well as his own,--doing no violence to the
proprieties in this way, but rather concealing her defects from a
carping public.

"I tell you sompfin' ittle Mit Vildy Tummins," Gay was saying to her
battered offspring. "You 's doin' to have a new ittle sit-ter
to-mowowday, if you 's a dood ittle dirl an does to seep nite an kick,
you _ser-weet_ ittle Vildy Tummins!" (All this punctuated with ardent
squeezes fraught with delicious agony to one who had a wound in her
side!) "Vay fink you 's worn out, 'weety, but we know you isn't, don'
we, 'weety? An I'll tell you nite ittle tory to-night, tause you isn't
seepy. Wunt there was a ittle day hen 'at tole a net an' laid fir-teen
waw edds in it, an bime bye erleven or seventeen ittle chits f'ew out of
