capital idea, and the best I could do. There wasn't another rug for the
kilt anyhow, and when other people have taken the best parts and the
nicest costumes, you've just got to put up with anything you can find
that's left."

"You did it so well," Ingred assured her hastily, for Verity had gone
very pink, and her voice sounded distinctly offended. "I thought the way
you dropped on one knee and cried: 'My liege lord! I am your humble
socman!' was most impressive. What made you think of 'socman'?"

"Got it out of the history book," said Verity, slightly mollified. "It
means a man who owned land, but wasn't quite as high up as a thane. I
meant to bring in some more Saxon words, but I hadn't time."

"You must win the dormitory score again, and give us another
performance," urged Mrs. Best. "I'm afraid it's too late for any more
to-night, though we're all sorry to stop. Those juniors ought to be in
bed. Janie and Doreen, if you'd like a quiet half-hour to finish your
prep. you may go into my room. Somebody put the tables back, please, and
be sure the trestles are in their right places this time, we don't want
another collapse! Phyllis, your cough's worse. Nurse shall rub your
chest with camphorated oil, and you mustn't kiss anybody. Betty too?
I'll give you a lozenge, but don't suck it lying down in bed, in case
you choke."

So saying, Mrs. Best, who generally mothered the hostel, dismissed her
large family and bustled away with Nurse to superintend the putting to
bed of the juniors and the due care of those who might be regarded as
even ever so slightly on the sick list. It was perhaps owing to the
excitement of their spirited performance that the members of No. 2
Dormitory could not get to sleep that night. They all lay wide awake in
bed, and told each other tales about burglars, in whispers. Verity's
stories were blood-curdling in the extreme; she was a great reader, and
had got them from magazines. Her three room-mates listened with cold
shivers running down their spines. According to Verity's accounts it was
a common and every day occurrence for a house-breaker to force an
entrance, murder the occupants, and depart, leaving a case to baffle the
police until some amateur detective turned up and solved the mystery.

"Has it ever struck you that the hostel would be a very easy place to
burgle?" asked Fil. "Those French windows have no shutters, and the
glass could be cut with a diamond."

"Or the doors could be opened with a skeleton key!" quavered Nora.

"I suppose they generally wear goloshes, so as to tread softly,"
ventured Ingred.

"Wouldn't it be dreadful," continued Verity, whose mind still ran on
magazine stories, "to marry a fascinating man whom you'd met by chance,
and then find out that he was a gentleman-burglar? What would you do?"

"It often happens on the cinema," said Nora. "The girl wavers about in
an agony whether to tell or not, and wrings her hands and rolls her
eyes, like they always _do_ roll them on the films, and then, just when
things are at the very last gasp, the husband tumbles over a precipice,
or is wrecked at sea, or smashed in a railway accident, and she marries
the other, who's as good as gold, and loved her first."

"Is the man who loves you first always as good as gold?" asked Fil.

"Well, generally on the Pictures. He's loved you as a child, you see.
You come on the film hand in hand, in socks, and he gives you his
apple."

"But suppose they don't love you from a child?" said Fil plaintively.
"I've only known a lot of horrid little boys whom I didn't care for in
the least. None of them ever gave me his apple, though I remember one
taking mine. Is the first fascinating man I meet the true lover or the
burglar? How am I to know which is which?"

"You'd better let me be there to decide for you, child, or you'll be
snapped up by the first adventurer that comes along," declared Nora.
"Don't trust him if he has a mustache. 'Daring Dick of the Black Gang'
had a little twisted mustache like Mephistopheles in 'Faust'."

"Oh dear! And the last piece I saw on the Pictures, the villain was
clean shaven! That's no guide at all!"

"Girls, you're breaking the silence rule!" said Mrs. Best, opening the
door of Dormitory 2, where the conversation, which had begun in
whispers, had risen to a pitch audible on the landing outside. "This
doesn't look like scoring again next week, and giving another
performance. Why, Nora, the rain's driving through that open window
straight on to your bed! You'll be getting rheumatism! I shall shut it,
and leave the door wide open for air instead. Now be good girls and go
to sleep at once. Don't let me hear any more talking."

The Foursomes, in common with most of the hostel, were fond of Mrs.
Best, so they turned over obediently, and composed themselves to
slumber. They were really tired by this time, and dropped off into the
land of Nod before the clock on the stairs had chimed another quarter.
How long she slept, Ingred did not know. She dreamt quite a long and
circumstantial dream of wandering on the cliffs near the sea with a
gentleman-burglar, who was telling her his intention of raiding
Buckingham Palace and taking away the Crown Jewels, and she heard his
daring designs (as we always do in dreams) without the slightest
surprise or any suggestion that the Crown Jewels are kept at the Tower
instead of at Buckingham Palace. She woke suddenly, and laughed at the
absurdity of the idea. She felt hot, and threw back her eiderdown. The
other girls were sleeping quietly, and the rain was still beating
against the window in heavy showers, for it was a stormy night. The door
of the bedroom stood wide open. What was that sound coming up the stairs
from the hall below? It was certainly not the ticking of the clock. It
seemed more like muffled and stealthy footsteps. In an instant Ingred
was very wide awake indeed, and listening intently. There it came again!
She could not lie still and ignore it. She got out of bed, and with
rather shaking knees walked on to the landing and peeped over the
banisters. There was a tiny oil-lamp hanging on the wall; it faintly
illuminated the stairs. Was that somebody moving about in the darkness
of the hall? If it was a burglar, he certainly must not come upstairs,
or she would die of fright. An idea occurred to her, and acting on a
sudden impulse she dashed into Dormitory 2, roused the others, and told
them to snatch what missiles they could, and hurry to her aid.

"We'll fling things at him if he tries to come up!" she gasped, groping
for her boots.

It was a horrible experience: four nervous, quaking girls stood in the
dim light on the landing gazing down into the haunted blackness of the
shadowy hall. The sounds had ceased temporarily, but now they began
again--a distinct shuffling as of footsteps, and even a subdued sniff,
then the outline of a dark figure made its appearance, bearing straight
for the stairs.

With quite commendable bravery Ingred flung her boots at it, which
missiles were instantly followed by Nora's hairbrush, Fil's dispatch
case, and Verity's pillow. It screamed in a most unburglar-like voice,
and apparently with genuine fright.

"If you t-t-t-try to c-c-come nearer, I'll sh-sh-shoot you dead!"
quavered Ingred, wishing she had at least some semblance of a pistol to
bluff with.

"What _are_ you doing, girls?" replied the dark shadow, persisting in
its movement towards the staircase, and, as it came into the faint
circle of radiance spread by the lamp, resolving itself into the
familiar form of Nurse Warner. "Have you suddenly gone mad?"

Here was a situation! The four girls flew back to their dormitory in
great haste, especially as Mrs. Best, disturbed by the noise, had opened
her door and come on to the scene in a pink-and-gray dressing-gown. They
were followed, however, by both Matron and Nurse, and forced to give an
explanation of their extraordinary conduct.

"I couldn't sleep for the wind, so I put on my felt slippers and my
cloak, and went downstairs for a biscuit," declared Nurse Warner, whose
voice sounded rather aggrieved. "I didn't think I should disturb
anybody."

"You girls are the limit with your silly notions!" said Mrs. Best,
really angry for once. "If you fill your heads with absurd ideas about
burglars before you go to sleep, of course you can imagine anything. If
I hear any more talking in No. 2 another night after the lights are out,
I shall separate you, and send each of you to sleep in another
dormitory. I'll not have the house upset like this! So you know what to
expect. Are you all in your beds? Then not another word!"

"It's very uncomfy without my pillow!" whispered naughty Verity, in
distinct disobedience to this mandate, as the door of Mrs. Best's room
closed. "Dare I go and fetch it?"

"Sh! Sh! No!"

"I know what we'll give Nursie for a Christmas present," murmured Fil
softly. "A nice ornamental tin box of biscuits to keep in her bedroom.
She shan't get hungry in the night again, poor dear!"

"_Sh! Sh! Will_ you go to sleep!" warned Ingred emphatically.




CHAPTER X

The Whispering Stones


The Saxon family had squeezed themselves and certain of their
possessions into the little home at Wynch-on-the-Wold, and while flowers
still bloomed in the garden and apples hung ripe on the trees it seemed
a kind of continuation of their summer holiday; but as the novelty wore
off, and stormy weather came on, their altered circumstances began to be
more evident. Most of us can make a plucky fight against fate at
first--there had been something rather romantic about retiring to the
bungalow--but the plain prose of the proceeding was yet to come, and
there were certainly many disadvantages to be faced. Mr. Saxon was
worried about business affairs; he was a proud, sensitive man, and felt
it a great "come down" to be obliged to resign Rotherwood, and the
social position it had stood for, and confess himself to the world as
one of the "newly poor." It was humiliating to have to walk or take a
tram where he had formerly used his car in fulfilling his professional
engagements, hard not to be able to entertain his friends, and perhaps
hardest of all to be obliged to refuse subscriptions to the numerous
charities in the town where his name had always stood conspicuously upon
the liberal list. His temper, never his strongest point, suffered under
the test, and he would come home from Grovebury in the evenings tired
out, moody and fretful, and inclined to find fault with everything and
everybody.

It took all his wife's sunny sweetness of disposition to keep the home
atmosphere cheerful and peaceful, for Egbert also had a temper, and was
bitterly disappointed at not being sent to Cambridge, and at having to
settle down in the family office instead. Father and son did not get on
remarkably well together. Mr. Saxon, like many parents, pooh-poohed his
boy's business efforts, and would sometimes--to Egbert's huge
indignation--point out his mistakes before the clerks. He would declare,
in a high and mighty way, that his own son should not receive special
preference at the office, and so overdid his attitude of impartiality
that he contrived to give him a worse time than any of his other
articled pupils.

Athelstane, who had begun his medical course at the University of
Birkshaw, also had his troubles. He had hoped to study at Guy's Hospital
in preparation for the London M.D., and to an ambitious young fellow it
was hard to be satisfied with a provincial degree. The thirty-mile motor
ride to and from Birkshaw soon lost its charm, and the difficulties of
home study in the evenings were great in a bungalow with thin partition
walls and a family not always disposed to quiet. As a rule, he kept his
feelings to himself, but he went about with a depressed look, and got
into a habit of lifting his eyebrows which was leaving permanent lines
on a hitherto smooth and unwrinkled forehead.

Pretty Quenrede, who had just left school, was going through the awkward
phase of discovering her individuality. At the College, with a full
program of lessons and games, she had followed the general lead of the
form. Now, cast upon her own resources, she was quite vague as to any
special bent or taste. The war-time occupations which had tempted her
imagination were no longer available, and _Careers for Women_ did not
attract her, even if family funds had run to the necessary training. So,
for the present, she stayed at home, going once a week to the School of
Art at Grovebury, and practicing singing in a rather desultory fashion.
Though she pretended to be glad she was an emancipated young lady, as a
matter of fact she missed school immensely, and was finding life
decidedly slow and tame.

With their elders palpably dissatisfied, Ingred and Hereward would have
been hardly human if they had not raised some personal grievances of
their own to grumble at, and matters would often have been dismal enough
at the bungalow but for Mrs. Saxon's happy capacity for looking on the
bright side of things. The whole household centered round "Mother." She
was a woman in a thousand. Naturally it had hurt her to relinquish
Rotherwood, and it grieved her--for the girls' sake--that most of her
old acquaintances in Grovebury had not troubled to pay calls at
Wynchcote. The small rooms, the one maid from the Orphanage, the
necessity of doing much of the housework herself, the difficulties of
shopping on a limited purse, and her husband's fretfulness and
fault-finding, might have soured a less unselfish disposition: she had
married, however, "for better or for worse," and took the altered
circumstances with cheery optimism. She was a great lover of nature and
of scenery, and the nearness of the moors, with their ever-changing
effects of storm and sunshine, and the opportunities they gave for the
study of birds and insects, proved compensation for some of the things
which life otherwise lacked.

Every morning, after the fuss of getting off the family to their several
avocations, she would run down the garden, and stand for a few minutes
by the wall that overlooked the moor, watching great shafts of sunlight
fall from a gray sky on to brown wastes of heather and bracken,
listening to the call of the curlews or to the trilling autumn warble of
the robin, perched on the red-berried hawthorn bush. Kind Mother Nature
could always soothe her spirits, and send her back with fresh courage
for the day's work. And, in the evening, when husband and children came
home to fire and lamp-light, she had generally some nature notes to tell
them, or some amusing little incident to make them laugh and forget
their various woes and worries.

"I'm so glad, Muvvie dear, you're not a melancholy lugubrious person!"
said Ingred once. "It would be _so_ trying if you sat at the tea-table
and sighed."

"Humor is the salt of life," smiled Mrs. Saxon. "We may just as well get
all the fun out of the little daily happenings. Even 'the orphan' has
her bright side!"

As "the orphan" was a temporary member of the Wynchcote establishment
she merits a word of description. She came from an institution in the
neighborhood, and, being the only servant procurable at the time, was
tolerated in spite of a terrible propensity for smashing plates, and for
carolling at the very pitch of a nasal voice. She was a rough,
good-tempered girl, devoted to Minx, the cat, and really kind if anybody
had a headache or toothache, but quite without any sense of
discrimination: she would show a traveling hawker into the drawing-room,
and leave the clergyman standing on the doorstep, took the best
serviettes to wipe the china, scoured the silver with Monkey Brand Soap,
and systematically bespattered the kitchen tablecloth with ink. Her love
of music was a terrible trial to the medical student of the family on
Saturday morning, when he was endeavoring to read at home.

"Carlyle says somewhere: 'Give, oh, give me a man who sings at his
work!'" growled Athelstane one day, bursting forth from his den to
complain of the nuisance, "but I bet the old buffer didn't write that
sentiment with a maid-servant howling popular songs in the next room.
According to all accounts he loathed noise and couldn't even stand the
crowing of a cock. I should call that bit of eloquence just bunkum. If
the orphan doesn't stop this voice-production business I shall have to
go and slay her. How _can_ a fellow study in the midst of such a racket?
Where's the Mater? Down in Grovebury? I suppose that accounts for it.
While the cat's away, &c."

"Hardly complimentary to compare your maternal relative to a cat!"
chuckled Ingred. "Stop the orphan if you can, but you might as well try
to stop the brook! She's quiet for five minutes then bursts out into
song again like a chirruping cricket or a croaking corn-crake. I want to
spiflicate her myself sometimes."

    "'Late last night I slew my wife,
    Stretched her on the parquet flooring;
    I was loath to take her life,
    But I _had_ to stop her snoring!'"

quoted Hereward from _Ruthless Rhymes_.

"Look here!" said Quenrede, emerging from the kitchen with a half-packed
lunch basket. "We three are taking sandwiches, and going for a good old
tramp over the moors. Why not drop your work for once and come with us?
You look as if you needed a holiday."

"I've a beast of a headache," admitted Athelstane.

"You want fresh air, not study," decreed Quenrede with sisterly
firmness, "and I shall just make some extra sandwiches and put another
apple in the basket. With mother out, the orphan will carol all the
morning, unless you gag her, so you may as well accept the inevitable."

"Cut and run, in fact!" added Hereward.

"The voice of the siren tempts me to go--to escape the voice of the
siren who stays!" wavered Athelstane.

"Oh, come along, old sport!" urged Ingred. "What are a few old bones to
Red Ridge Barrow? You can swat to-night to make up, if you want to."

"It's three to one!" said Athelstane, giving way gracefully; "and there
mayn't be any more fine Saturdays for walks."

The four young people started forth with the delightful sense of having
the day before them. It was fairly early, and a hazy November sun had
not yet drawn the moisture from the heather. On the moor the few trees
were bare, but the golden autumn leaves still clothed the woods in the
sheltered valley that stretched below. Masses of gossamer covered with
dew-drops lay among the bracken, like fairies' washing hung out to dry.
There was a hint of hoarfrost under the bushes. The air had that
delicious invigorating quality when every breath sets the body dancing.
It was too late in the year for flowers, though here and there a little
gorse lingered, or a few buttercups and hawkweeds. After about an hour
of red haziness the sun pierced the bank of mist and shone out
gloriously, almost as in summer; the birds, ready to snatch a moment's
joy, were flitting about tweeting and calling, a water-wagtail took a
bath in a shallow pool of a stream, and a great flock of bramblings,
rare visitors in those parts, paused in their migration to hold a
chattering conference round an old elder tree.

The Saxons were determined to-day to go farther afield than their walks
had hitherto taken them. The local guide-book mentioned some prehistoric
menhirs and a chambered barrow on the top of Red Ridge, a distant hill,
so they had fixed that as their Mecca.

It was a considerable tramp, but the bracing air helped them on, and
they sat down at last to eat their lunch by the side of the path that
led to the summit. The boys had wished to mount to the top without
calling a halt, but the girls had struck, and insisted on a rest before
the final climb.

"Pity Mother isn't here!" said Ingred, voicing the general feeling of
the family, which always missed its central pivot.

"Yes, but it would have been too great a trapse for her, poor darling!"
qualified Quenrede. "I don't see how we could get her all this way
unless we hired a pony."

"Or borrowed an aeroplane. One seems about as possible as the other,"
grunted Ingred.

"She shall have a photo of the stones at any rate," said Hereward,
fingering his camera. "Hurry up and finish, you girls, or the light will
be gone!"

"Well, we can't bolt our sandwiches at the rate you do! I wonder you
don't choke!"

The old gray stones stood in a circle on the top of the hill, from
whence they had possibly seen four thousand summers and winters pass by.
Whether their original purpose was temple, astronomical observatory, or
both is one of the riddles of antiquarian research, for neolithic man
left no record of his doings beyond the weapons buried with him in his
barrow. Legend, however, like a busy gossip, had stepped in and supplied
points upon which history was silent. Traditions of the neighborhood
explained the menhirs as twelve giants turned into stone by the magic
