impossible for me to remain inactive while my country needs my services,
even as a supernumerary," replied Christy.

"But what am I to do?" asked the detective, with a puzzled expression on
his face.

"Nothing at all, Mr. Gilfleur; I regard you as a non-combatant, and I
think you had better remain in your stateroom," replied Christy. "But I
must go on deck."

The Frenchman followed him to the quarter-deck, and seemed to be
inclined to take a hand in the conflict. He desired to be an American
citizen, and possibly he believed he could win his title to this
distinction in a battle better than by any other means. But he had no
naval training, could be of no service at the guns, and was more likely
to be in the way of others than to accomplish anything of value. It was
a needless risk, and the captain suggested that his life was too
valuable to his adopted country for him to expose himself before his
mission had been accomplished. He stepped aside, but he was not willing
to go below.

"I desire to offer my services as a volunteer, Captain Chanter," said
Christy, saluting the commander. "If you will assign me to any position
on deck, though it be nothing more than a station at one of the guns,
I will endeavor to do my duty."

"I have no doubt you would do your whole duty, Mr. Passford," replied
the captain, taking him by the hand. "You can be of more service to me
as an adviser than as a hand at a gun. It is plain enough that the
commander of the Dornoch intends to fight as long as there is anything
left of him or his ship. Your report of him gives me that assurance."

"I suppose by this time, Captain Chantor, you have arranged your plan
for the action," added Christy, looking curiously into the face of the
commander, though he had resolved to give no advice and to make no
suggestions unless directly requested to do so.

"I suppose the only way is to pound the enemy till he has had enough of
it, using such strategy as the occasion may require. According to your
report we outweigh her in metal, and we have proved that we can outdo
her in speed," replied Captain Chantor.

"But the Dornoch will have the privilege of pounding the Chateaugay at
the same time," said Christy in a very low tone, so that no one could
hear him.

"That is very true; of course we must expect to take as good as we
send."

"But then what use shall you make of your advantage in speed and weight
of metal?" asked the passenger very quietly. "We both believe that there
is humanity in war as well as in peace."

At that moment a shot passed under the counter of the ship, and buried
itself in the water a cable's length beyond her.

"That is good practice, Captain Chantor," said Christy. "That shot was
aimed at your rudder; and I have no doubt Captain Rombold is seeking to
cripple you by shooting it away."

"I believe in humanity in war; but I do not see where it comes in just
now, except in a very general way," replied the captain.

"If the Dornoch cripples you, and then takes her own time to knock the
Chateaugay to pieces, it will amount to the sacrifice of many lives,"
suggested the unattached officer.

"I should be very glad to have your opinion, Mr. Passford," added the
commander.

"I certainly do not desire to thrust my opinion upon you, Captain
Chantor; but as you have asked for it, I will express myself freely."

"Thank you, Mr. Passford."

"I should adopt the tactics of Commodore Dupont at Port Royal."

"In other words, you would keep sailing around the Dornoch."

"Precisely so. I would not give him a shot till I was out of the reach
of his broadside guns."

"And then pound her with the midship gun. That is my idea exactly.
Quartermaster, strike one bell."

"One bell, sir."

"Strike four bells, quartermaster," added the captain.

"Four bells, sir."

The Chateaugay was soon going ahead at her best speed, headed directly
away from the Dornoch, and it would have looked to an observer as though
she was running away from her. At any rate, the enemy made this
interpretation of her movement, and immediately gave chase, opening fire
upon the ship with her bow guns. Presently she fired her heavy midship
gun, the shot from which would have made havoc if it had hit the mark.
It was soon evident that the enemy's speed had been overrated, for the
Chateaugay gained rapidly upon her. A shot from her heavy gun knocked
off the upper works on one side of the Eleuthera, but did no other
damage.

At the end of two hours even the heavy gun of the enemy could not carry
its shot to the chase. It would have been easy enough to run away from
the Dornoch; but this was by no means the intention of Captain Chantor.
He was very cool and self-possessed, and he did not ask his passenger
for any further suggestions. He understood his business thoroughly,
though he had at first been disposed to make shorter work of the action
than he had now adopted. As soon as he had obtained his distance, he
gave the order to bring the ship about. Thus far he had not fired a gun,
and the enemy had apparently had it all his own way.

The midship was in readiness to initiate the work of the Chateaugay. At
the proper moment, the gunner himself sighted the piece, the lock string
was operated, and the hull of the ship shook under the discharge.
Christy had a spy-glass to his eye, levelled at the Dornoch. She had
just begun to change her course to conform to that of the Chateaugay,
and the observer on the quarter-deck discovered the splinters flying
about her forecastle. The shot appeared to have struck at the heel of
the bowsprit.

"That was well done, Captain Chantor," said Christy.

"Excellently well done; but Mr. Turreton will improve when he gets his
range a little better," replied the captain.

At this moment the report of the Dornoch's great gun was heard again;
but the shot fell considerably short of the Chateaugay. At the same time
she was crowding on all the steam she could make, and Captain Chantor
was manoeuvring his ship so as to maintain his distance. The midship
gun was kept as busy as possible, and Mr. Turreton improved his practice
very materially. Fought in this manner, the action was not very
exciting. The ship followed her circular course, varying it only to
maintain the distance. For several hours the unequal battle continued.
The mainmast of the Dornoch had been shot away, and Christy, with his
glass, saw several of the huge shots crash into her bow.

It was evident, after pounding her a good part of the day, that the
enemy could not stand much more of this punishment. At eight bells in
the afternoon watch she hauled down her flag. Christy had done nothing
but watch the Dornoch, and report to Captain Chantor. As her flag came
down, he discovered that her condition, after the last shot, was
becoming desperate.

"She has settled considerably in the water, Captain Chantor, and that is
evidently the reason why she hauled down her flag," said Christy, just
as the ship's company were cheering at the disappearance of the
Confederate flag from the peak of the enemy.

"I was confident she could not endure much more such hulling as Mr.
Turreton has been bestowing upon her," replied the commander, after he
had given the order to make the course directly towards the Dornoch.

Christy continued to watch the enemy's vessel. The ship's company were
employed in stretching a sail over the bow, evidently for the purpose of
stopping in whole or partially a dangerous leak in that part of the
vessel; and she seemed to be in immediate peril of going to the bottom.
They were also getting their boats ready, and the situation must have
been critical. In a short time the Chateaugay was within hailing
distance of her prize.

"Dornoch, ahoy!" shouted Captain Chantor, mounted on the port rail. "Do
you surrender?"

"I do," replied Captain Rombold; for Christy recognized his voice. "Our
ship is sinking!"

By this time the havoc made by the big gun of the Chateaugay could be
seen and estimated. The bow of the steamer had been nearly all shot
away. Her bowsprit and her mainmast had gone by the board. Her bulwarks
were stove in, and most of her boats appeared to have been knocked to
pieces. In spite of the efforts to keep her afloat, it was plain that
she was sinking; and Christy could see her settling in the water. The
boats of the victor were promptly lowered, and crews sent away in them
to the relief of the imperilled enemy. There were not more than sixty
men on board of her, including the officers; and they were soon
transferred to the deck of the Chateaugay.

Christy watched the boats with the most intense interest as they came
alongside the ship; for he knew that his Uncle Homer was on board of the
Dornoch, if the plans arranged at the hotel had been fully carried out.
Captain Rombold came in the last boat, and Colonel Passford was with
him. His nephew did not care to meet him just then. The Confederate
commissioner came on deck; and Christy looked at him with interest from
behind the mizzenmast. His expression testified to his grief and sorrow
at the early failure of his mission. The young lieutenant could pity the
man, while he rejoiced at his ill success in building up the navy of the
Confederacy.

His attention was drawn off from his uncle by the sudden sinking of the
Dornoch; and the vortex that followed her disappearance extended to the
Chateaugay. Most of the officers and seamen had brought off the whole or
a part of their clothing and other articles.

When Captain Rombold came on deck, Captain Chantor politely saluted him,
and returned the sword he surrendered to him. Colonel Passford kept
close to him; and Christy thought he looked dazed and vacant.

"While I must rejoice in my own good fortune, Captain Rombold, I can
sympathize personally with a brave commander who has lost his ship,"
said Captain Chantor, taking the hand of the late commander of the
Dornoch.

"I thank you for your consideration, Captain. I am sorry to have been so
easy a victim to your strategy; and I can reciprocate by congratulating
you on your victory, though your better guns enabled you to knock my
ship to pieces at your leisure," replied Captain Rombold.

He then introduced Colonel Passford, and both of them were invited to
the captain's cabin. The wounded were turned over to the surgeon, and
the crew were sent below. It was clearly impossible for the ship to
continue on her voyage with such an addition to her numbers; and the
Chateaugay was at once headed back to New York.




CHAPTER XV

THE GENTLEMAN WITH A GRIZZLY BEARD


The addition of about sixty persons to the full complement of the ship's
company of the Chateaugay made a considerable crowd on board of her; but
accommodations were provided for all, and in three days the ship would
deliver her human freight to the authorities in New York. The Dornoch
had gone to the bottom with all her valuable cargo; but her captors
would be remunerated in prize-money by the government, so that in a
material point of view she was not lost to them, and there was one less
cruiser to prey upon the commerce of the loyal nation.

Captain Rombold and Colonel Passford remained in the cabin all the rest
of the day; but the next morning both of them went on deck to take the
fresh air. Christy and Mr. Gilfleur were in the waist, and noticed them
as soon as they appeared. They had had some conversation the evening
before in regard to confronting the two most important prisoners, though
without arriving at a conclusion.

"Of course I must meet my uncle," said Christy. "I am not inclined to
skulk and keep out of sight rather than meet him. Though I have assisted
in doing him and his cause a great deal of mischief, I have done it in
the service of my country; and I have no excuses to offer, and no
apologies to make."

"I was not thinking of excusing myself, or apologizing for what I have
done," replied the detective quite earnestly. "That is not the point I
desire to make. Since I went to New York I have looked upon your country
as my own; and I would do as much to serve her as I ever would have done
for France."

"What is your point, Mr. Gilfleur?" asked Christy.

"I do not object to your fraternizing with your uncle, Mr. Passford, if
you are so disposed," continued the Frenchman; "but the case is quite
different with me. In the hotel at St. George's you were not presented
to Captain Rombold, and you did not allow the Confederate commissioner
to see and identify you. Neither of these gentlemen recognized you; but
the captain of the Dornoch would certainly know me, for I talked with
him a long time."

"Suppose both of them know us: what difference will that make?" demanded
the young lieutenant.

"It will explain to them in what manner we obtained our knowledge of the
force and weight of metal of the Dornoch. While we had as good a right
to be on shore in the Bermudas as the Confederates, if we were
recognized our method of operations would be betrayed, and in my opinion
that would be very bad policy, especially as we are to adopt the same
strategy in the Bahamas."

"I see; and I agree with you, Mr. Gilfleur, that it will be good policy
to keep our own counsel in regard to what we have done in the islands,"
added Christy, as he saw Captain Chantor approaching him.

"Good-morning, Mr. Passford. You and your uncle do not appear to be on
very friendly terms, for I notice that you do not speak to each other."

"Our relations have always been friendly, even while I was in a rebel
prison; but I have not happened to meet him since he came on board of
the Chateaugay."

"I will present you to him as his nephew, if you desire me to do so,"
continued the commander with a smile.

"I thank you, Captain: I intended to speak to him when an opportunity
came. But you will pardon me if I make a suggestion without being asked
to do so," said Christy, speaking in a low tone; and he proceeded to
state what had passed between him and Mr. Gilfleur. "I hope you have not
mentioned the fact that Mr. Gilfleur and myself have been in the
Bermudas."

"I have not, for it came to my mind that it would be very unwise to do
so," replied the captain. "Besides, I was not at all inclined to tell
Captain Rombold that I knew all about his ship, her size, the number of
her ship's company, and the weight of his guns. A man does not feel just
right when he finds he has been made the victim of a bit of strategy;
and I was disposed to spare his feelings. He charges his misfortune
altogether to his antiquated steamer, her failure in her promised speed,
and the neglect of the Confederate commissioners to provide him with a
suitable vessel."

"Mr. Gilfleur will keep out of the captain's sight during the run to New
York; but I was acting as a servant when we met him, and did not sit at
the same table. I will speak to my uncle now."

Captain Chantor attended him to the quarter-deck, where the commissioner
was taking his morning walk. They fell in behind him as he was moving
aft, so that he did not observe his nephew.

"Colonel Passford, I have a young gentleman on board of my ship who
bears your name; allow me to present to you Lieutenant Christopher
Passford, who is simply a passenger on the Chateaugay," said the
captain, directing the attention of the commissioner to the young man.

"My nephew!" exclaimed Colonel Passford, as he recognized Christy, and
extended his hand to him.

"I am very glad to see you, Uncle Homer, though I am sorry to meet you
under present circumstances," replied the nephew, taking the offered
hand. "I hope you are very well, sir."

"Not very well, Christy; and I am not likely to improve in health in a
Yankee prison," answered the colonel with a very sickly smile.

"Probably my father will be able to obtain a parole for you, and he will
be extremely glad to have you with him at Bonnydale," added Christy.

"The last time I met you, Christy, you looked upon me as a
non-combatant, released me, and sent me on shore."

"I am not sure that I did wisely at that time."

"I was not taken in arms; and I could hardly be regarded as a prisoner
of war."

"But you were engaged in the Confederate service, Uncle Homer, for you
were shipping cotton for the benefit of the cause."

"But I was merely a passenger on board of the Dornoch."

"Yet you are a Confederate commissioner, seeking a passage in some
vessel bound to England, for the purpose of purchasing steamers to serve
in your navy," added Christy with considerable energy, and without
thinking that he was in danger of compromising himself and his companion
in the visit to the Bermudas.

Colonel Passford stopped short, and gazed into the face of his nephew.
He appeared to be utterly confounded by the statement, though he did not
deny the truth of it.

"Without admitting the truth of what you say, Christy, I desire to ask
upon what your statement is founded," said the commissioner, after some
hesitation.

"As you are on one side in this great conflict, and I am on the other,
you must excuse me for not answering your question," replied Christy
very promptly, and declining to commit himself any farther.

"It is very sad to have our family divided so that we should be enemies,
however friendly we may be personally," added Colonel Passford in a tone
that indicated his profound grief and sorrow.

"I know how useless it is for us to discuss the question, Uncle Homer,
for I am sure you are as honest in your views as my father is in his."

"I have no desire to argue the question; but I believe the North will
come to its senses in good time--when the grass grows in the streets of
New York, if not before."

"You will have an opportunity to see for yourself, Uncle Homer, that New
York was never so busy, never so prosperous, as at the present time; and
the same may be truthfully said of all the cities of the North," replied
Christy with spirit.

"Sail, ho!" shouted the lookout forward.

An hour later the sail was reported to be a steamer, bound to the
westward, and her streak of black smoke indicated that she was English.
She was low in the water, had two smoke-stacks, and presented a very
rakish appearance. She was a vessel of not more than eight hundred tons,
and her build was quite peculiar. It was evident that she was a very
fast steamer. But she seemed to have no suspicions in regard to the
character of the Chateaugay.

Christy left his uncle, and went to the ward room, where he found Mr.
Gilfleur in his stateroom. He desired the advice of the Frenchman before
he said anything to the captain in regard to the approaching sail.
Together they had looked over all the steamers in the harbor of St.
George's, and those on board of them were not disposed to conceal the
fact that they were to run the blockade as soon as they could get over
to the coast of the United States.

"What have you been doing to yourself, Mr. Gilfleur?" asked Christy, as
soon as he discovered the detective, for he had completely changed his
appearance, and looked like an elderly gentleman of fifty, with a full
beard, grizzled with the snows of many winters.

"I don't care to be shut up in this stateroom during the voyage to New
York," replied the Frenchman with a pleasant laugh. "This is one of my
useful costumes, and I don't believe Captain Rombold will recognize me
now."

"I am very sure he will not," added Christy, looking him over, and
wondering at the skill which could so completely change his appearance.

"I want you to see the steamer which is approaching, bound to the
westward. If I am not mistaken, we have seen her before."

"I am all ready, and I will go on deck with you; but you must contrive
to let the captain know who I am, or he will order me below, or have too
much to say about me," replied the detective, as he followed Christy to
the quarter-deck.

Colonel Passford and Captain Rombold had seated themselves abaft the
mizzenmast, and seemed to be interested in the reports respecting the
approaching steamer. Christy called Captain Chantor to the rail, and
explained what the commander had already scented as a mystery in regard
to the gentleman with the grizzled beard. He laughed heartily as he
gazed at the apparent stranger, and declared that he thought he might be
another Confederate commissioner, for he looked respectable and
dignified enough to be one.

"I think that steamer is the Cadet, Captain Chantor; and I have brought
Mr. Gilfleur on deck to take a look at her."

The Frenchman had no doubt the steamer was the Cadet, for she was
peculiar enough in her build to be identified among a thousand vessels
of her class. For some time they discussed the character of the vessel,
and minutely examined her build and rig. Neither of them had any doubt
as to her identity, and the passenger reported the result of the
conference to the commander, who immediately ordered the American flag
to be displayed at the peak; and gave the command to beat to quarters.
