rather less, the tale missed fire.

"Anything," said the Mugger, shutting his left eye again--"ANYTHING is
possible that comes out of a boat thrice the size of Mugger-Ghaut. My
village is not a small one."

There was a whistle overhead on the bridge, and the Delhi Mail
slid across, all the carriages gleaming with light, and the shadows
faithfully following along the river. It clanked away into the dark
again; but the Mugger and the Jackal were so well used to it that they
never turned their heads.

"Is that anything less wonderful than a boat thrice the size of
Mugger-Ghaut?" said the bird, looking up.

"I saw that built, child. Stone by stone I saw the bridge-piers rise,
and when the men fell off (they were wondrous sure-footed for the most
part--but WHEN they fell) I was ready. After the first pier was made
they never thought to look down the stream for the body to burn. There,
again, I saved much trouble. There was nothing strange in the building
of the bridge," said the Mugger.

"But that which goes across, pulling the roofed carts! That is strange,"
the Adjutant repeated. "It is, past any doubt, a new breed of bullock.
Some day it will not be able to keep its foothold up yonder, and will
fall as the men did. The old Mugger will then be ready."

The Jackal looked at the Adjutant and the Adjutant looked at the Jackal.
If there was one thing they were more certain of than another, it was
that the engine was everything in the wide world except a bullock. The
Jackal had watched it time and again from the aloe hedges by the side of
the line, and the Adjutant had seen engines since the first locomotive
ran in India. But the Mugger had only looked up at the thing from below,
where the brass dome seemed rather like a bullock's hump.

"M--yes, a new kind of bullock," the Mugger repeated ponderously,
to make himself quite sure in his own mind; and "Certainly it is a
bullock," said the Jackal.

"And again it might be----" began the Mugger pettishly.

"Certainly--most certainly," said the Jackal, without waiting for the
other to finish.

"What?" said the Mugger angrily, for he could feel that the others knew
more than he did. "What might it be? _I_ never finished my words. You
said it was a bullock."

"It is anything the Protector of the Poor pleases. I am HIS servant--not
the servant of the thing that crosses the river."

"Whatever it is, it is white-face work," said the Adjutant; "and for my
own part, I would not lie out upon a place so near to it as this bar."

"You do not know the English as I do," said the Mugger. "There was a
white-face here when the bridge was built, and he would take a boat
in the evenings and shuffle with his feet on the bottom-boards, and
whisper: 'Is he here? Is he there? Bring me my gun.' I could hear him
before I could see him--each sound that he made--creaking and puffing
and rattling his gun, up and down the river. As surely as I had picked
up one of his workmen, and thus saved great expense in wood for the
burning, so surely would he come down to the Ghaut, and shout in a loud
voice that he would hunt me, and rid the river of me--the Mugger of
Mugger-Ghaut! ME! Children, I have swum under the bottom of his boat for
hour after hour, and heard him fire his gun at logs; and when I was well
sure he was wearied, I have risen by his side and snapped my jaws in his
face. When the bridge was finished he went away. All the English hunt in
that fashion, except when they are hunted."

"Who hunts the white-faces?" yapped the Jackal excitedly.

"No one now, but I have hunted them in my time."

"I remember a little of that Hunting. I was young then," said the
Adjutant, clattering his beak significantly.

"I was well established here. My village was being builded for the third
time, as I remember, when my cousin, the Gavial, brought me word of rich
waters above Benares. At first I would not go, for my cousin, who is a
fish-eater, does not always know the good from the bad; but I heard my
people talking in the evenings, and what they said made me certain."

"And what did they say?" the Jackal asked.

"They said enough to make me, the Mugger of Mugger-Ghaut, leave water
and take to my feet. I went by night, using the littlest streams as they
served me; but it was the beginning of the hot weather, and all streams
were low. I crossed dusty roads; I went through tall grass; I climbed
hills in the moonlight. Even rocks did I climb, children--consider this
well. I crossed the tail of Sirhind, the waterless, before I could
find the set of the little rivers that flow Gungaward. I was a month's
journey from my own people and the river that I knew. That was very
marvellous!"

"What food on the way?" said the Jackal, who kept his soul in his little
stomach, and was not a bit impressed by the Mugger's land travels.

"That which I could find--COUSIN," said the Mugger slowly, dragging each
word.

Now you do not call a man a cousin in India unless you think you can
establish some kind of blood-relationship, and as it is only in old
fairy-tales that the Mugger ever marries a jackal, the Jackal knew for
what reason he had been suddenly lifted into the Mugger's family circle.
If they had been alone he would not have cared, but the Adjutant's eyes
twinkled with mirth at the ugly jest.

"Assuredly, Father, I might have known," said the Jackal. A mugger
does not care to be called a father of jackals, and the Mugger of
Mugger-Ghaut said as much--and a great deal more which there is no use
in repeating here.

"The Protector of the Poor has claimed kinship. How can I remember the
precise degree? Moreover, we eat the same food. He has said it," was the
Jackal's reply.

That made matters rather worse, for what the Jackal hinted at was that
the Mugger must have eaten his food on that land-march fresh and fresh
every day, instead of keeping it by him till it was in a fit and proper
condition, as every self-respecting mugger and most wild beasts do when
they can. Indeed, one of the worst terms of contempt along the River-bed
is "eater of fresh meat." It is nearly as bad as calling a man a
cannibal.

"That food was eaten thirty seasons ago," said the Adjutant quietly. "If
we talk for thirty seasons more it will never come back. Tell us, now,
what happened when the good waters were reached after thy most wonderful
land journey. If we listened to the howling of every jackal the business
of the town would stop, as the saying is."

The Mugger must have been grateful for the interruption, because he went
on, with a rush:

"By the Right and Left of Gunga! when I came there never did I see such
waters!"

"Were they better, then, than the big flood of last season?" said the
Jackal.

"Better! That flood was no more than comes every five years--a handful
of drowned strangers, some chickens, and a dead bullock in muddy water
with cross-currents. But the season I think of, the river was low,
smooth, and even, and, as the Gavial had warned me, the dead English
came down, touching each other. I got my girth in that season--my
girth and my depth. From Agra, by Etawah and the broad waters by
Allahabad----"

"Oh, the eddy that set under the walls of the fort at Allahabad!" said
the Adjutant. "They came in there like widgeon to the reeds, and round
and round they swung--thus!"

He went off into his horrible dance again, while the Jackal looked on
enviously. He naturally could not remember the terrible year of the
Mutiny they were talking about. The Mugger continued:

"Yes, by Allahabad one lay still in the slack-water and let twenty go
by to pick one; and, above all, the English were not cumbered with
jewellery and nose-rings and anklets as my women are nowadays. To
delight in ornaments is to end with a rope for a necklace, as the saying
is. All the muggers of all the rivers grew fat then, but it was my Fate
to be fatter than them all. The news was that the English were being
hunted into the rivers, and by the Right and Left of Gunga! we believed
it was true. So far as I went south I believed it to be true; and I went
down-stream beyond Monghyr and the tombs that look over the river."

"I know that place," said the Adjutant. "Since those days Monghyr is a
lost city. Very few live there now."

"Thereafter I worked up-stream very slowly and lazily, and a little
above Monghyr there came down a boatful of white-faces--alive! They
were, as I remember, women, lying under a cloth spread over sticks, and
crying aloud. There was never a gun fired at us, the watchers of the
fords in those days. All the guns were busy elsewhere. We could hear
them day and night inland, coming and going as the wind shifted. I rose
up full before the boat, because I had never seen white-faces alive,
though I knew them well--otherwise. A naked white child kneeled by the
side of the boat, and, stooping over, must needs try to trail his hands
in the river. It is a pretty thing to see how a child loves running
water. I had fed that day, but there was yet a little unfilled space
within me. Still, it was for sport and not for food that I rose at the
child's hands. They were so clear a mark that I did not even look when I
closed; but they were so small that though my jaws rang true--I am sure
of that--the child drew them up swiftly, unhurt. They must have passed
between tooth and tooth--those small white hands. I should have caught
him cross-wise at the elbows; but, as I said, it was only for sport and
desire to see new things that I rose at all. They cried out one after
another in the boat, and presently I rose again to watch them. The boat
was too heavy to push over. They were only women, but he who trusts
a woman will walk on duckweed in a pool, as the saying is: and by the
Right and Left of Gunga, that is truth!"

"Once a woman gave me some dried skin from a fish," said the Jackal. "I
had hoped to get her baby, but horse-food is better than the kick of a
horse, as the saying is. What did thy woman do?"

"She fired at me with a short gun of a kind I have never seen before or
since. Five times, one after another" (the Mugger must have met with an
old-fashioned revolver); "and I stayed open-mouthed and gaping, my head
in the smoke. Never did I see such a thing. Five times, as swiftly as I
wave my tail--thus!"

The Jackal, who had been growing more and more interested in the story,
had just time to leap back as the huge tail swung by like a scythe.

"Not before the fifth shot," said the Mugger, as though he had never
dreamed of stunning one of his listeners--"not before the fifth shot
did I sink, and I rose in time to hear a boatman telling all those
white women that I was most certainly dead. One bullet had gone under
a neck-plate of mine. I know not if it is there still, for the reason I
cannot turn my head. Look and see, child. It will show that my tale is
true."

"I?" said the Jackal. "Shall an eater of old shoes, a bone-cracker,
presume, to doubt the word of the Envy of the River? May my tail be
bitten off by blind puppies if the shadow of such a thought has crossed
my humble mind! The Protector of the Poor has condescended to inform me,
his slave, that once in his life he has been wounded by a woman. That is
sufficient, and I will tell the tale to all my children, asking for no
proof."

"Over-much civility is sometimes no better than over-much discourtesy,
for, as the saying is, one can choke a guest with curds. I do NOT desire
that any children of thine should know that the Mugger of Mugger-Ghaut
took his only wound from a woman. They will have much else to think of
if they get their meat as miserably as does their father."

"It is forgotten long ago! It was never said! There never was a white
woman! There was no boat! Nothing whatever happened at all."

The Jackal waved his brush to show how completely everything was wiped
out of his memory, and sat down with an air.

"Indeed, very many things happened," said the Mugger, beaten in his
second attempt that night to get the better of his friend. (Neither bore
malice, however. Eat and be eaten was fair law along the river, and the
Jackal came in for his share of plunder when the Mugger had finished
a meal.) "I left that boat and went up-stream, and, when I had reached
Arrah and the back-waters behind it, there were no more dead English.
The river was empty for a while. Then came one or two dead, in red
coats, not English, but of one kind all--Hindus and Purbeeahs--then five
and six abreast, and at last, from Arrah to the North beyond Agra, it
was as though whole villages had walked into the water. They came out
of little creeks one after another, as the logs come down in the Rains.
When the river rose they rose also in companies from the shoals they
had rested upon; and the falling flood dragged them with it across the
fields and through the Jungle by the long hair. All night, too, going
North, I heard the guns, and by day the shod feet of men crossing fords,
and that noise which a heavy cart-wheel makes on sand under water; and
every ripple brought more dead. At last even I was afraid, for I said:
'If this thing happen to men, how shall the Mugger of Mugger-Ghaut
escape?' There were boats, too, that came up behind me without sails,
burning continually, as the cotton-boats sometimes burn, but never
sinking."

"Ah!" said the Adjutant. "Boats like those come to Calcutta of the
South. They are tall and black, they beat up the water behind them with
a tail, and they----"

"Are thrice as big as my village. MY boats were low and white; they beat
up the water on either side of them and were no larger than the boats
of one who speaks truth should be. They made me very afraid, and I
left water and went back to this my river, hiding by day and walking
by night, when I could not find little streams to help me. I came to
my village again, but I did not hope to see any of my people there.
Yet they were ploughing and sowing and reaping, and going to and fro in
their fields, as quietly as their own cattle."

"Was there still good food in the river?" said the Jackal.

"More than I had any desire for. Even I--and I do not eat mud--even
I was tired, and, as I remember, a little frightened of this constant
coming down of the silent ones. I heard my people say in my village
that all the English were dead; but those that came, face down, with the
current were NOT English, as my people saw. Then my people said that it
was best to say nothing at all, but to pay the tax and plough the land.
After a long time the river cleared, and those that came down it had
been clearly drowned by the floods, as I could well see; and though it
was not so easy then to get food, I was heartily glad of it. A little
killing here and there is no bad thing--but even the Mugger is sometimes
satisfied, as the saying is."

"Marvellous! Most truly marvellous!" said the Jackal. "I am become fat
through merely hearing about so much good eating. And afterward what, if
it be permitted to ask, did the Protector of the Poor do?"

"I said to myself--and by the Right and Left of Gunga! I locked my jaws
on that vow--I said I would never go roving any more. So I lived by the
Ghaut, very close to my own people, and I watched over them year after
year; and they loved me so much that they threw marigold wreaths at my
head whenever they saw it lift. Yes, and my Fate has been very kind to
me, and the river is good enough to respect my poor and infirm presence;
only----"

"No one is all happy from his beak to his tail," said the Adjutant
sympathetically. "What does the Mugger of Mugger-Ghaut need more?"

"That little white child which I did not get," said the Mugger, with a
deep sigh. "He was very small, but I have not forgotten. I am old now,
but before I die it is my desire to try one new thing. It is true they
are a heavy-footed, noisy, and foolish people, and the sport would be
small, but I remember the old days above Benares, and, if the child
lives, he will remember still. It may be he goes up and down the bank
of some river, telling how he once passed his hands between the teeth of
the Mugger of Mugger-Ghaut, and lived to make a tale of it. My Fate has
been very kind, but that plagues me sometimes in my dreams--the thought
of the little white child in the bows of that boat." He yawned, and
closed his jaws. "And now I will rest and think. Keep silent, my
children, and respect the aged."

He turned stiffly, and shuffled to the top of the sand-bar, while the
Jackal drew back with the Adjutant to the shelter of a tree stranded on
the end nearest the railway bridge.

"That was a pleasant and profitable life," he grinned, looking up
inquiringly at the bird who towered above him. "And not once, mark you,
did he think fit to tell me where a morsel might have been left along
the banks. Yet I have told HIM a hundred times of good things wallowing
down-stream. How true is the saying, 'All the world forgets the Jackal
and the Barber when the news has been told!' Now he is going to sleep!
Arrh!"

"How can a jackal hunt with a Mugger?" said the Adjutant coolly. "Big
thief and little thief; it is easy to say who gets the pickings."

The Jackal turned, whining impatiently, and was going to curl himself
up under the tree-trunk, when suddenly he cowered, and looked up through
the draggled branches at the bridge almost above his head.

"What now?" said the Adjutant, opening his wings uneasily.

"Wait till we see. The wind blows from us to them, but they are not
looking for us--those two men."

"Men, is it? My office protects me. All India knows I am holy." The
Adjutant, being a first-class scavenger, is allowed to go where he
pleases, and so this one never flinched.

"I am not worth a blow from anything better than an old shoe," said the
Jackal, and listened again. "Hark to that footfall!" he went on. "That
was no country leather, but the shod foot of a white-face. Listen
again! Iron hits iron up there! It is a gun! Friend, those heavy-footed,
foolish English are coming to speak with the Mugger."

"Warn him, then. He was called Protector of the Poor by some one not
unlike a starving Jackal but a little time ago."

"Let my cousin protect his own hide. He has told me again and again
there is nothing to fear from the white-faces. They must be white-faces.
Not a villager of Mugger-Ghaut would dare to come after him. See, I said
it was a gun! Now, with good luck, we shall feed before daylight. He
cannot hear well out of water, and--this time it is not a woman!"

A shiny barrel glittered for a minute in the moonlight on the girders.
The Mugger was lying on the sand-bar as still as his own shadow, his
fore-feet spread out a little, his head dropped between them, snoring
like a--mugger.

A voice on the bridge whispered: "It's an odd shot--straight down
