
While they were talking, Kitty heard the rattle of buggy wheels. The
sound came nearer and nearer. Whoever was driving was singing, to pass
the time away, and the quick ear of Kitty recognised the voice of
George Denham. He went dashing by; but he must have seen the girl
standing on the veranda, for he cried out, "Good night, Miss Kitty!"
and then caught up the burden of his song again as he went whirling
down the road. Kitty wrung her hands. She went in to her mother with
tears in her eyes.

"O mother! George has gone by without stopping. What shall we do?"

Mrs. Kendrick was a very practical woman. Knowing nothing of the
freshet in Murder Creek, she was amazed as well as amused at Kitty's
tragic attitude.

"Well, it's most too soon for George to begin to take his meals here, I
reckon," she said dryly. "You'd better make you a cup of ginger-tea and
go to bed."

"But, mother, there's a freshet in Murder Creek. Oh, why didn't he
stop?"

Mrs. Kendrick was kneeling on the floor cutting out clothes for the
plough-hands,--"slaving for her niggers," as she called it. She paused
in her work and looked at Kitty, as if to see whether she had heard her
aright.

"Well, upon my word!" she exclaimed, after critically surveying her
daughter, "I don't see how girls can be so weak-minded. Many a man as
good as George Denham has crossed Murder Creek in a freshet. I don't
see but what he's big enough and ugly enough to take care of himself."

"Oh," exclaimed Kitty, going from window to window, and vainly
endeavouring to peer out into the darkness, "why didn't he stop?"

"Well," said Mrs. Kendrick, resuming the use of her shears, "if you'll
try to worry along and stand it this time, I'll send out and have a
fence built across the big road, and get the niggers to light a
bonfire; and we'll stop him the next time he comes along. I'll have to
do my duty by my own children, I reckon. But don't be alarmed," she
continued, perceiving that Kitty's distress was genuine. "You may have
to fly around here and get George some supper, after all. I've been
waiting on niggers all day; and even if I hadn't, I'm too old and
fagged out to be rushing in amongst the pots and kettles to please
George Denham."

George Denham rattled down the road, singing of "Barbara Allen," but
thinking of Kitty Kendrick. Suddenly his horse shied, and then he heard
somebody call him.

"Mars. George! Is dat you, Mars. George?"

"Unless you want to make a ghost of me by frightening my horse,"
exclaimed the young man, checking the animal with some difficulty.
"What do you want?"

"Mars. George, is you see Miss Kitty w'en you come by des now?"

"No, I didn't stop. Is anything the matter?"

"No, sir, nothin' in 'tickler ain't de matter, 'ceppin' dat Miss Kitty
had sump'n' ter tell you."

"Are you one of the Kendrick negroes?"

"No, sir; I don't b'long dar."

"Who are you?"

"I 'clar' ter goodness, I skeer'd ter tell you, Mars. George; kaze you
mought fly up en git mad."

The young man laughed with such genuine heartiness that it did the
negro good to hear it.

"Well, I know who you are," he said; "you are Blue Dave, and you've
come to tell me that you want me to carry you to jail, where Bill Brand
can get his hands on you."

The negro was thunderstruck. "To' de Lord, Mars. George! how you know
who I is?"

"Why, I know by your looks. You've got horns and a club foot. That's
the way the Old Boy fixes himself."

"Now, Mars. George," said the negro in a grieved tone, "ef you could
see me good you wouldn't set dar en say I'm a bad-lookin' nigger."

"Are you really Blue Dave?" the young man asked, dropping his bantering
tone and speaking seriously.

"Yasser, Mars. George; I'm dat ve'y nigger."

"What do you want with me?"

"I des wanter tell you, Mars. George, dat dey's a freshet come fum
'bove, en Murder Creek is 'way out'n hits banks. You can't cross dar
wid no hoss en buggy dis night."

The young man reflected a moment. He was more interested in the
attitude of the negro than he was in the extent of the freshet or the
danger of an attempt to cross the creek.

"I've a knack of crossing Murder Creek in a freshet," he said. "But why
should you want to keep me out of it?"

"Well, sir, fer one thing," said Blue Dave, shifting about on his feet
uneasily, "you look so much like my young marster w'at died in
Perginny. En den dat day w'en de speckerlater put me up on de block,
you 'uz settin' dar straddle er yo' pony, en you 'lowed dat he oughter
be 'shame er hisse'f fer ter chain me up dat a-way."

"Oh, I remember. I made quite a fool of myself that day."

"Yasser; en den w'en de man say sump'n' sassy back, little ez you wuz,
you spurred de pony at 'im en tole 'im you'd slap 'im in de jaw. He 'uz
de skeer'dest w'ite man I ever see. I say ter myse'f den dat I hope de
day'd come w'en dat little boy'd grow up en buy me; en dat make I say
w'at I does. I want you to keep out 'n dat creek dis night, en den I
want you ter buy me. Please, sir, buy me, Mars. George; I make you de
bes' nigger you ever had."

"Why, great Jerusalem! you wouldn't be on my place a week before you'd
get your feelings hurt and rush off to the woods, and I'd never see you
any more."

"Des try me, Mars. George! des try me. I'll work my arms off ter de
elbows, en den I'll work wid de stumps. Des try me, Mars. George!"

"I expect you would be a right good hand if you hadn't been free so
long. Go home and let me see how you can work for your master, and then
maybe I'll think about buying you."

"Eh-eh, Mars. George! I better go jump in a burnin' bresh-pile. Ain't
you gwine ter tu'n back, Mars. George?"

"Not to-night. Go home and behave yourself."

With that George Denham clucked to his restive horse, and went
clattering down the road in the direction of Murder Creek, which
crossed the highway a mile further on. Blue Dave stood still a moment,
scratching his head and looking after the buggy.

"Is anybody ever see de beat er dat?" he exclaimed. "Ef Mars. George
gits in dat creek, dey's got ter be a merakel come 'bout ef he gits
out." He stood in the road a moment longer, still scratching his head
as if puzzled. Then he addressed himself indignantly. "Looky yer,
nigger, w'at you stan'in' yer fer? Whar yo' manners, whar yo'
perliteness?"

Thus, half--humorously, half--seriously, talking to himself, Blue Dave
went trotting along in the direction taken by George Denham. He moved
without apparent exertion, but with amazing swiftness. But the young
man in the buggy had also moved swiftly; and, go as fast as he might,
Blue Dave could not hope to overtake him before he reached the creek.

For George Denham was impatient to get home,--as impatient as his
horse, which did not need even the lightest touch of the whip to urge
it forward. He paid no attention to the familiar road. He was thinking
of pretty Kitty Kendrick, and of the day, not very far in the future,
he hoped, when, in going home, he should be driving towards her instead
of away from her. He paid no attention to the fact that, as he neared
the creek, his horse subsided from a swinging trot to a mincing gait
that betrayed indecision; nor did it strike him as anything unusual
that the horse should begin to splash water with his feet long before
he had reached the banks of the creek; no doubt it was a pool left
standing in the road after the heavy rains. But the pool steadily grew
deeper; and while George Denham was picturing Kitty Kendrick sitting on
one side of his fireplace and his old mother on the other,--his old
mother, with her proud face and her stately ways,--his horse stopped
and looked around. Young Denham slapped the animal with the reins,
without taking note of his surroundings. Thus reassured, the horse went
on; but the water grew deeper and deeper, and presently the creature
stopped again. This time it smelt of the water and emitted the low,
deeply-drawn snort by which horses betray their uneasiness; and when
George Denham would have urged it forward, it struck the water
impatiently with its forefoot. Aroused by this, the young man looked
around; but there was nothing to warn him of his danger. The fence that
would otherwise have been a landmark was gone. There was no loud and
angry roaring of the floods. Behind him the shifting clouds, the
shining stars, and the blue patches of sky mirrored themselves duskily
and vaguely in the slow creeping waters; before him the shadows of the
trees that clustered somewhere near the banks of the creek were so deep
and heavy that they seemed to merge the dark waters of the flood into
the gloom of the night. When the horse was quiet, peering ahead, with
its sharp little ears pointed forward, there was no sound save the
vague sighing of the wind through the tops of the scrub pines and the
gentle ripple of the waters.

As George Denham urged his horse forward, confident of his familiarity
with the surroundings, Blue Dave ran up on the little ridge to the left
through which the road had been cut or worn.

"Mars. George!" he shouted, "don't you see wharbouts you is? Wait,
Mars. George! Pull dat hoss up!"

But Blue Dave was too late. As he spoke, the horse and buggy plunged
into the flood, and for a moment they were lost to view. Then the
struggling animal seemed to strike rising ground; but the buggy was
caught in the resistless current, and, with George Denham clinging to
it, it dragged the horse down, and the swirling waters seemed to sweep
over and beyond them. Blue Dave lost not a moment. Flinging himself
into the flood from the vantage-ground on which he stood, a few strokes
of his sinewy arms carried him to where he saw George Denham disappear.
That young man was an expert swimmer; and though the sudden immersion
had taken him at a disadvantage, he would have made his way out with
little difficulty but for the fact that a heavy piece of driftwood had
been hurled against his head. Stunned, but still conscious, he was
making an ineffectual attempt to reach the shore, when he was caught by
Blue Dave and borne safely back to land. The horse, in its struggles,
had succeeded in tearing itself loose from the buggy, and they heard it
crawl up the bank on the other side and shake itself. Blue Dave carried
George Denham out of the water as one would carry a child. When he had
set the young man down in a comparatively dry place, he exclaimed with
a grin--

"Dar now, Mars. George! w'at I tell you? Little mo' en de tarrypins
would 'a' bin a-nibblin' atter you."

George Denham was dazed as well as weak. He put his hand to his head
and tried to laugh.

"You were just in time, old fellow," he said.

Then he got on his feet, and tried to walk, but he would have sunk down
again but for Blue Dave's arm.

"Why, I'm as weak as a stray cat," he exclaimed, feebly. "Let me lie
down here a moment."

"Dat I won't, Mars. George! dat I won't! I tuck 'n' brung you out, en
now I'm a-gwineter take 'n' ca'er you back dar whar Miss Kitty
waitin'."

"Well, you'll have to wait until I can walk."

"No, sir; I'll des squat down, en you kin crawl up on my back des like
you useter play hoss."

"Why, you can't carry me, old fellow; I'm too heavy for that."

"Shoo! don't you b'leeve de half er dat, Mars. George. I toted bigger
turns dan w'at you is long 'fo' I had de strenk w'at I got now. Grab me
'roun' de neck, Mars. George; git up little higher. Now, den, don't you
be fear'd er fallin'."

Blue Dave rose from his stooping posture, steadied himself a moment,
and then moved on with his living burden. He moved slowly and
cautiously at first, but gradually increased his pace to a swinging
walk that carried him forward with surprising swiftness.

To George Denham it all seemed like a dream. He suffered no pain, and
it was with a sort of queer elation of mind that he felt the huge
muscles of the negro swell and subside under him with the regularity of
machinery, and knew that every movement carried him toward Kitty
Kendrick and rest. He was strangely tired, but not otherwise
uncomfortable. He felt abundantly grateful to this poor runaway negro,
and thought that if he could overcome his mother's prejudices (she had
a horror of runaway negroes) he would buy Blue Dave and make him
comfortable. Thus they swung along until the negro's swift stride
brought them to Mrs. Kendrick's gate. There Blue Dave deposited George
Denham, and exclaimed with a laugh as he leaned against the fence--

"You'er right smart chunk er meat, Mars. George, ez sho ez de worl'!"

George Denham also leaned against the fence, but he didn't laugh. He
was thinking of what seemed to him a very serious matter.

"Mother will be frightened to death when that horse gets home," he
said.

"You go in dar en get worn, Mars. George," said Blue Dave. "I'm gwine
'roun' by de High Bridge en tell um whar you is."

"Why, you'll break yourself down," said George Deuham.

"Ah, Lord, Mars. George!" said the negro, laughing, "time you bin in de
woods long ez I is de four mile 'twix' yer en yo' house'll look mighty
short. Go in dar, Mars. George, 'fo' you git col'!"

Shortly after this, George Denham was in bed and fast asleep. He had
been met at the door by Kitty Kendrick, in whose telltale face the
blushes of that heartiest of all welcomes had chased away the pallor of
dread and anxiety. Mrs. Kendrick was less sympathetic in word than in
deed. She had known George Denham since he was a little boy in short
clothes; and while she approved of him, and had a sort of motherly
affection for him, she was disposed to be critical, as are most women
who have the knack of management.

"And so you've come back dripping, have you? Well, you ain't the first
head-strong, high-strung chap that's found out water is wet when the
creek blots out the big road, I reckon. I'm no duck myself. When I see
water, I'm like the old cat in the corner; I always feel like shaking
my foot. Kitty, call Bob and tell him to make a fire in the big room.
He's asleep, I reckon, and you'll have to holler. Set a nigger down and
he's snoring directly. You look pale," Mrs. Kendrick continued, turning
to George. "You must have gone in over your ears. I should think a
drenching like that would take all the conceit out of a man."

"Well, it has taken it all out of me, ma'am," said George, laughing.
Then the young man told Mrs. Kendrick of his misadventure, and of the
part Blue Dave had borne in it.

"He's the nigger that roosted on top of my house," said Mrs. Felix,
bustling around and putting a kettle of water on the fire. "Well, it's
a roundabout way to pay for his lodging, but it's the best he could do,
I reckon. Now, don't you worry yourself, George; in ten minutes you'll
be snug in bed, and then you'll drink a cup of composition tea, and
to-morrow morning you'll have forgotten all about trying to make a spring
branch out of Murder Creek."

As the successful mistress of a household, Mrs. Kendrick knew precisely
what was necessary to be done. There was no hitch in her system, no
delay in her methods, and no disputing her remedies. George Denham was
ordered to bed as if he had been a child; and though the "composition"
tea was hot in the month and bitter to the palate, it was useless to
protest against it. As a consequence of all this, the young man was
soon in the land of dreams.

When everything was quiet, Kitty prepared a very substantial lunch.
Then, calling her little brother Felix, she went across the yard to the
quarters, and stopped at Uncle Manuel's cabin. The door was ajar, and
Kitty could see the venerable old negro nodding before the flickering
embers. She went in and called his name--

"Uncle Manuel!"

"Eh! Who dat?" Then, looking around and perceiving Kitty, the old
negro's weather-beaten face shone with a broad smile of surprise and
welcome. "Why, honey! Why, little Mistiss! How come dis? You makes de
ole nigger feel proud; dat you does. I fear'd ter ax you ter set down,
honey, de cheer so rickety."

"Uncle Manuel," said Kitty, "do you know Blue Dave?"

Uncle Manuel was old, and wise, and cunning. He hesitated a moment
before replying, and even then his caution would not allow him to
commit himself.

"Blue Dave, he's dat ar runaway nigger, ain't he, honey? I done year
talk un 'im lots er times."

"Well," said Kitty, placing her basket upon Uncle Manuel's tool-chest,
"here is something for Blue Dave to eat. If you don't see him yourself,
perhaps you can send it to him by some one."

Uncle Manuel picked up the basket, weighed it in his hand, and then
placed it on the chest again. Then he looked curiously at Kitty, and
said--

"Honey, how come you gwine do dis? Ain't you year tell hit's ag'in de
law fer ter feed a runaway nigger?"

Kitty blushed as she thought of George Denham. "I send Blue Dave the
victuals because I choose to, Uncle Manuel," she said. "The law has
nothing to do with that little basket."

She started to go, but Uncle Manuel raised both hands heavenwards.

"Wait, little Mistiss," he cried, the tears running down his furrowed
face; "des wait, little Mistiss. 'Twou't hurt you, honey. De ole nigger
wuz des gwine ter git down ter his pra'rs 'fo' you come in. Dey ain't
no riper time dan dis."

Uncle Manuel's voice was husky with suppressed emotion. With his hands
still stretched toward the skies, and the tears still running down his
face, he fell upon his knees and exclaimed--

"Saviour en Marster er de worl'! draw nigh dis night en look down into
dis ole nigger's heart; lissen ter de humblest er de humble. Blessed
Marster! some run wild eh some go stray, some go hether en some go
yan'; but all un um mus' go befo' dy mercy-seat in de een'. Some'll
fetch big works, en some'll fetch great deeds, but po' ole Manuel won't
fetch nothiu' but one weak, sinful heart. Dear, blessed Marster! look
in dat heart en see w'at in dar. De sin dat's dar, Lord, blot it out
wid dy wounded han'. Dear Marster, bless my little Mistiss. Her comin's
en her gwines is des like one er dy angels er mercy; she scatters bread
en meat 'mongs' dem w'at's lonesome in der ways, en dem w'at runs up en
down in de middle er big tribalation. Saviour! Marster! look down 'pon
my little Mistiss; gedder her 'nead dy hev'mly wings. Ef trouble mus'
come, let it come 'pon me. I'm ole, but I'm tough; I'm ole, but I got
de strenk. Lord! let de troubles en de trials come 'pon de ole nigger
w'at kin stan' um, en save my little Mistiss fum sheddin' one tear. En
den, at de las' fetch us all home ter hev'm, whar dey's res' fer de
w'ary. Amen."

Never in her life before had Kitty felt so thrilling a sense of
nearness to her Creator as when Uncle Manuel was offering up his simple
prayer; and she went out of the humble cabin weeping gently.

III.

THE four-mile run to the Denham Plantation was fun for Blue Dave. He
was wet and cold, and the exercise acted as a lively invigorant. Once,
as he sped along, he was challenged by the patrol; but he disappeared
like a shadow, and came into the road again a mile away, singing to
himself--

Run, nigger, run! patter-roller ketch you;
Run, nigger, run! hit's almos' day!

He was well acquainted with the surroundings at the Denham Plantation,
having been fed many a time by the well-cared-for negroes; and he had
no hesitation in approaching the premises. The clouds had whirled
themselves away, and the stars told him it was ten o'clock. There was a
light in the sitting-room, and Blue Dave judged it best to go to the
back door. He rapped gently, and then a little louder. Ordinarily the
door would have been opened by the trim black housemaid; but to-night
it was opened by George Denham's mother, a prim old lady of whom
everybody stood greatly in awe without precisely knowing why. She
looked out, and saw the gigantic negro looming up on the doorsteps.

"Do you bring news of my son?" she asked. The voice was low, but
penetrating; and the calm, even tones told the story of a will too
strong to tolerate opposition, or even contradiction.

Blue Dave hesitated out of sheer embarrassment at finding such cool
serenity where he had probably expected to find grief or some such
excitement.

"Did you hear me speak?" the prim old lady asked, before the negro had
time to gather his wits. "Do you bring me news of my son?"

"Yessum," said Blue Dave, scratching his head; "dat w'at I come fer.
Mars. George gwine ter stay at de Kendrick Place ter-night. I speck he
in bed by dis time," he added, reassuringly.

"His horse has come home without buggy or harness. Is my son hurt?
Don't be afraid to tell me the truth. What has happened to him?"

How could the poor negro--how could anybody--know what a whirlwind of
yearning affection, dread, and anxiety was raging behind these cool,
level tones?

"Mistiss, I tell you de trufe: Mars. George is sorter hurted, but he
ain't hurted much. I met 'im in de road, en I tuck 'n' tole 'im dey wuz
a freshet in Murder Creek; but he des laugh at me, en he driv' in des
like dey wa'n't no water dar; en den w'en he make his disappearance, I
tuck 'n' splunge in atter 'im, en none too soon, n'er, kaze he got
strucken on de head wid a log, an w'en I fotch 'im out, he 'uz all
dazzle up like. Yit he ain't hurted much, Mistiss."

"What is your name?" the prim old lady asked.

"Blue Dave, ma'am."

"The runaway?"
The negro hesitated, looked around, and then hung down his head. He
knew the calm, fearless eyes of this gentlewoman were upon him; he felt
the influence of her firm tones. She repeated her question--

"Are you Blue Dave, the runaway?"

"Yessum."

The answer seemed to satisfy the lady. She turned and called Eliza, the
housemaid.

"Eliza, your master's supper is in the dining-room by the fire. Here
are the keys. Take it into the kitchen." Then she turned to Blue Dave.
"David," she said, "go into the kitchen and eat your supper."

Then Eliza was sent after Ellick, the negro foreman; and Ellick was not
long in finding Blue Dave a suit of linsey-woolsey clothes, a little
warmer and a little drier than those the runaway was in the habit of
wearing. Then the big greys were put to the Denham carriage, shawls and
blankets were thrown in, and Blue Dave was called.

"Have you had your supper, David?" said Mrs. Denham, looking grimmer
than ever as she stood on her veranda arrayed in bonnet and wraps.

"Thanky, Mistiss! thanky, ma'am. I ain't had no meal's vittles like
dat, not gence I lef Ferginny."

"Can you drive a carriage, David?" the old lady asked.

"Dat I kin, Mistiss." Whereupon he seized the reins and let down the
carriage steps. Mrs. Denham and her maid got in; but when everything
was ready, Blue Dave hesitated.

"Mistiss," he said, rather sheepishly, "w'en I come 'long des now, de
patter-rollers holler'd atter me."

"No matter, David," the grim old lady replied; "your own master
wouldn't order you off of my carriage."

"Keep yo' eye on dat off boss!" exclaimed Ellick, as the carriage moved
off.

"Hush, honey," Blue Dave cried, as exultantly as a child; "'fo' dey
gits ter de big gate, I'll know deze yer bosses better dan ef dey wuz
my br'er."

After that, nothing more was said. The road had been made firm and
smooth by the heavy beating rain, and the carriage swung along easily
and rapidly. The negro housemaid fell back against the cushions, and
was soon sound asleep; but Mrs. Denham sat bolt upright. Hers was an
uncompromising nature, it had been said, and certainly it seemed so;
but as the carriage rolled along, there grew before her mind's eye the
vague, dim outlines of a vision,--a vision of a human creature hiding
in the dark swamps, fleeing through the deep woods, and creeping
swiftly through the pine thickets. It was a pathetic figure, this
fleeing human creature, whether chased by dogs and men or pursued only
by the terrors that hide themselves behind the vast shadows of the
night; and the figure grew more pathetic when, as it seemed, it sprang
out of the very elements themselves to snatch her son from the floods.
The old lady sighed and pressed her thin lips together. She had made up
her mind.

Presently the carriage drew up at the Kendrick Place; and in a little
while, after effusive greetings all around, Mrs. Denham was sitting at
Mrs. Kendrick's hearth listening to the story of her son's rescue. She
wanted to go in and see George at once, but Mrs. Kendrick would consent
only on condition that he was not to be aroused.

"It is foolish to say it," said the old lady, smiling at Kitty as she
came out of the room in which her son was sleeping; "but my son seems
to look to-night just as he did when a baby."

Kitty smiled such a responsive smile, and looked so young and
beautiful, that the proud old lady stooped and kissed her.

"I think I shall love you, my dear."

"I reckon I'll have to get even with you," said Mrs. Kendrick, who had
