
"The company all left with the audience," said the usher. "I guess she
went along with 'em."

"Now is our time," said Anne, when the actor had disappeared. "Suppose
we go out the stage entrance and down that side street!"

Whereupon she led the way back of the boxes and into the wings, followed
by her friends, who looked curiously about them at the unusual sight.

"What a queer place," said Grace, "and how smudgy the scenery looks! Are
these little places dressing rooms, Anne?"

"Yes," answered Anne. "You see, it's all horrid when you are close. And
the life is worse--riding almost every day on smoky trains and spending
each night in a different place. The people are so different, too. I
would rather go to Oakdale High School," she exclaimed, "than be the
greatest actress in the world."

They were standing in one of the larger dressing rooms while Anne
endeavored to wipe the powder and rouge from her face with a pocket
handkerchief.

A tall figure darkened the doorway, and in the glass Anne saw the
reflection of her father's face. Without a word, she ran to the open
window and jumped out on the fire escape. The others followed nimbly
after her. Mr. Pierson turned and rushed down the passage to the side
entrance.

"Hurry, Anne!" called David. "He will meet you at the bottom if you
don't."

They climbed quickly down the ladder, almost treading on each other's
fingers in their haste, and in another moment they were running down an
alleyway.

"Another narrow escape," cried Anne, when they were out of danger. "How
shall I ever thank you, dear friends?"

"You have already discharged the debt, Anne, by letting us see you act,"
answered Grace.

"By the way, Grace," commanded David, "own up now. It was you, wasn't
it, who started the fire panic?"

"I told you I wouldn't tell," answered Grace, "and I never shall."

"Anne, did she say anything about it in her note?" asked Nora.

"No," said Anne mysteriously, "she never mentioned the word 'fire' at
all."

"I feel certain it was you who called 'fire,' Grace," said Jessica.

"I'll never, never tell," cried Grace teasingly; "so you'll never, never
know."

She turned in at her own gate and to this day the mystery is still
unsolved.




CHAPTER XI

MRS. GRAY'S ADOPTED DAUGHTERS


After Mrs. Gray's luncheon party in honor of Grace and her three friends
a tiny little idea had implanted itself in her mind. As the weeks rolled
on, and Christmas holidays approached, it grew and spread into a real
plan which occupied her thoughts a considerable part of every day.

As a secretary Anne had turned out admirably. The only drawback was that
Mrs. Gray could not see enough of her. The lonesome old lady almost
lived on Anne's semi-weekly visits, but the girl was too busy to give
any more of her time to reading aloud or driving with her benefactor.

Finally Mrs. Gray took a bold step. She invited the four girls to meet
at another Sunday luncheon, and announced her intentions from the head
of the table.

"My dear children," she said, "you are aware that I am a very old
woman."

"We are not aware of anything of the sort, Mrs. Gray," interrupted
Grace.

"Nevertheless I am," pursued Mrs. Gray. "A very old, lonesome person
with few pleasures. I have decided, therefore, to do an exceedingly
selfish thing, and give myself a real treat."

"You deserve it if anyone in the world does, Mrs. Gray," put in Jessica.
"You who are always giving other people treats."

"Wait until you hear the plan, child, before you pass judgment,"
answered Mrs. Gray. "It's been too many years to count since I have had
a really, jolly Christmas," she continued. "I have just sat here in this
quiet old house, and let the holidays roll over me without even noticing
them."

"Now, Mrs. Gray," exclaimed Grace, "the poor people in Oakdale would not
agree with you on that point. Only last Christmas I saw your carriage
stopping in front of the Flower Mission, and it was simply bursting with
presents."

"Yes, yes, my dear. It is the easiest thing in the world to give
presents and not so much pleasure after all. What I want is some actual
fun, good Christmas cheer and plenty of young people. But I shall have
to be selfish if I'm to get it all, because it will mean that I'm to rob
mothers and fathers for a whole week of their children. Mr. and Mrs.
Harlowe will have to learn to do without you, Grace, for seven days and
nights. Your father, Jessica, must keep his own house. Nora, your
brothers and sister must not expect to see you at all while you belong
to me. As for my precious Anne, here, I should just like to steal her
away altogether from her mother. In fact, my dears, I am going to adopt
you for a whole week during the holidays and then--such larks!"

And the charming old lady looked so gay and pretty that the girls all
laughed joyously.

"Do you mean that you really want us to make you a visit, Mrs. Gray?"

"I do indeed. That is the exceedingly selfish wish I have been
entertaining for the last six weeks. I not only want it, but I have
arranged for it already. I have made secret calls, my dears, and mothers
and fathers, brothers and sisters are all most agreeable. You are to
come to me a week before Christmas and must settle yourselves exactly as
if you were my own children. I mean to punish any homesick girl severely
by giving her an overdose of chocolate drops. Families may be visited
once a day, if necessary, though I shall frown down upon too frequent
absences. But, young ladies, before we get any further, tell me what you
think of the plan?"

The girls were almost speechless with amazement and pleasure. To visit
Mrs. Gray's beautiful home and live in a whirl of parties and funmaking
such as would be sure to follow was more than any of them had ever
dreamed of.

"It's perfectly delightful, Mrs. Gray!" they cried almost in one breath.

"And we shall give the Christmas party together, my four daughters and
I, and we'll do exactly as we choose and invite whom we please."

"Oh, oh!" exclaimed the four young girls. "Won't it be fun?"

"It will for me," said the little old lady. "And I need to have a good
time. I am getting old before my time for lack of amusement. And now, my
lady-birds, who else shall we invite to the house party?"

"Who else?" said Grace, somewhat crestfallen; for four intimate girl
chums are invariably jealous of admitting other girls to the charmed
circle.

"Do you mean what other girls, Mrs. Gray?" asked Jessica.

"No, no, child; I mean what other boys, of course. Do you think I want
any more than my four nice freshmen to amuse me? But I don't think this
party would be complete without four fine fellows to look after us. Who
are the four nicest boys you know?"

"David," exclaimed all four voices in unison.

Mrs. Gray laughed.

"There seems to be no difference of opinion on that score," she replied;
"but is David the only boy in Oakdale?"

"He's the nicest one," said Anne, who could never forget how kind David
had been to her when his sister was her bitter enemy.

"Reddy Brooks is nice, too," said Nora. "He threw apples at some tramps
once, and saved us from being robbed."

"Very good," said Mrs. Gray. "Reddy Brooks shall certainly be invited to
the house party. I admire courage above all things."

"Then there's 'Hippopotamus' Wingate," said Jessica.

"Who?" demanded Mrs. Gray.

"His name is really 'Theophilus', but the boys have always called him
'Hippopotamus,' and now the name sticks to him and everybody forgets he
has any other."

"Are you agreed on Hippopotamus, my adopted daughters?" demanded Mrs.
Gray.

It was voted by acclamation, that Hippopotamus was agreeable to the
company.

"And now, I have a fourth to propose," announced Mrs. Gray. "I think I
should like to import my great-nephew, Tom Gray, from New York. He is a
little older than these boys, perhaps. Nineteen is his age, I think, and
I haven't seen him since he was a child; but he's obliged to be nice
because he bears the name of one beloved by all who knew him."

"Whose name, Mrs. Gray?" asked Nora.

"That of my husband," said the old lady, softly. "The nicest Tom Gray
this world has ever known." And she looked at a portrait over the
sideboard of a very handsome young man dressed in the uniform of an Army
officer.

"He loved his country, my dears, and fought for it nobly. He was a
soldier and a gentleman," went on the old lady proudly, "and I am sorry
he left no son to follow in his footsteps. He was a great hunter and
traveler, too. I used to tell him if he had not loved his family so
dearly, he would certainly have been a gypsy. He liked camping and
tramping, and used to wander off in Upton Woods for hours at a time. He
knew the names of all the trees and birds and animals that exist, I
believe. But he loved his home, too, and no woods had the power to draw
him away from it for long. I used to tell him he had brought a piece of
the forest and put it in our front yard, for he planted all those
beautiful trees you now see growing on my lawn, which my old gardener,
who has been with me since I was first married, cherishes as he would
his own children."

"And is young Tom Gray like him, Mrs. Gray?" interposed Grace.

"I hope so, my dear," sighed the old lady. "If he has inherited the
beautiful traits of his uncle, his wholesome tastes for the outdoors and
nature, he can't help being a fine fellow. But I have not seen my nephew
since he was a child. He has been living here and there all these years,
sometimes in America and sometimes in England. His mother and father are
both dead, and he has been brought up by his mother's unmarried sisters,
who are half English themselves. But he must be a nice boy, even if he
has only one drop of his uncle's blood in his veins."

The girls sighed and said nothing. It was touching and beautiful to see
the old lady's loyalty and devotion after all these years of loneliness;
for her husband had been dead since she was a young woman. Still Mrs.
Gray never brooded. She was always cheerful and happy in doing
kindnesses for other people.

"If ever I marry," sentimental Jessica was thinking, "I hope it will be
somebody like Mrs. Gray's husband."

"I should like to have a brother like Tom Gray," observed Grace aloud.

"Well," said Mrs. Gray, "we shall have to wait and see what the new Tom
Gray is like. He may be utterly unlike _my_ Tom Gray."

And the old lady sighed.

"We shall all have to get new party dresses," exclaimed Nora to change
the subject. "I have been wanting one for an age and now I have a good
excuse."

"Oh, yes," cried Grace enthusiastically. "Now, at last, I shall be able
to get the blue silk mother promised I could have if at any time there
was an occasion worthy of it."

"I'm going to ask papa to give me a lavender crepe for a Christmas
present," said Jessica.

"O Mrs. Gray," continued Nora, "we are going to have such fun Oakdale
can't hold us."

"I think we should have a surprise for Mrs. Gray," announced Grace. "She
is doing so much for us. O girls! I have an idea."

"What!" demanded the others breathlessly, including Mrs. Gray herself,
who was as full of curiosity as a young girl.

"No, no," cried Grace, "it wouldn't be a surprise if I gave it away. But
it's going to require a lot of work and planning to carry it out."

"Is it big or little?" asked the dainty old lady as eager as a child to
find out the secret.

"It's rather small," answered Grace.

"Fine or superfine?"

"Both," laughed Grace. "But you'll not know till Christmas night; so
stifle your curiosity."

"I suppose I must wait, but it's going to be very hard," replied Mrs.
Gray plaintively.

And so the party was arranged. Notes, written by Anne, were dispatched
to the four boys; plans were discussed for the week's amusements, and
the four girls finally started home in a state of great excitement to
look over their wardrobes and furbish up their party dresses.

Only Anne had looked somewhat dubious during the conversation. How could
she spend a week in a beautiful house, with parties every night and
company all the time, and nothing to wear but that hideous black silk?

"Anne," called Mrs. Gray, as the young girl was about to close the front
door and follow the others down the steps. "Wait a moment. I want to see
you." She led Anne into the big drawing room. "Do you know that I am
greatly in your debt, my child?" continued the old lady, as she drew
Anne down beside her on the sofa. "I don't think I could ever possibly
repay you for the good you have done me this autumn. But I am going to
try, nevertheless, by making you a Christmas present before Christmas
arrives. Now, when I was your age, I preferred clothes to other things.
I think all young girls do; or, if they don't they are most unnatural.
Therefore, child, I have decided to pay off some of my indebtedness to
you by getting my dressmaker to make you some dresses, if it is
agreeable to you. Why, what is this! My little girl crying?"

The tears were streaming down Anne's cheeks.

"You mustn't cry, my own child," sobbed Mrs. Gray. "For I always cry
when I see other people doing it, and it's very bad for my old eyes, you
know."

"You are so good to me!" said Anne. "It makes me cry because I'm so
happy."

"Well, well!" exclaimed Mrs. Gray, drying her eyes and beginning to
laugh. "What a couple of sillies we are, to be sure. Now go, Anne, to my
dressmaker, Mrs. Harvey, who has orders to make you four dresses, two
for evening and two for afternoon. Mrs. Harvey has good taste and will
help you select them. But perhaps you will like the ones she and I
looked at the other day. One of them I am sure you will admire. I chose
it specially because it will give color to your pale cheeks."

"What is it, Mrs. Gray?" asked Anne eagerly.

"It's pink crepe de Chine, my dear."

And Anne held her breath to keep from crying again.




CHAPTER XII

MIRIAM PLANS A REVENGE


For weeks Miriam Nesbit had felt a sullen resentment toward her brother,
David, because he persisted in being friends with at least two of the
girls in Oakdale High School whom she disliked most.

When he announced, one morning at breakfast, that he had been included
in Mrs. Gray's house party, his sister suddenly burst into tears of
passionate rage.

"Please don't cry, Miriam, old girl," said David, who was not of a
quarrelsome disposition. "I'm awfully sorry if I hurt you, but, you
know, Mrs. Gray was one of my earliest sweethearts."

Which was perfectly true. When David was a little boy he used to crawl
through the garden hedge and call on the charming old lady nearly every
day.

David had hoped that Miriam would laugh at this, but she stormed all the
more, while poor Mrs. Nesbit looked wretched.

"It isn't Mrs. Gray," sobbed Miriam. "But to think that my own brother
would associate with Grace Harlowe, who is always working against me,
and that common little Pierson girl whose sister takes in sewing!"

"Miriam, Miriam!" exclaimed Mrs. Nesbit, "I am shocked to hear you say
such things. Because the girl is poor she is not necessarily common.
Your grandfather was a poor man, too. He started his career as a
machinist. You would never have had the money and position you have now
if he had not become an inventor. Is it possible you would try to keep
some one else from rising in life, when your own family struggled with
poverty years ago?"

Miriam was silenced for a moment. She had seldom heard her mother speak
so forcibly; but Mrs. Nesbit had seen, with growing misgivings, the
innate snobbishness in her daughter's character, and for a long time she
had been looking for an opportunity like the one that now presented
itself.

David had risen during Miriam's contemptuous speech, and had turned very
white; which was always a signal that his slow wrath had been kindled at
last; but since he was a child he had had such admirable control of his
