Guatemotzin, calmly enduring the tortures of the red-hot gridiron and
resolutely refusing to gratify either his captors' lust for treasure or
desire for revenge by vouchsafing them a single fact or a single moan.

By Inca's side was Valverde, who had been assiduous in his endeavors to
make him a Christian.  The friar was ready to offer such grim
consolation as he could to the wretched Peruvian in whose death
sentence he had concurred.  Atahualpa had hitherto turned a deaf ear to
all his importunities, but at the last moment Valverde told him that if
he would consent to receive baptism, he should be strangled instead of
burnt to death.  Atahualpa asked Pizarro if this was true, and being
assured that it was, he abjured his religion to avoid the agonies of
fire, and was thereupon baptised under the name of Juan de Atahualpa.
The name John was given to him because this baptism _in extremis_ took
place on St. John the Baptist's day.  Rarely, if ever, has there been a
more ghastly profanation of the Holy Sacrament of Regeneration!

Before he was garroted, Atahualpa begged that his remains might be
preserved at Quito with those of his mother's people.  Then he turned
to Pizarro and {92} made a final request of that iron-hearted man, that
he would look after and care for the Inca's little children.  While he
was strangled and his body was being burnt, the terrible soldiery could
be heard muttering the magnificent words of the Apostolic Creed for the
redemption of the soul of the monarch.  Incidentally it may be noted
that a little later the Spaniards burnt old Chalcuchima, of whom they
had got possession by treacherous promises, at the stake.  He did not
embrace Christianity at the last moment, but died as he had lived, a
soldier and a Peruvian.

The character of Atahualpa may be learned from his career.  He was a
cruel, ruthless usurper, neither magnanimous in victory nor resolute in
defeat.  As I have said, it is impossible to admire him, but no one can
think of his fate and the treacheries of which he was a victim without
being touched by his miseries.  If he sowed the wind he reaped the
whirlwind, and bad as he was, his conquerors were worse.

Pizarro placed the diadem on Toparca, a youthful brother of the late
Inca.  When he was alone with his attendants, the boy tore the _llauta_
from his forehead, and trampled it under his foot, as no longer the
badge of anything but infamy and shame, and in two short months he
pined and died from the consciousness of his disgrace.  Whereupon
another Peruvian, Manco Capac, the legitimate heir of Huascar, appeared
before Pizarro, made good his claim, and on the entry of the conquerors
into Cuzco, was crowned Inca with all the ancient ceremonies.  He soon
realized that he was but a puppet in Pizarro's hands, however, and by
and by he, too, made a bold stroke for freedom.

The conquest of Peru was complete.  Charles V., dazzled by the report
of Hernando Pizarro, and the {93} substantial treasures placed before
him, created Pizarro a Marquis of the country, confirmed him in the
government of the country for two hundred and seventy leagues south of
the Santiago River and gave Almagro authority to conquer everything
beyond that limit.  Almagro was very much dissatisfied with his share,
but concluded, before he made any violent objections, to go to the
south and find an El Dorado for himself.

Meanwhile Pizarro, who was almost as much of a builder as Rameses the
Great, laid out the city of Lima and the Spaniards flocked into Peru
from Spain in thousands.  The natives were enslaved and the country
divided into great estates, and Almagro and his discontented started
for Chili.  Hernando Pizarro, who was appointed governor of Cuzco, held
young Manco in close confinement, and everything outwardly was as fine
and lovely as a summer day.  There was growing, however, a tremendous
uprising in which hitherto somnolent Fate was about to lay her belated
hands upon nearly all the actors of the great drama which had
heretofore been so successfully played.


VI. The Inca and the Peruvians Strike Vainly for Freedom

The city of Cuzco was, without doubt, the most superb capital on the
American continent.  Indeed, in many respects, it would have compared
favorably with, let us say, Paris in the sixteenth century, with its
narrow, crooked, unpaved filthy streets, its indifferent protections,
and its utterly inadequate water and sewer system.  The streets, which
were broad and level, crossed each other at regular intervals at right
angles.  They were smoothly paved with large, carefully joined {94}
flagstones.  The houses in the city were mainly built of stone.  The
palace of the Inca, which stood alone in the great square, was of
marble.  The temples and buildings for public assemblages, armories,
granaries, storehouses, _et cetera_, were of great size.  The stones
used in their erection were of such dimensions that the Spanish
marvelled at the engineering genius which could have quarried them and
put them in place, just as the people of to-day are amazed at Baalbec
and the pyramids.  Stone conduits ran down each street, bringing
delicious water to each doorway, and the city was traversed by two
mountain streams crossed by bridges cut by watergates.  That the cold,
clear water might be kept pure and sweet, the beds of the rivers like
those of the Euphrates at Babylon, had been paved.

The city was surrounded by walls and dominated by a great fortress
called Sacsahuaman, which stood upon a steep and rocky hill overlooking
the capital.  On the side toward the city the fortress was practically
impregnable on account of the precipitous slopes of the cliffs.  The
other side was defended by three stone walls laid out in zigzag shape,
with salient and reentrant angles (demi-lunes), like an old-fashioned
rail fence, with many doors, each closed by stone portcullis, in each
wall.  Within the walls was a citadel of three tall towers.  The whole
constituted a most formidable position.

While Francisco Pizarro was founding and laying out on a magnificent
scale and with lavish generosity the city of Lima, near the seaboard,
Hernando was made governor of Cuzco.  Hernando was, without doubt, the
most able and most admirable of the Pizarros, although his fame has
been obscured by that of his {95} elder brother.  He had been directed
by Charles V to treat the Inca and the people with kindness, and,
perhaps on that account, he had not exercised so rigorous a
surveillance over the movements of young Manco as his ordinary prudence
would have dictated.  At any rate, the bold and youthful emperor found
no difficulty in leaving his ancient capital.  He repaired immediately
to the Valley of Yucay, in the high mountains of the northeastward of
Cuzco.  There had been brewing a vast conspiracy against the Spaniards
for some time, and at the summons of the Inca, thither resorted the
great chiefs of the Peruvians with their retainers and dependents,
including their women and children.

The partisans of the two Inca half-brothers, who had not been slain,
made common cause with each other.  All internal differences were
forgotten in the presence of the common enemy.  They had much to
revenge.  Their treasures had been taken, their temples polluted, their
religion profaned, their monarchs slain, their women outraged and the
people forced into a degrading, exhausting slavery.  Strange is it to
recognize that human slavery was introduced into Peru by the Christians!

It is good to think that the manhood of the Peruvians was awakened at
last.  Manco, burning with fiery patriotic zeal, summoned his great
vassals and subjects to his standard.  "Death to the Spaniards!" were
the watchwords that resounded with fierce war-cries among the mountains
and hills.  With ancient ceremonies, drinking from a common cup, they
pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor to their
hereditary chief in defense of their altars and their fires, their
native land.

{96}

Early in 1536 a vast army swept down through the mountain passes and
made toward the ancient capital.  The three Pizarros, Hernando, Juan
and Gonzalo, put themselves at the head of their horsemen and sallied
out to meet them.  They killed numbers of Peruvians, but all their
valor could not check the resistless force of the patriotic army.  The
Spaniards were swept back into the city, glad to escape with their
lives before such overwhelming numbers; indeed, only a timely attack by
a detachment in the rear of the Peruvians saved them from destruction
then and there.  Cuzco was at once invested.  The Indians, with a
heroism which cannot be too greatly commended, endeavored to carry the
place by assault.[9]

They set fire to the thatched roofs of their own houses, devoting their
city to flames, like the Russians at Moscow, to compass the
annihilation of the detested invaders.  The wind favored them, and a
besom of flame swept over the devoted town until over one-half of it
was laid in ruins.  There were ninety Spanish horse in the city,
probably as many foot, and a thousand Indian auxiliaries, but they were
soldiers of the highest quality and led by three captains whose like
for daring and skill are not often seen.

No one ever questioned the courage or the military ability of the
Pizarros and certainly they exhibited both qualities in full measure
during the siege.  Of all the brothers, it is probable that Hernando
was the most daring cavalier as well as the most capable captain,
although in personal prowess his younger brothers were not a whit
behind him.  Indeed, Gonzalo was {97} reckoned as the best lance in the
New World.  Stifled by the smoke, scorched by the flames, parched with
heat, choked with thirst, exhausted with hunger, crazed from loss of
sleep, yet battling with the energy of despair against overwhelming
numbers of Indians, who, with a reckless disregard for life, hurled
themselves upon the sword-points, the Spaniards after several days of
the most terrific fighting, were forced into the square, which they
held against their enemy by dint of the most heroic and continuous
endeavors.

The Peruvians barricaded the streets with the debris of their ruined
houses and sharpened stakes, and prepared to press home for a final
attack.  Although the slaughter among the Indians had been fearful, the
odds against the Spaniards did not appear diminished, for it was
learned afterward that there were more than one hundred thousand
warriors engaged, and, with a host of followers and servants, the total
aggregated at least eighty thousand more.  And, indeed, the Spaniards
mourned the death of many a brave cavalier and stout man-at-arms.  In
all the fighting the young Inca, in full war-gear of gold and silver,
mounted on a captured horse, with a Spanish lance in his hand, had
played a hero's dauntless part.

At the commencement of the siege there had been a discussion as to
whether they should occupy the great fortress of Sacsahuaman, or not.
Juan Pizarro had dissuaded the Spanish from the attempt, for, he said:
"Our forces are too weak to hold both places.  The city is the most
important, and should it happen that we need the fortress we can take
it any time."  Without opposition the Indian High Priest had occupied
it with a large body of men.

It was evident, at last, that the Spaniards would {98} either have to
retreat from their town or seize the fortress, which, now that they had
been driven from the walls, commanded their position in the square.
Most of the cavaliers were for retreat.  There is no doubt that the
horse could certainly have cut their way through the ranks of the
besiegers, and have escaped, together with most of the foot as well.

Hernando was quite as persistent as his indomitable brother Francisco,
however, and he talked equally as well to the soldiers.  He made them a
stirring address which he closed by declaring that he had been sent
there to hold the town, and hold it he would if he had to hold it
alone; that he would rather die there in the square with the
consciousness that he had kept his trust than abandon the place.  Juan
and Gonzalo seconded his stirring appeal.  It was resolved that the
fortress should be taken.  Hernando proposed to lead the assault in
person, but Juan interposed with the remark that he had objected to its
seizure in the first instance, and to him rightfully belonged the
leadership of the forlorn hope to repair the error.  Hernando consented.

Juan and Gonzalo, with their commands and fifty of their best horse,
were detailed for the purpose.  By Hernando's instructions they cut
through the Indians and galloped headlong down the road in the
direction of Lima.  The Indians were deceived by the seeming dash of
the horsemen through the lines and, supposing them to be in retreat,
turned their attention to the Spaniards left in the square.  The
conflict which had been intermitted for a space began again with the
utmost fury.

In the midst of it, Juan Pizarro, who had galloped about a league from
the town and then made a long {99} detour, suddenly appeared at
Sacsahuaman.  The Spaniards immediately rushed to the assault.  This
diversion caused the Indians, who had been literally forcing the
Spaniards in the town up against the wall, and in the last ditch, as it
were, to give ground.  Thereupon the dauntless Hernando charged upon
them, drove them out of the square, and succeeded in establishing
communications with Juan and Gonzalo on the hill.  He directed Juan to
hold his position and make no attack, but Juan thought he saw an
opportunity to gain the fortress, and at vespers the Spaniards rushed
at the walls.

There were Indians not only within but without the walls, and the
fighting was soon of the most sanguinary description.  Juan Pizarro had
been wounded previously in a skirmish and on account of this wound was
unable to wear his morion.  Hernando had especially cautioned him to be
careful on this account; but the impetuous valor of the Pizarros was
not to be restrained by considerations of any personal safety, and Juan
was in the front rank of the storming party.  They had cut their way
through to the fort and were battling for entrance when a stone hurled
from the tower struck Juan in the head, knocking him senseless.  The
wound was of such a character that two weeks afterward he died of it in
great agony.  He was the first to pay the penalty.  History has
preserved little concerning him, but some chroniclers have found him
the highest-minded of the brothers--possibly because less is known
about him!  At any rate, he was a valiant soldier.

Gonzalo succeeded to the leadership, and although he and his men fought
heroically, they were at last forced back from the fortress in spite of
the fact that {100} they had gained the outer walls.  The fighting had
transferred itself from the city to the hills, which was a sad tactical
error on the part of the Peruvians, for they had force enough to
overwhelm Hernando and his men in the city, while they held Juan and
Gonzalo in play at Sacsahuaman, in which case all the Spaniards would
eventually have fallen into their hands.

As night fell Hernando left the city and came up to the hill.  The
Spaniards busied themselves in making scaling-ladders, and in the
morning, with the aid of the ladders, the assault was resumed with
desperate fury.  Wall after wall was carried, and finally the fighting
ranged around the citadel.  The Inca had sent five thousand of his best
men to reenforce the defenders, but the Spaniards succeeded in
preventing their entrance to the fort which was now in a sorry plight.
The ammunition--arrows, spears, stone, _et cetera_--of the garrison was
almost spent.  The Spanish attack was pressed as rigorously as at the
beginning.  The High Priest--priests have ever been among the first to
incite people to war, and among the first to abandon the field of
battle--fled with a great majority of his followers, and escaped by
subterranean passages from the citadel, leaving but a few defenders to
do or die.

First among them was a chief, whose name, unfortunately, has not been
preserved.  He was one of those, however, who had drunk of the cup and
pledged himself in the mountains of Yucay.  Driven from wall to wall
and from tower to tower, he and his followers made a heroic defense.
The Spanish chroniclers say that when this hero, whose exploits recall
the half-mythical legends of the early Roman Republic, when men were as
demi-gods, saw one of his men falter, he {101} stabbed him and threw
his body upon the Spaniards.  At last he stood alone upon the last
tower.  The assailants offered him quarter, which he disdained.
Shouting his war-cry of defiance, he dashed his sole remaining weapon
in the faces of the escaladers and then hurled himself bodily upon them
to die on their sword-points.  Let him be remembered as a soldier, a
patriot, and a gentleman.

The fortress was gained!  Dismayed by the fearful loss that they had
sustained, the Peruvians, who had fought so valiantly, if so
unsuccessfully, withdrew temporarily.  Hernando Pizarro was master of
the situation.  He employed the few days of respite given him in
gathering supplies and strengthening his position.  It was well that he
did so, for in a short time the Peruvians once more appeared around the
city, to which they laid a regular siege.

There was more sharp fighting, but nothing like the Homeric combats of
the first investment.  The Peruvians had risen all over the land.
Detached parties of Spaniards had been cut off without mercy.
Francisco Pizarro was besieged in Lima.  Messengers and ships were
despatched in every direction, craving assistance.  Francisco did not
know what had happened in Cuzco, and the brothers in that city began to
despair of their being extricated from their terrible predicament.
Help came to them from an unexpected source.

We left Almagro marching toward Chili.  His was no lovely promenade
through a pleasant, smiling, fertile, wealthy land.  He traversed vast
deserts under burning skies.  He climbed lofty mountains in freezing
cold and found nothing.  In despair, he turned back to Peru.  The
limits assigned to Pizarro were {102} not clear.  Almagro claimed that
the city of Cuzco was within his province, and determined to return and
take it.  On the way his little army, under the command of a very able
soldier named Orgonez, met and defeated a large army of Peruvians.
This, taken with the arrival of the harvest time, which must of
necessity be gathered if the people were not to starve, caused the
subsequent dissipation of the Peruvian army.  The Inca maintained a
fugitive court in the impregnable and secret fastnesses of the
mountains, but the Peruvians never gave any more trouble to the
Spaniards.  They had spent themselves in this one fierce but futile
blow.  I am glad for the sake of their manhood that at least they had
fought one great battle for their lands and liberties.

[Illustration: "He Threw His Sole Remaining Weapon in the Faces of the
Escaladers"]


VII. "The Men of Chili" and the Civil Wars

Almagro, assisted by treachery on the part of some of the Spaniards who
hated the Pizarros, made himself master of the city, and, breaking his
plighted word, seized Hernando and Gonzalo.

Meanwhile Francisco, the Marquis, had despatched a certain captain
named Alvarado with a force to relieve Cuzco.  Almagro marched out with
his army and defeated the superior force of Alvarado in the battle of
Abancay, in July, 1537, in which, through the generalship of Orgonez,
Alvarado's troops were captured with little or no loss in Almagro's
army.  Almagro had left Gonzalo Pizarro behind in Cuzco, but had taken
Hernando, heavily guarded, with him.  Orgonez had urged Almagro to put
both of them to death.  "Dead men," he pithily remarked, "need no
guards."  On the principle of "In for a penny, in for a pound," {103}
Almagro was already deep enough in the bad graces of Francisco Pizarro,
and he might as well be in deeper than he was, especially as the
