
I took the hint, and keeping "the beauty" at a respectful distance,
followed in his lordly wake for about twenty minutes, until the rapidly-
crowding streets told me I was in the City.  Then, uncertain how to
direct my steps, I quickened my pace and overtook him.

"Please can you tell me the way to Hawk Street?"

He took two or three good puffs out of his big pipe, and blew the smoke
gracefully out of the corners of his mouth, and, by way of variety, out
of his nose, and then said, in a condescending voice, "Yes, my man;
first to the left and second to the right."

He certainly was a very self-assured young man, and struck me as quite
grand in his manners.  I had positively to screw up my courage to ask
him, "I say, you are one of Mrs Nash's lodgers, aren't you?"

He stared at me, not quite sure what to make of me.

"Only," said I, by way of explanation, "I saw you there just now, and
Mrs Nash said I'd better follow you."

"Mrs Nash is a jolly sight too familiar.  So are you."

With which the stately youth marched on, his nose higher in the air than
ever.

I was not greatly reassured by this first introduction, but for the time
being I was too intent on reaching Merrett, Barnacle, and Company's in
good time to think of much beside.  Fortunately my fellow-lodger's
direction was correct, and in a few minutes I found myself standing on
familiar ground in Hawk Street.

When I entered the office the youth who rejoiced in the name of Crow was
the only representative of the firm present.  He was engaged in the
intellectual task of filling up the ink-pots out of a big stone jar, and
doing it very badly too, as the small puddles of ink on nearly every
desk testified.  He knew me at once, and greeted me with great alacrity.

"Hullo! young 'un, here you are.  Look sharp and fill up the rest of
these, do you hear? and mind you don't make any spills!"

I proceeded to obey, while Mr Crow, quite a grandee now that there was
some one in the office junior to himself, stood, with his legs apart,
before the fireplace and read the _Times_, giving an occasional glance
at my proceedings.

"Hold hard!" he cried, presently, in an excited manner, when, having
filled all the ink-pots along one of the desks, I was proceeding to
attack on the other side of the screen; "hold hard! you don't want to
fill up for the Imports, I say.  They can do that themselves!"

Of course I agreed with him in this, and was just about restoring the
jar to Mr Crow's custody, when Jack Smith entered the office.

"Hullo!  Jack," I cried, feeling quite an old hand; "here you are.
Isn't it fine?"

"Rather," said Jack, solemnly, returning my grasp.  "I _am_ glad."

"So am I.  I was in such a fright when--"

"Now then, you young 'un there," said Crow, looking up from his paper,
"don't go dawdling, I say.  Just stick fresh nibs in all the Export
pens, and look sharp about it, too."

"I'll help you, Fred," said Jack Smith, as I proceeded to obey.

"No, you won't!" said Crow; "we don't want you messing about in our
department.  You stick to your Imports."

It was evident Exports and Imports at Messrs. Merrett, Barnacle, and
Company's were not on absolutely brotherly terms.  Anyhow I had to stick
in the nibs unassisted.

Presently the other clerks began to drop in, among them Mr Doubleday,
who was very witty on the subject of my appointment, and told Wallop he
understood I was to be admitted into partnership next week, and would
then sign all the cheques.

"All right!" said Wallop; "I'll put off asking for a rise till next
week."

I was presumptuous enough to laugh at this, which greatly offended both
the magnates.  Doubleday ordered me to my desk instantly.

"Get on with your work, do you hear? and don't stand grinning there!"

"What had I better do?"  I inquired, mildly.

"Do?" said Mr Doubleday, proceeding to take up his pen and settle
himself to work; "I'll let you know what to-- Look here.  Crow," he
broke off, in a rage, pointing to one of the ink puddles which that hero
had made, "here's the same beastly mess again!  Every Monday it's the
same--ink all over the place!  Why on earth don't you keep your messes
to yourself?"

"That young 'un filled up to-day," said Crow, coolly pointing to me.

I was so astounded by this false charge that I could hardly speak.  At
last I retorted, "I didn't; you know I didn't!"

"Yes, you did!" said Crow.

"I didn't fill up that pot; it was done before I got here."

"Don't tell lies!" said Crow.

"I'm not telling lies!" cried I.

"Yes, you are!" said Crow.  "I'm ashamed of you!"

"Oh, it was you, was it?" demanded Mr Doubleday, turning to me; "then
just come and wipe it up.  Look sharp!"

I was disposed to resist this piece of injustice to the utmost, but
somehow the morning of my arrival it would hardly look well to figure in
a row.

"I didn't do it," said I, in an agitated voice, "but I'll wipe it up."

"Look sharp about it, then!" said Doubleday, grinning at Wallop.

It is one thing to offer to wipe up an ink puddle, and quite another to
do it.

"Now then!" said Doubleday, as I stood doubtfully in front of the scene
of operation.

"I don't know," I faltered,--"I, that is--I haven't got anything I can
do it with."

"What! not got a handkerchief!" exclaimed the head clerk, in apparent
consternation.

"Yes; but I can't do it with that.  Wouldn't some blotting--"

"Blotting-paper!--the firm's blotting-paper to wipe up his messes!  What
do you think of that, all of you?  Come, out with your handkerchief!"

Things looked threatening.  I saw it was no use resisting.  Even the
Imports were standing on their stools and looking over the screen.  So I
took out my handkerchief and, with a groan, plunged it into the spilt
ink.

Doubleday and the clerks evidently appreciated this act of devotion, and
encouraged me with considerable laughter.  My handkerchief and my hand
were soon both the colour of the fluid they were wiping up, and my frame
of mind was nearly as black.

"Now then," said Doubleday, "aren't you nearly done?  See if there's any
gone down the crack there.  Is there?"

I stooped down to inspect the crack in question, and as I did so Mr
Doubleday adroitly slipped his pen under my soaking handkerchief, and,
by a sudden jerk, lifted it right into my face.

At the same moment the door opened and Mr Barnacle entered!  He looked
round for a moment sharply, and then, passing on to the inner-room,
said, "Doubleday, bring the two new office-boys into my room."

If I had heard just the sentence of death pronounced on me I could
hardly have been more horrified.  My face and hand were like the face
and hand of a negro, my collar and shirt were spotted and smeared all
over with ink, and even my light hair was decorated with black patches.
And in this guise I was to make my first appearance before my masters!
Jack Smith's expression of amazement and horror as he caught sight of me
only intensified my own distress, and Doubleday's stern "Now you're in
for it!" sounded hopelessly prophetic.

I could do nothing.  To wipe my face with my clean hand, with the tail
of my jacket, with my shirt-sleeve, could do no good.  No; I was in for
it and must meet my doom!

But I determined to make one expiring effort to escape it.

"Please, sir," I cried, as we came to the door and before we entered,
"I'm very sorry, but my face is all over ink.  May I wash it before I
come in?"

I was vaguely conscious of the titters of the clerks behind me, of the
angry grip of Doubleday on one side of me, and of Smith's solemn and
horrified face on the other, and the next moment I was standing with my
friend in front of Mr Barnacle's awful desk.

He regarded me sternly for a moment or two, during which I suffered
indescribable anguish of mind.

"What is the meaning of this?" said he.  "I don't understand it."

"Oh, please, sir," cried I, almost beseechingly, "I'm so sorry.  I was
wiping up some ink, and got some on my face.  I couldn't help."

Mr Barnacle looked angry and impatient.

"This is no place for nonsense," said he.

"Really I couldn't help," I pleaded.

There must have been some traces of earnestness visible, I fancy, on my
inky face, for I saw Mr Barnacle look at me curiously as I spoke, while
there was the faintest perceptible twitch at the corners of his lips.

"Go and wash at once," he said, sternly.

I fled from his presence as if I had been a leper, and amid the
merriment of my fellow-clerks sought the sink at the other end of the
office and washed there as I had never washed before.

After much exertion, my countenance resumed something like its natural
complexion, and the white skin faintly dawned once more on my fingers.
My collar and shirt-front were beyond cleaning, but at the end of my
ablutions I was, at any rate, rather more presentable than I had been.

Then I returned refreshed in body and mind to Mr Barnacle, whom I found
explaining to Smith his duties in the Import Department.  He briefly
recapitulated the lecture for my benefit, and then dismissed us both
under the charge of Mr Doubleday to our duties, and by the time one
o'clock was reached that day, and I was informed I might go out for
twenty minutes for my dinner, I was quite settled down as junior clerk
in the Export Department of Merrett, Barnacle, and Company.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

HOW MY FRIEND SMITH AND I KNOCKED ABOUT A BIT IN OUR NEW QUARTERS.

Smith and I had a good deal more than dinner to discuss that morning as
we rested for twenty minutes from our office labours.

He was very much in earnest about his new work, I could see; and I felt,
as I listened to him, that my own aspirations for success were not
nearly as deep-seated as his.  He didn't brag, or build absurd castles
in the air; but he made no secret of the fact that now he was once in
the business he meant to get on, and expected pretty confidently that he
would do so.

I wished I could feel half as sure of myself.  At any rate, I was
encouraged by Jack Smith's enthusiasm, and returned at the end of my
twenty minutes to my desk with every intention of distinguishing myself
at my work.

But somehow everything was so novel, and I was so curiously disposed,
that I could not prevent my thoughts wandering a good deal, or listening
to the constant running fire of small talk that was going on among my
fellow-clerks.  And this was all the less to be wondered at, since I
myself was a prominent topic of conversation.

Mr Doubleday was a most curious mixture of humour, pomposity, and
business, which made it very hard to know how exactly to take him.  If I
dared to laugh at a joke, he fired up, and ordered me angrily to get on
with my work.  And if I did become engrossed in the figures and entries
before me, he was sure to trip me up with some act or speech of
pleasantry.

"Why don't you stick a nib on the end of your nose and write with it?"
he inquired, as I was poring over an account-book in front of me, trying
to make out the rather minute hieroglyphics contained therein.

I withdrew my nose, blushingly, to a more moderate distance, a motion
which appeared greatly to entertain my fellow-clerks, whose amusement
only added to my confusion.

"Hullo!  I say," said Doubleday, "no blushing allowed here, is there,
Wallop?"

"Rather not.  No one ever saw _you_ blush," replied Mr Wallop.

This turned the laugh against Doubleday, and I, despite my bashfulness,
was indiscreet enough to join in it.

Mr Doubleday was greatly incensed.

"Get on with your work, do you hear? you young cad!" he cried.  "Do you
suppose we pay you eight bob a week to sit there and grin?  How many
accounts have you checked, I'd like to know?"

"Six," I said, nervously, quite uneasy at Mr Doubleday's sudden
seriousness.

"Six in two hours--that's three an hour."

"Quite right; not bad for Dubbs, that, is it, Crow?" put in Wallop.

"No.  He's reckoned it up right this time."

"I wish _you'd_ reckon it up right now and then," retorted Doubleday.
"How about the change out of those two handkerchiefs?"

"There is no change," said Crow, sulkily; "they were sixpence each."

"What's the use of saying that, when they are stuck up fourpence-
halfpenny each in the window, you young thief?"

"You can get them yourself, then," replied the injured Crow.  "I'll go
no more jobs for you--there!  I'm not the junior now, and I'm hanged if
I'll put up with it."

"You'll probably be hanged, whether you put up with it or not," was Mr
Doubleday's retort, who, apparently desirous to change the conversation,
suddenly rounded on me, as I was looking up and listening to the
edifying dialogue.

"Now then, young Batchelor, dawdling again.  Upon my word I'll speak to
Mr Barnacle about you.  Mind, I mean what I say."

"You'd better look-out, young turnip-top, I can tell you," growled Crow;
"when Dubbs means what he says, it's no joke, I can tell you."

On the whole my first afternoon's work at Merrett, Barnacle, and
Company's was somewhat distracting, and by the time half-past six
arrived I felt I had not accomplished quite as much as I had intended.

My first care on rejoining Jack was to sound him as to the possibility
of his coming to lodge at Mrs Nash's.  To my delight he anticipated me
by inquiring, "Have you got any place to lodge, Fred?"

"Yes," said I, "and I only wish you'd come there too, Jack."

"Whereabouts is it?" he asked.

"Mrs Nash's, at Beadle Square.  But you will come, won't you?"

"Perhaps there's not room."

"Oh yes," said I, taking upon myself to assert what I did not know,
"there is.  Come along, old man, it'll make all the difference if we get
together."

"How much is it?" asked Jack, doubtfully.

"Come along, and we'll ask," said I, dragging him along.

He came, and together we bearded Mrs Nash in her den.

"I say, Mrs Nash," said I, "my friend's coming to lodge here, please."

Mrs Nash eyed Jack suspiciously, and then said abruptly, "No room."

"Oh, bother!  Can't he sleep with me, then?"  I inquired.

"No," replied she, "he can't.  It's not allowed."

"When will there be room?"  Jack asked.

"Next week, may be."

"Oh, how jolly!"  I exclaimed.  "Then you will come, Jack, won't you?"

"How much is it?" inquired Jack of Mrs Nash.

"Three-and-six a week--in advance," said Mrs Nash; "no tick."

Jack pulled rather a long face.

"It'll be a tight fit," said he to me, "out of eight shillings a week."

"Oh, I can pay part," said I, too delighted at the prospect of Jack's
company to admit of any obstacle.  "My uncle pays my lodging, you know,
so I have the eight shillings all to myself."

Jack, however, scouted the idea.  After a little more parleying, to my
unspeakable joy he told Mrs Nash he would come next week.  I begged
hard for him to be allowed to share my quarters in the meanwhile.  The
landlady was inexorable, so we had to submit.

Jack took me a long stroll through the London streets that evening,
entertaining me with a description of his life as a grocer's shop-boy,
now happily at an end.  I forbore to ask him any questions on the
mysterious subject of his home, and he of course never referred to it.
Our walk ended again at Beadle Square, where we parted for the night; he
to return to some poor lodging in a distant part of the town, I to take
part in the nine o'clock supper at Mrs Nash's.

I was rather nervous as I approached the parlour where were congregated
my fellow-lodgers, and heard the sound of their noisy voices and
laughter.  I half repented that I had committed myself to sup on the
premises; it would have been so much less embarrassing to slip in just
at ten o'clock and go straight to bed.  However, I was in for it now.

I opened the door and entered the room.  The parlour was full of boys--
two dozen or more--of all ages, and engaged in all sorts of occupations.
Some lounged lazily in front of the fireplace, some were indulging in
rough horse-play in the corners, some were reading novels, some were
writing, some were talking, some were laughing.

As I entered, however, everybody suddenly ceased his occupation and
stared at me--everybody, that is, except the small group who were
skirmishing in the corner nearest the door.  These, with the most
laudable presence of mind, took in my situation at once, and next moment
I was one of the skirmishing party and having rather a lively time of
it.

By this time the rest of the company had taken in the state of affairs.

"Pass him on there," some one called, and I was accordingly passed on in
rather a lively way to another party of skirmishers, who in turn, after
buffeting me up and down a bit among themselves, passed me on to another
group, and so on, till, with back and limbs and head all rather the
worse for wear, I had performed the tour of the room and found myself
finally pitched head-first into the embrace of the lordly youth who that
morning had condescended to point out to me the way to Hawk Street.

"Look here," cried he, kicking out somewhat savagely at my shins; "don't
you be so jolly familiar, do you hear?  Look what you have done to my
shirt-front!"

"I beg your pardon," said I, rubbing my poor shin.  "I couldn't help--"

"Yes, you could, you young cad!" cried he, kicking again.

"No, I couldn't, and--oh!  I say, stop kicking, please!"

By this time most of the company had gathered round, some calling on the
youth to "let me have it" others encouraging me "to go in and win."  I
felt very greatly tempted, especially after the receipt of the third
kick, to act on the suggestion given, and might have done so, had not
Mrs Nash at that moment entered the room with the supper.

This interruption created a new diversion.

"I say, Mrs Nash," cried my adversary, "who's this kid?  We don't want
him here."

"You'll have to have him whether you want him or not," replied Mrs
Nash, in her usual gracious way.  "He's a lodger here."

"What do you want to shove another lodger in for when you know we're
chock-full?" demanded the youth.

"You hold your tongue, Mr Jackanapes," replied Mrs Nash.

"I say, don't you be so familiar," cried the young gentleman, greatly
offended.  "My name's Horncastle, not Jackanapes."

"Very well, then, Mr Horncastle, you'd better hold your tongue."

"I sha'n't hold my tongue.  You've got a spite against us, that's what
it is, or you wouldn't go crowding us out with kids like this."

"Crowding you out!" retorted Mrs Nash, scornfully.  "You've got another
kid coming next week, my beauty, so you'd better not talk of crowding
out till then."

"What! another besides this young cad?  Oh, that's too much!  We won't
stand it.  That's all about that," cried Mr Horncastle, in tones of
utter disgust.

"Won't you?  Then you can cook your own sausages for supper, my man, and
shell out what you owe on the nail.  We'll see who won't stand it or
not!"

This threat had the desired effect: Horncastle knuckled down as if by
magic.

"Oh, don't be a brute, Mrs Nash," he said, in tones of agitation.  "Do
us those sausages, there's a good body, and you can cram in half a dozen
kids if you like."

And so the question of my admission was settled satisfactorily, if not
flatteringly, for me, and the fellows, the novelty of my appearance
being once over, took no more notice of me than of any of the rest of
their fellow-lodgers.

Mrs Nash's establishment appeared to be one to which fond parents in
the country, whose darlings were about to launch out on the sea of life
in London, were invited to confide their sons, under the promise of a
comfortable, respectable, and economical home.

As to the comfortable, we who were best able to judge did not admit the
description a true one.  As to the respectable, that was a matter of
opinion.  If each of us had been the only lodger there, the place would
have been undoubtedly respectable, but with all the rest there, we each
of us considered the society rather "mixed."  As to the economical, we
were all agreed on that point.  The place was fearfully and wonderfully
economical!

By the time my first week in London was ended I had shaken down fairly
well, both to my work at Merrett, Barnacle, and Company's and my
quarters at Mrs Nash's.  I still found the fellowship of Messrs.
Doubleday and Wallop and Crow rather distracting, and more than once
envied Jack his berth among the Imports where, as a rule, silence
reigned supreme.  And yet I could hardly bring myself to dislike my
fellow-clerks, who, all of them, as far as I had found out, were good-
natured, and certainly very entertaining, and who, when they perceived
that I was amused by their proceedings, relaxed a good deal in their
attitude to me.

I gradually came to be on talking, if not on chaffing terms with several
of the fellows, and found myself, I never exactly knew how, installed in
the position, lately vacated by Mr Crow, of messenger and confidential
commission agent to the company.  Most of my twenty minutes in the
middle of the day was thus taken up in buying articles of comfort or
decoration for one and another of my seniors, or else changing books at
the library, taking messages to other clerks in other offices, and
otherwise laying myself out for the general good--a self-denial which
brought me more kicks than halfpence, but which, all the same, served to
establish my footing as a regular member of the Export fraternity at
Merrett, Barnacle, and Company's.

Smith, I discovered, was let in for something of the same work with the
Imports, but to a much smaller extent.  Indeed, he had so much less of
it than me that I one day questioned him on the subject.

"I say, Jack, it seems to me the Exports want a jolly lot more things
done for them than the Imports.  To-day I've got to go to Mudie's to
change a book, then I've to get a scarf-pin mended for Crow, and buy a
pair of flannel drawers for Wallop, and go and offer two shillings for a
five-shilling mariner's compass at the stores for Doubleday.  I shall
have to get my grub when I can to-day, I expect."

"Oh!" said Jack, "the Imports wanted to let me in for that sort of
thing, but I didn't see the use of it, and told them so."

"What did they say?" asked I, astonished at his boldness.

"They didn't like it, of course," said Jack; "but I don't see why they
shouldn't do their own jobs."

"Well," said I, "I wouldn't mind if I could stick out too, but somehow
I'm in for it now."

And off I started on my round of errands.

I was, however, greatly impressed with Jack's cool treatment of the
whole affair.  I would as soon have dreamed of refusing to go an errand
for Doubleday or Wallop as of flying.  The office, I knew full well,
would soon be made pretty hot for me if I did, and it was a marvel how
Jack apparently got over the difficulty so easily.  He was one of those
fellows, you know, who seem to care absolutely nothing about what others
think of them.  It's all one if fellows hate them or love them, and as
for being influenced by any desire to cultivate the good graces of one's
neighbours, you might as well expect a bear to cultivate the good graces
of a porpoise.

I soon began to suspect that Jack was not altogether comfortable in his
new quarters, although he never hinted to the contrary.  There were
vague rumours which came across the partition of uncomfortableness which
silently went on, and in which Jack took a prominent part; and an event
which happened just a week after our arrival made the thing certain.

One morning, Mr Barnacle, apparently in a great hurry, looked in at the
Import door and called out, "Smith, make me three copies of Elmore's
last consignment, at once, on foreign paper."

"Yes, sir," said Jack.

After a pause, I heard him say, "Will you lend me that entry-book,
please, Harris, to make the copies from?"

"No," curtly replied Harris; "I'm using it."

"But Mr Barnacle says he must have it at once."

"I can't help that," said Harris.

"That's right, Harris!" said another voice; "pay him out for his
beastly, selfish ill-nature!"

"Will you lend me the book, Harris?" again demanded Jack, in tones which
I could tell were fast losing their calmness.

"No, I won't! and what's more, shut up your row!" replied Harris.

There was a pause, then I heard Jack get off his stool and march boldly
to the door.  He came out and passed solemnly through our office to the
door of Mr Barnacle's room, which he entered.

Next moment Mr Barnacle came out, very red in the face, and demanded,
in a loud voice, "Who is it using the entry-book?  Didn't you hear me
say the copies were to be made at once, sir?  Let Smith have the book."

"It's on his desk," replied Harris, meekly.  "I was only ruling off the
last line, to show where the account ended."

"Copy it at once," said Mr Barnacle, sharply; "the papers have to be
down before twelve, and here's five minutes wasted already."
