chance in Arithmetic before going on to the higher branches, because, as
you are aware, this is a most vital and important subject.  Write down,
please: A and B each inherited thirty thousand pounds.  A invested his
capital in gold-mine shares to bring in eighteen per cent, interest.  B
put his money into the Post Office Savings Bank, and received two and a
half per cent.  State to three places in decimals the respective wealth
of each at the expiration of twenty-seven years!"

"Er--with what deduction for current expenses?" queried Irene, with an
air.  She had been snubbed once, but was not in the least subdued.
"What were their current expenses?"

"There were none!"

"Thomasina, what bosh!  There _must_ have been.  They couldn't live on
nothing."

"Well, they did, then.  Since you are so particular, I may tell you that
they were in prison!  They had their wants supplied by their native
land."

"I'm not going to do sums about convicts!  My mother wouldn't like it,"
said Dorothy, shutting up her book with a bang.  She leaned forward, and
whispered in Rhoda's ear, "Don't bother; it's only another joke.  What's
the use of worrying for nothing?"

"It's practice," said Rhoda, and away went her pencil, scribbling,
calculating, piling up row upon row of figures.  To her joy the answer
came out the same as Irene's, which surely must prove it right; yet, as
Dorothy had prophesied, Tom was once more sweeping in denunciation,
"Wrong!  Wrong!  All wrong!  The gold-mine failed, and left A a pauper,
while B lived happily ever after.  You are old enough to know that gold-
mines that pay eighteen per cent, invariably _do_ fail and ruin their
shareholders; or if you don't, you may be thankful to me for telling
you.  I must say, young ladies, you are coming exceedingly poorly
through my test.  I cannot congratulate you on your insight.  I doubt
whether it is any use examining you any further."

"Oh, yes, let us have the higher branches, Tom!  Do let us have the
higher branches!  Who knows?  Perhaps we may distinguish ourselves at
last.  Give us another chance!" pleaded the girls, mockingly; and, thus
challenged, Tom could not but consent.  She tackled Zoology, and giving
the three divisions of Plantigrada, Pinnigrada, and Digitigrada, added a
list of animals to be classified accordingly.  When it is said that the
list included such widely diverging creatures as "A camel-leopard, a
duck-billed platypus, Thomasina Bolderston, and Spring-heeled Jack," it
can be imagined with what zest the pupils began their replies.

Tom professed to be mortified beyond endurance to find her fairy tread
unanimously classed under the first heading, and begged the Blues to
take notice that if any girl pined to call her "splay-footed" to her
face she might do so, and take the consequences!  No one accepted the
challenge, however; so she proceeded to Latin, and, with much jingling
of keys, gave out a sentence for translation:--

"Aequam memento rebus in arduis servare mentem."  The girls smiled at
this, confident of their powers.  The students at Hurst prided
themselves on their Latin, and could have stood a much severer test
without wavering.  The seniors did not trouble to write their answers,
but waited complacently until the time came when they should have an
opportunity of airing their proficiency.  It never came, however, for
Tom chose to disappoint expectations by reading aloud her own
translation from her position in front of the fire.

"Memento--remember; mentem--and mind; servare--to hold up; aequam--your
mare; in rebus arduis--going up hill.  That translation, young ladies,
was given by an undergraduate in the University of Oxford.  He
afterwards rowed stroke in the 'Varsity boat, and was the best billiard
player of his year, so it would ill become us to dispute his
conclusions.  You will observe the valuable moral lessons inculcated in
the words, and, I trust, take them to heart--`Remember and mind--'"

A laugh sounded from the direction of the door, and there stood Miss
Everett, looking round with mischievous eyes.  Rhoda noted with relief
that she looked brighter than for days past, as if some good news had
arrived from the home about which she was so anxious.

"This sounds improving," she cried, merrily.  "Thomasina holding a Latin
class!  I am glad you have found such an exemplary way of passing the
afternoon.  I am afraid you must stop, however, as the gong will ring in
five minutes, and meantime I must break up the class.  I want,"--her eye
roved enquiringly round the room--"I want Rhoda!"

"Certainly, Miss Everett.  Anything to oblige you.  Rhoda, my love, you
have my permission to retire," drawled Thomasina, wagging her head in
languid assent, and Rhoda left the room in no little wonder as to the
reason of the summons.

Arrived in the corridor, Miss Everett laid both hands on the girl's
shoulders, and asked a quick, laughing question:--

"What about that hamper?"

"Hamper?" echoed Rhoda.  "Hamper?"  Her air of bewilderment was so
unaffectedly genuine that the other's expression became in turn doubtful
and uncertain.

"Yes, yes, the hamper!  The hamper of good things that has just arrived
for my brother.  I thought you--"

"I know nothing about it; truly I don't!  I wish I did, but--"

"But, my dear girl, it came from your home.  There was a game label upon
it, with your father's name in print--`From Henry Chester, Erley Chase.'
There cannot be two Henry Chesters living at houses of the same name."

"Ah!" exclaimed Rhoda, and her face lit up with pleasure.  "It's mother!
Of course it's mother!  It's just the sort of thing mother would do.  I
told her that your brother had been ill, and that you were anxious about
him, and so she set to work to see how she could help.  That's just like
mother, she's the kindest dear!  I believe she sits down in her armchair
after breakfast every single morning, and plans out how many kind things
she can do during the day."

"Bless her heart!" cried Miss Everett devoutly.  "Well, Rhoda, she
succeeded this time.  My mother has written me all about it.  It was a
dull, wet day, and Lionel seemed depressed, and there was nothing nice
in the house, and nothing nice to be bought in the little village shops,
and she was just wondering, wondering how in the world she could cheer
him, and manufacture a tempting lunch out of hopeless materials, when
tap-tap-tap came the carrier's man at the door.  Then in came the
hamper, and Lionel insisted upon opening it himself, and was so
interested and excited!  There were all sorts of good things in it--
game, and grapes, and lovely, lovely hot-house flowers filling up the
chinks.  They were all so happy!  It was such a piece of cheer arriving
in that unexpected fashion, and mother says the house is fragrant with
the scent of the flowers.  Lionel arranged them himself.  It kept him
quite happy and occupied.  How can I thank you, dear?"

"Don't thank me.  It was not my doing.  It's mother."

"But how did your mother know where we lived?  How did she know who we
were?"

"Well!"  Rhoda smiled and flushed.  "Naturally I tell her the news.  I
suppose I must have mentioned that your father was Vicar of Stourley.  I
don't remember; but then I've so often written about you, and she would
naturally be glad to do anything she could, for she knows you have been
kind to me, and that I'm very--fond of you!"

Miss Everett bent down quickly, and kissed her on the cheek.

"And my people knew who Mr Chester was because I've written of you, and
they know that you have been kind to _me_, and that I'm fond of you,
too.  Oh Rhoda, you don't know how lonely it feels to be a teacher
sometimes, or how grateful we are to anyone who treats us as human
beings, and not as machines.  You don't know how you have cheered me
many a time."

"But--but--I've been tiresome, and stupid, and rebellious.  I've given
you lots of trouble--"

"Perhaps, but you have been affectionate too, and seemed to like me a
little bit, in spite of my lectures; and if it had not been for your
kind words the hamper would never have come, so I insist upon thanking
you as well as your mother.  Many, many thanks, dear!  I shall always
re--" She stopped short suddenly, her attention arrested by the scraping
of chairs within the parlour, and concluded in a very different tone,
"The girls are coming!  For pity's sake don't let Tom find us
sentimentalising here!  Fly, Rhoda, fly!" and off she ran along the
corridor, flop, flop, flop, on her flat-soled shoes, as much in fear of
the scrutiny of the head girl as the youngest Blue in the house!



CHAPTER TWELVE.

HOME AGAIN.

The week of examination passed slowly by, and the morning dawned when
the all-important lists were to be read aloud.  The girls were tired
after the strain, the teachers exhausted by the work of reading over
hundreds of papers, and it was consequently a somewhat pale and
dejected-looking audience which assembled in the Hall to hear the
report.

Rhoda sat tense on her seat, and puzzled for some moments over the
meaning of a certain dull, throbbing noise, before discovering that it
was the beating of her own heart.  It seemed to her morbid sensitiveness
that every eye was upon her, that everyone was waiting to hear what
place the new girl had taken.  When Miss Bruce began to read she could
hardly command herself sufficiently to listen, but the first mention of
her own name brought her to her bearings with a shock of dismay.  After
all her work, her care, her preparation, to be so low as this, to take
so poor a place!  The mortification was so bitter that she would fain
have hidden herself out of reach of consolation, but to her surprise, so
far from condoling, teachers and pupils alike seemed surprised that she
had done so well.

"You have worked admirably, Rhoda.  I am pleased with you," said Miss
Murray.

"Well done, Fuzzy!" cried Tom, and even Miss Bruce said graciously:

"Very good progress for a first term, Rhoda!"

It was evident from their manner that they meant what they said, and
another girl might have gleaned comfort from the realisation that she
had expected too much of her own abilities.  Not so Rhoda!  It was but
an added sting to discover that she had been ranked so low, that an even
poorer result would have created no astonishment.  She was
congratulated, forsooth, on what seemed to her the bitterest
humiliation!  If anything was needed to strengthen the determination to
excel at any and every cost, this attitude of the school was sufficient.
In the solitude of the cubicle she vowed to herself that the day should
come, and that speedily, when she would be estimated at her right value.
She stood in the damp and cold gazing up at the Record Wall, and
renewed the vow with fast-beating heart.  The sun struggled from behind
the clouds and lit up the surface of the tablets, and the Honours girl,
and the B.A. girl, and the girls who had won the scholarships, seemed to
smile upon her and wish her success, but Eleanor Newman's name was in
the shade.  The sun had not troubled to light it up.  She was "stupid,"
and had never won a prize.

The last two days were broken and unsatisfactory, and Rhoda longed for
the time of departure to arrive; yet it was not without a pang of regret
that she opened her eyes on the last morning, and gazed round the little
blue cubicle.  It was delightful to be going home, yet school had its
strong points, and there were one or two partings ahead which could not
be faced without depression.  How nice it would be if she could take all
her special friends home--Dorothy and Kathleen, and Miss Everett, and--
yes!  Tom herself; for, wonderful to state, she was unaffectedly sorry
to part from Tom.  What fun they would have had running riot in Erley
Chase, and summoning the whole household to wait on their caprices!

The gong rang, and all the little bells followed suit in their usual
objectionable fashion, but the girls yawned and lay still for another
five minutes, aware that leniency was the order of the day.  The roll of
the organ and the first two lines of the hymn found them still in bed,
and the words were clearly distinguishable:--

  Awake my soul, and with the sun, Thy daily course of duty run--

"How stupid!" commented Rhoda to herself.  "`Course of duty' on the very
day we are leaving school.  What a ridiculous choice!" and then she
tumbled out of bed and listened no more.

The rest of the morning seemed a comical Alice-in-Wonderland repetition
of the day of arrival.  The same long queues were formed to march down,
instead of upstairs; the teachers stood on the landings to say good-bye,
instead of welcome; the "Black Marias" bore the pupils to, instead of
from, the station, where the saloon carriages stood waiting as before.
The Blues crowded into one carriage, and Tom seated herself by Rhoda,
and with twinkling eyes called attention to the undulating beauty of the
landscape.  It was all exactly the same, yet delightfully different, for
now there was no shyness nor restraint, but the agreeable consciousness
of liberty to chaff in return, and be as cheeky as one chose.

There was unceasing talk on the journey, yet each girl realised as the
train steamed into Euston that she had forgotten to say the most
important things, and was divided between regret and anxiety to look out
for friends waiting on the platform.  Rhoda had heard that Harold was to
meet her, and presently there he was--handsomer than ever, or looking so
after the three months' separation, and as immaculate as if he had
stepped out of the traditional bandbox.

"There he is!  That's Harold!  That's my brother!" she cried, with a
thrill of pride in the tall, frock-coated figure; and Thomasina looked,
and rolled her little eyes to the ceiling.

"What a bee-ootiful young man!  A perfect picter!  Give him my fond
love, Fuzzy, and say that I am desolated not to be able to stay to make
his acquaintance, but I must make a bolt for my train."

She seized her bag as she spoke and hurried to the door, prepared to
jump on to the platform at the first possible moment, while her
companions impatiently followed in her wake.  Rhoda had a vague
recollection of promising to write regularly to half a dozen girls, and
then she was shaking hands with Harold, and laughing in pure joy at
seeing the familiar face.

"Here I am!  Here I am!  I have come back at last!"

"So I see!"  He swept a glance over her, half smiling, half startled.
"Awfully glad to see you.  Got your luggage in the van, eh?  Don't know
how on earth we shall get hold of it in this crowd.  What an--excuse
me!--an appalling set of girls!"

"I thought so too, at first, but they look different when you know them.
Some of them are sweet, and awfully pretty."

"Humph!" said Harold, sceptically.  "They are not conspicuous.  I don't
see a decent-looking girl anywhere, except--who's the girl in the grey
hat?"

"That's Miss Everett, our house-mistress, the one I'm so fond of--the
one who has the invalid brother, you know, to whom mother sent the
game!"

"Teacher, is she?  I thought she was a pupil.  Sorry for her, poor
little thing, if she has to manage a lot of girls like you.  Ha!  `R.C.'
That's your box at last.  I'll get a porter to put it on a four-
wheeler.  Watch where I go, and keep close behind."

He strolled forward, and such was the effect of his imposing appearance
and lordly ways, that the porters flew to do his bidding, and piled the
luggage on the cab, while others who had been first on the scene were
still clamouring for attention.  Rhoda glanced proudly at him as they
drove away together, but the admiration evidently was on one side, for
he frowned, and said critically--

"You--er--look pale!  You have lost your colour!"

"I've been working hard."

"You have grown thinner!"

"Games, I suppose.  We are always running about."

"Er--what has become of your hair?"

Rhoda first stared, and then laughed.

"Oh, my pigtail!  I forgot that you hadn't seen it.  I hated it too, at
first, but I've grown accustomed to it, and find it very comfortable.
It worries me now to have my hair blowing about and tickling my face."

"All the same, my dear, you had better untie it before we get home.  We
will lunch at the Station Hotel, and you can comb it out there.  It will
give the mater a shock if she sees you looking so changed.  She would
hardly know you, I think."

The tone of disapproval hit hard, and to hide her chagrin Rhoda adopted
an air of indifference.

"Oh, we don't trouble ourselves about appearances at Hurst.  So long as
we are comfortable we are satisfied.  If a girl worries to dress up, we
chaff her unmercifully."

"The more foolish you!  I hope and pray, Rhoda, that you are not going
to develop into one of the strong-minded young women one meets nowadays,
who seem to spend their lives in trying to be as much like men as
possible.  It will be a mistake if you do.  Be as learned as you like,
and as sensible as you like, and as hardy as you like--that is all to
the good--but, for pity's sake, be pretty too, and dainty, and feminine!
We don't want to have all our womenkind swallowed up in athletes,
warranted to be `hard kicks,' or `useful forwards!'  We want them to
play the ornamental part in life, and be pretty, and sweet, and
attractive."

"Ha, ha, yes!  That's the man's point of view!" quoth Rhoda loftily, and
her brother smiled good-naturedly as the cab stopped before the hotel.

"It is, my dear, that's very certain; and as you will probably meet a
good many men as you go through life, you might as well study their
opinion.  It may be regrettable, but it is certainly true, that you will
have more influence if you are agreeable to look at.  You would have
more influence over _me_ at this moment if you would kindly walk
upstairs and make yourself look--er--a little more like your old self!"

"Oh, I don't mind.  Anything to please you!" said Rhoda carelessly, and
strode upstairs after the chambermaid, smiling to herself in lofty
superiority at Harold's "dandy ways."  She did not smile, however, when,
on coming suddenly in front of the mirror, she caught a full-length
reflection of herself, for her brother's presence had unconsciously
altered her point of view, so that she saw herself no longer from the
standpoint of Hurst Manor, but that of Erley Chase.  Yes, Harold was
right!  It was not only the pigtail; there was an indefinable difference
in her whole appearance.  The clothes were the same, the girl was the
same, but there was no longer the immaculate neatness, the dainty care,
the well-groomed look which had once characterised her.  In her usual
impetuous fashion, she had rushed from one extreme to the other; in
discarding vanity, had run perilously near neglect.

