
"I'm afraid that won't be just yet," said Mr. Gascoyne. "He doesn't
get strong as fast as his father hoped. He's a nice lad, not
brilliant, but very painstaking over his work. It's quite a pleasure
to teach him."




CHAPTER VIII

Gwen Receives a Letter


After her talk with Father on the evening of the prize-giving Gwen
went back to school determined, if she could not feel cordial just at
present towards her classmates, she would at least bury the hatchet
and take no notice of the unkindness they had exhibited. It seemed
much the most dignified course, for Gwen was far too proud to look
injured, or to show even to Netta that she had felt hurt. Perhaps the
girls were a little ashamed of themselves. Iris Watson and one or two
others spoke to her with quite an approach to friendliness, and
Elspeth Frazer asked her opinion about the costumes for the play. Gwen
was not taking a part, so she was rather a free lance in that respect,
and her advice was likely to be disinterested. Each Form got up its
own particular act with a secrecy worthy of the Freemasons. It was a
point of honour not to betray the least tiny hint of what was going to
happen, in order that the performance should be a complete surprise to
the rest of the school.

Now the Fifth had decided to give the trial scene from the _Merchant
of Venice_--rather an ambitious and decidedly a hackneyed piece to
select. The Dramatic Society was influenced in its choice, however,
by several considerations; the Form was studying _The Merchant_, and
had learnt the principal speeches for recitations, which would save a
great deal of trouble to the performers in the matter of studying
parts. Then Hilda Browne's father was a barrister and would lend his
wig for the occasion, and Louise Mawson could bring a gown that would
do excellently for Shylock's gaberdine, also two sets of tights and
doublets and feathered caps, all of which were invaluable assets in
the way of stage properties.

"We must manage the rest of the costumes as best we can," said
Elspeth. "Charlotte Perry knows of a dressmaker who makes fancy
dresses very cheaply. She does them for other schools. The chief
question is the scheme of colour: Hilda wants us to copy exactly from
some celebrated picture, and Louise says it doesn't matter as long as
everything looks very bright and gay. Here's a book of costumes. Tell
me what you think."

As Gwen turned over the pages of the little volume, with its
illustrations of Bassanio, Jessica, &c., a horrible suspicion suddenly
shot into her mind. Where had she seen that book before? And just
lately too! Why, at home, of course! She had come into the
sitting-room suddenly and found Winnie and Beatrice discussing it over
the fire. Winnie had suppressed it instantly, but not before she had
caught a glimpse both of the illustrations and the title. She
remembered them perfectly. Now Winnie, as well as being Junior
Mistress for the Fifth, was a member of a class for higher mathematics
composed of a few Senior girls and taught by a professor who came
weekly from the University at Radchester. On the strength of this
class she considered herself still one of the Sixth for special
purposes, and licensed to take part in school performances. Was the
Sixth going to act in the _Merchant of Venice_? It looked uncommonly
like it. Why else should Winnie be studying that particular book of
costumes?

Gwen was in a dilemma. She did not know what to do. Not only did the
Rodenhurst code of honour regard Form secrets as being inviolable as
those of the confessional, but further she had been continually warned
by Father and Beatrice that, now Winnie was a mistress, she and Lesbia
must be particularly careful never to repeat anything they heard at
home which might be likely to compromise their sister at school. It
was clearly impossible to betray the least hint of her suspicion, but
on the other hand it would be an exceedingly stupid _denouement_ if
both Forms were to act the same play. She decided to try finesse.

"Have you absolutely decided on _The Merchant_?" she said. "Don't you
think it's rather stale to choose our Form subject? It's been done
before too."

"Not for three years," objected Elspeth. "That's quite time enough for
most of the girls to have forgotten it. Besides, I know the speeches."

"You could learn some fresh ones."

"Oh, I dare say! It sounds easy enough when you haven't to do it
yourself. One's homework is quite enough just now without learning
pages of blank verse. Then there are the costumes."

"Wouldn't they come in for _The Rivals_? You might do some scenes from
that. We've never had it at school before, and it's simply ripping.
Or part of _She Stoops to Conquer_ would be gorgeously funny."

"You couldn't put Sir Anthony Absolute into Shylock's gaberdine, or
Tony Lumpkin into a Venetian doublet and tights! And what about the
wig? Hilda's had hard work to persuade her father to lend it, and
she'd be fearfully offended if it wasn't used."

These arguments were so conclusive that Gwen sighed. Nevertheless she
made a last appeal.

"Well, I think you're very silly to act _The Merchant_," she said.
"You might choose something far more original and interesting. It's an
opportunity wasted--and, if you'll only believe me, I'm quite sure
you'll be sorry for it."

"It's you that's silly, Gwen Gascoyne!" retorted the indignant
Elspeth. "We've chosen _The Merchant_, so why need you go trying to
upset everything. I was asking you about the costumes, not the play."

"Like Gwen's cheek!" murmured Louise Mawson. "We don't want ex-Juniors
interfering with our Dramatic!"

Gwen turned sharply away. It seemed most unfortunate that she always
got across the rest of the Form. In this instance her motive was the
purest, but as she could not explain, the girls naturally thought it
was only her love of putting herself forward which caused her to
suggest such a drastic measure as a change of programme.

"They never will understand me!" she thought bitterly. "Father said
they would be proud of me yet, but oh, dear! the more I try to do, the
more I seem disliked. They'll be fearfully sold when it comes to the
performance. I wonder if I ought to give them just a hint! It's really
too idiotic to have two _Merchants_. No, I won't! They'd probably only
slang me for letting out Form secrets. I'm glad I'm not acting, at any
rate. School's not exactly a terrestrial paradise at present. I wonder
what other troubles are coming to me? I believe I'm one of those
people who are born under an unlucky star!"

Gwen's words might almost have been prophetic, for the very next day
something happened--something so unprecedented and overwhelming that
she could never have anticipated it, even if she had been expecting
general ill luck.

At the interval she received a summons to Miss Roscoe's study. She
went at once, wondering why she had been sent for.

"Hope the Head's not going to put me into the Sixth!" she laughed to
herself. "That would be rather too good a joke. I'm willing to be a
prefect or even proctor if I'm asked!"

Gwen's reception at her last visit to the study had been so
favourable, that this time she tapped lightly at the door, and entered
confidently. One glance at Miss Roscoe's face, however, showed her
that she was in dire disgrace. The Principal's rather handsome, heavy
features seemed to cast themselves in a Roman mould when she was
annoyed; her brows would knit, and her mouth assume a set, dogged
expression of authority. All these storm signals being visible, Gwen
quaked in her shoes. Miss Roscoe had an unopened envelope in her
hand, and to this at once drew her pupil's attention.

"Gwen Gascoyne, a letter arrived this morning addressed to you at
Rodenhurst. Now, it is one of our principal rules that no girls are
allowed to have letters sent to them at the school. Tell your
correspondent on no account to write to you here again. If I find
anything further addressed to you, I shall enclose it in an envelope,
and post it to your father. I will not have Rodenhurst made a vehicle
for clandestine correspondence. You may go, but understand clearly
this is never to happen again."

Gwen took the letter, and left the room in silence. She was too much
astonished to defend herself. She could not imagine who had written to
her and put the school address. As soon as she was in the corridor she
tore open the envelope. It contained a bill from "Messrs. John Parker
& Sons, Glass and China Merchants" for

       "Replacing 10 articles in broken
          Tea Service ...            L1  2  6"

And at the bottom was written in a business hand:--

     "Messrs. Parker beg respectfully to request Miss Gascoyne's
     settlement of above. Should she prefer it, they will send
     the account to her father. They beg to assure her of their
     best attention at all times."

Gwen gasped.

"Why, I paid it!" she said almost aloud. "At least, I sent the money
by Emma. Is it possible she can have pocketed it? Oh, the deceiving
wretch! Where's Netta? I must tell her at once!"

She rushed into the gymnasium, and calling Netta aside, showed her the
fatal document. The two talked it over, aghast.

"Whew! This is a bad job!" exclaimed Netta. "Certainly it looks as if
Emma had decamped with the one pound two and six. She's left the
school, you know."

"I didn't know," sighed Gwen.

"Yes, she went ten days ago. Haven't you noticed there's a new
housemaid waiting at dinner? You must be as blind as a bat!"

"I'm afraid I am done for," said Gwen dramatically.

"Oh, I shouldn't give up too soon if I were you! I suppose, by the by,
you wouldn't care to tell your father?"

"I'd rather die!"

"Then you'll have to go somehow to Parker's, and ask if they've made a
mistake. If, as I strongly suspect, Emma really didn't pay it, then
you might get them to take part on account now, and leave the rest
till after Christmas. What could you give them?"

"I don't possess more than sixpence. I'm bankrupt, and in debt to you,
too."

"But you're sure to get something at Christmas, aren't you?"

"I expect so."

"Well, I'll tell you what I'll do: I'll lend you another ten
shillings. That will make a sovereign altogether, and you can pay me
back when you've had your Christmas presents."

"Oh, Netta, how good of you!"

"Not so particularly. It's only a loan, and I expect you to give it
back."

"Of course."

"You'd better go to Parker's this afternoon at four."

"I daren't!" said Gwen, who felt that she was floundering deeper and
deeper into a morass of trouble. "You don't know what a scrape I got
into at home for stopping behind that other time. Beatrice made me
promise absolutely always to come home with Winnie and Lesbia. I
should have to give all kinds of explanations."

"I'm supposed to go straight home too, on these dark afternoons. My
mother's rather particular about it."

"Then what's to be done?"

"You'll have to make a bolt in the dinner hour. There's nothing else
for it."

"Umph! It's risky."

"You must risk something, O my cautious philosopher! Nobody but
Thistles is about just then, and I think we can outwit Thistles. I'll
bring the half-sovereign to school with me to-morrow, and you can take
it to Parker's, in case it's wanted. I'm afraid you'll find you'll
need it."

"I should like to prosecute Emma--she richly deserves it!"

"Couldn't do that without giving ourselves away, so you'll have to
restrain your righteous wrath, my child!"

Gwen spent the rest of the day feeling as if a black shadow had
suddenly fallen over her life. She had believed the episode of the
china was completely finished with, and here it had cropped up again
like some horrible bogey prepared to haunt her. It was worse than
ever, for she had lost her own fifteen shillings as well as the ten
which Netta had previously lent her. Between Parker's and Netta she
now owed thirty-two and sixpence. The largeness of the debt appalled
her. How was she ever to refund it? She hoped she might get a little
money at Christmas. Her grandmother and Aunt Violet generally sent
postal orders for presents, telling the girls to buy what they liked;
it was these welcome gifts that constituted most of her contributions
to her savings box.

The hint which Parker's had given about sending the account to her
father frightened her greatly. Father must not know. He would have
quite enough Christmas bills to pay without adding an extra one.
Besides, what would he think of her? Gwen liked to stand high in her
father's estimation. Beatrice, too, would hear of it, and would not
spare her.

"I'm always the black sheep of the family," thought Gwen. "None of
them have ever done anything so dreadful as this. No! I simply
shouldn't dare to tell at home."

Netta turned up next morning with the half-sovereign, according to her
promise. She was not an ungenerous girl, and she had plenty of pocket
money, for her father was well off, and liberal to his only daughter.
She was willing to help Gwen out of a difficulty for which she knew
she herself was partly responsible, and perhaps also she rather
appreciated the sense of power that the debt gave her over her
schoolfellow. Netta dearly loved to lead: she would have liked to be
of importance in the Form, and was often annoyed that Hilda Browne,
Iris Watson, and some of the others looked down upon her. It was
pleasant therefore to feel that she had one satellite who was bound to
revolve in her orbit, and could be reckoned upon to support her on all
occasions.

Gwen had decided to commit a breach of school rules, and to rush out
between dinner and afternoon school to pay her visit to the china
shop. As she had said, it was a risky performance. If she were caught,
she would be reported to Miss Roscoe, and the penalty would be severe.
It seemed sailing 'twixt Scylla and Charybdis, but it was worth
trying. The first difficulty was how to put on her outdoor things
without anybody noticing. Girls kept strolling in and out of the
dressing-room in the most tiresome manner and after waiting as long as
she dared for the room to be empty, she was finally obliged to smuggle
her hat and coat into the passage, and garb herself there.

"I've barely time," she said to Netta, who was acting scout. "For
goodness sake tell me if you see Thistles about! Is the coast clear?
Then I'll scoot."

At the end of the passage, however, she encountered danger. Winnie was
standing by the gymnasium door, and Gwen only just drew back in time
to avoid her. Chafing with impatience, she waited while Winnie
