
"And broad," observed another.

"But _very_ thin," said Pussimek.

"No matter; he can stuff," said Kabelaw, with a nod to her sister
Sigokow, who was remarkably stout, and doubtless understood the virtue
of the process.

While this commentary was going on, the object of it was making himself
comfortable on a couch of skins which Nuna had spread for him on the
raised floor at the upper end of her hut.  In a few minutes the wearied
man was sound asleep, as was indicated by his nose.

No sooner did Mrs Okiok note the peculiar sound than she went out and
said to her assembled friends--"_Now_ you may come in; but--forget not--
no word is to be spoken.  Use your eyes and bite your tongues.  The one
who speaks shall be put out."

Under these conditions the multitude filed into the mansion, where they
sat down in rows to gaze their fill in profound silence; and there they
sat for more than an hour, rapt in contemplation of the wonderful sight.

"He snorts," was on the lips of Pussimek, but a warning glance from Nuna
checked the sentence in the bud.

"He dreams!" had almost slipped from the lips of Kunelik, but she caught
it in time.

Certainly these primitive people availed themselves of the permission to
use their eyes; nay, more, they also used their eyebrows--and indeed
their entire faces, for, the lips being sealed, they not only drank in
Rooney, so to speak, with their eyes, but tried to comment upon him with
the same organs.

Finding them very imperfect in this respect, they ventured to use their
lips without sound--to speak, as it were, in dumb show--and the
contortions of visage thus produced were indescribable.

This state of things was at its height when Rooney chanced to awake.  As
he lay with his face to the foe, the _tableau vivant_ met his gaze the
instant he opened his eyes.  Rooney was quick-witted, and had great
power of self-command.  He reclosed the eyes at once, and then, through
the merest chink between the lids, continued to watch the scene.  But
the wink had been observed.  It caused an abrupt stoppage of the
pantomime, and an intense glare of expectancy.

This was too much for Rooney.  He threw up his arms, and gave way to a
violent explosion of loud and hearty laughter.

If a bomb-shell had burst among the spectators, it could scarcely have
caused greater consternation.  A panic ensued.  Incontinently the mother
of Ippegoo plunged head first into the tunnel.  The mother of Arbalik
followed, overtook her friend, tried to pass, and stuck fast.  The
others, dashing in, sought to force them through, but only rammed them
tighter.  Seeing that egress was impossible, those in rear crouched
against the furthest wall and turned looks of horror on the Kablunet,
who they thought had suddenly gone mad.  But observing that Nuna and her
daughter did not share their alarm, they soon recovered, and when Rooney
at last sat up and began to look grave, they evidently felt somewhat
ashamed of themselves.  Pussimek at last seized the mother of Ippegoo by
the legs, and with a strong pull extracted her from the tunnel.  Issek,
being thus set free, quickly made her exit.  The rest followed by
degrees, until Rooney was left with Nuna and her daughter.

"Your friends have had a fright," remarked the sailor.

"They are easily frightened.  Are you hungry?"

"Yes; I feel as if I could eat a white bear raw."

"So I expected," returned the little woman, with a laugh, as she placed
a platter of broiled meat before her guest, who at once set to work.

Let us now return to Ippegoo.  Having borrowed a sledge, he had driven
off to the appointed place of rendezvous, before the arrival of Rooney
and Angut, as fast as the team could take him.  Arrived there, he found
Ujarak awaiting him.

"You have failed," said the wizard gravely.

"Yes, because Nunaga had left with her father and mother, and is now in
the village.  So is the Kablunet."

Whatever Ujarak might have felt, he took good care that his countenance
should not betray him.  Indeed this capacity to conceal his feelings
under a calm exterior constituted a large element of the power which he
had obtained over his fellows.  Without deigning a reply of any kind to
his humble and humbled follower, he stepped quietly into the sledge, and
drove away to the southward, intending to rejoin the hunters.

Arrived at the ground, he set off on foot over the ice until he found a
seal's breathing-hole.  Here he arranged his spears, erected a screen of
snow-blocks, and sat down to watch.

"Ippegoo," he said, at last breaking silence, "we must not be beaten."

"No, that must _not_ be," replied his pupil firmly.

"This time we have failed," continued the wizard, "because I did not
think that Okiok would leave his guest."

"I thought," said Ippegoo, somewhat timidly, "that your torngak told you
everything."

"You are a fool, Ippegoo."

"I know it, master; but can you not make me more wise by teaching me?"

"Some people are hard to teach," said Ujarak.

"That is also true," returned the youth mournfully.  "I know that you
can never make me an angekok.  Perhaps it would be better not to try."

"No.  You are mistaken," said the wizard in a more cheerful tone, for he
felt that he had gone too far.  "You will make a good enough angekok in
time, if you will only attend to what I say, and be obedient.  Come, I
will explain to you.  Torngaks, you must understand, do not always tell
all that they know.  Sometimes they leave the angekok dark, for a
purpose that is best known to themselves.  But they always tell enough
for the guidance of a wise man--"

"But--but--I am not a wise man, you know," Ippegoo ventured to remark.

"True; but when I have made you an angekok then you will become a wise
man--don't you see?"

As the word angekok signifies "wise man," Ippegoo would have been a fool
indeed had he failed to see the truism.  The sight raised his spirits,
and made him look hopeful.

"Well, then, stupid one, speak not, but listen.  As I have before told
you, I love Nunaga and Nunaga loves me--"

"I--I thought she loved Angut," said Ippegoo.

"O idiot," exclaimed the wizard; "did I not tell you that you cannot
understand?  The loves of angekoks are not as the loves of ordinary men.
Sometimes one's torngak makes the girl seem uncertain which man she
likes best--"

"Ye-yes; but in this case there _seems_ no uncertainty, for she and
Angut--"

"Silence! you worse than baby walrus!"

Ippegoo shut his mouth, and humbly drooped his eyelids.

After a few minutes, Ujarak, having swallowed his wrath, continued in a
calm tone--

"This time we have failed.  Next time we will be sure to succeed, and--"

"I suppose your torngak told--"

"Silence! weak-minded puffin!" thundered the wizard, to the great
astonishment of a seal which came up at that moment to breathe, and
prudently retired in time to save its life.

Once again the angekok with a mighty effort restrained his wrath, and
after a time resumed--

"Now, Ippegoo, we dare not venture again to try till after the feast,
for the suspicion which you have roused in Angut by the foolish wagging
of your tongue must be allowed to die out.  But in the meantime--though
you cannot, _must_ not, speak--you can listen, and you can get your
mother to listen, and, when you hear anything that you think I ought to
know, you will tell me."

"But if," said the pupil timidly, "I should only find out things that
your torngak has already told you, what--"

He stopped short, for Ujarak, springing up, walked smartly away, leaving
his follower behind to finish the question, and gather up the spears.

"Yes; he is right.  I _am_ a fool," murmured Ippegoo.  "Yet his conduct
does seem strange.  But he is an angekok.  That must be the reason."

Consoling himself with this reflection, the puzzled youth, putting the
spears and hunting tackle on his shoulders, followed after his irate
master towards the bay where the other hunters were encamped.

We turn now to two other actors in our tale, who, although not very
important characters, deserve passing notice.

When Nuna's youngest son, little Tumbler, was brought to the Eskimo
village, he made his appearance in the new black dress suit with which
Rooney had clothed him--much to the surprise and delight of the whole
community.  Not long after arriving, he waddled away through the village
in search of some piece of amusing mischief to do.  On his ramble he
fell in with a companion of about his own size, whose costume was that
of a woman in miniature--namely, a short coat with a fully developed
tail, which trailed on the ground with the approved fashionable swing.
This was none other than Pussi, the little daughter of Simek, the great
hunter.  Now it chanced that there was a mutual liking--a strong bond of
sympathy--between Tumbler and Pussi, which induced them always to play
together when possible.

No sooner, therefore, did Tumbler catch sight of his friend than he ran
after her, grasped her greasy little hand, and waddled away to do, in
company with her, what mischief might chance to be possible at the time.

Immediately behind the village there stood a small iceberg, which had
grounded there some years before, and was so little reduced in size or
shape by the action of each brief summer's sun that it had become to the
people almost as familiar a landmark as the solid rocks.  In this berg
there was a beautiful sea-green cavern whose depths had never yet been
fathomed.  It was supposed to be haunted, and was therefore visited only
by the more daring and courageous among the children of the tribe.
Tumbler and Pussi were unquestionably the most daring among these--
partly owing to native bravery in both, and partly to profound ignorance
and inexperience of danger.

"Let's go to ze g'een cave," suggested Tumbler.

Pussi returned that most familiar of replies--a nod.

We cannot, of course, convey the slightest idea of the infantine Eskimo
lisp.  As before said, we must be content with the nearest English
equivalent.

The green cave was not more than half a mile distant from the village.
To reach it the children had to get upon the sea-ice, and this involved
crossing what has been termed the ice-foot--namely, that belt of broken
up and shattered ice caused by the daily tides--at the point where the
grounded ice meets that which is afloat.  It is a chaotic belt, varying
in character and width according to position and depth of water, and
always more or less dangerous to the tender limbs of childhood.

Encountering thus an opportunity for mischievous daring at the very
beginning of their ramble, our jovial hero and heroine proceeded to
cross, with all the breathless, silent, and awesome delight that
surrounds half-suspected wickedness--for they were quite old enough to
know that they were on forbidden ground.

"Come, you's not frighted?" said Tumbler, holding out his hand, as he
stood on the top of a block, encouraging his companion to advance.

"No--not fri--frighted--but--"

She caught the extended hand, slipped her little foot, and slid
violently downward, dragging the boy along with her.

Scrambling to their feet, Pussi looked inclined to whimper, but as
Tumbler laughed heartily, she thought better of it, and joined him.

Few of the riven masses by which they were surrounded were much above
five or six feet thick; but as the children were short of stature, the
place seemed to the poor creatures an illimitable world of icy
confusion, and many were the slips, glissades, and semi-falls which they
experienced before reaching the other side.  Reach it they did, however,
in a very panting and dishevelled condition, and it said much for Red
Rooney's tailoring capacity that the black dress coat was not riven to
pieces in the process.

"Look; help me.  Shove me here," said Tumbler, as he laid hold of a
block which formed the last difficulty.

Pussi helped and shoved to the best of her small ability, so that
Tumbler soon found himself on a ledge which communicated with the
sea-ice.  Seizing Pussi by her top-knot of hair, he hauled while she
scrambled, until he caught a hand, then an arm, then her tail, finally
one of her legs, and at last deposited her, flushed and panting, at his
side.  After a few minutes' rest they began to run--perhaps it were more
correct to say waddle--in the direction of "ze g'een cave."

Now it chanced that the said cave was haunted at that time, not by
torngaks or other ghosts, but by two men, one of whom at least was
filled with an evil spirit.

Ujarak, having ascertained that Okiok had joined the hunting party, and
that the Kablunet had reached the village, resolved to make a daring
attempt to carry off the fair Nunaga from the very midst of her female
friends, and for this purpose sought and found his dupe Ippegoo, whom he
sent off to the green cave to await his arrival.

"We must not go together," he said, "for we might be suspected; but you
will go off to hunt seals to the south, and I will go out on the floes
to consult my torngak."

"But, master, if I go to the south after seals, how can we ever meet at
the green cave?"

"O stupid one!  Do you not understand that you are only to pretend to go
south?  When you are well out of sight, then turn north, and make for
the berg.  You will find me there."

Without further remark the stupid one went off, and in process of time
the master and pupil met at the appointed rendezvous.

The entrance to the cavern was light, owing to the transparency of the
ice, and farther in it assumed that lovely bluish-green colour from
which it derived its name; but the profound depths, which had never yet
been fathomed, were as black as ebony--forming a splendid background,
against which the icicles and crystal edges of the entrance were
beautifully and sharply defined.

Retiring sufficiently far within this natural grotto to be safe from
observation in the event of any one chancing to pass by, the wizard
looked earnestly into the anxious countenance of the young man.

"Ippegoo," he said, with an air of unwonted solemnity, for, having made
up his mind to a desperate venture, the wizard wished to subdue his tool
entirely as well as promptly to his will; "Ippegoo, my torngak says the
thing must be done to-night, if it is to be done at all.  Putting off,
he says, will perhaps produce failure."

"`Perhaps'!" echoed the youth, with that perplexed look which so
frequently crossed his features when the wizard's words puzzled him.  "I
thought that torngaks knew everything, and never needed to say
`perhaps.'"

"You think too much," said Ujarak testily.

"Was it not yesterday," returned the pupil humbly, "that you told me to
think well before speaking?"

"True, O simple one! but there are times to think and times not to
think.  Your misfortune is that you always do both at the wrong time,
and never do either at the right time."

"I wish," returned Ippegoo, with a sigh, "that it were always the time
not to think.  How much pleasanter it would be!"

"Well, it is time to listen just now," said the wizard, "so give me your
attention.  I shall this night harness my dogs, and carry off Nunaga by
force.  And you must harness your dogs in another sledge, and follow
me."

"But--but--my mother!" murmured the youth.

"Must be left behind," said the wizard, with tremendous decision and a
dark frown; but he had under-estimated his tool, who replied with
decision quite equal to his own--

"That _must_ not be."

Although taken much by surprise, Ujarak managed to dissemble.

"Well, then," he said, "you must carry her away by force."

"That is impossible," returned Ippegoo, with a faint smile and shake of
the head.

For the first time in his life the wizard lost all patience with his
poor worshipper, and was on the point of giving way to wrath, when the
sound of approaching footsteps outside the cave arrested him.  Not
caring to be interrupted at that moment, and without waiting to see who
approached, Ujarak suddenly gave vent to a fearful intermittent yell,
which was well understood by all Eskimos to be the laughter of a torngak
or fiend, and, therefore, calculated to scare away any one who
approached.

In the present instance it did so most effectually, for poor little
Pussi and Tumbler were already rather awed by the grandeur and
mysterious appearance of the sea-green cave.  Turning instantly, they
fled--or toddled--on the wings of terror, and with so little regard to
personal safety, that Pussi found herself suddenly on the edge of an
ice-cliff, without the power to stop.  Tumbler, however, had himself
more under command.  He pulled up in time, and caught hold of his
companion by the tail, but she, being already on a steep gradient,
dragged her champion on, and it is certain that both would have gone
over the ice precipice and been killed, if Tumbler had not got both
heels against an opportune lump of ice.  Holding on to the tail with
heroic resolution, while Pussi was already swinging in mid-air, the poor
boy opened wide his eyes and mouth, and gave vent to a series of yells
so tremendous that the hearts of Ujarak and Ippegoo leaped into their
throats, as they rushed out of the cavern and hastened to the rescue.

But another ear had been assailed by those cries.  Just as Ippegoo--who
was fleeter than his master--caught Tumbler with one hand, and Pussi's
tail with the other, and lifted both children out of danger, Reginald
Rooney, who chanced to be wandering in the vicinity, appeared, in a
state of great anxiety, on the scene.

"Glad am I you were in time, Ippegoo," said the seaman, shouldering the
little girl, while the young Eskimo put the boy on his back, "but I
thought that you and Ujarak were away south with the hunters.  What has
brought you back so soon?  Nothing wrong, I trust?"

"No; all goes well," returned Ippegoo, as they went towards the village.
"We have only come back to--to--"

"To make preparation for the feast when they return," said the wizard,
