ones like my brother."

"I'll try to be a humble long one," said the doctor as he stooped and
followed Otto into the cave.

Pauline was on her knees in front of the fire, with her back to the
door, as they entered.  She was stooping low and blowing at the flames
vigorously.

"O Otto!" she exclaimed, without looking round, "this fire will break my
heart.  It _won't_ light!"

"More company, Pina," said her brother.

Pauline sprang up and turned round with flushed countenance and
disordered hair; and again Otto had the ineffable delight of seeing
human beings suddenly reduced to that condition which is variously
described as being "stunned," "thunderstruck," "petrified," and "struck
all of a heap" with surprise.

Pauline was the first to recover self-possession.

"Really, Otto, it is too bad of you to take one by surprise so.  Excuse
me, sir,--no doubt you are one of the unfortunates who have been
wrecked.  I have much pleasure in offering you the hospitality of our
humble home!"

Pauline spoke at first half jestingly, but when she looked full at the
thin, worn countenance of the youth who stood speechless before her, she
forgot surprise and everything else in a feeling of pity.

"But you have been ill," she continued, sympathetically; "this wreck
must have--pray sit down."

She placed a little stool for her visitor beside the fire.

If Dr John Marsh had spoken the words that sprang to his lips he would
have begun with "Angelic creature," but he suppressed his feelings and
only stammered--

"Your b-brother, Miss Rigonda, must have a taste for taking people by
surprise, for he did not tell me that--that--I--I mean he did not
prepare me for--for--you are right.  I think I had better sit down, for
I have, as you perceive, been very ill, and am rather weak, and--and in
the circumstances such an unexpected--a--"

At this critical moment Dominick fortunately entered the cave, and
rescued the doctor from the quicksand, in which he was floundering.

"Oh! you must be the very man I want," he said, grasping his visitor by
the hand.

"That is strange," returned the doctor, with a languid smile, "seeing
that you have never met me before."

"True, my good sir; nevertheless I may venture to say that I know you
well, for there's a termagant of an Irish woman down at the camp going
about wringing her hands, shouting out your good qualities in the most
pathetic tones, and giving nobody a moment's peace because she does not
know what has become of you.  Having a suspicion that my brother must
have found you and brought you here, I came to see.  But pray, may I ask
your name, for the Irish woman only describes you as `Doctor, dear!'"

"Allow me to introduce him," cried Otto, "as an old friend of mine--Dr
Marsh."

Dominick looked at his brother in surprise.

"Otto is right," said the doctor, with a laugh, "at least if feeling may
be permitted to do duty for time in gauging the friendship."

"Well, Dr Marsh, we are happy to make your acquaintance, despite the
sadness of the circumstances," said Dominick, "and will do all we can
for you and your friends; meanwhile, may I ask you to come to the camp
and relieve the mind of your worshipper, for I can scarcely call her
less."

Poor Dr Marsh, feeling greatly exhausted by excitement as much as by
exertion, was on the point of excusing himself and begging his host to
fetch the widow up to the cave, when he was saved the trouble by the
widow herself, whose voice was just then heard outside.

"What's that yer sayin', Joe?" she exclaimed in a remonstrative tone,
"ye seed 'im go into that rabbit-hole?  Never!  Don't tell me!  Arrah
it's on his hands an knees he'd have to do it."

The voice which replied was pitched in a much deeper and softer key, but
it was heard distinctly to say, "Ay, widdy Lynch, that's the door I seed
him an' a boy go through; so ye'd better rap at it an' inquire."

"Faix, an' that's jist what I'll do, though I don't half belave ye."

She was about to apply her large red knuckles to the door in question
when her intention was frustrated and her doubts were scattered by the
door opening and Dominick presenting himself.

"Come in, Mrs Lynch, come in.  Your doctor is here, alive and well."

"Well, is it--ah!  I wish he was!  Are ye there, darlin'?"

"Yes, yes," came from within, in a laughing voice.  "Here I am, Mrs
Lynch, all right and comfortable.  Come in."

Being excessively tall, the widow was obliged, like others, to stoop to
enter; but being also excessively broad, she only got her head and
shoulders through the doorway, and then, unlike others, she stuck fast.
By dint, however, of a good pull from Dominick and a gentle push from
Joe, she was got inside without quite carrying away the structure which
the gale of the preceding night had spared.

"Och! 'tis a quare place intirely, and there is some disadvantage in
bein' big--thank ye kindly, sir--but on the whole--"

She got no further, for at that moment her sharp little grey eyes fell
on Pauline, and once again Otto's heart was stirred to its profoundest
depths by the expressive glare that ensued.  Indeed, Dominick and Marsh
were equally affected, and could not help laughing.

"Ha! ye may laugh," said the widow, with profound solemnity, "but if
it's not dramin' I am, what Father Macgrath says about ghosts is true,
and--"

"I hope you don't take _me_ for a ghost, Mrs Lynch," said Pauline,
stepping forward with a kindly smile and holding out her hand.

"No, cushla!  I don't," returned the widow, accepting the hand tenderly.
"Sure it's more like a ghost the doctor is, in spite of his larfin'.
But wonders 'll niver cease.  I'll lave 'im wid an aisy mind, for he's
in good hands.  Now, Joe, clear out o' the door, like a good man, an'
let me through.  They'll be wantin' me at the camp.  A good haul, Joe,
I'm tough; no fear o' me comin' to pieces.  Och! but it's a poor cabin.
An Irish pig wouldn't thank ye for it."

Murmuring similar uncomplimentary remarks, mingled with expressions of
surprise, the voice of the woman gradually died away, and the people in
the golden cave were left to discuss their situation and form hasty
plans for the present emergency.

At first, of course, they could do little else than make each other
partially acquainted with the circumstances which had so strangely
thrown them together, but Dominick soon put an end to this desultory
talk.

"You see, it will take all our time," he said, "between this and sunset
to get the emigrants comfortably under canvas, or some sort of shelter."

"True," assented Dr Marsh, "and it would never do with so many women
and children, some of whom are on the sick list, to leave them to the
risk of exposure to another storm like that which has just passed.  Is
your island subject to such?"

"By no means," answered Dominick.  "It has a splendid climate.  This
gale is quite exceptional.  Nevertheless, we cannot tell when the next
may burst on us.  Come, Otto, you and I will go down to the camp.  Now,
Dr Marsh, you must remain here.  I can see, without being told, that
you are quite unfit to help us.  I know that it is hard to be condemned
to inaction when all around are busy, but reflect how many patients you
have solemnly warned that their recovery would depend on implicit
obedience to the doctor's orders!  Divide yourself in two, now, and, as
a doctor, give yourself strict orders to remain quiet."

"H'm!  Gladly would I divide myself," was the doctor's reply, "if while
I left the patient half to act the invalid, I could take the impatient
half down to the camp to aid you.  But I submit.  The days of my once
boasted strength are gone.  I feel more helpless than a mouse."

There was something quite pitiful in the half-humorous look, and the
weary sigh, with which the poor youth concluded his remarks, and Otto
was so touched that he suddenly suggested the propriety of his staying
behind and taking care of him.

"Why, you conceited creature," cried Dominick, "of what use could _you_
be?  Besides, don't you think that Pina is a sufficiently good nurse?"

Otto humbly admitted that she was.

Dr Marsh, glancing at her pretty face, on which at the moment there
beamed an expression of deep sympathy, also admitted that she was; but,
being a man of comparatively few words, he said nothing.

It was a busy day for Dominick and his brother.  Not only had they to
counsel and advise with the unfortunate emigrants as to the best
position for the temporary encampment, with reference to wood and water,
as well as to assist with their own hands in the erection of tents made
of torn sails and huts and booths composed of broken planks and reeds,
but they had to answer innumerable questions from the inquisitive as to
their own history, from the anxious as to the probabilities of
deliverance, from the practical as to the resources of the islands, and
from the idiotic as to everything in general and nothing in particular.
In addition to which they had to encourage the timid, to correct the
mistaken, and to remonstrate with or resist the obstinate; also to romp
a little with the children as they recovered their spirits, quiet the
babies as they recovered their powers of lung, and do a little amateur
doctoring for the sick in the absence of the medical man.

In all these varied occupations they were much aided by the widow Lynch,
who, instead of proving to be, as they had expected, a troublesome
termagant, turned out to be a soft-hearted, kindly, enthusiastic,
sympathetic woman, with a highly uneducated, unbalanced mind, a
powerfully constituted and masculine frame, and "a will of her own."  In
this last particular she did not differ much from the rest of the human
species, but she was afflicted with an unusually strong desire to assert
it.

Very like Mrs Lynch in the matters of kindly soft-heartedness and
sympathy was Mrs Welsh--a poor, gentle, delicate Englishwoman, the wife
of a great hulking cross-grained fellow named Abel, who was a carpenter
by trade and an idler by preference.  Mrs Welsh was particularly good
as a sick-nurse and a cook, in which capacities she made herself
extremely useful.

About midday, Mrs Welsh having prepared a glorious though simple meal
for her section of the emigrant band, and the other sections having been
ministered to more or less successfully by their more or less capable
cooks, Dominick and Otto went up to the golden cave to dinner, which
they well knew the faithful Pauline would have ready waiting for them.

"What a day we have had, to be sure!" said Dominick as they walked
along; "and I'm as hungry as a kangaroo."

Without noticing the unreasonableness of supposing that long-legged
creature to be the hungriest of animals, Otto declared that he was in
the same condition, "if not more so."

On opening the door they were checked by the expression of Pauline's
face, the speaking eyes of which, and the silent mouth, were
concentrated into an unmistakable "hush!"--which was emphasised by a
significant forefinger.

"What's wrong?" whispered Dominick, anxiously.

"Sleeping," murmured Pauline--she was too good a nurse to whisper--
pointing to the invalid, who, overcome with the night's exposure and the
morning's excitement, had fallen into a profound slumber on Otto's
humble couch.

This was a rather severe and unexpected trial to Otto, who had come up
to the cave brimming over with camp news for Pauline's benefit.  He felt
that it was next to impossible to relate in a whisper all the doings and
sayings, comical and otherwise, that he had seen and heard that day.  To
eat his dinner and say nothing seemed equally impossible.  To awaken the
wearied sleeper was out of the question.  However, there was nothing for
it but to address himself to the suppression of his feelings.  Probably
it was good for him to be thus self-disciplined; certainly it was
painful.

He suffered chiefly at the top of the nose--inside behind his eyes--that
being the part of the safety-valve where bursts of laughter were
checked; and more than once, while engaged in a whispering commentary on
the amiable widow Lynch, the convulsions within bade fair to blow the
nasal organ off his face altogether.  Laughter is catching.  Pauline and
Dominick, ere long, began to wish that Otto would hold his tongue.  At
last, some eccentricity of Joe Binney, or his brother, or Mrs Lynch, we
forget which, raised the pressure to such a pitch that the safety-valves
of all three became ineffective.  They all exploded in unison, and poor
Marsh was brought to consciousness, surprise, and a sitting posture at
the same instant.

"I'm afraid," he said, rather sheepishly, "that I've been sleeping."

"You have, doctor, and a right good sleep you've had," said Dominick,
rising and placing a stool for the invalid.  "We ought to apologise for
disturbing you; but come, sit down and dine.  You must be hungry by this
time."

"Indeed I am.  The land air seems to have had a powerful effect on me
already."

"Truly it must," remarked Pauline, "else you could not have fallen
asleep in the very middle of my glowing description of our island home."

"Did I really do that?" said the doctor, with an air of self-reproach.

"Indeed you did; but in the circumstances you are to be excused."

"And I hope," added Dominick, "that you'll have many a good sleep in our
golden cave."

"Golden cave, indeed," echoed the invalid, in thought, for his mind was
too much taken up just then with Pauline to find vent in speech.  "A
golden cave it will be to me for evermore!"

It is of no use mincing the matter; Dr John Marsh, after being regarded
by his friends at home as hopelessly unimpressible--in short, an
absolute woman-hater--had found his fate on a desolate isle of the
Southern seas, he had fallen--nay, let us be just--had jumped over head
and ears in love with Pauline Rigonda!  Dr Marsh was no sentimental
die-away noodle who, half-ashamed, half-proud of his condition, displays
it to the semi-contemptuous world.  No; after disbelieving for many
years in the power of woman to subdue him, he suddenly and manfully gave
in--sprang up high into the air, spiritually, and so to speak, turning a
sharp somersault, went headlong down deep into the flood, without the
slightest intention of ever again returning to the surface.

But of this mighty upheaval and overturning of his sentiments he
betrayed no symptom whatever, excepting two bright spots--one on either
cheek--which might easily have been mistaken for the effects of
weakness, or recent excitement, or bad health, or returning hunger.
Calmly he set to work on the viands before him with unusual appetite,
conversing earnestly, meanwhile, with Dominick and Otto on the gravity
of their situation, and bestowing no more attention upon Pauline than
was barely consistent with good breeding, insomuch that that pretty
young creature began to feel somewhat aggrieved.  Considering all the
care she had so recently bestowed on him, she came to the conclusion, in
short, that he was by no means as polite as at first she had supposed
him to be.

By degrees the conversation about the present began to give place to
discussions as to the future, and when Dominick and Otto returned for
their evening meal at sunset, bringing with them Mr Malines, the mate,
and Joe Binney and his brother David and Hugh Morris as being
representative men of the emigrants and ship's crew, the meeting
resolved itself into a regular debating society.  At this point Pauline
deserted them and went down to the camp to cultivate the acquaintance of
the widow Lynch, Mrs Welsh, and the other female and infantine members
of the wrecked party.

"For my part," said Malines, "I shall take one o' the boats, launch it
in the lagoon, and go over to the big island, follow me who may, for it
is clear that there's not room for us all on this strip of sand."

"I don't see that," objected Hugh Morris.  "Seems to me as there's space
enough for all of us, if we're not too greedy."

"That shows ye knows nothin' about land, Hugh," said Joe Binney.
"What's of it here is not only too little, but too sandy.  I votes for
the big island."

"So does I," said David Binney.  "Big Island for me."

Thus, incidentally, was the large island named.

"But," said Hugh, still objecting, "it won't be half so convenient to
git things out o' the wreck, as where we are."

"Pooh! that's nothing," said Malines.  "It won't cost us much trouble to
carry all we want across a spit of sand."

Seeing that the two men were getting angry with each other, Dominick
interposed by blandly stating that he knew well the capabilities of the
spot on which they were encamped, and he was sure that such a party
would require more ground if they meant to settle on it.

"Well now, master," observed Joe, with a half-laugh, "we don't 'zactly
mean for to settle on it, but here we be, an' here we must be, till a
