on at a good rate."

"I wish she were going twice as fast," the mate said. "There is a
gentleman over there who seems anxious to have a talk with us, and
we don't want to make his acquaintance."

Bob looked round and saw, over the quarter, a large lugger some
three miles away.

"What vessel is that?" he asked.

"That is a French privateer--at least, there is very little doubt
about it. We must have passed each other in the dark for, when we
first made him out, he was about four miles away, sailing
northeast. He apparently sighted us, just as we made him out; and
hauled his wind, at once. He has gained about a mile on us, in the
last two hours. We have changed our course; and are sailing, as you
see, northwest, so as to bring the wind on our quarter; and I don't
think that fellow has come up much, since. Still, he does come up.
We feel the loss of our sail, now."

It seemed to Bob, looking up, that there was already an immense
amount of canvas on the brig. Stunsails had been set on her, and
she was running very fast through the water.

"We seem to have more canvas set than that vessel behind us," he
said.

"Yes, we have more, but those luggers sail like witches. They are
splendid boats, but they want very big crews to work them. That is
the reason why you scarcely ever see them, with us, except as
fishing craft, or something of that sort. I daresay that lugger has
a hundred men on board--eighty, anyhow--so it is no wonder we
sometimes get the worst of it. They always carry three hands to our
two and, very often, two to our one. Of course we are really a
trader, though we do carry a letter of marque. If we were a regular
privateer, we should carry twice as many hands as we do."

Walking to the poop rail, Bob saw that the men were bringing up
shot, and putting them in the racks by the guns. The breech covers
had been taken off. The first officer was overlooking the work.

"Well, lad," Captain Lockett said, coming up to him, "you see that
unlucky calm has got us into a mess, after all and, unless the wind
drops again, we are going to have to fight for it."

"Would the wind dropping help us, sir?"

"Yes, we have more canvas on her than the lugger carries and, if
the breeze were lighter, should steal away from her. As it is, she
doesn't gain much; but she does gain and, in another two or three
hours, she will be sending a messenger to ask us to stop."

"And what will you do, captain?"

"We shall send another messenger back, to tell her to mind her own
business. Then it will be a question of good shooting. If we can
knock out one of her masts, we shall get off; if we can't, the
chances are we shall see the inside of a French prison.

"If she once gets alongside, it is all up with us. She can carry
us, by boarding; for she can throw three times our strength of men
on to our deck."

There was but little talking on board the brig. When the men had
finished their preparations, they stood waiting by the bulwarks;
watching the vessel in chase of them, and occasionally speaking
together in low tones.

"You may as well pipe the hands to breakfast, Mr. Probert. I have
told the cook to give them an extra good meal. After that, I will
say a few words to them.

"Now, Master Repton, we may as well have our meal. We mayn't get
another good one, for some time; but I still hope that we shall be
able to cripple that fellow. I have great faith in that long
eighteen. The boatswain is an old man-o'-war's-man, and is a
capital shot. I am a pretty good one, myself and, as the sea is
smooth, and we have a good steady platform to fire from, I have
good hope we shall cripple that fellow before he comes up to us."

There was more talking than usual, at breakfast. Captain Lockett
and the second mate both laughed, and joked, over the approaching
fight. Mr. Probert was always a man of few words, and he said but
little, now.

"The sooner they come up, the better," he growled. "I hate this
running away, especially when you can't run fastest."

"The men will all do their best, I suppose, Probert? You have been
down among them."

The first mate nodded.

"They don't want to see the inside of a prison, captain, no more
than I do. They will stick to the guns; but I fancy they know, well
enough, it will be no use if it comes to boarding."

"No use at all, Probert. I quite agree with you, there. If she
comes up alongside, we must haul down the flag. It is of no use
throwing away the men's lives, by fighting against such odds as
that. But we mustn't let her get up."

"That is it, sir. We have got to keep her off, if it can be done.
We shall have to haul our wind a little, when we begin, so as to
get that eighteen to bear on her."

"Yes, we must do that," the captain said. "Then we will get the
other four guns over on the same side."

After breakfast was over, the captain went up and took his station
at the poop rail. The men had finished their breakfast and, on
seeing that the captain was about to address them, moved aft.

"My lads," he said, "that Frenchman behind will be within range, in
the course of another hour. What we have got to do is to knock some
of her spars out of her and, as she comes up slowly, we shall have
plenty of time to do it. I daresay she carries a good many more
guns than we do, but I do not suppose that they are heavier metal.
If she got alongside of us, she would be more than our match; but I
don't propose to let her get alongside and, as I don't imagine any
of you wish to see the inside of a French prison, I know you will
all do your best.

"Let there be no hurrying in your fire. Aim at her spars, and don't
throw a shot away. The chances are all in our favour; for we can
fight all our guns, while she can fight only her bow chasers--at
any rate, until she bears up. She doesn't gain on us much now and,
when she comes to get a few shot holes in her sails, it will make
the difference. I shall give ten guineas to be divided among the
men at the first gun that knocks away one of her spars; and five
guineas, besides, to the man who lays the gun."

The men gave a cheer.

"Get the guns all over to the port side. I shall haul her wind, a
little, as soon as we are within range."

By five bells, the lugger was within a mile and a half. The men
were already clustered round the pivot gun.

"Put her helm down, a little," the captain ordered. "That is
enough.

"Now, boatswain, you are well within range. Let us see what you can
do. Fire when you have got her well on your sights."

A few seconds later there was a flash, and a roar. All eyes were
directed on the lugger, which the captain was watching through his
glass. There was a shout from the men. The ball had passed through
the great foresail, a couple of feet from the mast.

"Very good," the captain said. "Give her a trifle more elevation,
next time. If you can hit the yard, it will be just as good as
hitting the mast.

"Ah! There she goes!"

Two puffs of white smoke broke out from the lugger's bow. One shot
struck the water nearly abreast of the brig, at a distance of ten
yards. The other fell short.

"Fourteens!" the captain said. "I thought she wouldn't have
eighteens, so far forward."

Shot after shot was fired but, so far, no serious damage had been
caused by them. The brig had been hulled once, and two shots had
passed through her sails.

The captain went, himself, to the pivot gun; and laid it carefully.
Bob stood watching the lugger intently, and gave a shout as he saw
the foresail run rapidly down.

"It is only the slings cut," the second mate--who was standing by
him--said. "They will have it up again, in a minute. If the shot
had been the least bit lower, it would have smashed the yard."

The lugger came into the wind and, as she did so, eight guns
flashed out from her side while, almost at the same moment, the
four broadside guns of the Antelope were, for the first time,
discharged. Bob felt horribly uncomfortable, for a moment, as the
shot hummed overhead; cutting one of the stunsail booms in two, and
making five fresh holes in the sails.

"Take the men from the small guns, Joe, and get that sail in," the
captain said. "Its loss is of no consequence."

In half a minute, the lugger's foresail again rose; and she
continued the chase, heading straight for the brig.

"He doesn't like this game of long bowls, Probert," the captain
said. "He intends to come up to board, instead of trusting to his
guns.

"Now, boatswain, you try again."

The brig was now sailing somewhat across the lugger's bows, so that
her broadside guns--trained as far as possible aft--could all play
upon her; and a steady fire was kept up, to which she only replied
by her two bow chasers. One of the men had been knocked down, and
wounded, by a splinter from the bulwark; but no serious damage had
so far been inflicted, while the sails of the lugger were spotted
with shot holes.

Bob wished, heartily, that he had something to do; and would have
been glad to have followed the first mate's example--that officer
having thrown off his coat, and taken the place of the wounded man
in working a gun--but he felt that he would only be in the way, did
he try to assist. Steadily the lugger came up, until she was little
more than a quarter of a mile behind them.

"Now, lads," the captain shouted, "double shot the guns--this is
your last chance. Lay your guns carefully, and all fire together,
when I give the word.

"Now, are you all ready? Fire!"

The five guns flashed out together, and the ten shot sped on their
way. The splinters flew from the lugger's foremast, in two places;
but a cry of disappointment rose, as it was seen that it was
practically uninjured.

"Look, look!" the captain shouted. "Hurrah, lads!" and a cloud of
white canvas fell over, to leeward of the lugger.

Her two masts were nearly in line, and the shot that had narrowly
missed the foremast, and passed through the foresail, had struck
the mainmast and brought it, and its sail, overboard. The crew of
the brig raised a general cheer. A minute before a French prison
had stared them in the face, and now they were free. The helm was
instantly put up, and the brig bore straight away from her pursuer.

"What do you say, Probert? Shall we turn the tables, now, and give
her a pounding?"

"I should like to, sir, nothing better; but it would be dangerous
work. Directly she gets free of that hamper, she will be under
command, and will be able to bring her broadside to play on us; and
if she had luck, and knocked away one of our spars, she would turn
the tables upon us. Besides, even if we made her strike her
colours, we could never take her into port. Strong handed as she
is, we should not dare to send a prize crew on board."

"You are right, Probert--though it does seem a pity to let her go
scot free, when we have got her almost at our mercy."

"Not quite, sir. Look there."

The lugger had managed to bring her head sufficiently up into the
wind for her broadside guns to bear, and the shot came hurtling
overhead. The yard of the main-topsail was cut in sunder, and the
peak halliard of the spanker severed, and the peak came down with a
run. They could hear a faint cheer come across the water from the
lugger.

"Leave the guns, lads, and repair damages!" the captain shouted.

"Throw off the throat halliards of the spanker, get her down, and
send a hand up to reef a fresh rope through the blocks, Mr.
Probert.

"Joe, take eight men with you, and stow away the topsail. Send the
broken yard down.

"Carpenter, see if you have got a light spar that will do, instead
of it. If not, get two small ones, and lash them so as to make a
splice of it."

In a minute the guns of the lugger spoke out again but, although a
few ropes were cut away, and some more holes made in the sails, no
serious damage was inflicted and, before they were again loaded,
the spanker was rehoisted. The lugger continued to fire, but the
brig was now leaving her fast. As soon as the sail was up, the
pivot gun was again set to work; and the lugger was hulled several
times but, seeing that her chance of disabling the brig was small,
she was again brought before the wind.

In half an hour a new topsail yard was ready, and that sail was
again hoisted. The Antelope had now got three miles away from the
lugger. As the sail sheeted home, the second mate shouted, from
aloft:

"There is a sail on the weather bow, sir! She is close hauled, and
sailing across our head."

"I see her," the captain replied.

"We ought to have noticed her before, Mr. Probert. We have all been
so busy that we haven't been keeping a lookout.

"What do you make her to be, Joe?" he said to the second mate.

"I should say she was a French frigate, sir."

The captain ascended the shrouds with his glass, remained there two
or three minutes watching the ship, and then returned to the deck.

"She is a frigate, certainly, Mr. Probert, and by the cut of her
sails I should say a Frenchman. We are in an awkward fix. She has
got the weather gage of us. Do you think, if we put up helm and ran
due north, we should come out ahead of her?"

The mate shook his head.

"Not if the wind freshens, sir, as I think it will. I should say we
had best haul our wind, and make for one of the Spanish ports. We
might get into Santander."

"Yes, that would be our best chance.

"All hands 'bout ship!"

The vessel's head was brought up into the wind, and payed off on
the other tack, heading south--the frigate being, now, on her
weather quarter. This course took the brig within a mile and a half
of the lugger, which fired a few harmless shots at her. When she
had passed beyond the range of her guns, she shaped her course
southeast by east for Santander, the frigate being now dead astern.
The men were then piped to dinner.

"Is she likely to catch us, sir?" Bob asked, as they sat down to
table.

"I hope not, lad. I don't think she will, unless the wind freshens
a good deal. If it did, she would come up hand over hand.

"I take it she is twelve miles off, now. It is four bells, and she
has only got five hours' daylight, at most. However fast she is,
she ought not to gain a knot and a half an hour, in this breeze
and, if we are five or six miles ahead when it gets dark, we can
change our course. There is no moon."

They were not long below.

"The lugger is under sail again, sir," the second mate, who was on
duty, said as they gained the deck.

"They haven't been long getting up a jury mast," Captain Lockett
said. "That is the best of a lug rig. Still, they have a smart crew
on board."

He directed his glass towards the lugger, which was some five miles
away.

"It is a good-sized spar," he said, "nearly as lofty as the
foremast. She is carrying her mainsail with two reefs in it and,
with the wind on her quarter, is travelling pretty nearly as fast
as she did before. Still, she can't catch us, and she knows it.

"Do you see, Mr. Probert, she is bearing rather more to the north.
She reckons, I fancy, that after it gets dark we may try to throw
the frigate out; and may make up that way, in which case she would
have a good chance of cutting us off. That is awkward, for the
frigate will know that; and will guess that, instead of wearing
round that way, we shall be more likely to make the other."

"That is so," the mate agreed. "Still, we shall have the choice of
either hauling our wind and making south by west, or of running on,
and she can't tell which we shall choose."

"That is right enough. It is just a toss up. If we run, and she
runs, she will overtake us; if we haul up close into the wind, and
she does the same, she will overtake us, again; but if we do one
thing, and she does the other, we are safe.

"Then again, we may give her more westing, after it gets dark, and
bear the same course the lugger is taking. She certainly won't gain
on us, and I fancy we shall gain a bit on her. Then in the morning,
if the frigate is out of sight, we can make for Santander, which
will be pretty nearly due south of us, then; or, if the lugger is
left well astern we can make a leg north, and then get on our old
course again, for Cape Ortegal. The lugger would see it was of no
use chasing us, any further."

"Yes, I think that is the best plan of the three, captain.

"I see the frigate is coming up. I can just make out the line of
her hull. She must be a fast craft."

The hours passed on slowly. Fortunately the wind did not freshen,
and the vessels maintained their respective positions towards each
other. The frigate was coming up, but, when it began to get dusk,
she was still some six miles astern. The lugger was five miles
away, on the lee quarter, and three miles northeast of the frigate.
She was still pursuing a line that would take her four miles to the
north of the brig's present position. The coast of Spain could be
seen stretching along to the southward. Another hour and it was
perfectly dark and, even with the night glasses, the frigate could
no longer be made out.

"Starboard your helm," the captain said, to the man at the wheel.
"Lay her head due east."

"I fancy the wind is dying away, sir," Mr. Probert said.

"So long as it don't come a stark calm, I don't care," the captain
replied. "That would be the worst thing that could happen, for we
should have the frigate's boats after us; but a light breeze would
suit us, admirably."

Two hours later, the wind had almost died out.

"We will take all the sails off her, Mr. Probert. If the frigate
keeps on the course she was steering when we last saw her, she will
go two miles to the south of us; and the lugger will go more than
that to the north. If they hold on all night, they will be hull
down before morning; and we shall be to windward of them and, with
the wind light, the frigate would never catch us; and we know the
lugger wouldn't, with her reduced sails."

In a few minutes all the sails were lowered, and the brig lay
motionless. For the next two hours the closest watch was kept, but
nothing was seen of the pursuing vessels.

"I fancy the frigate must have altered her course more to the
south," the captain said, "thinking that, as the lugger was up
north, we should be likely to haul our wind in that direction. We
will wait another hour, and then get up sail again, and lay her
head for Cape Ortegal."

When the morning broke, the brig was steering west. No sign of the
lugger was visible but, from the tops, the upper sails of the
frigate could be seen, close under the land, away to the southeast.

"Just as I thought," the captain said, rubbing his hands in high
glee. "She hauled her wind, as soon as it was dark, and stood in
for the coast, thinking we should do the same.

"We are well out of that scrape."

Two days later the brig dropped her anchor in the Tagus, where
three English ships of war were lying. A part of the cargo had to
be discharged, here; and the captain at once went ashore, to get a
spar to replace the topmast carried away in the gale.

"We may fall in with another Frenchman, before we are through the
Straits," he said, "and I am not going to put to sea again like a
lame duck."

Bob went ashore with the captain, and was greatly amused at the
scenes in the streets of Lisbon.

"You had better keep with me, as I shall be going on board, in an
hour. Tomorrow you can come ashore and see the sights, and spend
the day. I would let Joe come with you, but he will be too busy to
be spared, so you will have to shift for yourself."

Before landing in the morning, the captain advised him not to go
outside the town.

"You don't know the lingo, lad, and might get into trouble. You
see, there are always sailors going ashore from our ships of war,
and they get drunk and have sprees; and I don't fancy they are
favourites with the lower class, here, although the shopkeepers, of
course, are glad enough to have their money--but I don't think it
would be safe for a lad like you, who can't speak a word of the
language, to wander about outside the regular streets. There will
be plenty for you to see, without going further."

As Bob was a good deal impressed with the narrow escape he had had
from capture, he was by no means inclined to run any risk of
getting into a scrape, and perhaps missing his passage out. He
therefore strictly obeyed the captain's instructions; and
when--just as he was going down to the landing stage, where the
boat was to come ashore for him--he came upon a party of half
drunken sailors, engaged in a vigorous fight with a number of
Portuguese civil guards, he turned down a side street to avoid
getting mixed up in the fray--repressing his strong impulse to join
in by the side of his countrymen.

On his mentioning this to the captain, when he reached the brig,
the latter said:

"It is lucky that you kept clear of the row. It is all nonsense,
talking about countrymen. It wasn't an affair of nationality, at
