of famous and heroic men; now, hundreds of men and women--timid and
brave mixed undistinguishably--are carried in safety and comfort over
the well-known ocean, by respectable captains of whom the world knows
little or nothing beyond their names.  Once in a lifetime was the daring
feat attempted _then_.  Once or twice a week is the trifling trip
accomplished _now_.

But enough of moralising.  Suffice it to say that we doubled the Cape
without sails, without anxiety, without care, and with no triumph
whatever,--but not without interest.  Calm and sunny though it chanced
to be, we could not look upon that barren, mountainous, rocky shore,
without reflecting that it still is not less now than in days of old,
the Stormy Cape, and that danger as appalling as that of yore may
sometimes be encountered, while heroism quite as exalted as that of the
ancient Portuguese navigators is sometimes displayed by modern Britons.

There is a point not far from Cape Agulhas--between it and the Cape of
Good Hope--named Point Danger, where courage of the highest kind once
calmly faced and fought with Death.  On that Point, in February 1852,
the _Birkenhead_ was wrecked.  It may be truly said that courage
conquered on that occasion, because the end for which it fought was the
deliverance of women and children from death, and this end was gained,
though above 400 of the gallant men who fought the battle perished in
the hour of victory.

The _Birkenhead_, a large iron steamer, was engaged in the transport of
troops to the frontier, where war with the Kafirs raged at the time.
These troops were detachments from several regiments under command of
Colonel Seton of the 74th Highlanders.  About two o'clock in the morning
the vessel struck upon a rock near the well-named Point Danger, and so
tremendous was the shock that her iron plates were driven in as if made
of egg-shell.  The cabin was immediately flooded, and it was evident
that in a few minutes the vessel would be engulfed among the breakers.

None but those who have witnessed similar scenes can imagine the horrors
of the situation.  It was dark; the breakers roared around; the rugged
and almost inaccessible shores of the Cape of Storms were on the one
hand, the ocean on the other; men, women, and children were rushing
about the decks in wild terror; sharks were known to be in these waters,
and _only two_ of the ship's boats were available for service.  In this
moment of extremity God put it into the hearts of both officers and men
to act with unexampled courage and wisdom.

To save all was manifestly out of the question.  When people are in such
circumstances it is too often "every man for himself;" the strong push
aside the weak, fight for the boats, overcrowd and swamp them, and thus
few, if any, are left to tell the tale.  But it was not so with the
heroes of the _Birkenhead_.  At the word of command from Colonel Seton,
the soldiers drew up on the reeling deck as if on parade, and obeyed his
orders with steady calm, unflinching bravery.  If there were any selfish
spirits on board they were overawed by the heroism of the soldiers.  The
Colonel directed that the women and children and the sick should be put
into the boats.  This was quickly done, and these were all saved without
a single exception--to the number of two hundred souls.

But while this was being accomplished the vessel was breaking up, and
the fact that the men would be soon left to struggle in the waves was
apparent to all; yet the noble officer continued to give his orders, and
the not less noble men continued to obey, and saw the boats depart
without a murmur.  They were young soldiers too, who had never been
under fire, and this "action" was the first and last that they and their
leader were destined to fight.  The vessel suddenly parted amidships,
and though a few saved themselves by swimming and on floating pieces of
wreck, the greater number perished--no fewer than 357 officers and
soldiers--among whom was the Colonel--and sixty seamen, going down with
the ship.  It was a sad but splendid specimen of cool self-sacrificing
courage, and of the power of discipline in moments of tremendous trial.



LETTER THIRTEEN.

THE "CAPE DOCTOR"--THE CAPETOWN MINE--MULES, LITERATURE, AND
CUSTOMS-OFFICIALS.

It is pretty generally known that there is a "tablecloth" at Capetown.
Its proper resting-place is Table Mountain.  When the flat top of that
celebrated hill is clear, (I write of the summer season), the thirty
thousand inhabitants of Capetown may go forth in comfort if they can
stand the blazing sunshine, but as surely as that pure white cloud--the
tablecloth--rests on the summit of Table Mountain, so surely does the
gale known as the "south-easter" come down like a wolf on the fold.

The south-easter is a sneezer, and a frequent visitor at the Cape in
summer.  Where it comes from no one can tell: where it goes to is best
known to itself: what it does in passing is painfully obvious to all.
Fresh from the Antarctic seas it swoops down on the southern shores of
Africa, and sweeps over the land as if in search of a worthy foe.  It
apparently finds one in Table Mountain, which, being 3582 feet high,
craggy and precipitous, meets the enemy with frowning front, and hurls
him back discomfited--but not defeated.

Rallying on the instant, the south-easter rushes up over its
cloud-capped head and round its rugged sides, and down its dizzy slopes,
and falls with a shriek of fiendish fury on the doomed city.  Oceans of
sand and dust are caught up by it, whirled round as if in mad ecstasy,
and dashed against the faces of the inhabitants--who tightly shut their
mouths and eyes as they stoop to resist the onset.  Then the
south-easter yells while it sweeps dust, small stones, twigs, leaves,
and stray miscellanies, right over Signal Hill into the South Atlantic.

This is bad enough, but it is a mere skirmish--only the advance guard of
the enemy.  Supposing this attack to have been commenced in the morning,
the remainder of the day is marked by a series of violent assaults with
brief intervals of repose.  In rapid succession the south-easter brings
up its battalions and hurls them on the mountain.  It leaps over the
moat and ramparts of the "castle" with fury, roars down the cannons'
throats, shrieks out at the touch-holes, and lashes about the town right
and left, assaulting and violating, for the south-easter respects
neither person nor place.  It rattles roofs and windows, and all but
overturns steeples and chimneys; it well-nigh blows the shops inside
out, and fills them with dust; it storms the barracks and maltreats the
soldiers; it compels the shutting up of sun-umbrellas, or reverses and
blows them to ribbons; it removes hats and bonnets by the score, and
sweeps up small pebbles in its mad career, so that one feels as if being
painfully pelted with buck-shot; it causes the shipping to strain
fearfully at its cables, and churns the waters of Table Bay into a
seething mass of snow and indigo.

All this time the sun shines intensely in a cloudless sky, and
beautifies the "cloth" which floats on Table Mountain, undulating on its
surface, or pouring over its edge like a Niagara of wool, to be warmed
into invisibility before tumbling half-way down the mighty precipice
that backs the town.

Although I have compared the south-easter to an enemy, he is in reality
a friend.  The inhabitants call him the "Cape doctor," because in the
general clearance he sweeps away bad smells, the natural result of bad
drainage.

But the south-easter was _not_ blowing when I arrived at the ancient
capital of South Africa.  The "cloth" was drawn; the crags of the
mountain, the white buildings and green groves of the town and suburbs,
were unsullied by mist or dust as we steamed into the Bay, and the
rugged outlines of the hills of the interior were distinctly visible
through the warm haze.

The suburbs of the city are exceedingly beautiful, and here many of the
principal inhabitants have built elegant mansions, to which they retire
after the business of each day to escape the heat, dust, and smells of
the town.  A short line of railroad runs to these verdant spots at one
side, while a tramway extends on the other.  In another direction the
railway runs by Stellenbosch and the Paarl to Wellington and Worcester.

It may surprise some people to be told that there is a mine--a rich and
prolific mine--at Capetown.  Nevertheless, such is undoubtedly the case.

This mine is more extensive and valuable than any of the diamond or gold
mines of the Orange River or the Transvaal.  Indeed it is one of the
most extensive mines in the world.  It is, as already said, exceedingly
prolific, and is marked by one grand peculiarity, namely, that among
those who devote themselves to the working of it there are no
disappointed or unsuccessful diggers.  Another peculiarity is, that very
little capital is required to work it.  The digger is not obliged to
purchase "claims," for it is almost if not altogether "Free."

The only capital that must be sunk in it is Time, and of that even one
hour a day will suffice to bring up vast stores of wealth from its
unfathomable depths, while the labour bestowed tends to rest rather than
to weary the body, at the same time that it enlarges the mind and
invigorates the soul.

Still another peculiarity of this mine is, that its products are various
and innumerable.  You must go to Australia or to California for gold, to
Golconda or Kimberley for diamonds, to Mexico or Spain for silver, to
Cornwall for copper, tin, and lead, and to Sweden for iron; but in this
mine you will find the various metals and gems in neighbouring "pockets"
and nuggets, and seams and beds.  Here you may gather the golden
opinions of the ancients in close proximity to those of the moderns.
Here you will find pearls of thought, sparkling gems of imagery, broad
seams of satire, and silvery streams of sentiment, with wealth of wisdom
and of wit.  Hard iron-fisted facts also, and funny mercurial fancies
are to be found here in abundance, and there are tons of tin in the form
of rubbish, which is usually left at a pit's mouth, and brings little or
no "tin" to those who brought it to light, while there are voluminous
layers of literary lead, whose weight and dulness render the working of
them tedious;--but this need not, and does not, dishearten the digger,
for in all mines the poor and worthless material is ever in excess of
that which is valuable, and miserable indeed must be the spirit of him
who should refuse to manipulate the "dirt" because the large nuggets and
gems are few and far between.  Throughout all the cuttings flow
glittering brooks of knowledge, and also many crystal rivulets drawn
from the pure waters of the River of Life.

The mine of which I write is the Public Library of Capetown.

And let it not be supposed that I exaggerate or over-estimate this mine.
It unquestionably takes rank as one of the noted libraries of the
world, and South Africa has reason to be proud of, and grateful to, the
men who, by their enlightened schemes and liberality, were the means of
creating what is at once a mine and a monument to the Cape.

But Capetown boasts of many other institutions which are well worthy of
notice.  It is--and has been since its foundation by Van Riebeek in
1652--the seat of Governments.  [See Note 1.] It is also the seat of the
Supreme Court and of the University of the Cape of Good Hope.  It
possesses a first-rate "South African museum," two cathedrals, many
churches, a castle, fort, barracks, and other buildings too numerous to
mention.  Also a splendid breakwater, patent slip, and docks.

From the sublime to the ridiculous is well-known to be but a step.  From
mines of knowledge to matter-of-fact mules may seem a rather long step.
If it is, the blame of my taking it must rest on the force of
association.  From the library you can walk in a few minutes to the
docks, and docks has brought me to mules.  I saw a ship-load of mules
there, and it was a sight not to be forgotten.

Have you ever seen a fair stand-up fight between men and mules?  It is
not easy to say which of the two combatants is the more mulish.  I went
one day to the docks and chanced to witness a conflict.  They were
discharging the mules--the men were--from the hold of the small vessel
which had brought them over sea from South America.  "Victory or death"
was undoubtedly the motto of each.  Of course man prevailed because of
superior power,--not obstinacy.

Many days, ay weeks, had these mules spent on the heaving deep; no doubt
they had all been sea-sick, certainly they had been half killed, but
when I went down into the hold of that ship, where there must have been
at least fifty animals, the hundred ears of all of them lay quite flat,
pinned to their necks as a desperate pirate might nail his colours to
the mast, while deep unutterable hate and dogged resolution gleamed from
every eye.

They were ranged along the sides of the ship in two rows.  The rows had
been full all the voyage, but when I saw them, half the animals had been
got on shore, so that there was plenty of room for the remnant to career
about and kick defiance at their human persecutors.  What charmed me
most was not the triumph of intelligence over brute force, but the
application of brute force on both sides, with just sufficient
mechanical addition on the part of the men to render their power
irresistible.

When I entered the hold, the stench of which was almost overpowering, I
could see nothing in the dim light, but I could hear the wild clattering
of hoofs on wooden floors, the little shrieks of irrepressible fury, and
the deep firmly uttered command--such as:--

"Now, then, Dick, look out!"

"Grab 'im!"

"Dig into 'im!"

"Twist 'is tail!"

"That's it!"

"Hup!"

My eyes soon becoming accustomed to the dim light, I saw a trembling
mule in the embrace of three men.  It trembled with passion only.  One
had passed a stout sheet under it.  Next moment there was an order to
"hoist away," and the mule went past me, with rigid limbs, high into the
air, whence it was lowered I could not see whither, and disappeared.

Meanwhile the three men went viciously at another animal.  They were
unusually strong men, with immense chests, and brawny arms bared to the
shoulders.  They panted and perspired freely, and had been severely
dishevelled by their recent struggles.

I saw the dim outline of a mule, in the dark recesses of the hold to
which he had retired, crushing his companions against the bulk-heads of
the ship.  He evidently knew that his hour was come.

To this demon Dick advanced with a short rope in his hand.  The mule
eyed him with a gleam of malice.  Its ears became, if possible, flatter.
Dick made a loop on the rope, and leaning over the breast-high
barricade between him and his adversary made a cast after the manner of
South Americans, but the mule jerked his head aside, and the lasso
missed him.  While Dick was preparing for another cast, Tom came up
behind him with a sly motion.  The mule observed Tom, let fly both heels
with a tremendous crash on the barrier, and bolted to the other end of
the ship.  There Harry met him with a stick, and turned him back whence
he came.

Again Dick advanced, made a successful cast, and drew the noose tight.
For a few moments a perfect shower of kicks was delivered at the barrier
and on the sides of the ship, but the three men did not wait till the
creature was exhausted: they had no time for that.  Two of them hauled
the mule's head by main force to the edge of the barrier, the third
leaning far over caught its tail, and instantly drew it broadside on.
It was still some distance from the spot under the hatchway where the
band and tackle were to be attached.  Towards this Tom and Dick dragged
the beast by the head, while Harry assisted with the tail.  No power on
earth could have made that mule walk!  With its ears back and all its
legs planted stiffly forward, it was made to slide in the required
direction by main force.  The place of execution reached, Dick jammed
its head against the barrier, Tom hauled its tail taut over the same and
made fast.  There was no intentional cruelty in their actions, but
difficult work had to be quickly done, and they could not afford to be
squeamish.  Obstinate violence had to be overcome by resolute vigour.
The mule was now helplessly fixed, with its tongue hanging out and its
eyes protruding.  Nevertheless, in that condition it continued, without
ceasing, to struggle and try to kick, and flatten its ears.  It was a
magnificent exhibition of determination to resist to the very death!--a
glorious quality when exercised in a good cause, thought I--my mind
reverting to patriots and martyrs.

Meanwhile Harry had passed the broad band under the mule, drawn it over
its back, and attached the big hook to it.  The signal was given to the
men who managed the tackle on deck, and the animal bounded into empty
space.

It was at that moment I made the discovery that a mule's spirit resides
in its legs.  Its last act on earth, before leaving, was to deliver a
concentrated double-kick at the barrier, but the instant it found itself
in air its flattened ears sprung up with an air of horrified
astonishment, and all its legs hung straight and rigid, the four hoofs
coming together as if in abject supplication to any one, or anything,
that could deliver.  Not the smallest effort did it make; not a trace of
self-will did it display, while it shot upwards through the hatchway
nearly to the yard-arm, whence it obtained its first bird's-eye view of
Capetown docks.  For one moment it hung, while it was being swung over
the quay, whither it was lowered, and its feet once more came in contact
with mother-earth.  Then, but not till then, did the disease of its
limbs depart, and the spirit of its ears and heels return.  With a bound
it sprang into the air, but, before it had time to think, a human enemy
caught its rope, and drew its head tight to an iron post.  Another such
enemy cast off the broad band and tackle, and the creature was suddenly
let go free.  Its final act was to flourish its heels in the air, and
utter a squeal of rage as it trotted into the midst of a group of its
kindred which had already been treated in the same way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A spirited literary commencement--the publication of newspapers--under
men of great ability and high principle, bade fair to inaugurate an era
of progress that might have quickly led the colony to a far greater
height of moral, mental, and, by consequence, physical prosperity than
it has ever yet attained; but a long struggle for freedom of the press
followed, and in 1828 this freedom was secured.  The sparkling streams
thus set free have flowed and waxed in volume ever since.

There is a custom-house at Capetown.  It is not because of being one of
the noteworthy buildings of the port that I mention it, but because of
its having been to me a personal nuisance on the occasion of my arrival
in the colony.  A fellow-passenger had informed me--whether rightly or
wrongly I knew not and cared not--that watches, jewellery, and guns,
were among the taxable articles.  Knowing that my portmanteau contained
no such articles, except a brass watch-guard, I presented myself to the
official with an air of conscious innocence.  I had hoped that, like
many such officials in France and elsewhere, he would have been content
with an assurance that I had "nothing to declare" and the offer of my
keys, but I was mistaken.  This particular official was perhaps a "new
broom."  It may be that he had caught some smugglers not long before,
and the excitement had not yet worn off.  At all events, instead of
allowing me to pass he ordered me to open my portmanteau.

While I was engaged in doing so he opened my shoulder-bag and eyed its
contents curiously.  They were not numerous.  He found nothing
contraband, and appearing somewhat disappointed applied his nose to it.

"It has a queer smell," he remarked.

As the bag had frequently done duty at picnics and been loaded with
flasks and sandwiches, I was not surprised.  Besides, it occurred to me
that no tax was levied on "queer smells," though such a tax might have
been, with advantage, levied on the town itself.  It would certainly
have produced an immense revenue.  I smiled, however, in a pleasant
manner and said nothing.

Having shut the bag this official opened the portmanteau, and began to
examine each article in a way that would have rendered it probable he
might have finished sometime within the next twenty-four hours.  He
slowly turned over my shirts and flannels as if he expected to find
mines of jewellery in the folds thereof.  Suddenly he came on the brass
chain and his eye glittered, which was more than the chain did.  It had
to be re-deposited with a sigh.  I began to grow despairing.  Presently
he took up a book and opened it.  Was he going to refresh himself with a
chapter?  His turning over the leaves very slowly gave reason for the
suspicion.  Or did the obtuse creature expect to find watches and
gun-barrels between the leaves?  At last he shut the book, and, laying
it down, proceeded to exhume a morning coat.

At this point one of his superiors told him that that was enough, to my
immense relief, and the too-conscientious official allowed me to re-pack
and lock-up my property.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The Parliament of the Union of South Africa meets at Capetown,
but Pretoria is now the seat of the Union Government.



LETTER FOURTEEN.

STELLENBOSCH, ETCETERA.

An agreeable surprise is not only interesting to the recipient, but
sometimes to his friends.  I received one at Capetown, which is worthy
of record on several grounds.

For the proper explanation of that surprise I must turn aside for a
little.

A mission started in the year 1860 for the Zambesi, where it was met,
and for a time joined, by the great Dr Livingstone.  Its leader, Bishop
Mackenzie, who laid down his life in the cause, was a man as well as a
missionary.  By that I mean that he was manly,--a quality which is not
sufficiently appreciated, in some quarters, as being a most important
element in the missionary character.

While on his way up to the selected sphere of labour in Central Africa,
the Bishop and his party, with Dr Livingstone, got into the region of
the accursed slave-trade, and one day came unexpectedly on a band of
slaves.  They were chiefly women and children, bound together with
sticks and chains, and herded by a few armed slave-dealers, who, having
murdered their male defenders and burned their villages, were driving
them to the coast for shipment to eastern lands--largely, it is said, to
the land of the amiable Turk.

With characteristic zeal and energy Dr Livingstone advanced with a few
men to set these poor wretches free.  The slave-catchers did not await
the onset: they bravely fired a shot or two and fled.  To set the slaves
free was naturally a most congenial work for the good Bishop who had
gone there to free the black man from the slavery of sin.  The sticks
were cut, the bonds were unloosed, and the people were told that they
were free to go back to their homes.  Homes!  Their homes were in ashes,
and the brave hearts and stout arms that might have reared new homes
were cold and powerless in death, while armed Arab and Portuguese bands
were prowling about the land gathering together more victims.  To send
these unfortunates away would have been to insure their death or
recapture.  There was no alternative left but to keep and guard them.

Thus the Bishop suddenly found himself in possession of a small flock
with which to begin his mission.

He accepted the charge, conducted them to the region where the mission
was to be established, and finally settled down with them there.

Some time after this there came a rumour that a large and powerful band
of slavers was approaching the settlement with many slaves in
possession, and with the intention of attacking the tribe among whom the
missionaries were located.  What was now to be done?  To have remained
inactive until the slavers marched up to their huts would have been
equivalent to suicide.  It would have been worse, for it would have
insured the putting to flight of the few men of the tribe--who it seems
were not celebrated for courage--and the result would have been the
overthrow of the mission and the recapture of the women and children who
had already been delivered.

In these trying circumstances Bishop Mackenzie and his people came to
the conclusion that self-defence called for vigorous action, and, with
musket and rifle, sallied forth to meet the men-stealers, with the
Bishop at their head.
