stared!

And small blame to him, as Flynn might have said, for before him stood
his ideal of a fairy, an angel, a sylph--or anything beautiful that best
suits your fancy, reader!  Sunny hair, sunny eyes--earnest and inquiring
eyes--sunny smiles, and eyebrows to match.  Yes, she had eyebrows
distinctly darker than her hair, and well-defined over a pair of large
brown eyes.

Poor Miles was stricken, as we have said; but--would you believe it?--
there were men there looking at that girl at that time who, to use their
own phraseology, would not have accepted a dozen of her for the girls
they had left behind them!  One young fellow in particular murmured to
himself as follows--"Yes, very well in her way, no doubt, but she
couldn't hold a candle to my Emmy!"  Perhaps the most cutting remark of
all--made mentally, of course--was that of Sergeant Grady, who, for
reasons best known to himself, had left a wife, describable as a stout
well-favoured girl of forty, behind him.

"In twenty years or so," he thought, "she may perhaps be near as
good-lookin' as my Susy, but she'll never come quite up to her--never!"

"Come this way, Mrs Drew," said the captain.  "I will show you the
men's quarters.  Out of the way, my man!"

Flushing to the roots of his hair, Miles stepped hastily aside.

As he did so there was heard an awful rend of a sort that tests the
temper of women!  It was followed by a musical scream.  The girl's dress
had caught on a block tackle.

Miles leaped forward and unhooked it.  He was rewarded with a smiling
"Thank you," which was followed by a blush of confusion as Miss Drew's
mother exclaimed, "Oh!  Marion--how _could_ you?" by way of making
things easier for her, no doubt!

"You did that, young man, about as smart as I could a' done it myself,"
growled a voice behind him.

The speaker was Jack Molloy, and a general titter followed Miles as he
hurried away.

As we have said, the weather became much worse when the troop-ship drew
near to the Bay of Biscay; and it soon became evident that they were not
to cross that famous portion of the Atlantic, without experiencing some
of the violent action for which it is famed.  But by that time most of
the soldiers, according to Molloy, had got their sea-legs on, and rather
enjoyed the tossing than otherwise.

"I do like this sort o' thing," said a beardless young fellow, as a
number of the men sat on camp-stools, or stood on the weather-side of
the deck, chatting together about past times and future prospects.

"Ha!" exclaimed a seaman, who stood near them coiling up a rope; "hold
on till you've got a taste o' the Bay.  This is a mill-pond to that.
And you'll have the chance to-night.  If you don't, I'm a Dutchman."

"If I do, you'll have a taste of it too, old salt-water, for we're in
the same boat," retorted the young red-coat.

"True, but we ain't in the same body;" returned the sailor.  "I should
just like to see your four-futt legs wobblin' about in a nor'-west gale.
You'd sing another song."

"Come, Macleod," cried Moses Pyne, "tip us a Gaelic song."

"Hoots, man, wull ye be wantin' to be made sea-seek?--for that's what'll
do it," said the big Scotsman.  "Na, na, let Gaspard sing us `The Bay o'
Biscay O!'  That'll be mair appropriate."

There was a general chorus of assent to this; and as Gaspard Redgrave
was an obliging man, untroubled by false modesty, he cleared his throat
and began.  His voice, being a really splendid one, attracted all the
men who chanced to be within range of it: among others, Miles, who was
passing at the moment with a bag of biscuits in one hand and a meat-can
in the other.  He leaned up against one of those funnels which send
fresh air down to the stokers of steam-ships.  He had listened only a
few moments when Marion Drew glided amongst the men, and seemed to stand
as if entranced with delight in front of him, steadying herself by a
rope, for the vessel was pitching a good deal as well as rolling
considerably.

At the first chorus the crowd burst forth with wild enthusiasm--

  "As we lay, on that day,
  In the Bay of Biscay O!"

Dwelling with unnecessary length and emphasis on the "O!"

At the close of the second verse the men were preparing to burst forth
again when Miles observed an approaching billow which caused him to
start in alarm.  Although unused to the aspect of waves, he had an
instinctive feeling that there was danger approaching.  Voices of
warning were promptly raised from different parts of the vessel, but
already the loud chorus had begun and drowned every other sound.  Miles
dropped his biscuits and sprang towards Marion, who, with flashing eyes
and parted lips, was gazing at Gaspard.  He just reached her when the
wave burst over the side, and, catching most of the men quite
unprepared, swept them with terrible violence towards the lee-side of
the deck.

Marion was standing directly in the line of this human cataract, but
Miles swung her deftly round into the lee of the funnel, a handle of
which she happily caught, and clung to it like a limpet.

Her preserver was not so fortunate.  The edge of the cataract struck
him, swept him off his legs, and hurled him with many comrades against
the lee bulwarks, where he lay stunned and helpless in the swishing
water.

Of course soldiers and sailors ran from all parts of the vessel to the
rescue, and soon the injured men were carried below and attended to by
the doctors; and, considering the nature of the accident, it was matter
for surprise that the result was no worse than some pretty severe
contusions and a few broken ribs.

When Miles recovered consciousness, he found himself in his hammock,
with considerable pain in various parts of his body, and the Reverend
James Drew bending over him.

"You're all right now, my fine fellow," he said, in a low comforting
voice.  "No bones broken, so the doctors say.  Only a little bruised."

"Tell me, sir," said Miles, rousing himself, "is--is your daughter
safe?"

"Yes, thanks be to God, and to your prompt assistance, she is none the
worse--save the fright and a wetting."

Miles sank back on his pillows with a feeling of profound satisfaction.

"Now, you must try to sleep if you can," said the clergyman; "it will do
you good."

But Miles did not want anything to do him good.  He was quite content to
lie still and enjoy the simple fact that he had rescued Marion, perhaps
from death--at all events from serious injury!  As for pain--what was
that to him? was he not a soldier--one whose profession requires him to
suffer _anything_ cheerfully in the discharge of duty!  And was not love
the highest duty?

On the strength of some such thoughts he forgot his pain and calmly went
to sleep.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

HAS REFERENCE TO MANY THINGS CONNECTED WITH MIND, MATTER, AND
AFFECTIONS.

The wave which had burst with such disastrous effect on the deck of the
troop-ship was but the herald of one of those short, wild storms which
occasionally sweep with desolating violence over the Atlantic Ocean, and
too frequently strew with wreck the western shores of Europe.

In the Bay of Biscay, as usual, the power of the gale was felt more
severely than elsewhere.

"There's some sort o' mystery about the matter," said Jack Molloy to
William Armstrong, as they cowered together under the shelter of the
bridge.  "Why the Atlantic should tumble into this 'ere bay with greater
wiolence than elsewhere is beyond my comprehension.  But any man wi'
half an eye can see that it _do_ do it!  Jist look at that!"

There was something indeed to look at, for, even while he spoke, a
mighty wave tumbled on board of the vessel, rushed over the fore deck
like Niagara rapids in miniature, and slushed wildly about for a
considerable time before it found its way through the scuppers, into the
grey wilderness of heaving billows from which it sprang.

The great ship quivered, and seemed for a moment to stagger under the
blow, while the wind shrieked through the rigging as if laughing at the
success of its efforts, but the whitey-grey hull rose heavily, yet
steadily, out of the churning foam, rode triumphant over the
broad-backed billow that had struck her, and dived ponderously into the
valley of waters beyond.

"Don't you think," said the young soldier, whose general knowledge was a
little more extensive than that of the seaman, "that the Gulf Stream may
have something to do with it?"

Molloy looked at the deck with philosophically solemn countenance.
Deriving no apparent inspiration from that quarter, he gazed on the
tumultuous chaos of salt-water with a perplexed expression.  Finally and
gravely he shook his weather-beaten head--

"Can't see that nohow," he said.  "In course I knows that the Gulf
Stream comes out the Gulf o' Mexico, cuts across the Atlantic in a
nor'-easterly direction, goes slap agin the west of England, Ireland,
and Scotland, and then scurries away up the coast o' Norway--though
_why_ it should do so is best known to itself; p'r'aps it's arter the
fashion of an angry woman, accordin' to its own sweet will; but what has
that got for to do wi' the Bay of Biscay O?  That's wot I wants to
know."

"More to do with it than you think, Jack," answered the soldier.  "In
the first place, you're not quite, though partly, correct about the Gulf
Stream--"

"Well, I ain't zactly a scienkrific stoodent, you know.  Don't purfess
to be."

"Just so, Jack.  Neither am I, but I have inquired into this matter in a
general way, an' here's _my_ notions about it."

"Draw it fine, Willum; don't be flowery," said the sailor, renewing his
quid.  "Moreover, if you'll take the advice of an old salt you'll keep a
tighter grip o' that belayin'-pin you've got hold of, unless you wants
to be washed overboard.  Now then, fire away!  I'm all attention, as the
cat said at the mouth o' the mouse-hole."

"Well, then," began Armstrong, with the slightly conscious air of
superior knowledge, "the Gulf Stream does _not_ rise in the Gulf of
Mexico--"

"Did I say that it did, Willum?"

"Well, you said that it _came out of_ the Gulf of Mexico--and, no doubt,
so far you are right, but what I mean is that it does not originate
there."

"W'y don't you say what you mean, then, Willum, instead o' pitchin' into
a poor chap as makes no pretence to be a purfessor?  Heave ahead!"

"Well, Jack," continued the soldier, with more care as to his
statements, "I believe, on the best authority, that the Gulf Stream is
only part of a great ocean current which originates at the equator, and
a small bit of which flows north into the Atlantic, where it drives into
the Gulf of Mexico.  Finding no outlet there it rushes violently round
the gulf--"

"Gits angry, no doubt, an' that's what makes it hot?" suggested the
sailor.

"Perhaps!  Anyhow, it then flows, as you say, in a nor'-easterly
direction to the coasts of Great Britain and Ireland.  But it does more
than that.  It spreads as it goes, and also rushes straight at the
coasts of France and Spain.  Here, however, it meets a strong counter
current running south along these same coasts of France an' Spain.  That
is difficulty number one.  It has to do battle wi' that current, and you
know, Jack, wherever there's a battle there's apt to be convulsions of
some sort.  Well, then, a nor'-westerly gale comes on and rolls the
whole o' the North Atlantic Ocean against these coasts.  So here you
have this part of the Gulf Stream caught in another direction--on the
port quarter, as you sailors might call it--"

"Never mind wot us sailors might call it, Willum.  Wotever you say on
that pint you're sure to be wrong.  Heave ahead!"

"Well, then," continued Armstrong, with a laugh, "that's trouble number
two; and these troubles, you'll observe, apply to the whole west coast
of both countries; but in the Bay of Biscay there is still another
difficulty, for when these rushing and tormented waters try to escape,
they are met fair in the face by the whole north coast of Spain, and
thus--"

"_I_ sees it!" exclaimed Molloy, with a sudden beam of intelligence,
"you've hit the nail on the head, Willum.  Gulf Stream flies at France
in a hot rage, finds a cool current, or customer, flowin' down south
that shouts `Belay there!'  At it they go, tooth an' nail, when down
comes a nor'-wester like a wolf on the fold, takes the Stream on the
port quarter, as you say, an' drives both it an' the cool customer into
the bay, where the north o' Spain cries `Avast heavin', both o' you!'
an' drives 'em back to where the nor'-wester's drivin' 'em on!  No
wonder there's a mortal hullaballoo in the Bay o' Biscay!  Why, mate,
where got ye all that larnin'?"

Before his friend could reply, a terrific plunge of the vessel, a
vicious shriek of the wind, and the entrance of another tremendous sea,
suggested that the elements were roused to unusual fury at having the
secrets of their operations thus ruthlessly revealed, and also suggested
the propriety of the two friends seeking better shelter down below.

While this storm was raging, Miles lay in his hammock, subjected to
storms of the bosom with occasional calms between.  He was enjoying one
of the calms when Armstrong passed his hammock and asked how he was
getting on.

"Very well, Willie.  Soon be all right, I think," he replied, with a
contented smile.

For at that moment he had been dwelling on the agreeable fact that he
had really rescued Marion Drew from probable death, and that her parents
gratefully recognised the service--as he learned from the clergyman
himself, who expressed his gratitude in the form of frequent visits to
and pleasant chats with the invalid.

The interest and sympathy which Miles had felt on first seeing this man
naturally increased, and at last he ventured to confide to him the story
of his departure from home, but said nothing about the changed name.  It
is needless to relate all that was said on the occasion.  One can easily
imagine the bearing of a good deal of it.  The result on Miles was not
very obvious at the time, but it bore fruit after many days.

The calm in our hero's breast was not, however, of long duration.  The
thought that, as a private in a marching regiment, he had not the means
to maintain Marion, in the social position to which she had been
accustomed, was a very bitter thought, and ruffled the sea of his
feelings with a stiff breeze.  This freshened to something like a gale
of rebellion when he reflected that his case was all but hopeless; for,
whatever might have been the truth of the statement regarding the French
army under Napoleon, that "every soldier carried a marshal's baton in
his knapsack," it did not follow that soldiers in the British army of
the present day carried commissions in _their_ knapsacks.  Indeed, he
knew it was by no means a common thing for men to rise from the ranks,
and he was well aware that those who did so were elevated in virtue of
qualities which he did not possess.

He was in the midst of one of his bosom storms when Sergeant Hardy came
to inquire how he did.

Somehow the quiet, grave, manly nature of that sergeant had a powerful
effect, not only on Miles but on every one with whom he came in contact.
It was not so much his words as his manner that commended him.  He was
curiously contradictory, so to speak, in character and appearance.  The
stern gravity of his countenance suggested a hard nature, but lines of
good-humour lurking about the eyes and mouth put to flight the
suggestion, and acts of womanly tenderness on many occasions turned the
scale the other way.  A strong, tall, stiffly upright and slow-moving
frame, led one to look only for elephantine force, but when
circumstances required prompt action our sergeant displayed powers of
cat-like activity, which were all the more tremendous that they seemed
incongruous and were unexpected.  From his lips you looked for a voice
of thunder--and at drill you were not disappointed--but on ordinary
occasions his speech was soft and low; bass indeed as to its quality,
but never harsh or loud.

"A gale is brewing up from the nor'-west, so Jack Molloy says," remarked
Hardy, as he was about to pass on.

"Why, I thought it was blowing a gale _now_!" returned Miles.  "At least
it seems so, if we may judge from the pitching and plunging."

"Ah, lad, you are judging from the landlubber's view-point," returned
the sergeant.  "Wait a bit, and you will understand better what Molloy
means when he calls this only a `capful of wind.'"

Miles had not to wait long.  The gale when fully "brewed up" proved to
be no mean descendant of the family of storms which have tormented the
celebrated bay since the present economy of nature began; and many of
those who were on board of the troop-ship at that time had their eyes
opened and their minds enlarged as to the nature of a thorough gale;
when hatches have to be battened down, and the dead-lights closed; when
steersmen have to be fastened in their places, and the maddened sea
seems to roar defiance to the howling blast, and all things movable on
deck are swept away as if they were straws, and many things not meant to
be movable are wrenched from their fastenings with a violence that
nothing formed by man can resist, and timbers creak and groan, and loose
furniture gyrates about until smashed to pieces, and well-guarded glass
and crockery leap out of bounds to irrecoverable ruin, and even the
seamen plunge about and stagger, and landsmen hold on to ring-bolts and
belaying-pins, or cling to bulkheads for dear life, while mighty
billows, thundering in-board, hiss along the decks, and everything,
above, below, and around, seems being swept into eternity by the besom
of destruction!

But the troop-ship weathered the storm nobly; and the good Lord sent
fine weather and moderate winds thereafter; and ere long the soldiers
were enjoying the sunshine, the sparkling waters, and the sight of the
lovely shores of the blue Mediterranean.

Soon after that broken bones began to mend, and bruises to disappear;
and our hero, thoroughly recovered from his accident, as well as greatly
