be cast loose.  Selecting a box from this, he opened it, and took
therefrom a small instrument made partly of brass, partly of glass, and
partly of wood.

"You have often wondered, Benjy," he said, "what I meant to do with this
electrical machine.  You shall soon see.  Help me to arrange it, boy,
and do you, Leo, uncoil part of this copper wire.  Here, Alf, carry this
little box to the foot of the berg, and lay it in front of yon blue
cavern."

"Which?  That one close to the waterfall or--"

"No, the big cavern, just under the most solid part of the berg--the one
that seems to grow bluer and bluer until it becomes quite black in its
heart.  And have a care, Alf.  The box you carry is dangerous.  Don't
let it fall.  Lay it down gently, and come back at once.  Anders," he
added, turning round, "let all the people go back with dogs and sledges
for a quarter of a mile."

There was something so peremptory and abrupt in their leader's manner
that no one thought of asking him a question, though all were filled
with surprise and curiosity as to what he meant to do.

"Come here, Leo," he said, after his orders had been obeyed.  "Hold this
coil, and pay it out as I walk to the berg with the end in my hand."

The coil was one of extremely fine copper wire.  Leo let it run as the
Captain walked off.  A minute or two later he was seen to enter the dark
blue cavern and disappear.

"My dear dad is reckless," exclaimed Benjy, in some anxiety, "what if
the roof o' that cave should fall in.  There are bits of ice dropping
about everywhere.  What _can_ he be going to do?"

As he spoke, the Captain issued from the cave, and walked smartly
towards them.

"Now then, it's all right," he said, "give me the coil, Leo, and come
back, all of you.  Fetch the machine, Alf."

In a few minutes the whole party had retired a considerable distance
from the huge berg, the Captain uncoiling the wire as he went.

"Surely you're not going to try to blow it up piecemeal?" said Leo.

"No, lad, I'm not going to do that, or anything so slow," returned the
Captain, stopping and arranging the instrument.

"But if the box contains gunpowder," persisted Leo, "there's not enough
to--"

"It contains dynamite," said the Captain, affixing the coil to the
machine, and giving it a sharp turn.

If a volcano had suddenly opened fire under the iceberg the effect could
not have been more tremendous.  Thunder itself is not more deep than was
the crash which reverberated among the ice-cliffs.  Smoke burst in a
huge volume from the heart of the berg.  Masses, fragments, domes, and
pinnacles were hurled into the air, and fell back to mingle with the
blue precipices that tumbled, slid, or plunged in horrible confusion.
Only a portion, indeed, of the mighty mass had been actually disrupted,
but the shock to the surrounding ice was so shattering that the entire
berg subsided.

"Stu-pendous!" exclaimed Alf, with a look of awe-stricken wonder.

Benjy, after venting his feelings in a shriek of joyful surprise, seemed
to be struck dumb.  Anders and Butterface stood still,--speechless.  As
for the Eskimos, they turned with one hideous yell, and fled from the
spot like maniacs--excepting Chingatok, who, although startled, stood
his ground in an attitude expressive of superlative surprise.

"So,--it has not disappointed me," remarked the Captain, when the
hideous din had ceased, "dynamite is indeed a powerful agent when
properly applied: immeasurably more effective than powder."

"But it seems to me," said Leo, beginning to recover himself, "that
although you have brought the berg down you have not rendered it much
more passable."

"That's true, lad," answered the Captain with a somewhat rueful
expression.  "It does seem a lumpy sort of heap after all; but there may
be found some practicable bits when we examine it more closely.  Come,
we'll go see."

On closer inspection it was found that the ruined berg still presented
an absolutely insurmountable obstacle to the explorers, who, being
finally compelled to admit that even dynamite had failed, left the place
in search of a natural opening.

Travelling along the chain for a considerable time, in the hope of
succeeding, they came at last to a succession of comparatively level
floes, which conducted them to the extreme northern end of the chain,
and there they found that the floes continued onwards in an unbroken
plain to what appeared to be the open sea.

"That is a water-sky, for certain," exclaimed Captain Vane, eagerly, on
the evening when this discovery was made.  "The open ocean cannot now be
far off."

"There's a very dark cloud there, father," said Benjy, who, as we have
before said, possessed the keenest sight of the party.

"A cloud, boy! where?  Um--Yes, I see something--"

"It is land," said Chingatok, in a low voice.

"Land!" exclaimed the Captain, "are you sure?"

"Yes, I know it well.  I passed it on my journey here.  We left our
canoes and oomiaks there, and took to sledges because the floes were
unbroken.  But these ice-mountains were not here at that time.  They
have come down since we passed from the great sea."

"There!" said the Captain, turning to Leo with a look of triumph, "he
still speaks of the great sea!  If these bergs came from it, we _must_
have reached it, lad."

"But the land puzzles me," said Leo.  "Can it be part of Greenland?"

"Scarcely, for Greenland lies far to the east'ard, and the latest
discoveries made on the north of that land show that the coast turns
still more decidedly east--tending to the conclusion that Greenland is
an island.  This land, therefore, must be entirely new land--an island--
a continent perhaps."

"But it may be a cape, father," interposed Benjy.  "You know that capes
have a queer way of sticking out suddenly from land, just as men's noses
stick out from their faces."

"True, Benjy, true, but your simile is not perfect, for men's noses
don't always stick out from their faces--witness the nose of Butterface,
which, you know, is well aft of his lips and chin.  However, this _may_
be Greenland's nose--who knows?  We shall go and find out ere long.
Come, use your whip, Leo.  Ho!  Chingatok, tell your hairy kinsmen to
clap on all sail and make for the land."

"Hold on, uncle!" cried Alf, "I think I see a splendid specimen of--"

The crack of Leo's whip, and the yelping of the team, drowned the rest
of the sentence, and Alf was whirled away from his splendid specimen,
(whatever it was), for ever!

"It is a piece of great good fortune," said the Captain, as they swept
along over the hard and level snow, "that the Eskimos have left their
boats on this land, for now I shall have two strings to my bow."

"What is the other string?" asked Leo, as he administered a flip to the
flank of a lazy dog.

"Ah, that remains to be seen, lad," replied the Captain.

"Why, what a tyrant you are, uncle!" exclaimed Alf, who had recovered
from his disappointment about the splendid specimen.  "You won't tell us
anything, almost.  Who ever before heard of the men of an expedition to
the North Pole being kept in ignorance of the means by which they were
to get there?"

The Captain's reply was only a twinkle of the eye.

"Father wants to fill you with bliss, Alf," said Benjy, "according to
your own notions of that sort of thing."

"What do you mean, Ben?"

"Why, have we not all heard you often quote the words:--`Where ignorance
is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise.'"

"Hear, hear!  That's it, Benjy," said the Captain, with a nod and a
short laugh, while his son assumed the satisfied gravity of look
appropriate to one who has made a hit; "I won't decrease his bliss by
removing his ignorance yet awhile."

"Hain't Buzzby got nuffin' to say on that 'ere pint?" whispered
Butterface to Benjy, who sat just in front of him.

"Ah! to be sure.  I say, Alf," said the boy with an earnest look,
"hasn't your favourite author got something to say about the bliss of
ignorance?  I'm almost sure I heard you muttering something in your
dreams on that subject the other day."

"Of course he has.  He has a long poem on that subject.  Here is a bit
of it."

Alf, whose memory was good, immediately recited the following:

  "How sweet is ignorance!  How soothing to the mind,
  To search for treasures in the brain, and nothing find!
  Consider.  When the memory is richly stored,
  How apt the victim of redundant knowledge to be bored!
  When Nothing fills the chambers of the heart and brain,
  Then negative enjoyment comes with pleasures in her train!
  Descending on the clods of sense like summer rain.

  "Knowledge, 'tis said, gives power, and so it often does;
  Knowledge makes sorrow, too, around our pillows buzz.
  In debt I am, with little cash; I know it--and am sad.
  Of course, if I were ignorant of this--how glad!
  A loving friend, whom once I knew in glowing health,
  Has broken down, and also, somehow, lost his wealth.
  How sad the knowledge makes me!  Better far
  In ignorance to live, than hear of things that jar,
  And think of things that are not,--not of things that are.

  "`If ignorance is bliss,' the poet saith--why `if?'
  Why doubt a fact so clearly proven, stubborn, stiff?
  The heavy griefs and burdens of the world around,
  The hideous tyranny by which mankind is ground,
  The earthquake, tempest, rush of war, and wail of woe,
  Are all as though they were not--if I do not know!
  Wrapped in my robe of ignorance, what _can_ I miss?
  Am I not saved from all--and more than all--of this?
  Do I not revel in a regal realm of bliss?"

"Bravo!  Buzzby," cried the Captain, "but, I say, Alf, don't it seem to
smack rather too much of selfishness?"

"Of course it does, uncle.  I do not think Buzzby always sound in
principle, and, like many poets, he is sometimes confused in his logic."

"You're right, Benjy, the land is clear enough now," remarked the
Captain, whose interest in Buzzby was not profound, and whose feelings
towards logic bordered on the contemptuous, as is often the case with
half-educated men, and, strange to say, sometimes with highly-educated
men, as well as with the totally ignorant--so true is it that extremes
meet!

In the course of a couple of hours the sledges drew near to the island,
which proved to be a large but comparatively low one, rising not more
than a hundred feet in any part.  It was barren and ragged, with patches
of reindeer moss growing in some parts, and dwarf willows in others.
Myriads of sea-birds made it their home, and these received the invaders
with clamorous cries, as if they knew that white men were a dangerous
novelty, and objected to the innovation.

Despite their remonstrances, the party landed, and the Eskimos hurried
over the rocks to that part of the island where they had left their
kayaks and women's boats in charge of a party of natives who were
resident on the island at the time they passed, and from whom they had
borrowed the dogs and sledges with which they had travelled south.

Meanwhile the white men took to rambling; Leo to shoot wild-fowl for
supper, Alf to search for "specimens," and Benjy to scramble among the
rocks in search of anything that might "turn up."  Butterface assisted
the latter in his explorations.  While the rest were thus engaged, the
Captain extemporised a flag-staff out of two spears lashed together with
a small block at the top for the purpose of running up a flag, and
formally taking possession of the island when they should re-assemble.
This done, he wrote a brief outline of his recent doings, which he
inserted in a ginger-beer bottle brought for that very purpose.  Then he
assisted Anders in making the encampment and preparing supper.

The two were yet in the midst of the latter operation when a shout was
heard in the distance.  Looking in the direction whence it came they saw
Chingatok striding over the rocks towards them with unusual haste.  He
was followed by the other Eskimos, who came forward gesticulating
violently.

"My countrymen have left the island," said Chingatok when he came up.

"And taken the kayaks with them?" asked Captain Vane anxiously.

"Every one," replied the giant.

This was depressing news to the Captain, who had counted much on making
use of the Eskimo canoes in the event of his own appliances failing.

"Where have they gone, think you?" he asked.

"Tell Blackbeard," replied Chingatok, turning to Anders, "that no one
knows.  Since they went away the lanes of open water have closed, and
the ice is solid everywhere."

"But where the kayak and the oomiak cannot float the sledge may go,"
said the Captain.

"That is true; tell the pale chief he is wise, yet he knows not all
things.  Let him think.  When he comes to the great open sea what will
he do without canoes?"

"Huk!" exclaimed Oolichuk, with that look and tone which intimated his
belief that the pale chief had received a "clincher."

The chattering of the other Eskimos ceased for a moment or two as they
awaited eagerly the Captain's answer, but the Captain disappointed them.
He merely said, "Well, we shall see.  I may not know all things,
Chingatok, nevertheless I know a deal more than you can guess at.  Come
now, let's have supper, Anders; we can't wait for the wanderers."

As he spoke, three of the wanderers came into camp, namely Leo, Benjy,
and Butterface.

"What's come of Alf?" asked the Captain.

Neither Leo nor Benjy had seen him since they parted, a quarter of an
hour after starting, and both had expected to find him in camp, but
Butterface had seen him.

"Sawd him runnin'," said the sable steward, "runnin' like a mad kangaroo
arter a smallish brute like a mouse.  Nebber sawd nuffin' like Massa Alf
for runnin'."

"Well, we can't wait for him," said the Captain, "I want to take
possession of the island before supper.  What shall we call it?"

"Disappointment Isle," said Leo, "seeing that the Eskimos have failed
us."

"No--I won't be ungrateful," returned the Captain, "considering the
successes already achieved."

"Call it Content Isle, then," suggested Benjy.

"But I am not content with partial success.  Come, Butterface, haven't
you got a suggestion to make."

The negro shook his woolly head.  "No," he said, "I's 'orrible stoopid.
Nebber could get nuffin' to come out o' my brain--sep w'en it's knocked
out by accident.  You's hard to please, massa.  S'pose you mix de two,--
dis'pintment an' content,--an' call 'im Half-an'-half Island."

"Home is in sight now," said Chingatok, who had taken no interest in the
above discussion, as it was carried on in English.  "A few days more and
we should be there if we only had our kayaks."

"There's the name," exclaimed the Captain eagerly when this was
translated, "`Home-in-sight,' that will do."

Rising quickly, he bent a Union Jack to the halyards of his primitive
flag-staff, ran it up, and in the name of Queen Victoria took possession
of _Home-in-sight Island_.  After having given three hearty British
cheers, in which the Eskimos tried to join, with but partial success,
they buried the ginger-beer bottle under a heap of stones, a wooden
cross was fixed on the top of the cairn, and then the party sat down to
supper, while the Captain made a careful note of the latitude and
longitude, which he had previously ascertained.  This latest addition to
Her Majesty's dominions was put down by him in latitude 85 degrees 32
minutes, or about 288 geographical miles from the North Pole.



CHAPTER TEN.

A SKETCHER IN IMMINENT DANGER.  DIFFICULTIES INCREASE, AND ARE OVERCOME
AS USUAL.

The first night on Home-in-sight Island was not so undisturbed as might
have been expected.  The noisy gulls did indeed go to sleep at their
proper bed-time, which, by the way, they must have ascertained by
instinct, for the sun could be no certain guide, seeing that he shone
all night as well as all day, and it would be too much to expect that
gulls had sufficient powers of observation to note the great luminary's
exact relation to the horizon.  Polar bears, like the Eskimo, had
forsaken the spot.  All nature, indeed, animate and inanimate, favoured
the idea of repose when the explorers lay down to sleep on a mossy couch
that was quite as soft as a feather bed, and much more springy.

The cause of disturbance was the prolonged absence of Alf Vandervell.
That enthusiastic naturalist's failure to appear at supper was nothing
uncommon.  His non-appearance when they lay down did indeed cause some
surprise, but little or no anxiety, and they all dropped into a sound
sleep which lasted till considerably beyond midnight.  Then the Captain
awoke with a feeling of uneasiness, started up on one elbow, yawned, and
gazed dreamily around.  The sun, which had just kissed his hand to the
disappointed horizon and begun to re-ascend the sky, blinded the Captain
with his beams, but did not prevent him from observing that Alf's place
was still vacant.

"Very odd," he muttered, "Alf didn't use to--to--w'at's 'is name in--
this--way--"

The Captain's head dropped, his elbow relaxed, and he returned to the
land of Nod for another half-hour.

Again he awoke with a start, and sat upright.

"This'll never do," he exclaimed, with a fierce yawn, "something _must_
