the gun on the pommel of their saddles; and in this way fire a great
many shots in quick succession.  This, however, is a dangerous mode of
shooting, as the ball sometimes sticks half-way down the barrel and
bursts the gun, carrying away a finger, and occasionally a hand.

In this way they soon killed as many buffaloes as they could carry in
their carts, and one of the hunters set off in chase of a calf.  In a
short time he edged one away from the rest, and then, getting between it
and the herd, ran straight against it with his horse and knocked it
down.  The frightened little animal jumped up again and set off with
redoubled speed; but another butt from the horse again sent it
sprawling.  Again it rose, and was again knocked down, and in this way
was at last fairly tired out; when the hunter, jumping suddenly from his
horse, threw a rope round its neck, and drove it before him to the
encampment, and soon after brought it to the fort.  It was as wild as
ever when I saw it at Norway House, and seemed to have as much distaste
to its thraldom as the day it was taken.

As the summer advanced the heat increased, and the mosquitoes became
perfectly insupportable.  Nothing could save one from the attacks of
these little torments.  Almost all other insects went to rest with the
sun: sand-flies, which bite viciously during the day, went to sleep at
night; the large _bull-dog_, whose bite is terrible, slumbered in the
evening; but the mosquito, the long-legged, determined, vicious,
persevering mosquito, whose ceaseless hum dwells for ever on the ear,
_never_ went to sleep.  Day and night the painful, tender little pimples
on our necks and behind our ears were being constantly retouched by
these villainous flies, it was useless killing thousands of them--
millions supplied their place.  The only thing, in fact, that can
protect one during the night (_nothing_ can during the day) is a net of
gauze hung over the bed; but as this was looked upon by the young men as
somewhat effeminate, it was seldom resorted to.  The best thing for
their destruction, we found, was to fill our rooms with smoke, either by
burning damp moss or by letting off large puffs of gunpowder, and then
throwing the doors and windows open to allow them to fly out.  This,
however, did not put them all out; so we generally spent an hour or so
before going to bed in hunting them with candles.  Even this did not
entirely destroy them; and often might our friends, by looking
telescopically through the keyhole, have seen us wandering during the
late hours of the night in our shirts looking for mosquitoes, like
unhappy ghosts doomed to search perpetually for something they can never
find.  The intense, suffocating heat also added greatly to our
discomfort.

In fine weather I used to visit my friend Mr Evans at Rossville, where
I had always a hearty welcome.  I remember on one occasion being obliged
to beg the loan of a canoe from an Indian, and having a romantic paddle
across part of Playgreen Lake.  I had been offered a passage in a boat
which was going to Rossville, but was not to return.  Having nothing
particular to do, however, at the time, I determined to take my chance
of finding a return conveyance of some kind or other.  In due time I
arrived at the parsonage, where I spent a pleasant afternoon in
sauntering about the village, and in admiring the rapidity and ease with
which the Indian children could read and write the Indian language by
means of a syllable alphabet invented by their clergyman.  The same
gentleman afterwards made a set of leaden types with no other instrument
than a penknife, and printed a great many hymns in the Indian language.

In the evening I began to think of returning to the fort; but no boat or
canoe could be found small enough to be paddled by one man, and as no
one seemed inclined to go with me, I began to fear that I should have to
remain all night.  At last a young Indian told me he had a hunting
canoe, which I might have if I chose to venture across the lake in it,
but it was very small.  I instantly accepted his offer; and, bidding
adieu to my friends at the parsonage, followed him down to a small creek
overshaded by tall trees, where, concealed among the reeds and bushes,
lay the canoe.  It could not, I should think, have measured more than
three yards in length, by eighteen inches in breadth at the middle,
whence it tapered at either end to a thin edge.  It was made of birch
bark scarcely a quarter of an inch thick; and its weight may be imagined
when I say that the Indian lifted it from the ground with one hand and
placed it in the water, at the same time handing me a small light
paddle.  I stepped in with great care, and the frail bark trembled with
my weight as I seated myself, and pushed out into the lake.  The sun had
just set, and his expiring rays cast a glare upon the overhanging clouds
in the west, whilst the shades of night gathered thickly over the
eastern horizon.  Not a breath of wind disturbed the glassy smoothness
of the water, in which every golden-tinted cloud was mirrored with a
fidelity that rendered it difficult to say which was image and which
reality.  The little bark darted through the water with the greatest
ease, and as I passed among the deepening shadows of the lofty pines,
and across the gilded waters of the bay, a wild enthusiasm seized me; I
strained with all my strength upon the paddle, and the sparkling drops
flew in showers behind me as the little canoe flew over the water more
like a phantom than a reality--when suddenly I missed my stroke; my
whole weight was thrown on one side, the water gurgled over the gunwale
of the canoe, and my heart leaped to my mouth, as I looked for an
instant into the dark water.  It was only for a moment; in another
instant the canoe righted, and I paddled the remainder of the way in a
much more gentle manner--enthusiasm gone, and a most wholesome degree of
timidity pervading my entire frame.  It was dark when I reached the
fort, and upon landing I took the canoe under my arm and carried it up
the bank with nearly as much ease as if it had been a camp-stool.

When the day was warm and the sun bright--when the sky was clear and the
water blue--when the air was motionless, and the noise of arrivals and
departures had ceased--when work was at a stand, and we enjoyed the
felicity of having nothing to do, Mr Russ and I used to saunter down to
the water's edge to have an hour or two's fishing.  The fish we fished
for were goldeyes, and the manner of our fishing was this:--

Pausing occasionally as we walked along, one of us might be observed to
bend in a watchful manner over the grass, and, gradually assuming the
position of a quadruped, fall plump upon his hands and knees.  Having
achieved this feat, he would rise with a grasshopper between his finger
and thumb; a tin box being then held open by the other, the unlucky
insect was carefully introduced to the interior, and the lid closed
sharply--some such remark attending each capture as that "_That_ one was
safe," or, "There went another;" and the mystery of the whole proceeding
being explained by the fact that these same incarcerated grasshoppers
were intended to form the bait with which we trusted to beguile the
unwary goldeyes to their fate.

Having arrived at the edge of the place where we usually fished, each
drew from a cleft in the rock a stout branch of a tree, around the end
of which was wound a bit of twine with a large hook attached to it.
This we unwound quickly, and after impaling a live grasshopper upon the
barbs of our respective hooks, dropped them into the water, and gazed
intently at the lines.  Mr Russ, who was a great lover of angling, now
began to get excited, and made several violent pulls at the line, under
the impression that something had _bitten_.  Suddenly his rod, stout as
it was, bent with the immense muscular force applied to it, and a small
goldeye, about three or four inches long, flashed like an electric spark
from the water, and fell with bursting force on the rocks behind, at the
very feet of a small Indian boy, who sat, nearly in a state of nature,
watching our movements from among the bushes.  The little captive was of
a bright silvery colour, with a golden eye, and is an excellent fish for
breakfast.  The truth of the proverb, "It never rains but it pours," was
soon verified by the immense number of goldeyes of every size, from one
foot to four inches, which we showered into the bushes behind us.  Two
or three dozen were caught in a few minutes, and at last we began to get
quite exhausted; and Mr Russ proposed going up to the house for his new
fly-rod, by way of diversifying the sport, and rendering it more
scientific.

Down he came again in a few minutes, with a splendidly varnished,
extremely slim rod, with an invisible line and an aerial fly.  This
instrument was soon put up; and Mr Russ, letting out six fathoms of
line, stood erect, and making a splendid heave, caught the Indian boy by
the hair!  This was an embarrassing commencement; but being an easy,
good-natured man, he only frowned the boy out of countenance, and
shortened his line.  The next cast was more successful; the line swept
gracefully through the air, and fell in a series of elegant circles
within a few feet of the rock on which he stood.  Goldeyes, however, are
not particular; and ere he could draw the line straight, a very large
one darted at the fly, and swallowed it.  The rod bent into a beautiful
oval as Mr Russ made a futile attempt to whip the fish over his head,
according to custom, and the line straightened with fearful rigidity as
the fish began to pull for its life.  The fisher became energetic, and
the fish impatient, but there was no prospect of its ever being landed;
till at last, having got his rod inextricably entangled among the
neighbouring bushes, he let it fall, and most unscientifically hauled
the fish out by the line, exclaiming, in the bitterness of his heart,
"that rods were contemptible childish things, and that a stout branch of
a tree was the rod for him."  This last essay seemed to have frightened
all the rest away, for not another bite did we get after that.

Towards the beginning of June 1843, orders arrived from headquarters,
appointing me to spend the approaching winter at York Factory, the place
where I had first pressed American soil.  It is impossible to describe
the joy with which I received the news.  Whether it was my extreme
fondness for travelling, or the mere love of change, I cannot tell, but
it had certainly the effect of affording me immense delight, and I set
about making preparation for the journey immediately.  The arrival of
the canoes from Canada was to be the signal for my departure, and I
looked forward to their appearance with great impatience.

In a few days the canoes arrived; and on the 4th of June, 1843, I
started, in company with several other gentlemen, in two north canoes.
These light, graceful craft were about thirty-six feet long, by from
five to six broad, and were capable of containing eight men and three
passengers.  They were made entirely of birch bark, and gaudily painted
on the bow and stern.  In these fairy-like boats, then, we swept swiftly
over Playgreen Lake, the bright vermilion paddles glancing in the
sunshine, and the woods echoing to the lively tune of _A la claire
fontaine_, sung by the two crews in full chorus.  We soon left Norway
House far behind us, and ere long were rapidly descending the streams
that flow through the forests of the interior into Hudson Bay.

While running one of the numerous rapids with which these rivers abound,
our canoe struck upon a rock, which tore a large hole in its side.
Fortunately the accident happened close to the shore, and nearly at the
usual breakfasting hour; so that while some of the men repaired the
damages, which they did in half an hour, we employed ourselves agreeably
in demolishing a huge ham, several slices of bread, and a cup or two of
strong tea.

This was the only event worth relating that happened to us during the
voyage; and as canoe-travelling is enlarged upon in another chapter, we
will jump at once to the termination of our journey.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

YORK FACTORY--WINTER AMUSEMENTS--INTENSE COLD--THE
SEASONS--"SKYLARKING"--SPORTING IN THE WOODS AND MARSHES--TRADING WITH
INDIANS--CHRISTMAS DOINGS--BREAKING-UP OF THE ICE IN SPRING.

Are you ambitious, reader, of dwelling in a "pleasant cot in a tranquil
spot, with a distant view of the changing sea?"  If so, do not go to
York Factory.  Not that it is such an unpleasant place--for I spent two
years very happily there--but simply (to give a poetical reason, and
explain its character in one sentence) because it is a monstrous blot on
a swampy spot, with a partial view of the frozen sea!

First impressions are generally incorrect; and I have little doubt that
_your_ first impression is, that a "monstrous blot on a swampy spot"
cannot by any possibility be an agreeable place.  To dispel this
impression, and at the same time to enlighten you with regard to a
variety of facts with which you are probably unacquainted, I shall
describe York Factory as graphically as may be.  An outline of its
general appearance has been already given in a former chapter, so I will
now proceed to particularise the buildings.  The principal edifice is
the "general store," where the goods, to the amount of two years' outfit
for the whole northern department, are stored.  On each side of this is
a long, low whitewashed house, with green edgings, in one of which
visitors and temporary residents during the summer are quartered.  The
other is the summer mess-room.  Four roomy fur-stores stand at right
angles to these houses, thus forming three sides of the front square.
Behind these stands a row of smaller buildings for the labourers and
tradesmen; and on the right hand is the dwelling-house of the gentleman
in charge, and adjoining it the clerks' house; while on the left are the
provision-store and Indian trading-shop.  A few insignificant buildings,
such as the oil-store and lumber-house, intrude themselves here and
there; and on the right a tall ungainly outlook rises in the air,
affording the inhabitants an extensive view of their wild domains; and
just beside it stands the ice-house.  This latter building is filled
every spring with blocks of solid ice of about three feet square, which
do not melt during the short but intensely hot summer.  The inhabitants
are thus enabled to lay up a store of fresh meat for summer use, which
lasts them till about the commencement of winter.  The lower stratum of
ice in this house never melts; nor, indeed, does the soil of the
surrounding country, which only thaws to the depth of a few feet, the
subsoil being perpetually frozen.

The climate of York Factory is very bad in the warm months of the year,
but during the winter the intensity of the cold renders it healthy.
Summer is very short; and the whole three seasons of spring, summer, and
autumn are included in the months of June, July, August, and September--
the rest being winter.

During part of summer the heat is extreme, and millions of flies,
mosquitoes, etcetera, render the country unbearable.  Fortunately,
however, the cold soon extirpates them.  Scarcely anything in the way of
vegetables can be raised in the small spot of ground called by courtesy
a garden.  Potatoes one year, for a wonder, attained the size of
walnuts; and sometimes a cabbage and a turnip are prevailed upon to
grow.  Yet the woods are filled with a great variety of wild berries,
among which the cranberry and swampberry are considered the best.  Black
and red currants, as well as gooseberries, are plentiful; but the first
are bitter, and the last small.  The swampberry is in shape something
like the raspberry, of a light yellow colour, and grows on a low bush,
almost close to the ground.  They make excellent preserves, and,
together with cranberries, are made into tarts for the mess during
winter.

In the month of September there are generally a couple of weeks or so of
extremely fine weather, which is called the Indian summer; after which
winter, with frost, cold, and snow, sets in with rapidity.  For a few
weeks in October there is sometimes a little warm weather (or rather, I
should say, a little _thawy_, weather); but after that, until the
following April, the thermometer seldom rises to the freezing-point.  In
the depth of winter it falls from 30 to 40, 45, and even 50 degrees
_below zero_ of Fahrenheit.  This intense cold, however, is not so much
felt as one might suppose, as during its continuance the air is
perfectly calm.  Were the slightest breath of wind to arise when the
thermometer stands so low, no man could show his face to it for a
moment.  Forty degrees below zero, and quite calm, is infinitely
preferable to fifteen degrees below, or thereabouts, with a strong
breeze of wind.  Spirit of wine is, of course, the only liquid that can
be used in the thermometers, as mercury, were it exposed to such cold,
would remain frozen nearly half the winter.  Spirit never froze in any
cold ever experienced at York Factory, unless when very much adulterated
with water; and even then the spirit would remain liquid in the centre
of the mass [see note 1].

To resist this intense cold the inhabitants dress, not in furs, as is
generally supposed, but in coats and trousers made of smoked deer-skins;
the only piece of fur in their costume being the cap.  The houses are
built of wood, with double windows and doors.  They are heated by means
of large iron stoves, fed with wood; yet so intense is the cold, that I
have seen the stove in places _red-hot_, and a basin of water in the
room _frozen_ nearly solid.  The average cold, I should think, is about
15 or 16 degrees below zero, or 48 degrees of frost.  The country around
is a complete swamp, but the extreme shortness of the warm weather, and
the consequent length of winter, fortunately prevent the rapid
decomposition of vegetable matter.  Another cause of the unhealthiness
of the climate during summer is the prevalence of dense fogs, which come
off the bay and enshroud the country; and also the liability of the
weather to sudden and extreme changes.

Summer may be said to commence in July, the preceding month being a
fight between summer and winter, which cannot claim the slightest title
to the name of spring.  As August advances the heat becomes great; but
about the commencement of September Nature wears a more pleasing aspect,
which lasts till the middle of October.  It is then clear and beautiful,
just cold enough to kill all the mosquitoes, and render brisk exercise
agreeable.  About this time, too, the young ducks begin to fly south,
affording excellent sport among the marshes.  A week or so after this
winter commences, with light falls of snow occasionally, and hard frost
during the night.  Flocks of snow-birds (the harbingers of cold in
autumn, and heat in spring) begin to appear, and soon the whirring wings
of the white partridge may be heard among the snow-encompassed willows.
The first thaw generally takes place in April; and May is characterised
by melting snow, disruption of ice, and the arrival of the first flocks
of wild-fowl.

The country around the fort is one immense level swamp, thickly covered
with willows, and dotted here and there with a few clumps of pine-trees.
The only large timber in the vicinity grows on the banks of Hayes and
Nelson Rivers, and consists chiefly of spruce fir.  The swampy nature of
the ground has rendered it necessary to raise the houses in the fort
several feet in the air upon blocks of wood; and the squares are
intersected by elevated wooden platforms, which form the only promenade
the inhabitants have during the summer, as no one can venture fifty
yards beyond the gates without wetting his feet.  Nothing bearing the
most distant resemblance to a hillock exists in the land.  Nelson River
is a broad stream, which discharges itself into Hudson Bay, near the
mouth of Hayes River, between which lies a belt of swamp and willows,
known by the name of the Point of Marsh.  Here may be found, during the
spring and autumn, millions of ducks, geese, and plover, and during the
summer billions of mosquitoes.  There are a great many strange plants
and shrubs in this marsh, which forms a wide field of research and
pleasure to the botanist and the sportsman; but the lover of beautiful
scenery and the florist will find little to please the eye or
imagination, as Nature has here put on her plainest garb, and flowers
there are none.

Of the feathered tribes there are the large and small grey Canada goose,
the laughing goose (so called from the resemblance of its cry to
laughter), and the wavie or white goose.  The latter are not very
numerous.  There are great numbers of wild ducks, pintails, widgeons,
divers, sawbills, black ducks, and teal; but the prince of ducks (the
canvas-back) is not there.  In spring and autumn the whole country
becomes musical with the wild cries and shrill whistle of immense hosts
of plover of all kinds--long legs, short legs, black legs, and yellow
legs--sandpipers and snipe, which are assisted in their noisy concerts
by myriads of frogs.  The latter are really the best songsters in Hudson
Bay [see note 2].  Bitterns are also found in the marshes; and
sometimes, though rarely, a solitary crane finds its way to the coast.
In the woods, and among the dry places around, there are a few grey
grouse and wood partridges, a great many hawks, and owls of all sizes--
from the gigantic white owl, which measures five feet across the back
and wings, to the small grey owl, not much bigger than a man's hand.

In winter the woods and frozen swamps are filled with ptarmigan--or, as
they are called by the trappers, white partridges.  They are not very
palatable; but, nevertheless, they form a pretty constant dish at the
winter mess-table of York Factory, and afford excellent sport to the
inhabitants.  There are also great varieties of small birds, among which
the most interesting are the snow-birds, or snow-flakes, which pay the
country a flying visit at the commencement and termination of winter.

Such is York Fort, the great depot and gate to the wild regions
surrounding Hudson Bay.  Having described its appearance and general
characteristics, I shall proceed to introduce the reader to my future
companions, and describe our amusements and sports among the marshes.

BACHELORS' HALL.

On the--of June, 1843, I landed the second time on the wharf of York
Fort, and betook myself to Bachelors' Hall, where Mr Grave, whom I met
by the way, told me to take up my quarters.  As I approached the door of
the well-remembered house, the most tremendous uproar that ever was
heard proceeded from within its dingy walls; so I jumped the paling that
stood in front of the windows, and took a peep at the interior before
introducing myself.

The scene that met my eye was ludicrous in the extreme.  Mounted on a
chair, behind a bedroom door, stood my friend Crusty, with a large pail
of water in his arms, which he raised cautiously to the top of the door,
for the purpose of tilting it over upon two fellow-clerks who stood
below, engaged in a wrestling match, little dreaming of the cataract
that was soon to fall on their devoted heads; at the door of a room
opposite stood the doctor, grinning from ear to ear at the thought of
sending a thick stream of water in Crusty's face from a large syringe
which he held in his hands; while near the stove sat the jolly skipper,
looking as grave as possible under the circumstances.

The practical joke was just approaching to a climax when I looked in.
The combatants neared the door behind which Crusty was ensconced.  The
pail was raised, and the syringe pointed, when the hall door opened, and
Mr Grave walked in!  The sudden change that ensued could not have been
more rapidly effected had Mr Grave been a magician.  The doctor thrust
the syringe into his pocket, into which a great deal of the water
escaped and dripped from the skirts of his coat as he walked slowly
across the room and began to examine, with a wonderful degree of
earnestness, the edge of an amputating knife that lay upon his
dressing-table.  The two wrestlers sprang with one accord into their own
room, where they hid their flushed faces behind the door.  Certain
smothered sounds near the stove proclaimed the skipper to be revelling
in an excruciating fit of suppressed laughter; while poor Crusty, who
slipped his foot in rapidly descending from his chair, lay sprawling in
an ocean of water, which he had upset upon himself in his fall.

Mr Grave merely went to Mr Wilson's room to ask a few questions, and
then departed as if he had seen nothing; but a peculiar twist in the
corners of his mouth, and a comical twinkle in his eye, showed that,
although he said nothing, he had a pretty good guess that his "young
men" had been engaged in mischief!

Such were the companions to whom I introduced myself shortly after; and,
while they went off to the office, I amused myself in looking round the
rooms in which I was to spend the approaching winter.

The house was only one story high, and the greater part of the interior
formed a large hall, from which several doors led into the sleeping
apartments of the clerks.  The whole was built of wood; and few houses
could be found wherein so little attention was paid to ornament or
luxury.  The walls were originally painted white, but this, from long
exposure to the influence of a large stove, had changed to a dirty
yellow.  No carpet covered the floor; nevertheless, its yellow planks
had a cheerful appearance; and gazing at the numerous knots with which
it was covered often afforded me a dreamy kind of amusement when I had
nothing better to do.  A large oblong iron box, on four crooked legs,
with a funnel running from it through the roof, stood exactly in the
middle of the room; this was a stove, but the empty wood-box in the
corner showed that its services were not required at that time.  And
truly they were not; for it was the height of summer, and the whole room
was filled with mosquitoes and bull-dog flies, which kept up a perpetual
hum night and day.  The only furniture that graced the room consisted of
two small unpainted deal tables without tablecloths, five whole wooden
chairs, and a broken one--which latter, being light and handy, was
occasionally used as a missile by the young men when they happened to
quarrel.  Several guns and fishing-rods stood in the corners of the
hall, but their dirty appearance proclaimed that sporting, at that time,
was not the order of the day.  The tables were covered with a
miscellaneous collection of articles; and from a number of pipes
reposing on little odoriferous heaps of cut tobacco, I inferred that my
future companions were great smokers.  Two or three books, a pair of
broken foils, a battered mask, and several surgical instruments, over
which a huge mortar and pestle presided, completed the catalogue.

The different sleeping apartments around were not only interesting to
contemplate, but also extremely characteristic of the pursuits of their
different tenants.  The first I entered was very small--just large
