  Inter.;-- Step forward, left.

goes the

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right.

weasel.

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left and close right to the left. Finish with
  hands on hips.


Chorus

1st Line;-- Watch how

  Inter.;-- Turn to partner and step dip, right. (In line of direction.)
  Clap hands three times.

the needle does fly,

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left. (In reverse line of direction.) Clap hands
  three times.

2nd Line;-- Nimble hands to guide it;

  Inter.;-- Encircle to the right with three walking steps. (Right;
  left; right and close left to right.) As the first step is taken clap
  hands once and replace hands to hips.

3rd Line;-- Every time

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left. (In reverse line of direction.) Clap hands
  three times.

the wheel goes round,

  Inter.;-- Step dip, right. (In line of direction.) Clap hands three
  times.

4th Line;-- Pop goes the weasel.

  Inter.;-- Encircle to the left with three walking steps. (Left; right;
  left and close right to the left.) As the first step is taken clap
  hands once and replace hands to hips.




DAPPLE GREY


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  I had a little pony
    And his name was Dapple Grey;
  I lent him to a lady,
    To ride a mile away.
  She whipped him and she slashed him,
    She rode him through the mire;
  I would not lend my pony now
    For all the lady's hire.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Children arranged in double circle formation, facing
counter clockwise (line of direction); outside hands placed on hips;
inside hands joined and raised shoulder height.

Suggestion;-- In so far as possible have the sex units divided, the boys
forming the inside circle and the girls forming the outside circle.

Start the dance movement with the outside foot. (Boys beginning with the
left foot; girls beginning with the right foot.)

Description of pupils in outer circles. (Girls.) Counterlike-- Inner


1st Line;-- I had

  Interpretation;-- Point step forward, right.

a little

  Inter.;-- Point step backward, right.

pony

  Inter.;-- Three steps forward and hold. (Right; left and right.)

  Cues;-- Point and point and step, step, step.

And his name

  Inter.;-- Swing left forward and point step forward, left.

was Dapple

  Inter.;-- Point step backward, left.

Grey;

  Inter.;-- Three steps forward and hold. (Left; right and left.)

Cues;-- Point and point and step, step, step.

2nd Line;-- I lent

  Inter.;-- With a jump, face partner; clasp outside hands and raise
  both arms to shoulder height.

him to

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once.

a lady,

  Inter.;-- Step throw, right and step throw, left.

To ride a mile away.

  Inter.;-- Seven chasses in line of direction, closing left to right,
  completing movement.

3rd Line;-- She

whipped him and she slashed him,

  Inter.;-- Replace left hand to hip. Grasp imaginary whip with the
  right hand and with a vigorous motion imitate whipping. (Three times
  replacing hand to hip upon the word, "him.") Mark time, in place, six
  counts. (Right; left; right; left; right and left.)

  NOTE.-- The downward movement of whipping takes place as the right
  foot is lowered to the floor.

She

rode him through the mire;

  Inter.;-- Clasp partner's hands, raising arms to shoulder height and
  bend and stretch knees six times.

4th Line;-- I would

  Inter.;-- Step dip, right, clapping hands three times.

not lend

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left, clapping hands three times.

my pony now

  Inter.;-- Face line of direction; replace hands to hips and execute
  two steps forward. (Right; left and close light to left.)

For all

  Inter.;-- Step throw, right.

the lady's

  Inter.;-- Step throw, left.

hire.

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place, three counts. (Right; left and right.)




SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE


_Permission to use words and music:--
McLoughlin Bros._ Arr. by +J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Sing a song of sixpence,
    A pocket full of Rye;
  Four and twenty Blackbirds
    Bak'd in a Pie.
  When the Pie was open'd,
    The Birds began to sing;
  Wasn't that a dainty dish
    To set before a King.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle formation facing counter clockwise (right) in
close order formation. Hands are placed upon the shoulders of the pupil
in front.


1st Verse

1st Line;-- Sing a song of sixpence, A pocket full of Rye;

  Interpretation;-- Starting with the inside foot (left) moving in line
  of direction execute point step forward and step, left; right; left
  and right. During this movement, bend the trunk slightly to the left
  and right as the activity proceeds.

  Cues;-- Point and step; point and step; point and step; point and
  step.

2nd Line;-- Four and twenty Blackbirds

  Inter.;-- Turn the head to the left; step sideward, left and close
  right to left and repeat.

  Cue;-- Step and close; step and close.

Bak'd in a Pie.

  Inter.;-- Turn the head to the right; step sideward, right and close
  left to the right and repeat.

  Cue;-- Step and close; step and close.

3rd Line;-- When the Pie was open'd,

  Inter.;-- Facing inward (left); clasp hands to the right and left and
  starting with the right foot execute three steps backward. (Right;
  left; right and close left to the right.)

  Cues;-- Step; step; step and close.

The Birds began to sing;

  Inter.;-- Three chasse steps in line of direction. (To the right.)

4th Line;-- Wasn't that a dainty dish

  Inter.;-- Extend arms forward slightly flexed, clapping hands seven
  times, and step bend, left and right. (Step to the left; place the
  right toe behind the left heel, bending both knees slightly. During
  this movement the head is turned to the left, the trunk bending
  slightly as the knee bending occurs. (Counterlike as to movement of
  head and trunk when executed to the right.)

To set before

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips; step sideward, left and close right
  to left.

a King?

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.


_Second Verse_

[Music:
  The King was in the counting house,
    Counting out his money;
  The Queen was in the parlour,
    Eating bread and honey;
  The maid was in the garden,
    Hanging out the clothes;
  There came a little Dicky Bird,
    And popp'd upon her nose.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle facing inward with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- The King was in the counting house,

  Interpretation;-- Starting with the left foot execute three steps
  forward. (Left; right; left and close right to the left.)

Counting out his money;

  Inter.;-- Bend knees deeply and suit activity to the words, holding
  imaginary coins in the palm of the left hand, counting with the right
  hand. (Six counts.)

2nd Line;-- The Queen was in the parlour,

  Inter.;-- Stretch the knees, lower heels; facing to the right, start
  with the right foot, execute three chasse steps to the right, with
  arms raised sideward.

Eating bread and honey;

  Inter.;-- Hold imaginary plate in the left hand (palm up) and suit
  activity to words, imitating eating with the right hand. (Six counts.)

3rd Line;-- The maid was in the garden,

  Inter.;-- Extend arms forward slightly flexed, clapping hands seven
  times, and step bend, left and right. (Step to the left, place right
  toe behind the left heel, bending both knees slightly. During this
  movement the head is turned to the left, the trunk bending slightly as
  the knee bending occurs. (Counterlike as to movement of head and trunk
  when executed to the right.)

Hanging

  Inter.;-- Replace left foot; stretch the knees; bending trunk forward,
  downward grasping clothes with hands.

out

  Inter.;-- Stretching the trunk; raise arms forward upward to imaginary
  clothesline.

the clothes;

  Inter.;-- Take clothespin out of mouth with right hand and pin clothes
  to line.

4th Line;-- There came a little Dicky Bird,

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips, execute four hops forward.

And popp'd

  Inter.;-- Clap hands, replacing same to hips, and execute one-quarter
  turn to the left by hopping.

upon her nose.

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errors corrected by transcriber.

Missing or invisible periods (full stops) have been silently supplied.

Rhythmic Steps, #7.
  Hand clapping occurs on counts _one_ and _two_.
    _printed "_one and two_" (continuous italics): may be correct_
Fly Away Jack and Jill #1: line 4 Int.
  No activity for either files.
    _text unchanged (compare "circles" below)_
See Saw, Marjory Daw: text
  Because he won't work any faster.
    _apostrophe missing_
Fly Away Jack and Jill #2: line 2 Int.
  No activity for either circles.
    _text unchanged (compare "files" above)_
Same, next line--
  Inter.;-- Inner circle;-- No activity.
    _"No activity" printed in first column_
Same--
  4th Line;-- Come again, Jack
    _header "4th Line" missing_

