troops to the village where these franc tireurs are hidden."

"An infamous scoundrel!" the major said warmly. "Of course, one
cannot refuse to deal with traitors, when the information is of
importance; but one longs to put a pistol bullet into them. Badly
as the French have come out in many particulars, since the war
began, there is not one which gives me such a mean idea of them as
the number of offers which have been sent in to supply information,
and betray their countrymen."

"Put on your boots, Percy," Ralph said, in a low voice. "It is time
for us to be off. Don't hurry; and above all, if they should take
it into their heads to address us suddenly in French, or English,
don't start or seem to notice."

The major was, however, so absorbed in the information he had
received--and so confident that the English, in which it had been
told, would be unintelligible to anyone who might overhear it--that
he paid no attention to the boys who--one of them limping
badly--went slowly down the street; stopping, occasionally, to look
in at the shop windows. It was not until they were fairly outside
the town, and out of sight of the German sentries, that they either
spoke or quickened their pace.

"The franc tireurs of Dijon may thank their lucky stars that they
sent down spies to Saverne today, Percy; and especially that we, of
all the members of the corps, were selected. If we had not been
where we were, just at that moment, and if we had not understood
English, it would have been all up with the corps, and no mistake."

"What an infamous scoundrel, as the major said, that schoolmaster
must be, Ralph! What do you think the commandant will do?"

"He has nothing to do but to retreat, as quickly as we can go,
Percy; but if it costs him half the corps, I hope he will hang that
schoolmaster, before he goes."

"I hope so, too," Percy said; and scarcely another word was spoken,
until they reached the village.

It was still early, scarcely two o'clock, and Major Tempe was
drilling the whole corps--the two detached companies having arrived
that morning--when the boys, having again put on uniform,
approached him.

Major Tempe nodded to them, as they came up.

"You are back early," he said. "You are excused from drill. I will
see you at my quarters, when it is over."

"If you please, major," Ralph said, respectfully, "you had better
dismiss the men, at once. We have news of the highest importance to
tell you."

The major looked surprised but, seeing by the boys' faces that the
news was very serious, he at once dismissed the men; telling them
to keep near, as they might be wanted. Then, calling his officers,
he proceeded at once with the Barclays towards his quarters.

"Excuse me, major," Ralph said, "but instead of going to your
quarters, would you move to some open space, where we can speak
without a possibility of being overheard by anyone?"

Still more surprised, Major Tempe led the way to some felled trees
at the edge of the forest, a short distance from the village. Here
he sat down, and motioned to the others to do the same. Ralph then
told his story, interrupted many times by exclamations of rage,
upon the part of his auditors; and giving full credit to Percy for
his idea of the plan by which, unnoticed, they had managed to get
within hearing of the German officers. The fury of the French
officers knew no bounds. They gesticulated, they stamped up and
down, they swore terribly, they were ready to cry from sheer rage.

Major Tempe, alone, uttered no remark during the whole narration.
When it was concluded, he sat silent for a minute or two; with his
lips pressed together, and a look of deep indignation on his face.
Then he rose, and said in a solemn tone:

"As sure as the sun shines, and as sure as my name is Edward Tempe,
so sure shall that schoolmaster, of Grunsdorf, be hung before
tomorrow morning!

"Lieutenant Ribouville, order the assembly to be sounded, and form
the men here in hollow square.

"Messieurs Barclay, you will fall in with your company."

A little surprised--and hurt that the commandant had said no word
of commendation to them, for the service they had performed--the
boys hurried off to their quarters, to get their rifles.

"Sure, Master Ralph, and what is the matter, at all?" Tim Doyle
said, as they entered. "Sure the major, honest man, must have gone
off his head, entirely! Scarcely had we finished our male, and
began to smoke the first pipe in aise and comfort, when the bugle
blows for parade.

"'Confound the bugle!' says I, and I shoved me pipe aside, and put
on my belt and fell in.

"Hardly had we begun the maneuvers when your honors arrived and
said a word, private, to the major. The words weren't out of your
mouth before he dismisses us from drill.

"'Botheration!' says I, 'is there no pace for the wicked?'

"Back I comes again, and takes off me belt and piles me firelock;
and before I had got three draws at me pipe, and was just beginning
to enjoy the creetur when, crack! and there goes the assimbly
again. Sure and the major, honest man, has lost his head entirely;
and it's a pity, for he is an illegant man, and a good officer,
says I."

"Come along, Tim," Ralph said, laughing, "else you'll be late for
parade. You will hear all about it in time, I have no doubt."

In five minutes the men were all assembled in a hollow square, two
deep, facing the officers in the center The men saw at once, by the
faces of Major Tempe and the officers, that something very serious
had happened; and they had no sooner taken their places than there
was a deep hush of expectancy, for it was evident that the
commandant was about to address them.

"My men," he said, after a pause of a minute or two, "a great
calamity has happened; and a still greater one would have happened,
had we not providentially received warning in time. It had been
resolved--as you would have heard this evening, had all gone
well--that tonight we should attack the German sentries, and blow
up the rock tunnel of Saverne. The affair would have been hot, but
it would have been a vital service to France; and the franc tireurs
of Dijon would have merited, and obtained, the thanks of all
France. It was for the purpose of the attack that the two companies
detached from us were recalled.

"All promised well for success. Two of your number had been down
into Saverne, in disguise, and had brought us full information
respecting the force and disposition of the enemy. All was
prepared, the chance of success favorable, and the force the enemy
could have brought against us was no larger than our own. We should
have saved France, and immortalized ourselves.

"At the present moment there are two thousand five hundred men in
Saverne. Tomorrow night this village is to be attacked, and every
franc tireur found here put to the sword."

A cry of surprise and rage broke from the men.

"And how, think you, has the change been wrought? By treachery!"

Those cries of rage were renewed.

"By treachery! A Frenchman has been found, base and vile enough to
sell us to Prussia. All hope of success is over, and we have only
to retreat."

"Who is he? Who is he?" burst from the infuriated men. "Death to
the traitor! Death to the traitor!"

"Yes, men, death to the traitor!" the major said, solemnly. "It is
the schoolmaster of Grunsdorf who has sold you to the Prussians;
who wrote that letter to their general, telling him of your
intentions, which has caused these great reinforcements to be sent;
and who has offered to guide a force to surround us, tomorrow
night."

Another low cry of horror and indignation broke from the men.

"Is it your opinion that this man has deserved death?"

"Yes," was the unanimous answer.

"Then he dies," Major Tempe said, solemnly. "You were to have been
his victims; you are his judges.

"Grunsdorf is three miles from here, in the woods, not far from
Saverne. A party will be told off, presently, who will be charged
with the execution of this sentence.

"I have now another duty. The corps has been saved from
destruction. You--all of us--have been preserved from death by the
intelligence and courage of two of your number.

"Ralph and Percy Barclay, stand forward!"

The two boys stepped two paces forward into the hollow square.

"Selected by me," continued Major Tempe, "for the duty, from their
perfect acquaintance with German; they, upon their first visit to
Saverne, obtained all the information required. Upon their second
visit, this morning--finding the enemy had been immensely
reinforced--they perceived the extreme importance of discovering
the reason for the arrival of the reinforcements, and their
intention. With a coolness and tact which does them the greatest
credit, they contrived to arrive, and to remain within hearing of,
a number of officers; and then learned the whole particulars of the
treachery of this man, and of the intention of our enemies. So
important was the secret judged that the Germans were afraid of
telling it in German, or in French, lest they might be overheard.
To prevent the possibility of this, they conversed in English; and
the consequence is that we are saved, almost by a miracle.

"Ralph and Percy Barclay, your names will be inserted in the order
of the day, being the first of the corps to whom that honor has
been given; and I hereby offer you, in the name of myself, my
officers, and the whole corps, my hearty thanks for your courage,
coolness, and devotion.

"The parade is dismissed. The men will assemble at five o'clock, in
full marching order, with all necessaries and accouterments."

As Major Tempe ceased speaking, the men broke up from the order in
which they had been standing, and crowded round the young Barclays;
shaking them by the hand, patting them on the shoulder, and
congratulating them heartily upon the service that they had
rendered, and upon the terms in which their commandant had thus
publicly acknowledged it.

At five o'clock the corps assembled again in heavy marching order
and, after inspection, the second, third, and fourth companies
marched off; with their officers, who alone knew their destination,
at their head. Major Tempe remained on the ground, with the first
company. After waiting for a few minutes, they were marched off in
the direction which the others had taken but--after getting out of
sight of the village, and fairly entering the forest--they turned
sharp off, and took the direction of Saverne.



Chapter 8: The Traitor.


After the company had marched for half an hour, a halt was called,
and their commandant said:

"I daresay you have all guessed the object which we have in view.
We are going to carry out the sentence pronounced by the whole
corps. We are going to have that schoolmaster--that traitor--who
has sold our lives to the Prussians; and who--which is of
infinitely greater importance--has done immense injury to France,
by betraying our intention of blowing up the tunnel. That traitor I
intend to have, tonight; and if I have him, I will hang him, as
sure as fate.

"This lane which we are following leads to Grunsdorf; which,
according to the information I collected before leaving, cannot be
above a mile distant. Now, we must be cautious. It is quite
possible that a detachment of the enemy may have been sent up to
the village, and in that case we might catch a Tartar. Even if
there are no Germans there, we must be cautious, or the bird will
escape. We neither know him, nor the house he lives in and--as he
would naturally guess that his treachery had been discovered, and
that we had come for him--he would slip out into the forest, the
instant he saw the first bayonet approaching. It is essential,
therefore, that we should obtain accurate information of the state
of affairs, and of the position of this traitor's house.

"In another half hour it will be dusk. The Barclays have again
volunteered to go in, and find out what we require. They will go on
at once; and in an hour we will follow, and remain concealed, just
outside the village, until they return.

"Sergeant, you will go forward with them, and agree upon the place
where we shall remain hid, until they join us.

"Now, my lads, you have already received your instructions. Change
your things, and go forward at once."

The distance was farther than they had expected, and it was nearly
dark before the boys entered Grunsdorf. There was no one moving in
the quiet village, for a fine rain was falling as the boys walked
slowly along.

"There is no one to ask, Percy. We must go into the public house,
as arranged, and ask where the priest's house is. It would not do
for two strangers to ask for the schoolmaster. The priest will tell
us where he lives."

So saying, they entered the little cabaret, walked down a long
passage leading from the door, and paused for a moment at the
threshold--for in the room were some eight or ten Prussian
soldiers.

"It is too late to retreat, Percy. Come in boldly."

Lifting their caps, they walked up to an unoccupied table; and
called for some bread, cheese, and beer. The landlord brought the
refreshments, and the boys had scarcely begun to eat when a
Prussian sergeant--who had exchanged a word with the landlord,
evidently in reference to them--strode up to them and, laying his
hand upon Ralph's shoulder, said:

"Who are you, young fellows? The landlord says you do not belong to
the village."

"We belong to a party of woodcutters, from Colmar," Ralph said,
quietly.

Illustration: Among the German Soldiers.

"Oh, indeed!" the sergeant said, in an incredulous voice, "and
where are your party?"

"Out in the forest, at the place where we have begun to fell
trees," Ralph said.

"But people do not come to cut wood without horses, or carts to
take it away," the sergeant persisted.

"They are up in the forest with our father," Ralph said.

"Have you heard anything about this party?" the sergeant asked the
landlord.

The man hesitated a moment. He evidently suspected, also, that the
boys might belong to the franc tireurs; and was anxious to say
nothing which could harm them.

"No," he said, after a pause, "I can't say that I have heard of
them; but I know some of the forest was sold, not long ago, and
they might have come from Colmar without coming this way."

"We only arrived this morning," Percy said, quietly, "so that you
could hardly have heard of us, unless some of the people of your
place happened to pass, when we were at work; and we have not seen
anyone, all day."

"At any rate," the sergeant said, "I shall see if your story be
true, and you will at once take us to the place.

"Corporal, get ten men in readiness."

"Certainly," Ralph said, "if you will allow us to finish our
supper, we will show you the way, at once."

The sergeant nodded, and resumed his seat.

"Look here, Percy," Ralph said, quietly, "we are in a nasty fix,
this time. There is only one thing to be done, that I can see. If
we both go they will shoot us, to a certainty; for although one
might make a bolt in the wood, it is certain we could not both get
away.

"Only one thing is to be done. I will say your foot is bad, and ask
for you to stay here. Directly we have gone, you slip out and
go--as hard as you can--to the place where our men are hid. I will
bring them in that direction. We shall have passed the place before
you can reach it--at least, unless you can get out, at once--and
pass on in the darkness. Take off your shoes, so as to run lightly.
As we pass, fire a volley right into us; and I will make a dart
into the wood, in the confusion."

"But you might be shot by our men, Ralph. They could not possibly
distinguish you, in the dark. No, I will go with the men, and you
make your way to Tempe."

"No, no, Percy, I won't have that."

"Very well," Percy said, doggedly, "then we will go together."

There was a silence for a minute or two, and then Ralph said:

"Look here, Percy, this is madness; however, as you won't do as I
tell you, we will draw lots. I will put a piece of crumb in one of
my hands. You shall guess which it is in. If you guess right, I
will go with the Germans. If you guess wrong, you shall go."

"Very well," Percy said; "I agree to that."

Ralph then broke off a small piece of bread, and put it in one of
his hands--having already, before he made the proposition, broken
off a similar piece, unobserved by Percy. He then put both hands
under the table, and then lifted them again; all the time trying to
appear not to be engaged upon anything out of the way, as he knew
that some of the Germans were watching them.

"Left," Percy said.

Ralph replied by opening the left hand, and dropping the piece of
bread on the table; at the same time putting his right hand back
into his pocket, as if to get out his handkerchief--and dropping,
as he did so, the piece of bread it contained into the place.

"There, Percy, fortune has decided it.

"Goodbye; God bless you. I daresay I shall get out of it but, if
not, give my love to them all, at home."

Then he finished his beer and rose, without giving Percy time to
reply, even could he have done so; but the lad was so much choked,
with the effort to keep from crying, that he could not have spoken.
Ralph turned to the sergeant and--stretching his arms, with the
natural air of a tired boy, objecting to be disturbed--said:

"Now, sir, I am ready to start. I suppose there is no occasion for
us both to go, for my brother has hurt his foot. We shouldn't have
come in, tonight; but it is his first time out with the woodmen,
and he is not accustomed to sleeping out, in the wet."

"Yes, one is enough. He can stay," the sergeant said.

"You had better ask the landlord to show you a corner, where you
can sleep on the straw, Karl," Ralph said. "It is no use waiting
for me. I shall be back in an hour."

With a nod to Percy, Ralph now walked steadily to the door. The
sergeant, with the men told off for the duty, accompanied him. When
they reached the street, it was raining heavily.

"I wonder," Ralph said, "whether the landlord would lend me a sack,
to put on my shoulders."

"Is this place far off, youngster?" the sergeant asked, peering out
into the darkness.

Ralph's heart gave a jump; for he detected, in the tone, a certain
hesitation as to taking the men out in such a night, upon such
slight suspicion. He was, however, too shrewd to show any desire to
dissuade the sergeant from it, so he replied:

"No, it is no distance to speak of; not a mile, at most. We should
be there and back in half an hour, if it was light; but there is
only a path among the woods and it is dark.

"I think we had better have some lanterns, for I do not think I
