19. "Whatever," said I, to show him I had caught a word. "Yes,
yes--yes, yes," said he; and then he looked at the other men as much
as to say, "I told you I spoke English," and began again as hard as
ever in the Gaelic.

20. This time I picked out another word, "tide." Then I had a flash of
hope. I remembered he was always waving his hand toward the mainland
of the Ross.

21. "Do you mean when the tide is out?"--I cried, and could not
finish.

22. "Yes, yes," said he. "Tide."

23. At that I turned tail upon their boat (where my adviser had once
more begun to tee-hee with laughter), leaped back the way I had come,
from one stone to another, and set off running across the isle as I
had never run before. In about half an hour I came upon the shores of
the creek, and, sure enough, it was shrunk into a little trickle of
water, through which I dashed, not above my knees, and landed with a
shout on the main island.

24. A sea-bred boy would not have stayed a day on Earraid, which is
only what they call a tidal islet, and, except, in the bottom of the
neaps, can be entered and left twice in every twenty-four hours,
either dry-shod, or, at the most, by wading. Even I, who had seen the
tide going out and in before me in the bay, and even watched for the
ebbs, the better to get my shellfish--even I (I say), if I had sat
down to think, instead of raging at my fate, must have soon guessed
the secret and got free.

25. It was no wonder the fishers had not understood me. The wonder was
rather that they had ever guessed my pitiful illusion, and taken the
trouble to come back. I had starved with cold and hunger on that
island for close upon one hundred hours. But for the fishers, I might
have left my bones there, in pure folly. And even as it was, I had
paid for it pretty dear, not only in past sufferings but in my present
case, being clothed like a beggar man, scarce able to walk, and in
great pain of my sore throat.

26. I have seen wicked men and fools--a great many of both--and I
believe they both get paid in the end; but the fools first.

      --_Robert Louis Stevenson_ (_By arrangement_)


  How are the parenthetical clauses in this selection kept
  in the back-ground? (Introduction, p. 24.)

  11. I could not believe such wickedness ... heart would
  burst. Observe the Climax. (Introduction, p. 31.)

  19. Whatever, said I, ... How is the direct speech made
  to stand out from the narration which interrupts it?
  (Introduction, p. 24.)

       *       *       *       *       *


ON HIS BLINDNESS


  When I consider how my light is spent
    Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
    And that one talent which is death to hide,
  Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent
  To serve therewith my Maker, and present
    My true account, lest He, returning, chide;
    "Doth God exact day labour, light denied?"

  I fondly ask. But Patience, to prevent
  That murmur, soon replies, "God doth not need
    Either man's work, or His own gifts. Who best
    Bear His mild yoke, they serve Him best: His state
  Is kingly; thousands at His bidding speed,
    And post o'er land and ocean without rest:
    They also serve who only stand and wait."

      --_Milton_


  PREPARATORY.--Divide the sonnet into two parts, giving
  each part a title.

  Read the first part in prose order, supplying the
  ellipses.

  How many distinct statements are there in the second
  part?

  Select the clauses of the first part that are equal in
  rank and have the same Shading. Show which should be
  made prominent, and which held in the background.

  Read the first part of this sonnet, with a view to
  Perspective. (Introduction, p. 33.)

  1-4. With what do you connect WHEN ... SPENT, and
  LODGED? How?

  How do you make the statements of the second part stand
  out singly? (Introduction, pp. 8 and 10.)

       *       *       *       *       *


BRIGGS IN LUCK

From "Doctor Birch and his Young Friends"


_Enter the Knife-boy._ Hamper for Briggses!
_Master Brown._ Hurray, Tom Briggs! I'll lend you my knife.

If this story does not carry its own moral, what fable does, I wonder?
Before the arrival of that hamper, Master Briggs was in no better
repute than any other young gentleman of the lower school; and in fact
I had occasion myself, only lately, to correct Master Brown for
kicking his friend's shins during the writing-lesson. But how this
basket, directed by his mother's house-keeper, and marked "GLASS WITH
CARE," whence I concluded that it contained some jam and some bottles
of wine probably, as well as the usual cake and game-pie, and half a
sovereign for the elder Master B., and five new shillings for Master
Decimus Briggs--how, I say, the arrival of this basket alters all
Master Briggs's circumstances in life, and the estimation in which
many persons regard him!

If he is a good-hearted boy, as I have reason to think, the very first
thing he will do, before inspecting the contents of the hamper, or
cutting into them with the knife which Master Brown has so
considerately lent him, will be to read over the letter from home
which lies on top of the parcel. He does so, as I remarked to Miss
Raby (for whom I happened to be mending pens when the little
circumstance arose), with a flushed face and winking eyes. Look how
the other boys are peering into the basket as he reads--I say to her,
"Isn't it a pretty picture?" Part of the letter is in a very large
hand. That is from his little sister. And I would wager that she
netted the little purse which he has just taken out of it, and which
Master Lynx is eyeing.

"You are a droll man, and remark all sorts of queer things," Miss Raby
says, smiling, and plying her swift needle and fingers as quick as
possible.

"I am glad we were both on the spot, and that the little fellow lies
under our guns as it were, and so is protected from some such brutal
school-pirate as young Duval for instance, who would rob him,
probably, of some of those good things; good in themselves, and better
because fresh from home. See, there is a pie as I said, and which I
daresay is better than those which are served at our table (but you
never take any notice of these kind of things, Miss Raby), a cake, of
course, a bottle of currant wine, jam-pots, and no end of pears in
the straw. With this money little Briggs will be able to pay the tick
which that impudent child has run up with Mrs. Ruggles; and I shall
let Briggs Major pay for the pencil-case which Bullock sold to
him.--It will be a lesson to the young prodigal for the future.

"But, I say, what a change there will be in his life for some time to
come, and at least until his present wealth is spent! The boys who
bully him will mollify toward him and accept his pie and sweetmeats.
They will have feasts in the bedroom; and that wine will taste more
deliciously to them than the best out of the Doctor's cellar. The
cronies will be invited. Young Master Wagg will tell his most dreadful
story and sing his best song for a slice of that pie. What a jolly
night they will have! When we go the rounds at night, Mr. Prince and I
will take care to make a noise before we come to Briggs's room, so
that the boys may have time to put the light out, to push the things
away, and to scud into bed. Doctor Spry may be put in requisition the
next morning."

"Nonsense! you absurd creature," cries out Miss Raby, laughing; and I
lay down the twelfth pen very nicely mended.

"Yes; after luxury comes the doctor, I say; after extravagance, a hole
in the breeches pocket. To judge from his disposition, Briggs Major
will not be much better off a couple of days hence than he is now,
and, if I am not mistaken, will end life a poor man. Brown will be
kicking his shins before a week is over, depend upon it. There are
boys and men of all sorts, Miss R.--there are selfish sneaks who hoard
until the store they daren't use grows mouldy--there are spendthrifts
who fling away, parasites who flatter and lick its shoes, and
snarling curs who hate and envy good fortune."

I put down the last of the pens, brushing away with it the quill chips
from her desk first, and she looked at me with a kind, wondering face.
I brushed them away, clicked the pen-knife into my pocket, made her a
bow, and walked off--for the bell was ringing for school.

      --_William Makepeace Thackeray_


  MASTER, BASKET, GLASS, HALF, AFTER. (Appendix A, 1.)

  FRIEND'S SHINS, SELFISH SNEAKS, SPENDTHRIFTS. (Appendix
  A, 3 and 6.)

  Make an analysis from the standpoint of Perspective of
  the following sentences: BUT HOW THIS BASKET ... REGARD
  HIM; IF HE IS A GOOD-HEARTED BOY ... PARCEL; HE DOES SO
  ... WINKING EYES; SEE THERE IS A PIE ... STRAW.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LAUGHING SALLY


  A wind blew up from Pernambuco,
    (Yeo heave ho! the _Laughing Sally_!
    Hi yeo, heave away!)
  A wind blew out of the east-sou'-east
    And boomed at the break of day.                                    5

  The _Laughing Sally_ sped for her life,
    And a speedy craft was she.
  The black flag flew at her top to tell
    How she took toll of the sea.

  The wind blew up from Pernambuco;                                   10
    And in the breast of the blast
  Came the King's black ship like a hound let slip
    On the trail of the _Sally_ at last.

  For a day and a night, a night and a day;
    Over the blue, blue round,                                        15
  Went on the chase of the pirate quarry,
    The hunt of the tireless hound.

  "Land on the port bow!" came the cry;
    And the _Sally_ raced for shore,
  Till she reached the bar at the river-mouth                         20
    Where the shallow breakers roar.

  She passed the bar by a secret channel
    With clear tide under her keel,--
  For he knew the shoals like an open book,
    The captain at the wheel.                                         25

  She passed the bar, she sped like a ghost,
    Till her sails were hid from view
  By the tall, liana'd, unsunned boughs
    O'erbrooding the dark bayou.

  At moonrise up to the river-mouth                                   30
    Came the King's black ship of war,
  The red cross flapped in wrath at her peak,
    But she could not cross the bar.

  And while she lay in the run of the seas,
    By the grimmest whim of chance,                                   35
  Out of the bay to the north came forth
    Two battle-ships of France.

  On the English ship the twain bore down
    Like wolves that range by night;
  And the breakers' roar was heard no more                            40
    In the thunder of the fight.

  The crash of the broadsides rolled and stormed
    To the _Sally_ hid from view
  Under the tall liana'd boughs
    Of the moonless dark bayou.                                       45

  A boat ran out for news of the fight,
    And this was the word she brought--
  "The King's ship fights the ships of France
    As the King's ships all have fought!"

  Then muttered the mate, "I'm a man of Devon!"                       50
    And the captain thundered then--
  "There's English rope that bides for our necks,
    But we all be Englishmen!"

  The _Sally_ glided out of the gloom
    And down the moon-white river.                                    55
  She stole like a gray shark over the bar
    Where the long surf seethes for ever.

  She hove to under a high French hull,
    And the red cross rose to her peak.
  The French were looking for fight that night,                       60
    And they hadn't far to seek.

  Blood and fire on the streaming decks,
    And fire and blood below;
  The heat of hell, and the reek of hell,
    And the dead men laid a-row!                                      65

  And when the stars paled out of heaven
    And the red dawn-rays uprushed,
  The oaths of battle, the crash of timbers,
    The roar of the guns was hushed.

  With one foe beaten under his bow,                                  70
    The other far in flight,
  The English captain turned to look
    For his fellow in the fight.

  The English captain turned and stared;--
    For where the _Sally_ had been                                    75
  Was a single spar upthrust from the sea
    With the red cross flag serene!

  A wind blew up from Pernambuco
    (Yeo heave ho! the _Laughing Sally_!
    Hi yeo, heave away!)
  And boomed for the doom of the _Laughing Sally_!
    Gone down at the break of day.

      --_Charles G. D. Roberts_ (_By arrangement_)


  PREPARATORY.--Divide the poem into sections giving to
  each part a descriptive title. (Introduction, p. 10.)
  How is each section made to stand out?

  In what Time is the section which describes the flight
  of the _Laughing Sally_ read? Give your reason.
  (Introduction, pp. 5 and 13.)

  Contrast the first and last stanzas from the standpoint
  of feeling. How does the voice express the difference?

  BLEW, KNEW, NEWS, KING'S SHIP, SEETHES, AND. (Appendix
  A, 2, 3, 5, and 6.)

  Distinguish the sound of _a_ in LAUGHING SALLY, CRAFT,
  LAST, PASSED, WRATH, CHANCE, CRASH, DARK, FAR, DAWN.
  (Appendix A, 1.)

  8-9. Note the Grouping and Pause. (Introduction, p. 11.)

  11-13. Observe the Grouping. Which phrases have the
  heaviest Shading? (Introduction, p. 33.)

  16. Where is the Pause? Why?

  18. LAND ON THE PORT BOW. What change is made in Pitch
  and Force? Account for it. (Introduction, pp. 22 and
  25.)

  24. What is the Inflection on this line?

  30-37. Observe the Grouping and Shading throughout these
  stanzas.

  38-45. What sense is appealed to in these stanzas? How
  is the Time affected?

  46-53. How are the transitions to direct discourse
  indicated? (Introduction, p. 24.)

  What is the difference in Pitch between the mate's and
  the captain's speech? (Introduction, p. 23.)

  66-67. Note the contrast with the preceding stanza and
  with the two following lines.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE PRODIGAL SON

Luke xv 11-32


A certain man had two sons: And the younger of them said to his
father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And
he divided unto them his living.

And not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and
took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance
with riotous living. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty
famine in that land; and he began to be in want. And he went and
joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his
fields to feed swine. And he would fain have filled his belly with the
husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him. And when he
came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have
bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and
go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son:
make me as one of thy hired servants.

And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him. And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son. But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best
robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his
feet: And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat,
and be merry; For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was
lost, and is found. And they began to be merry.

Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to
the house, he heard musick and dancing. And he called one of the
servants, and asked what these things meant. And he said unto him, Thy
brother is come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because
he hath received him safe and sound. And he was angry, and would not
go in: therefore came his father out, and intreated him. And he
answering said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee,
neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment; and yet thou never
gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends: But as soon
as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots,
thou hast killed for him the fatted calf. And he said unto him, Son,
thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. It was meet that
