his new friend with curiosity.

"In a small way."

"I should like to see some of your pictures."

"I can show you one," and Chester opened his copy of _Puck_ and pointed
to the sketch already referred to.

"Did you really draw this yourself?"

"Yes."

"And did you get any money for it?"

"Ten dollars," answered Chester, with natural pride.

"My! I wish I could get money for drawing."

"Perhaps you can some time."

Bob shook his head.

"I haven't any talent that way."

"What house is that?" asked Chester, pointing to the marble mansion at
the corner of Thirty-fourth Street.

"That used to belong to A. T. Stewart, the great merchant. I suppose
you haven't any houses like that in Wyncombe?"

"Oh, no."

"We will turn down here. This is Thirty-fourth Street."

They kept on, crossing Sixth and Seventh Avenues, and presently stood
in front of a neat, brownstone house between Seventh and Eighth
Avenues.

"That is where Mr. Conrad lives," said Rob.




CHAPTER XI.

CHESTER'S FIRST EXPERIENCES IN NEW YORK.


The bell was rung, and a servant opened the door.

"I will go up to Mr. Conrad's room," said Rob.

The servant knew him, and no objection was made. They went up two
flights to the front room on the third floor. Rob opened the door
without ceremony and entered, followed by Chester.

He found himself in a spacious room, neatly furnished and hung around
with engravings, with here and there an oil painting. There was a table
near the window with a portfolio on it. Here, no doubt, Mr. Conrad did
some of his work. There was no bed in the room, but through an open
door Chester saw a connecting bedroom.

"This is a nice room," he said.

"Yes, cousin Herbert likes to be comfortable. Here, give me your
valise, and make yourself at home."

Chester sat down by the window and gazed out on the broad street. It
was a pleasant, sunny day, and everything looked bright and attractive.

"You are going to live in New York, aren't you?" asked Rob.

"Yes, if I can make a living here."

"I guess cousin Herbert will help you."

"He has already. He has obtained a place for me in a real estate office
at five dollars a week."

"I think I could live on five dollars a week."

"I suppose it costs considerable to live in New York."

Chester felt no apprehension, however. He was sure he should succeed,
and, indeed, he had reason to feel encouraged, for had he not already
engaged two hundred dollars' worth of work?--and this sum seemed as
much to him as two thousand would have done to Mr. Conrad.

An hour glided by rapidly, and then a step was heard on the stairs.

"That's cousin Herbert," said Rob, and he ran to open the door.

"Hello, Rob. Did you find Chester?"

"Yes, here he is!"

"Glad to see you, Chester," said the artist, shaking his hand
cordially; "you must excuse my not going to meet you, but I was busily
engaged on a large drawing for _Harper's Weekly_, and, feeling in a
favorable mood, I didn't want to lose the benefit of my inspiration.
You will find when you have more experience that an artist can
accomplish three times as much when in the mood.

"I am glad you didn't leave off for me. Rob has taken good care of me."

"Yes, Rob is used to the city; I thought you would be in safe hands.
And how do you like my quarters?"

"They are very pleasant. And the street is so wide, too."

"Yes, I like Thirty-fourth street. I lodge, but I don't board here."

Chester was surprised to hear this. In Wyncombe everyone took his meals
in the same house in which he lodged.

"And that reminds me, don't you feel hungry? I don't ask Rob, for he
always has an appetite. How is it with you, Chester?"

"I took a very early breakfast."

"So I thought," laughed Conrad. "Well, put on our coats, and we'll go
to Trainor's."

They walked over to Sixth Avenue and entered a restaurant adjoining the
Standard Theater. It was handsomely decorated, and seemed to Chester
quite the finest room he was ever in. Ranged in three rows were small
tables, each designed for four persons. One of these was vacant, and
Conrad took a seat on one side, placing the two boys opposite.

"Now," he said, "I had better do the ordering. We will each order a
different dish, and by sharing them we will have a variety."

There is no need to mention of what the dinner consisted. All three
enjoyed it, particularly the two boys. It was the first meal Chester
had taken in a restaurant, and he could not get rid of a feeling of
embarrassment at the thought that the waiters, who were better dressed
than many of the prominent citizens of Wyncombe, were watching him. He
did not, however, allow this feeling to interfere with his appetite.

"Do you always eat here, Mr. Conrad?" asked Chester.

"No; sometimes it is more convenient to go elsewhere. Now and then I
take a table d'hote dinner."

"I don't think I can afford to come here often," Chester remarked,
after consulting the bill of fare and the prices set down opposite the
different dishes.

"No; it will be better for you to secure a boarding place. You want to
be economical for the present. How did you leave your mother?"

"Very well, thank you, Mr. Conrad. We have been very fortunate in
securing a boarder who pays eight dollars a week, so that mother thinks
she can get along for the present without help from me."

"That is famous. Where did you get such a boarder in Wyncombe?"

"It is a lady, the cousin of Mr. Gardener, the lawyer. She will be
company for mother."

"It is an excellent arrangement. Now, boys, if you have finished, I
will go up and settle the bill."

As they left the restaurant, Mr. Conrad said:

"In honor of your arrival, I shall not work any more to-day. Now, shall
we go back to my room, or would you like to take a walk and see
something of the city?"

The unanimous decision was for the stroll.

Mr. Conrad walked down Broadway with the boys, pointing out any notable
buildings on the way. Chester was dazzled. The great city exceeded his
anticipations. Everything seemed on so grand a scale to the country
boy, and with his joyous excitement there mingled the thought: "And I,
too, am going to live here. I shall have a share in the great city, and
mingle in its scenes every day."

Rob was used to the city, and took matters quietly. He was not
particularly impressed. Yet he could not help enjoying the walk, so
perfect was the weather. As they passed Lord & Taylor's, a lady came
out of the store.

"Why, mother," said Rob, "is that you?"

"Yes, Rob. I came in on a shopping excursion, and I want you to go with
me and take care of me."

Rob grumbled a little, but, of course, acceded to his mother's request.
So Chester was left alone with Mr. Conrad.

"How do you feel about coming to New York, Chester?" asked his friend.
"You are not afraid of failure, are you?"

"No, Mr. Conrad, I feel very hopeful. Something has happened to me
to-day that encourages me very much."

"What is it?"

Chester told the story of his meeting with Prof. Hazlitt, and the
proposition which had been made to him.

"Why, this is famous," exclaimed Conrad, looking pleased. "I know of
Prof. Hazlitt, though I never met him. He was once professor in a
Western college, but inheriting a fortune from his uncle, came to New
York to pursue his favorite studies. He does not teach now, but, I
believe, delivers an annual course of lectures before the students of
Columbia College. He is a shrewd man, and the offer of employment from
him is indeed a compliment. I am very glad you met him. He may throw
other work in your way."

"I hope I can give him satisfaction," said Chester. "It makes me feel
rich whenever I think of the sum I am to receive. Two hundred dollars
is a good deal of money."

"To a boy like you, yes. It doesn't go very far with me now. It costs a
good deal for me to live. How much do you think I have to pay for my
room--without board?"

"Three dollars a week," guessed Chester.

Mr. Conrad smiled.

"I pay ten dollars a week," he said.

Chester's breath was quite taken away.

"Why, I did not think the whole house would cost as much--for rent."

"You will get a more correct idea of New York expenses after a while.
Now, let me come back to your plans. You had better stay with me for a
few days."

"But I am afraid I shall be putting you to inconvenience, Mr. Conrad."

"No; it will be pleasant for me to have your company. On Monday morning
I will go with you to the office of the real estate broker who is to
employ you."

Chester passed Sunday pleasantly, going to church in the forenoon, and
taking a walk with Mr. Conrad in the afternoon. He wrote a short letter
to his mother, informing her of his safe arrival in the city, but not
mentioning his engagement by Prof. Hazlitt. He preferred to wait till
he had an interview with the professor, and decided whether he could do
the work satisfactorily.

"Your future employer is Clement Fairchild," said the artist. "His
office is on West Fourteenth Street, between Seventh and Eight
Avenues."

"What sort of a man is he?" asked Chester.

"I don't know him very well, but I believe he does a very good
business. You will know more about him in a week than I can tell you.
There is one comfort, and that is that you are not wholly dependent
upon him. I advise you, however, to say nothing in the office about
your art work. Business men sometimes have a prejudice against outside
workers. They feel that an employee ought to be solely occupied with
their interests."

"I will remember what you say, Mr. Conrad."

Chester looked forward with considerable curiosity and some anxiety to
his coming interview with Mr. Fairchild.




CHAPTER XII.

A REAL ESTATE OFFICE.


About eight o'clock on Monday morning Chester, accompanied by his
friend Conrad, turned down Fourteenth Street from Sixth Avenue and kept
on till they reached an office over which was the sign:

"Clement Fairchild, Real Estate."

"This is the place, Chester," said the artist. "I will go in and
introduce you."

They entered the office. It was of fair size, and contained a high
desk, an office table covered with papers, and several chairs. There
was but one person in the office, a young man with black whiskers and
mustache and an unamiable expression. He sat on a high stool, but he
was only reading the morning paper. He turned lazily as he heard the
door open, and let his glance rest on Mr. Conrad.

"What can I do for you?" he asked, in a careless tone.

"Is Mr. Fairchild in?" asked the artist.

"No."

"When will he be in?"

"Can't say, I am sure. If you have any business, I will attend to it."

"I have no special business, except to introduce my young friend here."

"Indeed!" said the clerk, impudently. "Who is he?"

"He is going to work here," returned Mr. Conrad, sharply.

"What?" queried the bookkeeper, evidently taken by surprise. "Who says
he is going to work here?"

"Mr. Fairchild."

"He didn't say anything to me about it."

"Very remarkable, certainly," rejoined Conrad. "I presume you have no
objection."

"Look here," said the bookkeeper, "I think there is some mistake about
this. The place was all but promised to my cousin."

"You'll have to settle that matter with your employer. Apparently he
doesn't tell you everything, Mr. ----"

"My name is Mullins--David Mullins," said the bookkeeper, with dignity.

"Then, Mr. Mullins, I have the pleasure of introducing to you Chester
Rand, late of Wyncombe, now of New York, who will be associated with
you in the real estate business."

"Perhaps so," sneered Mullins.

"He will stay here till Mr. Fairchild makes his appearance."
