accelerated, the speed of the pursuer lessened. It seemed as if Ted
would never overtake his prize. How they raced one another, the bobbing
craft and the breathless boy! Ted Turner was a strong swimmer but the
canoe with its solitary occupant was so light that it shot over the
surface of the water like a feather.

Was the contest to be a losing one, after all?

Laurie, looking back at the wake of the boat, saw Ted's arm move slower
and slower and suddenly a wave of realization of the other's danger
came upon him. They might both be drowned,--two of them instead of one!

"Give it up, old man!" he called bravely. "Don't try any more. You may
go down yourself and I should have to die with that misery on my soul.
You've done your best. It's all right. Just let me go! I'm not afraid."

There was no answer from the swimmer but he did not stop. On the
contrary, he kept stubbornly on, plowing with mechanical persistence
through the water. Then at length he, too, was in the current and was
gaining surely and speedily. Presently he was only a length away from
the boat--he was nearer--nearer! His arm touched the stern and Laurie
Fernald caught his hand in a firm grip. There he hung, breathing
heavily.

"I've simply got to stop a second or two and get my wind," said he.
"Then we'll start back."

"Ted!"

"There are no oars, of course, but I can tie the rope around my body or
perhaps catch it between my teeth. The canoe isn't heavy, you know.
After we get out of the current and into quiet water, we shall have no
trouble. We can cut straight across the stream and the distance to
shore won't be great. I can do it all right."

And do it he did, just how neither of the lads could have told.

Nevertheless he did contrive to bring the boat and Laurie with it to a
place of safety. Shoulder-deep in the water stood the frenzied Mr.
Hazen who had plunged in to meet them and drag them to land. They had
come so far down the river that when the canoe was finally beached they
found themselves opposite the sweeping lawns of Pine Lea.

Ted and the tutor were chilled and exhausted and Laurie was weak from
fright and excitement. It did not take long, you may be sure, to summon
help and bundle the three into a motor car which carried them to Pine
Lea. Once there the invalid was put to bed and Mr. Hazen and Ted
equipped with dry garments.

"I shall get the deuce from the Fernalds for this!" commented the young
tutor gloomily to Ted. "If it had not been for you, that boy would
certainly have been drowned. Ugh! It makes me shudder to think of it!
Had anything happened to him, I believe his father and grandfather
would have lynched me."

"Oh, Laurie is going to take all the blame," replied Ted, making an
attempt to comfort the dejected young man. "He told me so himself."

"That's all very well," rejoined Mr. Hazen, "but it won't help much. I
shouldn't have left him. I had no right to do it, no matter what he
said. I suppose the boat wasn't securely tied. It couldn't have been.
Then the breeze came up. Goodness knows how the thing actually
happened. I can't understand it now. But the point is, it did. Jove!
I'm weak as a rag! I guess there can't be much left of you, Ted."

"Oh, I'm all right now," protested Ted. "What got me was the fright of
it. I didn't mind the swimming, for I've often crossed the river and
back during my morning plunge. My work keeps me in pretty good
training. But to-day I got panicky and my breath gave out. I was so
afraid I wouldn't overtake the boat before----"

"I know!" interrupted the tutor with a shiver. "Well, it is all over
now, thank God! You were a genuine hero and I shall tell the Fernalds
so."

"Stuff! Don't tell them at all. What's the use of harrowing their
feelings all up now that the thing is past and done with?"

"But Laurie--he is all done up and they will be at a loss to account
for it," objected Mr. Hazen. "Besides, the servants saw us come ashore
and have probably already spread the story all over the place. And
anyhow, I believe in being perfectly aboveboard. You do yourself, you
know that. So I shall tell them the whole thing precisely as it
happened. Afterward they'll probably fire me."

"No, they won't! Cheer up!"

"I deserve to be fired, too," went on the young tutor without heeding
the interruption. "I ought not to have left Laurie an instant."

"Perhaps not. But you won't do it again."

"You bet I won't!" cried Mr. Hazen boyishly.

It subsequently proved that Mr. Hazen knew far more of his employers
than did Ted, for after the story was told only the pleas of the young
rescuer availed to soften the sentence imposed.

"He's almighty sorry, Mr. Fernald," asserted Ted Turner. "Don't tip him
out. Give him a second try. He won't ever do it again."

"W--e--ll, for your sake I will," Mr. Clarence said, yielding
reluctantly to the pleading of the lad who sat opposite. "It would be
hard for me to deny you anything after what you've done. You've saved
our boy's life. We never shall forget it, never. But Hazen can thank
you for his job--not me."

And so, as a result of Ted's intercession, Mr. Hazen stayed on. In
fact, as Mr. Clarence said, they could deny the lad nothing. It seemed
as if the Fernalds never could do enough for him. Grandfather Fernald
gave him a new watch with an illuminated face; and quite unknown to any
one, Laurie's father opened a bank account to his credit, depositing a
substantial sum as a "starter."

But the best of the whole thing was that Laurie turned to Ted with a
deeper and more earnest affection and the foundation was laid for a
strong and enduring friendship.




CHAPTER VIII

DIPLOMACY AND ITS RESULTS


Laurie, Ted, and Mr. Hazen were in the shack on a Saturday afternoon
not long after the adventure on the river. A hard shower had driven
them ashore and forced them to scramble into the shelter of the camp at
the water's edge. How the rain pelted down on the low roof! It seemed
as if an army were bombarding the little hut! Within doors, however,
all was tight, warm, and cosy and on the hearth before a roaring fire
the damp coats were drying.

In the meantime the two boys and the young tutor had dragged out some
coils of wire and a pair of amateur telephone transmitters which Ted
had concocted while in school and for amusement were trying to run from
one end of the room to the other a miniature telephone. Thus far their
attempts had not been successful and Ted was becoming impatient.

"We got quite a fair result at the laboratory after the things were
adjusted," commented he. "I don't see why we can't work the same stunt
here."

"I'm afraid we haven't put time enough into it yet," replied Mr. Hazen.
"Don't you remember how long Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of the
telephone, experimented before he got results?"

Laurie, who was busy shortening a bit of wire, glanced up with
interest.

"I can't for the life of me understand how he knew what he wanted to
do, can you?" he mused. "Think of starting out to make something
perfectly new--a machine for which you had no pattern! I can imagine
working out improvements on something already on the market. But to
produce something nobody had ever seen before--that beats me! How did
he ever get the idea in the first place?"

The tutor smiled.

"Mr. Bell did not set out to make a telephone, Laurie," he answered.
"What he was aiming to do was to perfect a harmonic telegraph, a scheme
to which he had been devoting a good deal of his time. He and his
father had studied carefully the miracle of speech--how the sounds of
the human voice were produced and carried to others--and as a result of
this training Mr. Bell had become an expert teacher of the deaf. He was
also professor of Vocal Physiology at Boston University where he had
courses in lip reading, or a system of visible speech, which his father
had evolved. This work kept him busy through the day so whatever
experimenting he did with sounds and their vibrations had to be done at
night."

"So he stole time for electrical work, too, did he?" observed Ted.

"I'm afraid that his interest in sound vibration caused him a sorry
loss of sleep," said the tutor. "But certainly his later results were
worth the amount of rest he sacrificed. One of the first agencies he
employed to work upon was a piano. Have you ever tried singing a note
into this instrument when the sustaining pedal is depressed? Do it some
time and notice what happens. You will find that the string tuned to
the pitch of your voice will start vibrating while all the others
remain quiet. You can even go farther and try the experiment of
uttering several different pitches, if you want to, and the
corresponding strings will give back your notes, each one singling out
its own particular vibration from the air. Now the results reached in
these experiments with the piano strings meant a great deal more to
Alexander Graham Bell than they would have meant to you or to me. In
the first place, his training had given him a very acute ear; and in
the next place, he was able to see in the facts presented a
significance which an unskilled listener would not have detected. He
found that this law of sympathetic vibration could be repeated
electrically and, if desired, from a distance by means of
electromagnets placed under a group of piano strings; and if afterward
a circuit was made by connecting the magnets with an electric battery,
you immediately had the same singing of the keys and a similar
searching of each for its own pitch."

"I'd like to try that trick some time," exclaimed Ted, leaning forward
eagerly.

"So should I!" echoed Laurie.

"I think we could quite easily make the experiment if Laurie's mother
would not object to our rigging up an attachment to her piano," Mr.
Hazen responded.

"Oh, Mater wouldn't mind," answered Laurie confidently. "She never
minds anything I want to do."

"I know she is a very long-suffering person," smiled the tutor. "Do you
recall the white mice you had once, Laurie, and how they got loose and
ran all over the house?"

"And the chameleons! And the baby alligator!" chuckled Laurie. "Mother
did get her back up over that alligator. She didn't like meeting him in
the hall unexpectedly. But she wouldn't mind a thing that wasn't
alive."

"You call an electric wire dead then," said Ted with irony.

"Well, no--not precisely," grinned Laurie. "Still I'm certain Mater
would be less scared of it than she would of a mouse, even if the wire
could kill her and the mouse couldn't."

"Let's return to Mr. Bell and his piano strings," Ted remarked, after
the laughter had subsided.

Mr. Hazen's brow contracted thoughtfully and in his leisurely fashion
he presently replied:

"You can see, can't you, that if an interrupter caused the electric
current to be made and broken at intervals, the number of times it
interrupted per second would, for example, correspond to the rate of
vibration in one of the strings? In other words, that would be the only
string that would answer. Now if you sang into the piano, you would
have the rhythmic impulse that set the piano strings vibrating coming
directly through the air, while with the battery the impulse would come
through the wire and the electromagnets instead. In each case, however,
the principle involved would be the same."

"I can see that," said Ted quickly. "Can't you, Laurie?"

His chum nodded.

"Now," continued Mr. Hazen, "just as it was possible to start two or
more different notes of the piano echoing varying pitches, so it is
possible to have several sets of these _make-and-break_ or intermittent
currents start their corresponding strings to answering. In this way
one could send several messages at once, each message being toned to a
different pitch. All that would be necessary would be to have differently
keyed interrupters. This was the principle of the harmonic telegraph at
which Mr. Bell was toiling outside the hours of his regular work and
through which he hoped to make himself rich and famous. His intention
was to break up the various sounds into the dots and dashes of the
Morse code and make one wire do what it had previously taken several
wires to perform."

"It seems simple enough," speculated Laurie.

"It was not so simple to carry out," declared Mr. Hazen. "Of course, as
I told you, Mr. Bell could not give his entire time to it. He had his
teaching both at Boston University and elsewhere to do. Nor was he
wholly free at the Saunders's, with whom he boarded at Salem, for he
was helping the Saunders's nephew, who was deaf, to study."

"And in return poor Mrs. Saunders had to offer up her piano for
experiments, I suppose," Ted observed.

"Well, perhaps at first--but not for long," was Mr. Hazen's reply. "Mr.
Bell soon abandoned piano strings and in their place resorted to flat
strips of springy steel, keying them to different pitches by varying
their length. One end of these strips he fastened to a pole of an
electromagnet and the other he extended over the other pole and left
free."

"And the current interrupters?" queried Ted.

"Those current interrupters are the things which have since become
known as transmitters," explained Mr. Hazen. "Those Mr. Bell made all
alike except that in each one of them were springs kept in constant
vibration by a magnet or point of metal placed above each spring so
that the spring would touch it at every vibration, thus making and
breaking the electric current the same number of times per second that
corresponded to the pitch of the piece of steel. By tuning the springs
of the receivers to the same pitch with the transmitters and running a
wire between them equipped with signalling keys and a battery, Bell
reasoned he could send as many messages at one time as there were
pitches."

"Did he get it to work?" Laurie asked.

"Mr. Bell didn't, no," replied the tutor. "What sounded logical enough
on paper was not so easy to put into practise. The idea has been
carried out successfully, however, since then. But Mr. Bell
unfortunately had no end of troubles with his scheme, and we all may
thank these difficulties for the telephone, for had his harmonic
telegraph gone smoothly we might not and probably would not have had
Bell's other and far more important invention."

"The discovery of the telephone was a 'happen,' then," Ted ventured.

"More or less of a happen," was the reply. "Of course, the intelligent
