sir?"  (throwing up the window and looking out.)

"Calling! no; I wasn't `calling.'  I was shrieking, howling, yelling.
Is Hobbs there?"

"No, sir; 'Obbs is not 'ere, sir."

"Well, then, be so good as to go and look for him, and say I want him
directly to go for the letters."

"'Ere I am, sir," said Hobbs, coming suddenly round the corner of the
house, with an appearance of extreme haste.

Hobbs had, in fact, been within hearing of his master, having been,
during the last half-hour, seated in McAllister's kitchen, where the
uproarious merriment had drowned all other sounds.  Hobbs had become a
great favourite with the Highland family, owing to his hearty good
humour and ready power of repartee.  The sharp Cockney, with the
easy-going effrontery peculiar to his race, attempted to amuse the
household--namely, Mrs McAllister, Dan, Hugh, and two good-looking and
sturdy-limbed servant-girls--by measuring wits with the "canny Scot," as
he called the farmer.  He soon found, however, that he had caught a
Tartar.  The good-natured Highlander met his raillery with what we may
call a smile of grave simplicity, and led him slyly into committing
himself in such a way that even the untutored servants could see how far
the man was behind their master in general knowledge; but Hobbs took
refuge in smart reply, confident assertion, extreme volubility, and the
use of hard words, so that it sometimes seemed to the domestics as if he
really had some considerable power in argument.  Worthy Mrs McAllister
never joined in the debate, except by a single remark now and then.  She
knew her son thoroughly, and before the Sudberrys had been a week at the
White House she understood Hobbs through and through.

She was wont to sit at her spinning-wheel regarding this intellectual
sparring with grave interest, as a peculiar phase of the human mind.  A
very sharp encounter had created more laughter than usual at the time
when Mr Sudberry halloed for his man-servant.

"You must be getting deaf; Hobbs, I fear," said the master, at once
pacified by the man's arrival; "go down and fetch--"

"Pray do not send him away just now," cried Mrs Sudberry: "I have
something particular for him to do.  Can you go down yourself, dear?"

The good man sighed.  "Well, I will go," and accordingly away he went.

"Stay, my dear."

"Well."

"I expect one or two small parcels by the coach this morning; mind you
ask for 'em and bring 'em up."

"Ay, ay!" and Mr Sudberry, with his hands in his pockets, and his
wideawake thrust back and very much on one side of his head, sauntered
down the hill towards the road.

One of the disadvantageous points about the White House was its distance
from any town or market.  The nearest shop was four miles off, so that
bread, butter, meat, and groceries, had to be ordered a couple of days
beforehand, and were conveyed to their destination by the mail-coach.
Even after they were deposited at the gate of Mr McAllister's farm,
there was still about half a mile of rugged cart-road to be got over
before they could be finally deposited in the White House.  This was a
matter of constant anxiety to Mr Sudberry, because it was necessary
that someone should be at the gate regularly to receive letters and
parcels, and this involved constant attention to the time of the mail
passing.  When no one was there, the coachman left the property of the
family at the side of the road.  Hobbs, however, was usually up to time,
fair weather and foul, and this was the first time his master had been
called on to go for the letters.

Walking down the road, Mr Sudberry whistled an extremely operatic air,
in the contentment of his heart, and glanced from side to side, with a
feeling amounting almost to affection, at the various objects which had
now become quite familiar to him, and with many of which he had
interesting associations.

There was the miniature hut, on the roof of which he usually laid his
rod on returning from a day's fishing.  There was the rude stone bridge
over the burn, on the low parapet of which he and the family were wont
to sit on fine evenings, and commune of fishing, and boating, and
climbing, and wonder whether it would be possible ever again to return
to the humdrum life of London.  There was the pool in the same burn over
which one day he, reckless man, had essayed to leap, and into which he
had tumbled, when in eager pursuit of Jacky.  A little below this was
the pool into which the said Jacky had rushed in wild desperation on
finding that his father was too fleet for him.  Passing through a
five-barred gate into the next field, he skirted the base of a high,
precipitous crag, on which grew a thicket of dwarf-trees and shrubs, and
at the foot of which the burn warbled.  Here, on his left, stood the
briar bush out of which had _whirred_ the first live grouse he ever set
eyes on.  It was at this bird, that, in the madness of his excitement,
he had flung first his stick, then his hat, and lastly his shout of
disappointment and defiance.  A little further on was that other bush
out of which he had started so many grouse that he now never approached
it without a stone in each hand, his eyes and nostrils dilated, and his
breath restrained.  He never by any chance on these occasions sent his
artillery within six yards of the game; but once, when he approached the
bush in a profound reverie, and without the usual preparation, he
actually saw a bird crouching in the middle of it!  To seize a large
stone and hit the ground at least forty yards beyond the bush was the
work of a moment.  Up got the bird with a tremendous whizz!  He flung
his stick wildly, and, hitting it, (by chance), fair on the head,
brought it down.  To rush at it, fall on it, crush it almost flat, and
rise up slowly holding it very tight, was the result of this successful
piece of poaching.  Another result was a charming addition to a dinner a
few days afterwards.

At all these objects Mr Sudberry gazed benignantly as he sauntered
along in the sunshine, indulging in sweet memories of the recent past,
and whistling operatically.

The high-road gained, he climbed upon the gate, seated himself upon the
top bar to await the passing of the mail, and began to indulge in a
magnificent air, the florid character of which he rendered much more
effective than the composer had intended by the introduction of
innumerable flourishes of his own.

It was while thus engaged, and in the middle of a tremendous shake, that
Mr Sudberry suddenly became aware of the presence of a man not more
than twenty yards distant.  He was lying down on the embankment beside
the road, and his ragged dress of muddy-brown corduroy so resembled the
broken ground, on which he lay that he was not a very distinct object,
even when looked at point-blank.  Certainly Mr Sudberry thought him an
extremely disagreeable object as he ended in an ineffective quaver and
with a deep blush; for that man must be more than human, who, when
caught in the act of attempting to perpetrate an amateur concert in all
its parts, does not _feel_ keenly.

Being of a sociable disposition, Mr Sudberry was about to address this
ill-favoured beggar--for such he evidently was--when the coach came
round a distant bend in the road at full gallop.  It was the ordinary
tall, top-heavy mail of the first part of the nineteenth century.  Being
a poor district, there were only two horses, a white and a black; but
the driver wore a stylish red coat, and cracked his whip smartly.  The
road being all down hill at that part, the coach came on at a spanking
pace, and pulled up with a crash.

The beggar turned his face to the ground, and pretended to be asleep.

Mr Sudberry noticed this; but, being interested in his own affairs,
soon forgot the circumstance.

"Got any letters for me to-day, my man?"

Oh, yes, he has letters and newspapers too.  Mr Sudberry mutters to
himself as they are handed down, "Capital!--ha!--business; hum!--
private; ho!--compasses; good!  Any more?"

There are no more; but there is a parcel or two.  The coachman gets down
and opens the door of the box behind.  The insides peep out, and the
outsides look down with interest.  A great many large and heavy things
are pulled out and laid on the road.

Mr Sudberry remarks that it would have been "wiser to have stowed _his_
parcels in front."

The coachman observes that _these_ are _his_ parcels, shuts the door,
mounts the box, and drives away, with the outsides grinning and the
insides stretching their heads out, leaving Mr Sudberry transfixed and
staring.

"`One or two small parcels,'" murmured the good man, recalling his
wife's words; "`and mind you bring 'em up.'  One salmon, two legs of
mutton, one ham, three dozen of beer, a cask of--of--something or other,
and a bag of--of--ditto, (groceries, I suppose), `and mind you bring 'em
up!'  How! `_that_ is the question!'" cried Mr Sudberry, quoting
Hamlet, in desperation.

Suddenly he recollected the beggar-man.  "Halloo! friend; come hither."

The man rose slowly, and rising did not improve his appearance.  He was
rather tall, shaggy, loose-jointed, long-armed, broad-shouldered, and he
squinted awfully.  His nose was broken, and his dark colour bespoke him
a gypsy.

"Can you help me up to yonder house with these things, my man?"

"No," said the man, gruffly, "I'm footsore with travellin', but I'll
watch them here while you go up for help."

"Oh! ahem!" said Mr Sudberry, with peculiar emphasis; "you seem a stout
fellow, and might find more difficult ways of earning half a crown.
However, I'll give you that sum if you go up and tell them to send down
a barrow."

"I'll wait here," replied the man, with a sarcastic grin, limping back
to his former seat on the bank.

"Oh! very well, and I will wait _here_," said Mr Sudberry, seating
himself on a large stone, and pulling out his letters.

Seeing this, the gypsy got up again, and looked cautiously along the
road, first to the right and then to the left.  No human being was in
sight.  Mr Sudberry observed the act, and felt uncomfortable.

"You'd better go for help, sir," said the man, coming forward.

"Thank you, I'd rather wait for it."

"This seems a handy sort of thing to carry," said the gypsy, taking up
the sack that looked like groceries, and throwing it across his
shoulder.  "I'll save you the trouble of taking this one up, anyhow."

He went off at once at a sharp walk, and with no symptom either of
lameness or exhaustion.  Mr Sudberry was after him in a moment.  The
man turned round and faced him.

"Put that where you took it from!" thundered Mr Sudberry.

"Oh! you're going to resist."

The gypsy uttered an oath, and ran at Mr Sudberry, intending to
overwhelm him with one blow, and rob him on the spot.  The big blockhead
little knew his man.  He did not know that the little Englishman was a
man of iron frame; he only regarded him as a fiery little gentleman.
Still less did he know that Mr Sudberry had in his youth been an expert
boxer, and that he had even had the honour of being knocked flat on his
back more than once by _professional_ gentlemen--in an amicable way, of
course--at four and sixpence a lesson.  He knew nothing of all this, so
he rushed blindly on his fate, and met it--that is to say, he met Mr
Sudberry's left fist with the bridge of his nose, and his right with the
pit of his stomach; the surprising result of which was that the gypsy
staggered back against the wall.

But the man was not a coward, whatever other bad qualities he might have
been possessed of.  Recovering in a moment, he rushed upon his little
antagonist, and sent in two sledge-hammer blows with such violence that
nothing but the Englishman's activity could have saved him from instant
defeat.  He ducked to the first, parried the second, and returned with
such prompt good-will on the gypsy's right eye, that he was again sent
staggering back against the wall; from which point of observation he
stared straight before him, and beheld Mr Sudberry in the wildness of
his excitement, performing a species of Cherokee war-dance in the middle
of the road.  Nothing daunted, however, the man was about to renew his
assault, when George and Fred, all ignorant of what was going on, came
round a turn of the road, on their way to see what was detaining their
father with the letters.

"Why, that's father!" cried Fred.

"Fighting!" yelled George.

They were off at full speed in a moment.  The gypsy gave but one glance,
vaulted the wall, and dived into the underwood that lined the banks of
the river.  He followed the stream a few hundred yards, doubled at right
angles on his course, and in ten minutes more was seen crossing over a
shoulder of the hill, like a mountain hare.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 15.

A DREAM AND A BALL.

That evening Mr Sudberry, having spent the day in a somewhat excited
state--having swept everything around him, wherever he moved, with his
coat-tails, as with the besom of destruction--having despatched a note
to the nearest constabulary station, and having examined the bolts and
fastenings of the windows of the White House--sat down after supper to
read the newspaper, and fell fast asleep, with his head hanging over the
back of his chair, his nose turned up to the ceiling, and his mouth wide
open.  His loving family--minus Tilly and Jacky, who were abed--
encircled the table, variously employed; and George stood at his elbow,
fastening up a pair of bookshelves of primitive construction, coupled
together by means of green cord.

While thus domestically employed, they heard a loud, steady thumping
outside.  The Sudberrys were well acquainted by this time with that
sound and its cause.  At first it had filled Mrs Sudberry with great
alarm, raising in her feeble mind horrible reminiscences of tales of
burglary and midnight murder.  After suffering inconceivable torments of
apprehension for two nights, the good lady could stand it no longer, and
insisted on her husband going out to see what it could be.  As the sound
appeared to come from the cottage, or off-shoot from the White House, in
which the McAllisters lived, he naturally went there, and discovered
that the noise was caused by the stoutest of the two servant-girls.
This sturdy lass, whose costume displayed a pair of enormous ankles to
advantage, and exhibited a pair of arms that might have made a
prize-fighter envious, was standing in the middle of the floor, with a
large iron pot before her and a thick wooden pin in her hands, with the
end of which she was, according to her own statement, "champin'
tatties."

Mrs McAllister, her son, Hugh and Dan, and the other servant-girl, were
seated round the walls of the room, watching the process with deep
interest, for their supper was in that pot.  The nine dogs were also
seated round the room, watching the process with melancholy interest;
for their supper was _not_ in that pot, and they knew it, and wished it
was.

"My dear," said Mr Sudberry, on returning to the parlour, "they are
`champing tatties.'"

"What?"

"`Champing tatties,' in other words, mashing potatoes, which it would
seem, with milk, constitute the supper of the family."

Thus was Mrs Sudberry's mind relieved, and from that night forward no
further notice was taken of the sound.

But on the present occasion the champing of the tatties had an unwonted
effect on Mr Sudberry.  It caused him to dream, and his dreams
naturally took a pugilistic turn.  His breathing became quick and short;
his face began to twitch; and Lucy suggested that it would be as well to
"awake papa," when papa suddenly awaked himself; and hit George a
tremendous blow on the shoulder.

"Hallo! father," cried George remonstratively, rubbing the assaulted
limb; "really, you know, if you come it in this way often, you will
alienate my affections, I fear."

"My dear boy!--what?--where?  Why, I was dreaming!"

Of course he was, and the result of his dream was that everybody in the
room started up in surprise and excitement.  Thereafter they sat down in
a gay and very talkative humour.  Soon afterwards a curious squeaking
was heard in the adjoining cottage, and another thumping sound began,
which was to the full as unremitting as, and much more violent than,
that caused by "champin' tatties."  The McAllister household, having
supped, were regaling themselves with a dance.

"What say to a dance with them?" said George.

"Oh!" cried Lucy, leaping up.

"Capital!" shouted Mr Sudberry, clapping his hands.

A message was sent in.  The reply was, "heartily welcome!" and in two
minutes Mr Sudberry and stout servant-girl Number 1, George and stout
girl Number 2, Hugh and Lucy, Dan and Hobbs, (the latter consenting to
act as girl Number 3), were dancing the Reel o' Tullochgorum like
maniacs, to the inspiring strains of McAllister's violin, while Peter
sat in a corner in constant dread of being accidentally sat down upon.
Fred, in another corner, looked on, laughed, and was caressed furiously
by the nine dogs.  Mrs Sudberry talked philosophy in the window, with
grave, earnest Mrs McAllister, whose placid equanimity was never
disturbed, but flowed on, broad and deep, like a mighty river, and whose
interest in all things, small and great, seemed never to flag for a
moment.

The room in which all this was going on was of the plainest possible
description.  It was the hall, the parlour, the dining-room, the
drawing-room, and the library of the McAllister Family.  Earth was the
floor, white-washed and uneven were the walls, non-existent was the
ceiling, and black with peat-smoke were the rafters.  There was a
dresser, clean and white, and over it a rack of plates and dishes.
There was a fire-place--a huge yawning gulf; with a roaring fire, (for
culinary purposes only, being summer),--and beside it a massive iron
gallows, on which to hang the family pot.  Said pot was a caldron; so
big was it that there was a species of winch and a chain for raising and
lowering it over the fire; in fact, a complicated sort of machinery,
mysterious and soot-begrimed, towered into the dark depths of the ample
chimney.  There was a brown cupboard in one corner, and an apoplectic
eight-day clock in another.  A small bookshelf supported the family
Bible and several ancient and much-worn volumes.  Wooden benches were
ranged round the walls; and clumsy chairs and tables, with various
pails, buckets, luggies, troughs, and indescribable articles, completed
the furniture of the picturesque and cosy apartment.  The candle that
lighted the whole was supported by a tall wooden candlestick, whose foot
rested on the ground, and whose body, by a simple but clumsy
contrivance, could be lengthened or shortened at pleasure, from about
three to five feet.

But besides all this, there was a world of _materiel_ disposed on the
black rafters above--old farm implements, broken furniture, an old
musket, an old claymore, a broken spinning-wheel, etcetera, all of which
were piled up and so mingled with the darkness of the vault above, that
imagination might have deemed the spot a general rendezvous for the aged
and the maimed of "still life."

Fast and furious was the dancing that night.  Native animal spirits did
it all.  No artificial stimulants were there.  "Tatties and mulk" were
at the bottom of the whole affair.  The encounter of that forenoon
seemed to have had the effect of recalling the spirit of his youth to
Mr Sudberry, and his effervescing joviality gave tone to all the rest.

"Now, Fred, you must take my place," said he, throwing himself in an
exhausted condition on a "settle."

"But perhaps your partner may want a rest?" suggested Fred.

Lass Number 1 scorned the idea: so Fred began.

"Are your fingers not tired?" asked Mr Sudberry, wiping his bald
forehead, which glistened as if it had been anointed with oil.

"Not yet," said McAllister quietly.

Not yet!  If the worthy Highlander had played straight on all night and
half the next day, he would have returned the same answer to the same
question.

"You spend a jolly life of it here," said Mr Sudberry to Mrs
McAllister.

"Ay, a pleasant life, no doot; but we're not _always_ fiddling and
dancing."

"True, but the variety of herding the cattle on these splendid hills is
charming."

"So it is," assented Mrs McAllister; "we've reason to be contented with
our lot.  Maybe ye would grow tired of it, however, if ye was always
here.  I'm told that the gentry whiles grow tired of their braw rooms,
and take to plowterin' aboot the hills and burns for change.  Sometimes
they even dance wi' the servants in a Highland cottage!"

"Ha! you have me there," cried Mr Sudberry, laughing.

"Let me sit down, pa, pray do!" cried Lucy.  Her father rose quickly,
and Lucy dropped into his place quite exhausted.

"Come, father, relieve me!" cried Fred.  "I'm done up, and my partner
_won't_ give in."

To say truth, it seemed as if the said partner, (stout lass Number 1),
never would give in at all.  From the time that the Sudberrys entered
she had not ceased to dance reel after reel, without a minute of
breathing-time.  Her countenance was like the sun in a fog; her limbs
moved as deftly and untiringly, after having tired out father and son,
as they did when she began the evening; and she now went on, with a
quiet smile on her face, evidently resolved to show their English guests
