eaten; but it is inferior to the venison of either the fallow or red
deer.

The elk belongs equally to the Old and New Worlds.  His range is the
wooded countries of high latitudes in the north, both of Europe and
Asia; and in America he is found in similar situations.  In the latter
continent he is called the Moose; and the name Elk is there erroneously
given to another and more southern species--the Wapiti--to be noticed
presently.

In North America the range of the elk may be defined by regarding the
boundary-line of the United States and Canada as its southern limit.
Formerly elks were met with as far south as the Ohio--now they are rare
even in Wisconsin.  In Canada, and northward to the shores of the Arctic
Sea, wherever timber is plenteous, the great moose deer dwell.  They
roam in small herds--or perhaps only families, consisting of six or
seven individuals--and feed chiefly on the leaves of plants and trees.
Their legs are so long, and their necks so short, that they cannot graze
on the level ground, but, like the giraffes of Africa, are compelled to
browse on the tops of tall plants, and the twigs and leaves of trees, in
the summer; while in the winter they feed on the tops of the willows and
small birches, and are never found far from the neighbourhood where such
trees grow.  Though they have no fore-teeth in their upper jaw, yet they
are enabled somehow or other to crop from the willows and birch trees
twigs of considerable thickness, cutting them off as clean as if the
trees were pruned by a gardener's shears.

The moose is a sly animal, and in early winter all the craft of the
hunter is required to capture it.  In summer it is easier to do so:
these animals are then so tormented with mosquitoes and gnats, that they
become almost heedless of the approach of their more dangerous enemy,
man.  In winter the hunter follows the moose by his track, easily
discovered in the snow; but it is necessary to approach from the
leeward, as the slightest sound borne to his ear upon the breeze is
sufficient to start him off.  A very singular habit of the moose adds to
the difficulty of approaching him.  When he has the intention to repose,
he turns sharply out of the general track he has been following, and
then, making a circuit, lies down, his body being hidden by the
surrounding snow.  In this lair he can hear any one passing along the
track he has made; and, thus warned, his escape is easy.  The hunter who
understands his business can usually give a guess (from a survey of the
ground) of where these detours are likely to be taken, and takes his
measures accordingly.  When within range, the hunter usually makes some
noise, as by snapping a twig: the moose starts to his feet, and shows
himself above the snow.  For a moment he squats on his hams, before
starting off.  This is the fatal moment, for it is the time for the
hunter to take sure aim and send the fatal bullet.  If the shot prove
only a slight wound, and not mortal, the moose sometimes turns upon his
enemy; and if a friendly tree be not convenient, the hunter stands a
good chance of being trampled to death.  In the rutting season the moose
will assail even man himself without provocation; and at such times the
old "bulls" (as the hunters term the males) have terrible conflicts with
one another.

The habits of the elk of Northern Europe appear to be identical with the
moose of America.  Hunting it in Sweden and Norway is a favourite sport,
and its flesh is eaten, the nose and tongue being esteemed great
delicacies, as they are in America.  It is related that elks were
formerly used in Sweden to draw the sledge; but, for certain reasons,
this was prohibited by law.

In point of size, the _Wapiti_ stands next to the elk.  In shape he
resembles the well-known Stag or Red Deer of our parks, but is much
larger.  The wapiti is exclusively a native of North America; and it may
be remarked that his range is more southerly, and not so northerly as
that of the moose.  He is not found so far south as the Southern States,
nor farther north than the Canadas; but around the great lakes, and
westward to the Rocky Mountains, and even to the Pacific, the wapiti is
met with.  He is a noble creature--perhaps the noblest of the deer
tribe--and it is a boast of the backwoods' hunter to have killed an elk;
for such, as already mentioned, is the name erroneously given to this
animal.

Perhaps the _Reindeer_ is the most celebrated of all the deer; and just
on that account I shall say but little of this species, since its habits
are familiar to every one.  Every one has read of the Laplander and his
reindeer--how these people have tamed and trained, and otherwise
submitted it to a variety of useful purposes; but the Laplanders are not
the only people who have to do with the reindeer.  The tribes of the
Tungusians and Tchutski, who inhabit the northern parts of Asia, have
also trained it to various uses--as a beast of burden, and also to ride
upon.  The variety--perhaps it is a distinct species--which the
Tungusians employ for the saddle, is much larger than that of the
Laplanders; but it may be remarked that there are also varieties in
Lapland itself.  The same remark applies to the reindeer of America,
which is found in the northern parts of the Hudson's Bay territory, and
all along the shores of the Arctic Ocean, making its way over frozen
seas, even to the islands that lie around the pole.  In these desolate
countries the Caribou (for by such name is the reindeer known in
America) is hunted by both Indians and Esquimaux; but it has never been
trained by either race to any useful purpose, and is only sought for as
furnishing an important article of food and clothing.  At least two
kinds of Caribou exist in the vast tracts of almost unknown country
known as Prince Rupert's Land, or the Hudson's Bay territory.

As the three kinds described belong--at least partially--to the New
World, we shall finish with the other deer of this hemisphere, before
proceeding to those peculiar to the Old World.

The _Virginian Deer_ is the species common to the United States proper,
and, in fact, the only wild species now found in the greater number in
the States.  It is a small animal, very similar to the fallow-deer of
Europe; and several varieties (or species), not differing much from the
Virginian deer, exist throughout the forests of Mexico, California,
Oregon, and South America.  In Mexico there are three or four species,
severally known as the Mexican Deer, the Mazama, the Cariacou, and by
other appellations.  Of course, the inhabitants simply know them as
venados (deer).  In Guyana there are one or two small species, and along
the forest-covered sides of the Andes two or three more.  In Bolivia
there is a large kind known as the Tarush; and on the pampas of Buenos
Ayres and Patagonia is a kind called Guazuti, which associates in large
herds, and is remarkable for the powerful odour emitted by the bucks.

In the forests of the Amazon, and all through the Brazilian country,
deer exist of different species; several, as the Guazuviva, the Pita,
the Eyebrowed Brocket, and the Large-eared Brocket, being tiny little
creatures, not much larger than the fawns of the ordinary species.

Returning to North America, we find several varieties of the Virginian
Deer in the countries lying along the Pacific coast--viz., California,
Oregon, and Russian America.  These have received trivial names, though
it is believed that they are only varieties, as mentioned above.  Two,
however, appear to be specifically different from the Virginian deer.
One of these is the Mule Deer of the Rocky Mountains--almost as large as
the red deer of our own country, and well-known to the trappers of the
Upper Missouri.  Another is a well-marked species, on account of the
length of its tail--whence it has received its hunter appellation of the
Long-tailed Deer.

The _Deer of Europe_ are not numerous in species; but if we consider the
large herds shut up in parks, they are perhaps as plentiful in numbers
as elsewhere, over a like extent of territory.

The _Reindeer_ and _Elk_, as already stated, are both indigenous to
Europe; so also the _Stag_ or _Red Deer_, the greatest ornament of our
parks.  The red deer runs wild in Scotland, and in most of the great
forests of Europe and Asia.  There are also varieties of this noble
animal, a small one being found in the mountains of Corsica.

The _Fallow-Deer_ is too well-known to need description.  It is enough
to say that it exists wild in most countries of Europe, our own
excepted.  Into this country it is supposed to have been introduced from
Denmark.

The _Roebuck_, another species of our parks, is indigenous to both
England and Scotland.  It is now found plentiful only in the northern
parts of Great Britain.  It is a native also of Italy, Sweden, Norway,
and Siberia.

The _African Deer_ consist of two species, supposed to be varieties of
red deer.  They are found in Barbary, and usually known as the Barbary
Deer.  But the fallow-deer also exists in North Africa, in the woods of
Tunis and Algiers; and Cuvier has asserted that the fallow-deer
originally came from Africa.  This is not probable, since they are at
present met with over the whole continent of Asia, even in China itself.

We now arrive at the species more especially termed _Asiatic_ or _Indian
Beer_.  These form a numerous group, containing species that differ
essentially from each other.

There is the _Ritsa_, or Great Black Stag of the Japanese and Sumatrans.
It is named _black_ stag, from its dark brown colour during winter.  It
is fully as large as our own stag; and is further distinguished by long
hair growing upon the upper part of its neck, cheeks, and throat, which
gives it the appearance of having a beard and mane!  It inhabits Bengal,
and some of the large Indian islands.

The _Samboo_, or _Sambur_, is another large species, not unlike the
rusa.  It is found in various parts of India, and especially in the
tropical island of Ceylon.  Several varieties of it have been described
by naturalists.

In the Himalaya Mountains there exist two or three species of large
deer, not very well-known.  One is the Saul Forest Stag, or Bara-singa--
a species almost as large as the Canadian wapiti.  Another is the Marl,
or Wallich's Stag, which is also found in Persia.  Still another
species, the Sika, inhabits Japan; and yet another, the Baringa, or
Spotted Deer of the Sunderbunds, dwells along the marshy rivers of this
last-mentioned territory.  Again, there is the Spotted Rusa, and other
species, inhabitants of the Saul Forests.  In fact, the number of
species of Indian deer is far from being accurately ascertained, to say
nothing of the very imperfect descriptions given of those that are
actually known.

When we come to the great Oriental islands--the Isles of Ind--we find
many new and beautiful species; some being large noble stags, while
others are tiny graceful little creatures like gazelles.

In Sumatra and Borneo we have a distinct species of Sambur Deer; in
Timor a smaller one; a third exists in Java; and a fourth in the
Philippines.  In Java, too, we find the beautiful little Muntjak; and
another tiny variety in China, called the Chinese Muntjak.

Returning again to the Himalaya country, we encounter, in the plains
south of this great chain, the Spotted Axis, so well-known from its
beautiful markings, which resemble those of the fawn of our own
fallow-deer.  But it may be remarked that there are two or three species
of spotted deer, and that they inhabit the plains of India--from the
Himalayas southward to the Island of Ceylon.  Ascending these great
mountains, we encounter among their lower slopes another very singular
species of cervine creature--the Musk Deer--which, though but little
known, is one of the most interesting of its tribe; especially so, as it
is from the secreting glands of this curious little animal that most of
the celebrated perfume of commerce is obtained.

Crossing the Himalayas, and advancing northwards, we find upon the
plains of Central Asia a species of deer, known among the Tartars as
Siaga, and to our own naturalists as the Tail-less Roe.  Several species
entirely unknown to scientific men will yet be discovered, when the
immense steppes of Asia come to be explored by observers capable of
describing and classifying.

Like many another genus of animals, a complete monograph of the deer
tribe would be of itself the labour of a life.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

QUADRUPEDS WITH POCKETS.

In the year 1711 was brought to France, from the Island of New Guinea,
an animal of an unknown species, and one that was singular in many
respects; but especially so, from the fact of its having a double skin,
covering a part of its belly, and forming a sort of pocket or pouch.
This animal was Le Brun's Kangaroo; very properly named after the
naturalist who first described it, since it was the first of the
marsupial or pouched animals known to the scientific world.

The Opossums of America were afterwards scientifically described; but it
is only of late years that the numerous species and genera of pouched
animals--constituting almost the entire mammalia of the Australian
world--have become generally known to Europeans.

The peculiarity of the _pouched_ animals is in reality the _pouch_,
common to all of them.  Otherwise they differ in many respects--some
being carnivorous, others graminivorous, others insectivorous, and so
on.  In fact, among them we have forms analogous to almost all the
different groups of ordinary mammalia.  Some naturalists have even
classified them in the different groups, but with little success; and it
is perhaps better to keep them together, retaining the "pouch" as the
common characteristic.

The marsupial animals bring forth their young before they are fully
developed.  The mother places the mouth, of what is little more than a
foetus, to her teat; and there it remains till it is able to go alone.
The pouch covers the teats, and serves to protect the young, while the
process of development is going on.  Even after the little ones are able
to run about, they continue to use this singular nest as a place of
repose, and a refuge in case of attack by an enemy!

The pouched animals are not entirely confined to the Australian island.
The large island of New Guinea possesses some of them; and there are
species in Java, and others of the Asiatic islands.  America (both North
and South) has the opossums, in numerous species; but it is in
Australia, and the contiguous islands of Van Diemen's Land and New
Guinea, that we find both the genera and species in greatest numbers.
These countries are, in fact, the head-quarters of the marsupial
animals.

The true genera are not numerous, though the species of most of them
are; and it is but natural to suppose that many new ones--both genera
and species--will yet be discovered, when the vast _terra incognita_ of
Australia comes to be explored.  In fact, every expedition into the
interior brings home with it some new animal that carries a pouch!

As the opossums were the first of these animals whose habits became
generally known to Europeans, we shall speak first of them; and it may
be remarked, that although there are several species in the Australian
countries resembling the true opossums, and are even called opossums,
yet among naturalists the name is usually limited to the pouched animals
of America.

The old writer, Lawson, gives as succinct an account of the habits of
the best known species--the Virginia opossum--as may be found anywhere.
We shall adopt it _verbatim_:--"The possum," says he, "is found nowhere
but in America.  She is the wonder of all the land animals--being of the
size of a badger, and near that colour.  The female, doubtless, breeds
her young at her teats, for I have seen them stuck fast thereto when
they have been no bigger than a small raspberry, and seemingly
inanimate.  She has a paunch, or false belly, wherein she carries her
young, after they are from those teats, till they can shift for
themselves.

"Their food is roots, poultry, or wild fruits.  They have no hair on
their tails, but a sort of scale or hard crust, as the beavers have.  If
a cat has nine lives, this creature surely has nineteen; for if you
break every bone in their skin, and smash their skull, leaving them
quite dead, you may come an hour after and they will be quite gone away,
or, perhaps, you may meet them creeping away.  They are a very stupid
creature, utterly neglecting their safety.  They are most like rats than
anything.  I have for necessity, in the wilderness, eaten of them.
Their flesh is very white and well-tasted, but their ugly tails put me
out of conceit with that fare.  They climb trees as the racoons do.
Their fur is not esteemed or used, save that the Indians spin it into
girdles and gaiters."

Bating the exaggeration about their tenacity of life, and also the error
as to their mode of bringing forth, the above account hits off the
opossum to a nicety.  Lawson might have added that their tails are
highly prehensile, and are not only used for suspending them to the
branches of trees, but also employed by the female for holding her young
upon her back--in which fashion she often carries them about.

The flesh of the opossum is not only eatable, but much eaten, and even
sought after as a delicacy both by negroes and whites.

It is surprising how the number of species of this animal has lately
multiplied, under the research of naturalists.  Perhaps no creature
illustrates more forcibly the folly of setting limits to the species of
animals, by simply trusting to the account of those known or described.
Over thirty species have been found in America, of which five or six
belong to the northern division of the continent.  The tropical region
is their head-quarters; but they are not confined to the torrid zone,
since there are species existing everywhere, from Canada to Chili.

Another form of pouched animal that can scarcely be called an opossum is
the Yapock of tropical South America.  It is a smaller animal than the
opossum, aquatic in its habits, and in fact approaches nearer to the
family of the water-rats.  Of this, too, there are several species.

Crossing to Australia we find the pouched animals, as already observed,
of several different and very dissimilar genera.

Taking them in the usual order of mammalia, we have three kinds truly
carnivorous.  First, the Tasmanian wolf, a creature which possesses all
the fierce attributes of his synonyme, and is, in fact, a wolf, only one
who carries a pocket.  He is an animal as active as fierce, and lives by
preying on the kangaroos and other kindred animals.  He is also
troublesome to the breeders of sheep; as, since the introduction of
these innocent animals to his country, he appears to have formed a
preference for mutton over kangaroo flesh.  Fortunately his range is not
extensive, as he is confined to the island of Van Dieman's Land, and has
not been observed elsewhere.  Only one species has been yet discovered.

Another pouched animal, equally carnivorous, is the Ursine Opossum.
This is a burrowing creature about the size of a badger, and of equally
voracious habits.

In some places it proves extremely destructive to the poultry of the
settler, though it will also eat carcass, or dead fish--in short,
anything.

In a state of captivity it will not submit to be tamed, biting
everything that comes near it, at the same time uttering a sort of
yelling growl.  Small though it be, in many of its actions and habits it
resembles the bear, and might be regarded as the Australian
representative of the ursine family; but several of its species approach
nearer to the weasels--for it is not so poor in species as the Tasmanian
wolf, there being at least five kinds of it in Australia and Van
Dieman's Land.  One variety of it is distinguished by the name of Native
Devil!

Another genus of Australian _carnivora_ is in the Phascogals.  These
animals are smaller than the last, and dwell upon trees like squirrels.
From their having bushy tails, they might readily be mistaken for
animals of the squirrel kind; but their habits are entirely different--
since to birds, and other small game, they are as destructive as the
weasel itself.

After the true carnivora come the Bandicoots.  These are named after the
great bandicoot rat of India, to which the early settlers fancied they
bore a resemblance.  They are insect-eaters, and represent in Australia
the shrews and tenrecs of the Old World.  They also feed upon roots and
bulbs, which with their strong claws they are enabled to scratch up out
of the ground.  Their mode of progression is by leaps--not like those of
the kangaroo, but still more resembling the pace of a rabbit or hare--
and they appear to prefer mountainous regions for their habitat.  There
are several species of them in Australia and the adjacent islands.

The Phalangers, or Fox Opossums, come next in order.  These creatures
are so called from a sort of resemblance which they bear to the
well-known Reynard; but, fortunately, the resemblance does not extend to
their habits, as they are all supposed to be innocent creatures, living
on fruits and seeds, and climbing trees for the purpose of obtaining
them.  The true Vulpine Opossum--which is a native of Australia, near
Port Jackson--is very much like a small fox; but there are two
sub-genera of the phalangers that differ much from this form.  One of
these is the Scham-scham, a very beautiful spotted creature found in the
Molucca and Papuan islands.  Several other species of phalangers inhabit
these and other Asiatic islands, especially Celebes and New Ireland.

The other sub-genus is that of the Flying Squirrels, usually known as
Norfolk Island Flying Squirrels, though it is not even certain that they
inhabit the last-mentioned island.  It needs only to be said that these
animals are very much like other flying squirrels; and in fact they
_are_ squirrels, only squirrels of the marsupial kind.  There are
several species already described.

Another pouched animal is the Koala, or Ashy Koala as it is called.  It
differs in appearance from all the others, being of stout make, and
almost without a tail.  It is not unlike the bear in its form and
movements; but its bulk is scarce equal to that of a moderate sized dog.
It can climb trees with great facility, though it makes its lodgment
among their roots, in a den which it hollows out for itself.  Its food
is supposed to be fruits, and very likely it is the Australian
representative of the _frugivorous_ bears.  It has the singular habit of
carrying its young one upon its back, after the latter has grown too
large to be conveniently stowed away in the pouch.  Two species of koala
have been spoken of, but as yet one only is described and certainly
known.

The Wombat is another animal of thick stout form, and also without tail.
It is a slow creature, easily overtaken by a man on foot.  It burrows
in the ground.  During the day it remains in its hole, issuing forth
only at night to procure its food, which consists mainly of herbage.
There is but one species known, belonging to both Van Dieman's Land and
New South Wales.

I have kept the Kangaroos to the last: not that they are the least
interesting, but because these very singular animals are now so
well-known, and their habits have been so often described, that it seems
almost superfluous to say a word about them.  I shall content myself
with observing that the genus of the kangaroos has been divided into two
sub-genera, the true Kangaroos, and those known as Kangaroo Rats.  The
difference, however, is not very great, since the rats are as mild and
inoffensive in their habits as the kangaroos themselves.  Of the
kangaroo rats there are several species; but when we arrive at the true
kangaroos we find a list altogether too numerous to mention.  They are
of all sizes, too, from that of the great giant kangaroo, that stands,
or rather squats, full five feet in height, down to little tiny
creatures not bigger than rabbits or squirrels.  There are nearly fifty
species in all inhabiting the known parts of the Australasian islands.
It may be remarked, in conclusion, that two or three other kinds of
pouched animals, differing from all the foregoing, have been lately
brought to light by recent explorers; but, since nothing certain has
been ascertained in regard to their habits, it would be idle in this
place even to mention their names.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

ANT-EATERS, ARMADILLOES, AND OTHER ODD ANIMALS.

This is, perhaps, the most interesting of the groups--interesting on
account of the singular animals which compose it, every one of which may
be termed an odd creature.  In a strictly natural classification these
animals would not come together, since many of the species are unlike
the others both in appearance and habits; but in a scientific point of
view the absence of incisor teeth has caused them to be ranged together
in a group, known as the _edentata_, or toothless animals.

In this group we shall give the first place to the true ant-eaters, and
first speak of the ant-eaters of America.  Of these there are four
well-known species, the great Ant-bear, or Tamanoir; the Tamandua, or
little Ant-bear; another little ant-bear, the Ringed Tamandua; and a
very small species that differs much from the other three.  They are all
inhabitants of tropical America, and there are varieties of them in
different districts.

The Tamanoir is by far the largest, often attaining the size of a
Newfoundland dog; and the long hair which covers its sides, together
with its immense bushy tail, give to it the appearance of being much
bulkier than it is.

Its habits are tolerably well-known, constituting a very curious chapter
in natural history which we have not space to give.  Suffice it to say
that its food consists entirely of ants and termites, which of
themselves form a strange feature in the zoology of tropical countries.
These it eats--not with teeth, but by means of its long slimy tongue, by
which it is enabled to draw into its mouth hundreds of the little
creatures at a time.

The two species of smaller ant-bears, or Tamanduas, obtain their
sustenance in a similar manner, and in other respects are like their
great congener; but they possess a power with which the latter is not
gifted--that of climbing trees, and making their nests high up in the
cavities of the trunks.  They have the further power of being able to
suspend themselves from the branches with their tails, which, like those
of the opossums, are highly prehensile.  The tamanduas do not live
solely upon ant-diet.  The wild bees, that build nests among the
branches, are also objects of their attention; and their thick hairy
skins appear to protect them from the stings of these insects.

The smallest species--called the Ouatiri, or Two-toed Ant-eater--differs
altogether from the three above-mentioned.  It more resembles a little
monkey, and is covered all over with a thick coat of soft woolly hair of
a yellowish colour.  It is also a tree-climber, possesses a naked
prehensile tail, and makes its nest in a hole in the trunk, or in one of
the larger branches.

In Africa the ant-eaters are represented by several kinds of animals,
differing essentially from each other in outward appearance, though all
agreeing in their habits, or rather in the nature of their food.

The Aard-vark, or Earth-hog, of the Cape colonists, is the most noted
kind.  This animal is a long, low-bodied creature, with sharp-pointed
snout, and an immense whip-like tongue, which he is capable of
projecting to a great distance, in the same manner as the tamanoir.  His
body is covered with a dense shock of reddish-brown hair; and he dwells
in a burrow, which he can cleverly make for himself--hence his trivial
name of Ground-hog.

The other African ant-eaters are usually called Pangolins, or Manis.
These are covered with scales that resemble suits of ancient armour; and
on this account they have sometimes been confounded with the
armadilloes, though the two kinds of creatures are altogether different
in their habits.  The pangolins possess, in common with the armadilloes,
the power of rolling themselves into a ball whenever attacked by an
enemy--a fashion not peculiar to pangolins and armadilloes, but also
practised by our own well-known hedgehog.

The Sloths belong to this group of mammalia; not that they have the
