waited. He is very patient when there is something to gain by it.
For such a splendid dinner as Paddy the Beaver would make, he
felt that he could well afford to be patient. So he waited and
waited, and everything was as still as if no living thing but the
trees where there. Even the trees seemed to be asleep.

At last, after a long, long time, he heard just the faintest
splash. He pricked up his ears and peeped out on the pond with
the hungriest look in his yellow eyes. There was a little line of
silver coming straight toward him. He knew that it was made by
Paddy the Beaver swimming. Nearer and nearer it drew. Old Man
Coyote chuckled way down deep inside, without making a sound. He
could see Paddy's head now, and Paddy was coming straight in, as
if he hadn't a fear in the world.

Almost to the edge of the pond swam Paddy. Then he stopped. In a
few minutes he began to swim again, but this time it was back in
the direction of his house, and he seemed to be carrying
something. It was one of the little food logs he had cut that
day, and he was taking it out to his storehouse. Then back he
came for another. And so he kept on, never once coming ashore.
Old Man Coyote waited until Paddy had carried the last log to his
storehouse and then, with a loud whack on the water with his
broad tail, had dived and disappeared in his house.

Then Old Man Coyote arose and started elsewhere to look for his
dinner, and in his heart was bitter disappointment.



CHAPTER XVIII  Old Man Coyote Tries Another Plan.

For three nights Old Man Coyote had stolen up through the green
Forest with the coming of the Black Shadows and had hidden among
the aspen trees where Paddy the Beaver cut his food, and for
three nights Paddy had failed to come ashore. Each night he had
seemed to have enough food logs in the water to keep him busy
without cutting more. Old Man Coyote lay there, and the hungry
look in his eyes changed to one of doubt and then to suspicion.
Could it be that Paddy the Beaver was smarter than he thought? It
began to look very much as if Paddy knew perfectly well that he
was hiding there each night. Yes, Sir, that's the way it looked.
For three nights Paddy hadn't cut a single tree, and yet each
night he had plenty of food logs ready to take to his storehouse
in the pond.

"That means that he comes ashore in the daytime and cuts his
trees," thought Old Man Coyote as, tired and with black anger in
his heart, he trotted home the third night. "He couldn't have
found out about me himself; he isn't smart enough. It must be
that someone has told him. And nobody knows that I have been over
there but Sammy Jay. It must be he who has been the tattletale. I
think I'll visit Paddy by daylight tomorrow, and then we'll see!"

Now the trouble with some smart people is that they are never
able to believe that others may be as smart as they. Old Man
Coyote didn't know that the first time he had visited Paddy's
pond he had left behind him a footprint in a little patch of soft
mud. If he had known it, he wouldn't have believed that Paddy
would be smart enough to guess what that footprint meant. So Old
Man coyote laid all the blame at the door of Sammy Jay, and that
very morning, when Sammy came flying over the Green Meadows, Old
Man Coyote accused him of being a tattletale and threatened the
most dreadful things to Sammy if ever he caught him.

Now Sammy had flown down to the green Meadows to tell Old Man
Coyote how Paddy was doing all his work on land in the daytime.
But when Old Man Coyote began to call him a tattletale and
accuse him of having warned Paddy, and to threaten dreadful
things, he straightway forgot all his anger at Paddy and turned
it all on Old Man Coyote. He called him everything he could think
of, and this was a great deal, for Sammy has a wicked tongue.
When he hadn't any breath left, he flew over to the Green Forest,
and there he hid where he could watch all that was going on.

That afternoon Old Man Coyote tried his new plan. He slipped into
the Green Forest, looking this way and that way to be sure that
no one saw him. Then very, very softly, he crept up through the
Green Forest toward the pond of Paddy the Beaver. As he drew
near, he heard a crash, and it make him smile. He knew what it
meant. It meant that Paddy was at work cutting down trees. With
his stomach almost on the ground, he crept forward little by
little, little by little, taking the greatest care not to rustle
so much as a leaf. Presently he reached a place where he could
see the aspen trees, and there, sure enough, was Paddy, sitting
up on his hind legs and hard at work cutting another tree.

Old Man Coyote lay down for a few minutes to watch. Then he
wriggled a little nearer. Slowly and carefully he drew his legs
under him and made ready for a rush. Paddy the Beaver was his at
last! At just that very minute a harsh scream rang out right over
his head:

"Thief! thief! thief!"

It was Sammy Jay, who had followed him all the way. Paddy the
Beaver didn't stop to even look around. He knew what that meant,
and he scrambled down his little path to the water as he never
had scrambled before. And as he dived with a great splash, Old Man
Coyote landed with a great jump on the very edge of the pond.



CHAPTER XIX  Paddy and Sammy Jay Become Friends.

Paddy the Beaver floated in his pond and grinned in the most
provoking way at Old Man Coyote, who had so nearly caught him. Old
Man Coyote fairly danced with anger on the bank. He had felt so
sure of Paddy that time that it was hard work to believe that Paddy
had really gotten away from him. He bared his long, cruel teeth,
and he looked very fierce and ugly.

"Come on in; the water's fine!" called Paddy.

Now, of course this wasn't a nice thing for Paddy to do, for it
only made Old Man Coyote all the angrier. You see, Paddy knew
perfectly well that he was absolutely safe, and he just couldn't
resist the temptation to say some unkind things. He had had to be
on the watch for days lest he should be caught, and so he hadn't
been able to work quite so well as he could have done with
nothing to fear, and he still had a lot of preparations to make
for winter. So he told Old Man Coyote just what he thought of
him, and that he wasn't as smart as he thought he was or he never
would have left a foot print in the mud to give him away.

When Sammy Jay, who was listening and chuckling as he listened,
heard that, he flew down where he would be just out of reach of
Old Man Coyote, and then he just turned that tongue of his loose,
and you know that some people say that Sammy's tongue is hung in
the middle and wags at both ends. Of course this isn't really so,
but when he gets to abusing people it seems as if it must be
true. He called Old Man Coyote every bad name he could think of.
He called him a sneak, a thief, a coward, a bully, and a lot of
other things.

"You said I had warned Paddy that you were trying to catch him
and that was why you failed to find him at work at night, and all
the time you had warned him yourself!" screamed Sammy. "I used to
think that you were smart, but I know better now. Paddy is twice
as smart as you are.

     "Mr. Coyote is every so sly;
      Mr. Coyote is clever and spry;
      If you believe all you hear.

      Mr. Coyote is naught of the kind;
      Mr. Coyote is stupid and blind;
      He can't catch a flea on his ear."

Paddy the Beaver laughed till the tears came at Sammy's foolish
verse, but it made Old Man Coyote angrier than ever. He was angry
with Paddy for escaping from him, and he was angry with Sammy,
terribly angry, and the worst of it was he couldn't catch either
one, for one was at home in the water and the other was at home
in the air and he couldn't follow in either place. Finally he saw
it was of no use to stay there to be laughed at, so, muttering
and grumbling, he started for the Green Meadows.

As soon as he was out of sight Paddy turned to Sammy Jay.

"Mr. Jay," said he, knowing how it pleased Sammy to be called
mister. "Mr. Jay, you have done me a mighty good turn today, and
I am not going to forget it. You can call me what you please and
scream at me all you please, but you won't get any satisfaction
out of it, because I simply won't get angry. I will say to
myself, 'Mr. Jay saved my life the other day,' and then I won't
mind your tongue."

Now this made Sammy feel very proud and very happy. You know it
is very seldom that he hears anything nice said of him. He flew
down on the stump of one of the trees Paddy had cut. "Let's be
friends," said he.

"With all my heart!" replied Paddy.



CHAPTER XX  Sammy Jay Offers To Help Paddy.

Paddy sat looking thoughtfully at the aspen trees he would have
to cut to complete his store of food for the winter. All those
near the edge of his pond had been cut. The others were scattered
about some little distance away. "I don't know," said Paddy out
loud. "I don't know."

"What don't you know?" asked Sammy Jay, who, now that he and
Paddy had become friends, was very much interested in what Paddy
was doing.

"Why," replied Paddy, "I don't know just how I am going to get
those trees. Now that Old Man Coyote is watching for me, it isn't
safe for me to go very far from my pond. I suppose I could dig a
canal up to some of the nearest trees and then float them down to
the pond, but it is hard to work and keep watch for enemies at
the same time. I guess I'll have to be content with some of these
alders growing close to the water, but he bark of aspens is so
much better that I--I wish I could get them."

"What's a canal?" asked Sammy abruptly.

"A canal? Why a canal is a kind of ditch in which water can run,"
replied Paddy.

Sammy nodded. "I've seen Farmer Brown dig one over on the Green
Meadows, but it looked like a great deal of work. I didn't
