  "When Tom walked out, the sky to spy,
  A naughty gnat flew in his eye;
  But Tom knew not it was a gnat--
  He thought, at first, it was a cat.

  "And then, it felt so very big,
  He thought it surely was a pig
  Till, standing still to hear it grunt,
  He cried: 'Why, it's an _elephunt_!'

  "But--when the gnat flew out again
  And Tom was free from all his pain,
  He said: 'There flew into my eye
  A leetle, teenty-tiny fly.'"

"Indeed," said Inga, laughing, "the gnat was much like your stones that
seemed as big as mountains."

After their dinner they inspected the palace, which was filled with
valuable goods stolen by King Gos from many nations. But the day's
events had tired them and they retired early to their big sleeping
apartment.

"In the morning," said the boy to Rinkitink, as he was undressing for
bed, "I shall begin the search for my father and mother and the people
of Pingaree. And, when they are found and rescued, we will all go home
again, and be as happy as we were before."

They carefully bolted the door of their room, that no one might enter,
and then got into their beds, where Rinkitink fell asleep in an instant.
The boy lay awake for a while thinking over the day's adventures, but
presently he fell sound asleep also, and so weary was he that nothing
disturbed his slumber until he awakened next morning with a ray of
sunshine in his eyes, which had crept into the room through the open
window by King Rinkitink's bed.

Resolving to begin the search for his parents without any unnecessary
delay, Inga at once got out of bed and began to dress himself, while
Rinkitink, in the other bed, was still sleeping peacefully. But when the
boy had put on both his stockings and began looking for his shoes, he
could find but one of them. The left shoe, that containing the Pink
Pearl, was missing.

Filled with anxiety at this discovery, Inga searched through the entire
room, looking underneath the beds and divans and chairs and behind the
draperies and in the corners and every other possible place a shoe might
be. He tried the door, and found it still bolted; so, with growing
uneasiness, the boy was forced to admit that the precious shoe was not
in the room.

With a throbbing heart he aroused his companion.

[Illustration]

"King Rinkitink," said he, "do you know what has become of my left
shoe?"

"Your shoe!" exclaimed the King, giving a wide yawn and rubbing his eyes
to get the sleep out of them. "Have you lost a shoe?"

"Yes," said Inga. "I have searched everywhere in the room, and cannot
find it."

"But why bother me about such a small thing?" inquired Rinkitink. "A
shoe is only a shoe, and you can easily get another one. But, stay!
Perhaps it was your shoe which I threw at the cat last night."

"The cat!" cried Inga. "What do you mean?"

"Why, in the night," explained Rinkitink, sitting up and beginning to
dress himself, "I was wakened by the mewing of a cat that sat upon a
wall of the palace, just outside my window. As the noise disturbed me, I
reached out in the dark and caught up something and threw it at the cat,
to frighten the creature away. I did not know what it was that I threw,
and I was too sleepy to care; but probably it was your shoe, since it is
now missing."

"Then," said the boy, in a despairing tone of voice, "your carelessness
has ruined me, as well as yourself, King Rinkitink, for in that shoe was
concealed the magic power which protected us from danger."

[Illustration]

The King's face became very serious when he heard this and he uttered a
low whistle of surprise and regret.

"Why on earth did you not warn me of this?" he demanded. "And why did
you keep such a precious power in an old shoe? And why didn't you put
the shoe under a pillow? You were very wrong, my lad, in not confiding
to me, your faithful friend, the secret, for in that case the shoe would
not now be lost."

To all this Inga had no answer. He sat on the side of his bed, with
hanging head, utterly disconsolate, and seeing this, Rinkitink had pity
for his sorrow.

"Come!" cried the King; "let us go out at once and look for the shoe
which I threw at the cat. It must even now be lying in the yard of the
palace."

This suggestion roused the boy to action. He at once threw open the door
and in his stocking feet rushed down the staircase, closely followed by
Rinkitink. But although they looked on both sides of the palace wall and
in every possible crack and corner where a shoe might lodge, they failed
to find it.

After a half hour's careful search the boy said sorrowfully:

"Someone must have passed by, as we slept, and taken the precious shoe,
not knowing its value. To us, King Rinkitink, this will be a dreadful
misfortune, for we are surrounded by dangers from which we have now no
protection. Luckily I have the other shoe left, within which is the
magic power that gives me strength; so all is not lost."

Then he told Rinkitink, in a few words, the secret of the wonderful
pearls, and how he had recovered them from the ruins and hidden them in
his shoes, and how they had enabled him to drive King Gos and his men
from Regos and to capture the city. The King was much astonished, and
when the story was concluded he said to Inga:

"What did you do with the other shoe?"

"Why, I left it in our bedroom," replied the boy.

"Then I advise you to get it at once," continued Rinkitink, "for we can
ill afford to lose the second shoe, as well as the one I threw at the
cat."

"You are right!" cried Inga, and they hastened back to their bedchamber.

On entering the room they found an old woman sweeping and raising a
great deal of dust.

"Where is my shoe?" asked the Prince, anxiously.

The old woman stopped sweeping and looked at him in a stupid way, for
she was not very intelligent.

"Do you mean the one odd shoe that was lying on the floor when I came
in?" she finally asked.

"Yes--yes!" answered the boy. "Where is it? Tell me where it is!"

"Why, I threw it on the dust-heap, outside the back gate," said she,
"for, it being but a single shoe, with no mate, it can be of no use to
anyone."

"Show us the way to the dust-heap--at once!" commanded the boy, sternly,
for he was greatly frightened by this new misfortune which threatened
him.

The old woman hobbled away and they followed her, constantly urging her
to hasten; but when they reached the dust-heap no shoe was to be seen.

"This is terrible!" wailed the young Prince, ready to weep at his loss.
"We are now absolutely ruined, and at the mercy of our enemies. Nor
shall I be able to liberate my dear father and mother."

"Well," replied Rinkitink, leaning against an old barrel and looking
quite solemn, "the thing is certainly unlucky, any way we look at it. I
suppose someone has passed along here and, seeing the shoe upon the
dust-heap, has carried it away. But no one could know the magic power
the shoe contains and so will not use it against us. I believe, Inga, we
must now depend upon our wits to get us out of the scrape we are in."

With saddened hearts they returned to the palace, and entering a small
room where no one could observe them or overhear them, the boy took the
White Pearl from its silken bag and held it to his ear, asking:

"What shall I do now?"

"Tell no one of your loss," answered the Voice of the Pearl. "If your
enemies do not know that you are powerless, they will fear you as much
as ever. Keep your secret, be patient, and fear not!"

Inga heeded this advice and also warned Rinkitink to say nothing to
anyone of the loss of the shoes and the powers they contained. He sent
for the shoemaker of King Gos, who soon brought him a new pair of red
leather shoes that fitted him quite well. When these had been put upon
his feet, the Prince, accompanied by the King, started to walk through
the city.

Wherever they went the people bowed low to the conqueror, although a
few, remembering Inga's terrible strength, ran away in fear and
trembling. They had been used to severe masters and did not yet know how
they would be treated by King Gos's successor. There being no occasion
for the boy to exercise the powers he had displayed the previous day,
his present helplessness was not suspected by any of the citizens of
Regos, who still considered him a wonderful magician.

Inga did not dare to fight his way to the mines, at present, nor could
he try to conquer the Island of Coregos, where his mother was enslaved;
so he set about the regulation of the City of Regos, and having
established himself with great state in the royal palace he began to
govern the people by kindness, having consideration for the most humble.

The King of Regos and his followers sent spies across to the island they
had abandoned in their flight, and these spies returned with the news
that the terrible boy conqueror was still occupying the city. Therefore
none of them ventured to go back to Regos but continued to live upon the
neighboring island of Coregos, where they passed the days in fear and
trembling and sought to plot and plan ways how they might overcome the
Prince of Pingaree and the fat King of Gilgad.

[Illustration]




A Present for Zella

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 9


Now it so happened that on the morning of that same day when the Prince
of Pingaree suffered the loss of his priceless shoes, there chanced to
pass along the road that wound beside the royal palace a poor
charcoal-burner named Nikobob, who was about to return to his home in
the forest.

Nikobob carried an ax and a bundle of torches over his shoulder and he
walked with his eyes to the ground, being deep in thought as to the
strange manner in which the powerful King Gos and his city had been
conquered by a boy Prince who had come from Pingaree.

Suddenly the charcoal-burner espied a shoe lying upon the ground, just
beyond the high wall of the palace and directly in his path. He picked
it up and, seeing it was a pretty shoe, although much too small for his
own foot, he put it in his pocket.

Soon after, on turning a corner of the wall, Nikobob came to a dust-heap
where, lying amidst a mass of rubbish, was another shoe--the mate to the
one he had before found. This also he placed in his pocket, saying to
himself:

"I have now a fine pair of shoes for my daughter Zella, who will be much
pleased to find I have brought her a present from the city."

And while the charcoal-burner turned into the forest and trudged along
the path toward his home, Inga and Rinkitink were still searching for
the missing shoes. Of course, they could not know that Nikobob had found
them, nor did the honest man think he had taken anything more than a
pair of cast-off shoes which nobody wanted.

Nikobob had several miles to travel through the forest before he could
reach the little log cabin where his wife, as well as his little
daughter Zella, awaited his return, but he was used to long walks and
tramped along the path whistling cheerfully to beguile the time.

Few people, as I said before, ever passed through the dark and tangled
forests of Regos, except to go to the mines in the mountain beyond, for
many dangerous creatures lurked in the wild jungles, and King Gos never
knew, when he sent a messenger to the mines, whether he would reach
there safely or not.

The charcoal-burner, however, knew the wild forest well, and especially
this part of it lying between the city and his home. It was the favorite
haunt of the ferocious beast Choggenmugger, dreaded by every dweller in
the Island of Regos. Choggenmugger was so old that everyone thought it
must have been there since the world was made, and each year of its life
the huge scales that covered its body grew thicker and harder and its
jaws grew wider and its teeth grew sharper and its appetite grew more
keen than ever.

In former ages there had been many dragons in Regos, but Choggenmugger
was so fond of dragons that he had eaten all of them long ago. There had
also been great serpents and crocodiles in the forest marshes, but all
had gone to feed the hunger of Choggenmugger. The people of Regos knew
well there was no use opposing the Great Beast, so when one
unfortunately met with it he gave himself up for lost.

[Illustration]

All this Nikobob knew well, but fortune had always favored him in his
journeys through the forest, and although he had at times met many
savage beasts and fought them with his sharp ax, he had never to this
day encountered the terrible Choggenmugger. Indeed, he was not thinking
of the Great Beast at all as he walked along, but suddenly he heard a
crashing of broken trees and felt a trembling of the earth and saw the
immense jaws of Choggenmugger opening before him. Then Nikobob gave
himself up for lost and his heart almost ceased to beat.

He believed there was no way of escape. No one ever dared oppose
Choggenmugger. But Nikobob hated to die without showing the monster, in
some way, that he was eaten only under protest. So he raised his ax and
brought it down upon the red, protruding tongue of the monster--and cut
it clean off!

For a moment the charcoal-burner scarcely believed what his eyes saw,
for he knew nothing of the pearls he carried in his pocket or the magic
power they lent his arm. His success, however, encouraged him to strike
again, and this time the huge scaly jaw of Choggenmugger was severed in
twain and the beast howled in terrified rage.

Nikobob took off his coat, to give himself more freedom of action, and
then he earnestly renewed the attack. But now the ax seemed blunted by
the hard scales and made no impression upon them whatever. The creature
advanced with glaring, wicked eyes, and Nikobob seized his coat under
his arm and turned to flee.

That was foolish, for Choggenmugger could run like the wind. In a moment
it overtook the charcoal-burner and snapped its four rows of sharp teeth
together. But they did not touch Nikobob, because he still held the coat
in his grasp, close to his body, and in the coat pocket were Inga's
shoes, and in the points of the shoes were the magic pearls. Finding
himself uninjured, Nikobob put on his coat, again seized his ax, and in
a short time had chopped Choggenmugger into many small pieces--a task
that proved not only easy but very agreeable.

"I must be the strongest man in all the world!" thought the
charcoal-burner, as he proudly resumed his way, "for Choggenmugger has
been the terror of Regos since the world began, and I alone have been
able to destroy the beast. Yet it is singular that never before did I
