before dark. There is, too, another land worthy of thy journey, a land
joyous to all that seek it. Only wives and maidens dwell there. If thou
wilt, we can seek it and live there alone together in joy."

When the maiden ceased to speak, Connla of the Fiery Hair rushed away
from his kinsmen and sprang into the curragh, the gleaming,
straight-gliding crystal canoe. And then they all, king and court, saw
it glide away over the bright sea towards the setting sun, away and
away, till eye could see it no longer. So Connla and the Fairy Maiden
went forth on the sea, and were no more seen, nor did any know whither
they went.



188

        One of the best of the volumes of Irish tales
        is Lady Wilde's _Ancient Legends of Ireland_,
        and one of the best stories in that volume is
        her version of the witch story of "The Horned
        Women." The story is compact and restrained in
        the telling, and carries effectively to the
        listener the "creepy" spell of the witches. The
        way in which the house was prepared against the
        enchantments of the returning witches furnishes
        a good illustration of some of the deep-seated
        superstitions of the folk.


THE HORNED WOMEN

A rich woman sat up late one night carding and preparing wool, while all
the family and servants were asleep. Suddenly a knock was given at the
door, and a voice called, "Open! Open!"

"Who is there?" said the woman of the house.

"I am the Witch of the one Horn," was answered.

The mistress, supposing that one of her neighbors had called and
required assistance, opened the door, and a woman entered, having in her
hand a pair of wool carders, and bearing a horn on her forehead, as if
growing there. She sat down by the fire in silence, and began to card
the wool with violent haste. Suddenly she paused, and said aloud: "Where
are the women; they delay too long."

Then a second knock came to the door, and a voice called as before,
"Open! Open!"

The mistress felt herself constrained to rise and open to the call, and
immediately a second witch entered, having two horns on her forehead,
and in her hand a wheel for spinning wool.

"Give me place," she said, "I am the Witch of the two Horns"; and she
began to spin as quick as lightning.

And so the knocks went on, and the call was heard, and the witches
entered, until at last, twelve women sat round the fire--the first with
one horn, the last with twelve horns.

And they carded the thread, and turned their spinning wheels, and wound
and wove.

All were singing together an ancient rhyme, but no word did they speak
to the mistress of the house. Strange to hear and frightful to look upon
were these twelve women, with their horns and their wheels; and the
mistress felt near to death, and she tried to rise that she might call
for help, but she could not move, nor could she utter a word or a cry,
for the spell of the witches was upon her.

Then one of them called to her in Irish, and said, "Rise, woman, and
make us a cake." Then the mistress searched for a vessel to bring water
from the well that she might mix the meal and make the cake, but she
could find none.

And they said to her, "Take a sieve, and bring water in it." And she
took the sieve and went to the well; but the water poured from it, and
she could fetch none for the cake, and she sat down by the well and
wept.

Then came a voice by her, and said, "Take yellow clay and moss and bind
them together, and plaster the sieve so that it will hold."

This she did, and the sieve held the water for the cake; and the voice
said again: "Return, and when thou comest to the north angle of the
house cry aloud three times, and say, 'The mountain of the Fenian women
and the sky over it is all on fire.'"

And she did so.

When the witches inside heard the call, a great and terrible cry broke
from their lips, and they rushed forth with wild lamentations and
shrieks, and fled away to Slievenamon, where was their chief abode. But
the Spirit of the Well bade the mistress of the house to enter and
prepare her home against the enchantments of the witches, if they
returned again.

And first, to break their spells, she sprinkled the water in which she
had washed her child's feet (the feet-water) outside the door on the
threshold; secondly, she took the cake which the witches had made in her
absence, of meal mixed with the blood drawn from the sleeping family,
and she broke the cake in bits, and placed a bit in the mouth of each
sleeper, and they were restored; and she took the cloth they had woven,
and placed it half in and half out of the chest with the padlock; and,
lastly, she secured the door with a great crossbeam fastened in the
jambs, so that they could not enter, and having done these things she
waited.

Not long were the witches in coming, and they raged and called for
vengeance.

"Open! Open!" they screamed. "Open, feet-water!"

"I cannot," said the feet-water; "I am scattered on the ground, and my
path is down to the Lough."

"Open, open, wood and trees and beam!" they cried to the door.

"I cannot," said the door, "for the beam is fixed in the jambs, and I
have no power to move."

"Open, open, cake that we have made and mingled with blood!" they cried
again.

"I cannot," said the cake, "for I am broken and bruised, and my blood is
on the lips of the sleeping children."

Then the witches rushed through the air with great cries, and fled back
to Slievenamon, uttering strange curses on the Spirit of the Well, who
had wished their ruin. But the woman and the house were left in peace,
and a mantle dropped by one of the witches was kept hung up by the
mistress as a sign of the night's awful contest; and this mantle was in
possession of the same family from generation to generation for five
hundred years after.



189

        The story of "King O'Toole and His Goose" is
        from Samuel Lover's _Stories and Legends of the
        Irish Peasantry_, as reprinted in slightly
        abridged form in William Butler Yeats's _Irish
        Fairy Tales_. The extreme form of the dialect
        is kept as in the original, since the humor is
        largely dependent on the language of the
        peasant who tells the story. It will serve as a
        good illustration for practice work for the
        amateur story-teller. Probably most teachers
        would find it necessary to "reduce" this
        dialect or to eliminate it altogether. Mr.
        Jacobs, who includes this story in his _Celtic
        Fairy Tales_, reduces the dialect very
        materially, keeping just enough to remind one
        that it is Irish. He also says the final word
        as to the moral of the story: "This is a moral
        apologue on the benefits of keeping your word.
        Yet it is told with such humor and vigor, that
        the moral glides insensibly into the heart."


KING O'TOOLE AND HIS GOOSE

"By Gor, I thought all the world, far and near, heerd o' King
O'Toole--well, well, but the darkness of mankind is ontellible! Well,
sir, you must know, as you didn't hear it afore, that there was a king,
called King O'Toole, who was a fine ould king in the ould ancient times,
long ago; and it was him that owned the churches in the early days. The
king, you see, was the right sort; he was the rale boy, and loved sport
as he loved his life, and huntin' in partic'lar; and from the risin' o'
the sun, up he got, and away he wint over the mountains beyant afther
the deer; and the fine times them wor.

"Well, it was all mighty good, as long as the king had his health; but,
you see, in coorse of time the king grew ould, by raison he was stiff in
his limbs, and when he got sthriken in years, his heart failed him, and
he was lost intirely for want o' divarshin, bekase he couldn't go a
huntin' no longer; and, by dad, the poor king was obleeged at last for
to get a goose to divart him. Oh, you may laugh, if you like, but it's
truth I'm tellin' you; and the way the goose divarted him was
this-a-way: You see, the goose used for to swim across the lake, and go
divin' for throut, and cotch fish on a Friday for the king, and flew
every other day round about the lake, divartin' the poor king. All went
on mighty well, antil, by dad, the goose got sthriken in years like her
master, and couldn't divart him no longer, and then it was that the poor
king was lost complate. The king was walkin' one mornin' by the edge of
the lake, lamentin' his cruel fate, and thinkin' o' drownin' himself,
that could get no divarshun in life, when all of a suddint, turnin'
round the corner beyant, who should he meet but a mighty dacent young
man comin' up to him.

"'God save you,' says the king to the young man.

"'God save you kindly, King O'Toole,' says the young man. 'Thrue for
you,' says the king. 'I am King O'Toole,' says he, 'prince and
plennypennytinchery o' these parts,' says he; 'but how kem ye to know
that?' says he. 'Oh, never mind,' says Saint Kavin.

"You see it was Saint Kavin, sure enough--the saint himself in disguise,
and nobody else. 'Oh, never mind,' says he, 'I know more than that. May
I make bowld to ax how is your goose, King O'Toole?' says he.
'Bluran-agers, how kem ye to know about my goose?' says the king. 'Oh,
no matther; I was given to understand it,' says Saint Kavin. After some
more talk the king says, 'What are you?' 'I'm an honest man,' says Saint
Kavin. 'Well, honest man,' says the king, 'and how is it you make your
money so aisy?' 'By makin' ould things as good as new,' says Saint
Kavin. 'Is it a tinker you are?' says the king. 'No,' says the saint;
'I'm no tinker by thrade, King O'Toole; I've a betther thrade than a
tinker,' says he--'what would you say,' says he, 'if I made your ould
goose as good as new?'

"My dear, at the word o' makin' his goose as good as new, you'd think
the poor ould king's eyes was ready to jump out iv his head. With that
the king whistled, and down kem the poor goose, all as one as a hound,
waddlin' up to the poor cripple, her masther, and as like him as two
pays. The minute the saint clapt his eyes on the goose, 'I'll do the job
for you,' says he, 'King O'Toole.' 'By _Jaminee_!' says King O'Toole,
'if you do, but I'll say you're the cleverest fellow in the sivin
parishes.' 'Oh, by dad,' says Saint Kavin, 'you must say more nor
that--my horn's not so soft all out,' says he, 'as to repair your ould
goose for nothin'; what'll you gi' me if I do the job for you?--that's
the chat,' says Saint Kavin. 'I'll give you whatever you ax,' says the
king; 'isn't that fair?' 'Divil a fairer,' says the saint; 'that's the
way to do business. Now,' says he, 'this is the bargain I'll make with
you, King O'Toole: will you gi' me all the ground the goose flies over,
the first offer, afther I make her as good as new?' 'I will,' says the
king, 'You won't go back o' your word?' says Saint Kavin. 'Honor
bright!' says King O'Toole, howldin' out his fist. 'Honor bright!' says
Saint Kavin, back agin, 'it's a bargain. Come here!' says he to the poor
ould goose--'come here, you unfort'nate ould cripple, and it's I that'll
make you the sportin' bird.' With that, my dear, he took up the goose by
the two wings--'Criss o' my crass and you,' says he, markin' her to
grace with the blessed sign at the same minute--and throwin' her up in
the air, 'whew,' says he, jist givin' her a blast to help her; and with
that, my jewel, she tuk to her heels, flyin' like one o' the aigles
themselves and cuttin' as many capers as a swallow before a shower of
rain.

"Well, my dear, it was a beautiful sight to see the king standin' with
his mouth open, lookin' at his poor ould goose flyin' as light as a
lark, and betther nor ever she was: and when she lit at his fut, patter
her an the head, and, '_Ma vourneen_,' says he, 'but you are the
_darlint_ o' the world.' 'And what do you say to me,' says Saint Kavin,
'for makin' her the like?' 'By gor,' says the king, 'I say nothin' bates
the art o' man, barrin' the bees.' 'And do you say no more nor that?'
says Saint Kavin. 'And that I'm behoulden to you,' says the king. 'But
will you give me all the ground the goose flew over?' says Saint Kavin.
'I will,' says King O'Toole, 'and you're welkim to it,' says he, 'though
it's the last acre I have to give.' 'But you'll keep your word thrue?'
says the saint. 'As thrue as the sun,' says the king. 'It's well for
you, King O'Toole, that you said that word,' says he; 'for if you didn't
say that word, _the devil receave the bit o' your goose id ever fly
agin_.'

"Whin the king was as good as his word, Saint Kavin was _plazed_ with
him, and thin it was that he made himself known to the king. 'And,' says
he, 'King O'Toole, you're a dacent man, for I only kem here to _thry
you_. You don't know me,' says he, 'bekase I'm disguised.' 'Musha!
thin,' says the king, 'who are you?' 'I'm Saint Kavin,' said the Saint,
blessin' himself. 'Oh, queen iv heaven!' says the king makin' the sign
o' the crass betune his eyes, and fallin' down on his knees before the
saint; 'is it the great Saint Kavin,' says he, 'that I've been
discoorsin' all this time without knowin' it,' says he, 'all as one as
if he was a lump iv a _gosson_?--and so you're a saint?' says the king.
'I am,' says Saint Kavin. 'By gor, I thought I was only talking to a
dacent boy,' says the king. 'Well, you know the differ now,' says the
saint. 'I'm Saint Kavin,' says he, 'the greatest of all the saints.'

"And so the king had his goose as good as new, to divart him as long as
he lived: and the saint supported him afther he kem into his property,
as I tould you, until the day iv his death--and that was soon afther;
for the poor goose thought he was ketchin' a throut one Friday; but, my
jewel, it was a mistake he made--and instead of a throut, it was a
thievin' horse-eel; and by gor, instead iv the goose killin' a throut
for the king's supper,--by dad, the eel killed the king's goose--and
small blame to him; but he didn't ate her, bekase he darn't ate what
Saint Kavin had laid his blessed hands on."




SECTION IV


FAIRY STORIES--MODERN FANTASTIC TALES




BIBLIOGRAPHY


  Alden, Raymond Macdonald, _Why the Chimes Rang, and Other
      Stories_.

  Andersen, Hans Christian, _Fairy Tales_.

  Barrie, Sir James Matthew, _The Little White Bird_. [Peter Pan.]

  Baum, L. Frank, _The Wizard of Oz_.

  Benson, A. C., _David Blaize and the Blue Door_.

  Beston, H. B., _The Firelight Fairy Book_.

  Brown, Abbie Farwell, _The Lonesomest Doll_.

  Browne, Frances, _Granny's Wonderful Chair_.

  Carryl, Charles E., _Davy and the Goblin_.

  "Carroll, Lewis," _Alice's Adventures in Wonderland_.

  "Carroll, Lewis," _Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice
      Found There_.

  Chamisso, Adelbert von, _The Wonderful History of Peter
      Schlemihl_.

  "Collodi, C.," _The Adventures of Pinocchio_.

  Cox, Palmer, _The Brownies: Their Book_.

  Craik, Dinah Mulock, _Adventures of a Brownie_.

  Craik, Dinah Mulock, _The Little Lame Prince and His
      Traveling-Cloak_.

  Crothers, Samuel McChord, _Miss Muffet's Christmas Party_.

  Dickens, Charles, _A Christmas Carol_.

  Ewald, Carl, _Two-Legs, and Other Stories_.

  Grahame, Kenneth, _The Wind in the Willows_.

  Harris, Joel Chandler, _Nights with Uncle Remus_.

  Hawthorne, Nathaniel, "The Snow Image," "Little Daffydowndilly,"
      "A Rill from the Town Pump."

  Ingelow, Jean, _Mopsa the Fairy_.

  Ingelow, Jean, _Stories Told to a Child_. 2 vols.

  Jordan, David Starr, _The Book of Knight and Barbara_.

  Lagerlof, Selma, _The Wonderful Adventures of Nils_.

  La Motte-Fouque, F. de, _Undine_.

  Lang, Andrew, _Prince Prigio_.

  Kingsley, Charles, _The Water Babies_.

  Maeterlinck, Maurice, _The Blue Bird_.

  Macdonald, George, _The Princess and the Goblin_.

  Macdonald, George, _At the Back of the North Wind_.

  Pyle, Katherine, _In the Green Forest_.

  Raspe, Rudolph Erich, _Baron Munchausen's Narrative_.

  Richards, Laura E., _The Story of Toto_.

  Richards, Laura E., _The Pig Brother_.

  Ruskin, John, _The King of the Golden River_.

  Stockton, Frank R., _Fanciful Tales_.

  Swift, Jonathan, _Gulliver's Travels_.

  Thackeray, William Makepeace, _The Rose and the Ring_.

  Wilde, Oscar, _The Happy Prince, and Other Stories_.

  Wilkins, Mary E., _The Pot of Gold_.



SECTION IV: FAIRY STORIES--MODERN FANTASTIC TALES

INTRODUCTORY

The difficulties of classification are very apparent here, and once more
it must be noted that illustrative and practical purposes rather than
logical ones are served by the arrangement adopted. The modern fanciful
story is here placed next to the real folk story instead of after all
the groups of folk products. The Hebrew stories at the beginning belong
quite as well, perhaps even better, in Section V, while the stories at
the end of Section VI shade off into the more modern types of short
tales. Then the fact that other groups of modern stories are to follow
later, illustrating more realistic studies of life and the very recent
and remarkably numerous writings centering around animal life, limits
the list here. Many of the animal stories might, with equal propriety,
be placed under the head of the fantastic.

_The child's natural literature._ The world has lost certain secrets as
the price of an advancing civilization. It is a commonplace of
observation that no one can duplicate the success of Mother Goose,
whether she be thought of as the maker of jingles or the teller of
tales. The conditions of modern life preclude the generally naive
attitude that produced the folk rhymes, ballads, tales, proverbs,
fables, and myths. The folk saw things simply and directly. The complex,
analytic, questioning mind is not yet, either in or out of stories. The
motives from which people act are to them plain and not mixed.
Characters are good or bad. They feel no need of elaborately explaining
their joys and sorrows. Such experiences come with the day's work.
"To-morrow to fresh woods, and pastures new." The zest of life with them
is emphatic. Their humor is fresh, unbounded, sincere; there is no trace
of cynicism. In folk literature we do not feel the presence of a
"writer" who is mightily concerned about maintaining his reputation for
wisdom, originality, or style. Hence the freedom from any note of
straining after effect, of artificiality. In the midst of a life limited
to fundamental needs, their literature deals with fundamentals. On the
whole, it was a literature for entertainment. A more learned upper class
may have concerned itself then about "problems" and "purposes," as the
whole world does now, but the literature of the folk had no such
interests.

Without discussing the limits of the culture-epoch theory of human
development as a complete guide in education, it is clear that the young
child passes through a period when his mind looks out upon the world in
a manner analogous to that of the folk as expressed in their literature.
Quarrel with the fact as we may, it still remains a fact that his nature
craves these old stories and will not be satisfied with something "just
as good."

_The modern fairy story._ The advance of civilization has been
accompanied by a wistful longing for the simplicities left by the way.
In some periods this interest in the past has been more marked than in
others. When the machinery of life has weighed too heavily on the human
spirit, men have turned for relief to a contemplation of the "good old
times" and have preached crusades of a "return to nature." Many modern
writers have tried to recapture some of the power of the folk tale by
imitating its method. In many cases they have had a fair degree of
success: in one case, that of Hans Christian Andersen, the success is
admittedly very complete. As a rule, however, the sharpness of the sense
of wonder has been blunted, and many imitators of the old fairy tale
succeed in keeping only the shell. Another class of modern fantastic
tale is that of the _pourquoi_ story, which has the explanation of
something as its object. Such tales grow out of the attempt to use the
charm of old stories as a means of conveying instruction, somewhat after
the method of those parents who covered up our bitter medicine with some
of our favorite jam. Even "Little Red Riding Hood," as we saw, has been
turned into a flower myth. So compelling is this pedagogical motive that
so-called nature myths have been invented or made from existing stories
in great numbers. The practical results please many teachers, but it may
be questioned whether the gain is sufficient to compensate children for
the distorting results upon masterpieces.

_Wide range of the modern fairy tale._ The bibliography will suggest
something of the treasures in the field of the modern fanciful story.
From the delightful nonsense of _Alice in Wonderland_ and the
"travelers' tales" of _Baron Munchausen_ to the profound seriousness of
_The King of the Golden River_ and _Why the Chimes Rang_ is a far cry.
There are the rich fancies of Barrie and Maeterlinck, at the same time
delicate as the promises of spring and brilliant as the fruitions of
summer. One may be blown away to the land of Oz, he may lose his shadow
with Peter Schlemihl, he may outdo the magic carpet with his
Traveling-Cloak, he may visit the courts of kings with his Wonderful
Chair; Miss Muffet will invite us to her Christmas party, Lemuel
Gulliver will lead us to lands not marked in the school atlas; on every
side is a world of wonder.

_Some qualities of these modern tales._ Every age produces after its own
fashion, and we must expect to find the modern user of the fairy-story
method expressing through it the qualities of his own outlook upon the
world. Interest in the picturesque aspects of landscape will be
emphasized, as in the early portions of "The Story of Fairyfoot" and,
with especial magnificence of style, throughout _The King of the Golden
River_. There will appear the saddened mood of the modern in the face of
the human miseries that make happiness a mockery, as in "The Happy
Prince." The destructive effects of the possessive instinct upon all
that is finest in human nature is reflected in "The Prince's Dream."
That the most valuable efforts are often those performed with least
spectacular settings may be discerned in "The Knights of the Silver
Shield," while the lesson of kindly helpfulness is the burden of "Old
Pipes and the Dryad." In many modern stories the reader is too much
aware of the conscious efforts of style and structure. The thoughtful
child will sometimes be too much distressed by the more somber modern
story, and should not hear too many of the gloomy type.

_Andersen the consummate master._ Hans Christian Andersen is the
acknowledged master of the modern story for children. What are the
sources of his success? Genius is always unexplainable except in terms
of itself, but some things are clear. To begin, he makes a mark--drives
down a peg: "There came a soldier marching along the high road--_one,
two! one, two!_" and you are off. No backing and filling, no jockeying
for position, no elaborate setting of the stage. The story's the thing!
Next, the language is the language of common oral speech, free and
unrestrained. The rigid forms of the grammar are eschewed. There is no
beating around the bush. Seeing through the eyes of the child, he uses
the language that is natural to such sight: "Aha! there sat the dog with
eyes as big as mill-wheels." In quick dramatic fashion the story unrolls
before your vision: "So the soldier cut the witch's head off. There she
lay!" No agonizing over the cruelty of it, the lack of sympathy. It is a
joke after the child's own heart, and with a hearty laugh at this end to
an impostor, the listener is on with the story. The logic is the logic
of childhood: "And everyone could see she was a real princess, for she
was so lovely." When Andersen deals with some of the deeper truths of
existence, as in "The Nightingale" or "The Ugly Duckling," he still
manages to throw it all into the form that is natural and convincing and
simple to the child. He never mounts a pedestal and becomes a grown-up
philosopher. Perhaps Andersen's secret lay in the fact that some fairy
godmother invested him at birth with a power to see things so completely
as a child sees them that he never questioned the dignity of the method.
In few of his stories is there any evidence of a constraint due to a
conscious attempt to write down to the understandings of children.


SUGGESTIONS FOR READING

        The most valuable discussion of the
        difficulties to be mastered in writing the
        literary fairy tale, and the story of the only
        very complete mastery yet made, will be found
        in the account of Hans Christian Andersen in
        _Eminent Authors of the Nineteenth Century_, by
        Georg Brandes. Now and then hints of importance
        on such stories and their value for children
        may be found in biographies of the more
        prominent writers represented in the section
        and mentioned in the bibliography, and in
        magazine articles and reviews. These latter may
        be located by use of the periodical indexes
        found in most libraries. For the proper
        attitude which the schools should have toward
        fiction and fanciful writing in general,
        nothing could be better than two lectures on
        "Children's Reading," in _On the Art of
        Reading_, by Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch.



190

        The rabbis of old were good story-tellers. They
        were essentially teachers and they understood
        that the best sermon is a story. "They were
        fond of the parable, the anecdote, the apt
        illustration, and their legends that have been
        transmitted to us, all aglow with the light and
        life of the Orient, possess perennial charm."
        It is possible to find in rabbinical sources a
        large number of brief stories that have the
        power of entertaining as well as of emphasizing
        some qualities of character that are important
        in all ages. The plan of this book does not
        include the wonderful stories of the Old
        Testament, which are easy of access to any
        teacher and may be used as experience directs.
        The Hebrew stories following correspond very
        nearly to the folk anecdote and are placed in
        this section because of their literary form.

        Dr. Abram S. Isaacs (1851--) is a professor in
        New York University and is also a rabbi. The
        selection that follows is from his _Stories
        from the Rabbis_. (Copyrighted. Used by special
        permission of The Bloch Publishing Company, New
        York.) Taking advantage of the popular
        superstition that a four-leaved clover is a
        sign of good luck, Dr. Isaacs has grouped
        together four parable-like stories, each of
        which deals with wealth as a subject. The
        editors are responsible for the special titles
        given. The messages of these stories might be
        summarized as follows: If you would be lucky,
        (1) be honest because it is right to be honest,
        (2) value good friends more highly than gold,
        (3) let love accompany each gift of charity,
        and (4) use common sense in your business
        ventures.


A FOUR-LEAVED CLOVER

ABRAM S. ISAACS

1. THE RABBI AND THE DIADEM

Great was the alarm in the palace of Rome, which soon spread throughout
the entire city. The Empress had lost her costly diadem, and it could
not be found. They searched in every direction, but it was all in vain.
Half distracted, for the mishap boded no good to her or her house, the
Empress redoubled her exertions to regain her precious possession, but
without result. As a last resource it was proclaimed in the public
streets:

"The Empress has lost a priceless diadem. Whoever restores it within
thirty days shall receive a princely reward. But he who delays, and
brings it after thirty days, shall lose his head."

In those times all nationalities flocked toward Rome; all classes and
creeds could be met in its stately halls and crowded thoroughfares.
Among the rest was a rabbi, a learned sage from the East, who loved
goodness and lived a righteous life, in the stir and turmoil of the
Western world. It chanced one night as he was strolling up and down, in
busy meditation, beneath the clear, moonlit sky, he saw the diadem
sparkling at his feet. He seized it quickly, brought it to his dwelling,
where he guarded it carefully until the thirty days had expired, when he
resolved to return it to the owner.

He proceeded to the palace, and, undismayed at sight of long lines of
soldiery and officials, asked for an audience with the Empress.

"What dost thou mean by this?" she inquired, when he told her his story
and gave her the diadem. "Why didst thou delay until this hour? Dost
thou know the penalty? Thy head must be forfeited."

"I delayed until now," the rabbi answered calmly, "so that thou mightst
know that I return thy diadem, not for the sake of the reward, still
less out of fear of punishment; but solely to comply with the Divine
command not to withhold from another the property which belongs to him."

"Blessed be thy God!" the Empress answered, and dismissed the rabbi
without further reproof; for had he not done right for right's sake?


2. FRIENDSHIP

A certain father was doubly blessed--he had reached a good old age, and
had ten sons. One day he called them to his side, and after repeated
expressions of affection, told them that he had acquired a fortune by
industry and economy, and would give them one hundred gold pieces each
before his death, so that they might begin business for themselves, and
not be obliged to wait until he had passed away. It happened, however,
that, soon after, he lost a portion of his property, much to his regret,
and had only nine hundred and fifty gold pieces left. So he gave one
hundred to each of his nine sons. When his youngest son, whom he loved
most of all, asked naturally what was to be his share, the father
replied:

"My son, I promised to give each of thy brothers one hundred gold
pieces. I shall keep my word to them. I have fifty left. Thirty I shall
reserve for my funeral expenses, and twenty will be thy portion. But
understand this--I possess, in addition, ten friends, whom I give over
to thee as compensation for the loss of the eighty gold pieces. Believe
me, they are worth more than all the gold and silver."

The youth tenderly embraced his parent, and assured him that he was
content, such was his confidence and affection. In a few days the father
died, and the nine sons took their money, and without a thought of their
youngest brother and the small amount he had received, followed each his
own fancy. But the youngest son, although his portion was the least,
resolved to heed his father's words, and hold fast to the ten friends.
When a short time had elapsed he prepared a simple feast, went to the
ten friends of his father, and said to them: "My father, almost in his
last words, asked me to keep you, his friends, in honor. Before I leave
this place to seek my fortune elsewhere, will you not share with me a
farewell meal, and aid me thus to comply with his dying request?"

The ten friends, stirred by his earnestness and cordiality, accepted his
invitation with pleasure, and enjoyed the repast, although they were
used to richer fare. When the moment for parting arrived, however, one
of them rose and spoke: "My friends, it seems to me that of all the sons
of our dear friend that has gone, the youngest alone is mindful of his
father's friendship for us, and reverences his memory. Let us, then, be
true friends to him, for his own sake as well, and provide for him a
generous sum, that he may begin business here, and not be forced to live
among strangers."

The proposal, so unexpected and yet so merited, was received with
applause. The youth, proud of their friendship, soon became a prosperous
merchant, who never forgot that faithful friends were more valuable than
gold or silver, and left an honored name to his descendants.


3. TRUE CHARITY

There lived once a very wealthy man, who cared little for money, except
as a means for helping others. He used to adopt a peculiar plan in his
method of charitable relief. He had three boxes made for the three
different classes of people whom he desired to assist. In one box he put
gold pieces, which he distributed among artists and scholars, for he
honored knowledge and learning as the highest possession. In the second
box he placed silver pieces for widows and orphans, for whom his
sympathies were readily awakened. In the third were copper coins for the
general poor and beggars--no one was turned away from his dwelling
without some gift, however small.

That the man was beloved by all, need hardly be said. He rejoiced that
he was enabled to do so much good, retained his modest bearing, and
continued to regard his wealth as only an incentive to promote the
happiness of mankind, without distinction of creed or nationality.
Unhappily, his wife was just the opposite. She rarely gave food or
raiment to the poor, and felt angry at her husband's liberality, which
she considered shameless extravagance.

The day came when in the pressure of various duties he had to leave his
house, and could not return until the morrow. Unaware of his sudden
departure, the poor knocked at the door as usual for his kind gifts; but
when they found him absent, they were about to go away or remain in the
street, being terrified at the thought of asking his wife for alms.
Vexed at their conduct, she exclaimed impetuously: "I will give to the
poor according to my husband's method."

She seized the keys of the boxes, and first opened the box of gold. But
how great was her terror when she gazed at its contents--frogs jumping
here and there. Then she went to the silver box, and it was full of
ants. With troubled heart, she opened the copper box, and it was crowded
with creeping bugs. Loud then were her complaints, and bitter her tears,
at the deception, and she kept her room until her husband returned.

No sooner did the man enter the room, annoyed that so many poor people
were kept waiting outside, than she asked him: "Why did you give me keys
to boxes of frogs, ants, and bugs, instead of gold, silver, and copper?
Was it right thus to deceive your wife, and disappoint the poor?"

"Not so," rejoined her husband. "The mistake must be yours, not mine. I
have given you the right keys. I do not know what you have done with
them. Come, let me have them. I am guiltless of any deception." He took
the keys, quickly opened the boxes, and found the coins as he had left
them. "Ah, dear wife," said he, when she had regained her composure,
"your heart, I fear, was not in the gift, when you wished to give to the
poor. It is the feeling that prompts us to aid, not the mere money,
which is the chief thing after all."

And ever after, her heart was changed. Her gifts blessed the poor of the
land, and aroused their love and reverence.


4. AN EASTERN GARDEN

In an Eastern city a lovely garden flourished, whose beauty and
luxuriance awakened much admiration. It was the owner's greatest
pleasure to watch its growth, as leaf, flower, and tree seemed daily to
unfold to brighter bloom. One morning, while taking his usual stroll
through the well-kept paths, he was surprised to find that some
blossoms were picked to pieces. The next day he noticed more signs of
mischief, and rendered thus more observant he gave himself no rest until
he had discovered the culprit. It was a little trembling bird, whom he
managed to capture, and was about to kill in his anger, when it
exclaimed: "Do not kill me, I beg you, kind sir. I am only a wee, tiny
bird. My flesh is too little to satisfy you. I would not furnish
one-hundredth of a meal to a man of your size. Let me free without any
hesitation, and I shall teach you something that will be of much use to
you and your friends."

"I would dearly like to put an end to you," replied the man, "for you
were rapidly putting an end to my garden. It is a good thing to rid the
world of such annoyances. But as I am not revengeful, and am always glad
to learn something useful, I shall set you free this time." And he
opened his hand to give the bird more air.

"Attention!" cried the bird. "Here are three rules which should guide
you through life, and if you observe them you will find your path made
easier: Do not cry over spilt milk; do not desire what is unattainable,
and do not believe what is impossible."

The man was satisfied with the advice, and let the bird escape; but it
had scarcely regained its liberty, when, from a high tree opposite, it
exclaimed:

"What a silly man! The idea of letting me escape! If you only knew what
you have lost! But it is too late now."

"What have I lost?" the man asked, angrily.

"Why, if you had killed me, as you intended, you would have found inside
of me a huge pearl, as large as a goose's egg, and you would have been a
wealthy man forever."

"Dear little bird," the man said in his blandest tones; "sweet little
bird, I will not harm you. Only come down to me, and I will treat you as
if you were my own child, and give you fruit and flowers all day. I
assure you of this most sacredly."

But the bird shook its head sagely, and replied: "What a silly man, to
forget so soon the advice which was given him in all seriousness. I told
you not to cry over spilt milk, and here you are, worrying over what has
happened. I urged you not to desire the unattainable, and now you wish
to capture me again. And, finally, I asked you not to believe what is
impossible, and you are rashly imagining that I have a huge pearl inside
of me, when a goose's egg is larger than my whole body. You ought to
learn your lessons better in the future, if you would become wise,"
added the bird, as with another twist of its head it flew away, and was
lost in the distance.



191

        A classic collection of short stories from the
        ancient Hebrew sages is the little book,
        _Hebrew Tales_, published in London in 1826 by
        the noted Jewish scholar Hyman Hurwitz
        (1770-1844). A modern handy edition of this
        book (about sixty tales) is published as Vol.
        II of the Library of Jewish Classics. Of
        special interest is the fact that it contained
        three stories by the poet Samuel Taylor
        Coleridge, who had published them first in his
        periodical, _The Friend_. Coleridge was much
        interested in Hebrew literature, and especially
        fond of speaking in parables, as those who know
        "The Ancient Mariner" will readily recall. The
        following is one of the three stories referred
        to, and it had prefixed to it the significant
        text, "The Lord helpeth man and beast." (Psalm
        XXXVI, 6.)


THE LORD HELPETH MAN AND BEAST

SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE

During his march to conquer the world, Alexander, the Macedonian, came
to a people in Africa who dwelt in a remote and secluded corner, in
peaceful huts, and knew neither war nor conqueror. They led him to the
hut of their chief, who received him hospitably, and placed before him
golden dates, golden figs, and bread of gold.

"Do you eat gold in this country?" said Alexander.

"I take it for granted," replied the chief, "that thou wert able to find
eatable food in thine own country. For what reason, then, art thou come
amongst us?"

"Your gold has not tempted me hither," said Alexander, "but I would
become acquainted with your manners and customs."

"So be it," rejoined the other: "sojourn among us as long as it pleaseth
thee."

At the close of this conversation, two citizens entered, as into their
court of justice. The plaintiff said, "I bought of this man a piece of
land, and as I was making a deep drain through it, I found a treasure.
This is not mine, for I only bargained for the land, and not for any
treasure that might be concealed beneath it; and yet the former owner of
the land will not receive it." The defendant answered, "I hope I have a
conscience, as well as my fellow citizen. I sold him the land with all
its contingent, as well as existing advantages, and consequently, the
treasure inclusively."

The chief, who was at the same time their supreme judge, recapitulated
their words, in order that the parties might see whether or not he
understood them aright. Then, after some reflection, said: "Thou hast a
son, friend, I believe?"

"Yes."

"And thou," addressing the other, "a daughter?"

"Yes."

"Well, then, let thy son marry _thy_ daughter, and bestow the treasure
on the young couple for a marriage portion." Alexander seemed surprised
and perplexed. "Think you my sentence unjust?" the chief asked him.

"Oh, no!" replied Alexander; "but it astonishes me."

"And how, then," rejoined the chief, "would the case have been decided
in your country?"

"To confess the truth," said Alexander, "we should have taken both
parties into custody, and have seized the treasure for the king's use."

"For the king's use!" exclaimed the chief; "does the sun shine on that
country?"

"Oh, yes!"

"Does it rain there?"

"Assuredly."

"Wonderful! But are there tame animals in the country, that live on the
grass and green herbs?"

"Very many, and of many kinds."

"Ay, that must, then, be the cause," said the chief: "for the sake of
those innocent animals the All-gracious Being continues to let the sun
shine, and the rain drop down on your country; since its inhabitants are
unworthy of such blessings."



192

        By almost common consent Hans Christian
        Andersen (1805-1875), the Danish author, is the
        acknowledged master of all modern writers of
        fairy tales. He was born in poverty, the son of
        a poor shoemaker. With a naturally keen
        dramatic sense, his imagination was stirred by
        stories from the _Arabian Nights_ and La
        Fontaine's _Fables_, by French and Spanish
        soldiers marching through his native city, and
        by listening to the wonderful folk tales of his
        country. On a toy stage and with toy actors,
        these vivid impressions took actual form. The
        world continued a dramatic spectacle to him
        throughout his existence. His consuming
        ambition was for the stage, but he had none of
        the personal graces so necessary for success.
        He was ungainly and awkward, like his "ugly
        duckling." But when at last he began to write,
        he had the power to transfer to the page the
        vivid dramas in his mind, and this power
        culminated in the creation of fairy stories for
        children which he began to publish in 1835. It
        is usual to say that Andersen, like Peter Pan,
        "never grew up," and it is certain that he
        never lost the power of seeing things as
        children see them. Like many great writers
        whose fame now rests on the suffrages of child
        readers, Andersen seems at first to have felt
        that the _Tales_ were slight and beneath his
        dignity. They are not all of the same high
        quality. Occasionally one of them becomes "too
        sentimental and sickly sweet," but the best of
        them have a sturdiness that is thoroughly
        refreshing.

        The most acute analysis of the elements of
        Andersen's greatness as the ideal writer for
        children is that made by his fellow-countryman
        Georg Brandes in _Eminent Authors of the
        Nineteenth Century_. A briefer account on
        similar lines will be found in H. J. Boyesen's
        _Scandinavian Literature_. A still briefer
        account, eminently satisfactory for an
        introduction to Andersen, by Benjamin W. Wells,
        is in Warner's _Library of the World's Best
        Literature_. The interested student cannot, of
        course, afford to neglect Andersen's own _The
        Story of My Life_. Among the more elaborate
        biographies the _Life of Hans Christian
        Andersen_ by R. Nisbet Bain is probably the
        best. The first translation of the _Tales_ into
        English was made by Mary Howitt in 1846 and, as
        far as it goes, is still regarded as one of the
        finest. However, Andersen has been very
        fortunate in his many translators. The version
        by H. W. Dulcken has been published in many
        cheap forms and perhaps more widely read than
        any other. In addition to the stories in the
        following pages, some of those most suitable
        for use are "The Little Match Girl," "The
        Silver Shilling," "Five Peas in the Pod," "Hans
        Clodhopper," and "The Snow Queen." The latter
        is one of the longest and an undoubted
        masterpiece.

        The first two stories following are taken from
        Mrs. Henderson's _Andersen's Best Fairy Tales_.
        (Copyright. Rand McNally & Co.) This little
        book contains thirteen stories in a very simple
        translation and also an excellent story of
        Andersen's life in a form most attractive to
        children. "The Princess and the Pea" is a story
        for the story's sake. The humor, perhaps
        slightly satirical, is based upon the notion so
        common in the old folk tales that royal
        personages are decidedly more delicate than the
        person of low degree. However, the tendency to
        think oneself of more consequence than another
        is not confined to any one class.


THE REAL PRINCESS

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

(Version by Alice Corbin Henderson)

There was once a Prince who wanted to marry a Princess. But it was only
a _real_ Princess that he wanted to marry.

He traveled all over the world to find a real one. But, although there
were plenty of princesses, whether they were _real_ princesses he could
never discover. There was always something that did not seem quite right
about them.

At last he had to come home again. But he was very sad, because he
wanted to marry a _real_ Princess.

One night there was a terrible storm. It thundered and lightened and the
rain poured down in torrents. In the middle of the storm there came a
knocking, knocking, knocking at the castle gate. The kind old King
himself went down to open the castle gate.

It was a young Princess that stood outside the gate. The wind and the
rain had almost blown her to pieces. Water streamed out of her hair and
out of her clothes. Water ran in at the points of her shoes and out
again at the heels. Yet she said that she was a _real_ Princess.

"Well, we will soon find out about that!" thought the Queen.

She said nothing, but went into the bedroom, took off all the bedding,
and put a small dried pea on the bottom of the bedstead. Then she piled
twenty mattresses on top of the pea, and on top of these she put twenty
feather beds. This was where the Princess had to sleep that night.

In the morning they asked her how she had slept through the night.

"Oh, miserably!" said the Princess. "I hardly closed my eyes the whole
night long! Goodness only knows what was in my bed! I slept upon
something so hard that I am black and blue all over. It was dreadful!"

So then they knew that she was a _real_ Princess. For, through the
twenty mattresses and the twenty feather beds, she had still felt the
pea. No one but a _real_ Princess could have had such a tender skin.

So the Prince took her for his wife. He knew now that he had a _real_
Princess.

As for the pea, it was put in a museum where it may still be seen if no
one has carried it away.

Now this is a true story!



193

        With some dozen exceptions, all of Andersen's
        _Tales_ are based upon older stories, either
        upon some old folk tale or upon something that
        he ran across in his reading. Dr. Brandes, in
        his _Eminent Authors_, shows in detail how "The
        Emperor's New Clothes" came into being. "One
        day in turning over the leaves of Don Manuel's
        _Count Lucanor_, Andersen became charmed by the
        homely wisdom of the old Spanish story, with
        the delicate flavor of the Middle Ages
        pervading it, and he lingered over chapter vii,
        which treats of how a king was served by three
        rogues." But Andersen's story is a very
        different one in many ways from his Spanish
        original. For one thing, the meaning is so
        universal that no one can miss it. Most of us
        have, in all likelihood, at some time pretended
        to know what we do not know or to be what we
        are not in order to save our face, to avoid the
        censure or ridicule of others. "There is much
        concerning which people dare not speak the
        truth, through cowardice, through fear of
        acting otherwise than 'all the world,' through
        anxiety lest they should appear stupid. And the
        story is eternally new and it never ends. It
        has its grave side, but just because of its
        endlessness it has also its humorous side."
        When the absurd bubble of the grand procession
        is punctured by the child, whose mental honesty
        has not yet been spoiled by the pressure of
        convention, the Emperor "held himself stiffer
        than ever, and the chamberlains carried the
        invisible train." For it would never do to hold
        up the procession!


THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

(Version by Alice Corbin Henderson)

Many years ago there lived an Emperor who thought so much of new clothes
that he spent all his money on them. He did not care for his soldiers;
he did not care to go to the theater. He liked to drive out in the park
only that he might show off his new clothes. He had a coat for every
hour of the day. They usually say of a king, "He is in the council
chamber." But of the Emperor they said, "He is in the clothes closet!"

It was a gay city in which the Emperor lived. And many strangers came to
visit it every day. Among these, one day, there came two rogues who set
themselves up as weavers. They said they knew how to weave the most
beautiful cloths imaginable. And not only were the colors and patterns
used remarkably beautiful, but clothes made from this cloth could not be
seen by any one who was unfit for the office he held or was too stupid
for any use.

"Those would be fine clothes!" thought the Emperor. "If I wore those I
could find out what men in my empire were not fit for the places they
held. I could tell the clever men from the dunces! I must have some
clothes woven for me at once!"

So he gave the two rogues a great deal of money that they might begin
their work at once.

The rogues immediately put up two looms and pretended to be working. But
there was nothing at all on their looms. They called for the finest
silks and the brightest gold, but this they put into their pockets. At
the empty looms they worked steadily until late into the night.

"I should like to know how the weavers are getting on with my clothes,"
thought the Emperor.

But he felt a little uneasy when he thought that any one who was stupid
or was not fit for his office would be unable to see the cloth. Of
course he had no fears for himself; but still he thought he would send
some one else first, just to see how matters stood.

"I will send my faithful old Minister to the weavers," thought the
Emperor. "He can see how the stuff looks, for he is a clever man, and no
one is so careful in fulfilling duties as he is!"

So the good old Minister went into the room where the two rogues sat
working at the empty looms.

"Mercy on us!" thought the old Minister, opening his eyes wide, "I can't
see a thing!" But he didn't care to say so.

Both the rascals begged him to be good enough to step a little nearer.
They pointed to the empty looms and asked him if he did not think the
pattern and the coloring wonderful. The poor old Minister stared and
stared as hard as he could, but he could not see anything, for, of
course, there was nothing to see!

"Mercy!" he said to himself. "Is it possible that I am a dunce? I never
thought so! Certainly no one must know it. Am I unfit for office? It
will never do to say that I cannot see the stuff!"

"Well, sir, why do you say nothing of it?" asked the rogue who was
pretending to weave.

"Oh, it is beautiful--charming!" said the old Minister, peering through
his spectacles. "What a fine pattern, and what wonderful colors! I shall
tell the Emperor that I am very much pleased with it."

"Well, we are glad to hear you say so," answered the two swindlers.

Then they named all the colors of the invisible cloth upon the looms,
and described the peculiar pattern. The old Minister listened intently,
so that he could repeat all that was said of it to the Emperor.

The rogues now began to demand more money, more silk, and more gold
thread in order to proceed with the weaving. All of this, of course,
went into their pockets. Not a single strand was ever put on the empty
looms at which they went on working.

The Emperor soon sent another faithful friend to see how soon the new
clothes would be ready. But he fared no better than the Minister. He
looked and looked and looked, but still saw nothing but the empty looms.

"Isn't that a pretty piece of stuff?" asked both rogues, showing and
explaining the handsome pattern which was not there at all.

"I am not stupid!" thought the man. "It must be that I am not worthy of
my good position. That is, indeed, strange. But I must not let it be
known!"

So he praised the cloth he did not see, and expressed his approval of
the color and the design that were not there. To the Emperor he said,
"It is charming!"

Soon everybody in town was talking about the wonderful cloth that the
two rogues were weaving.

The Emperor began to think now that he himself would like to see the
wonderful cloth while it was still on the looms. Accompanied by a number
of his friends, among whom were the two faithful officers who had
already beheld the imaginary stuff, he went to visit the two men who
were weaving, might and main, without any fiber and without any thread.

"Isn't it splendid!" cried the two statesmen who had already been there,
and who thought the others would see something upon the empty looms.
"Look, your Majesty! What colors! And what a design!"

"What's this?" thought the Emperor. "I see nothing at all! Am I a dunce?
Am I not fit to be Emperor? That would be the worst thing that could
happen to me, if it were true."

"Oh, it is very pretty!" said the Emperor aloud. "It has my highest
approval!"

He nodded his head happily, and stared at the empty looms. Never would
he say that he could see nothing!

His friends, too, gazed and gazed, but saw no more than had the others.
Yet they all cried out, "It is beautiful!" and advised the Emperor to
wear a suit made of this cloth in a great procession that was soon to
take place.

"It is magnificent, gorgeous!" was the cry that went from mouth to
mouth. The Emperor gave each of the rogues a royal ribbon to wear in his
buttonhole, and called them the Imperial Court Weavers.

The rogues were up the whole night before the morning of the procession.
They kept more than sixteen candles burning. The people could see them
hard at work, completing the new clothes of the Emperor. They took yards
of stuff down from the empty looms; they made cuts in the air with big
scissors; they sewed with needles without thread; and, at last, they
said, "The clothes are ready!"

The Emperor himself, with his grandest courtiers, went to put on his new
suit.

"See!" said the rogues, lifting their arms as if holding something.
"Here are the trousers! Here is the coat! Here is the cape!" and so on.
"It is as light as a spider's web. One might think one had nothing on.
But that is just the beauty of it!"

"Very nice," said the courtiers. But they could see nothing; for there
_was_ nothing!

"Will your Imperial Majesty be graciously pleased to take off your
clothes," asked the rogues, "so that we may put on the new ones before
this long mirror?"

The Emperor took off all his own clothes, and the two rogues pretended
to put on each new garment as it was ready. They wrapped him about, and
they tied and they buttoned. The Emperor turned round and round before
the mirror.

"How well his Majesty looks in his new clothes!" said the people. "How
becoming they are! What a pattern! What colors! It is a beautiful
dress!"

"They are waiting outside with the canopy which is to be carried over
your Majesty in the procession," said the master of ceremonies.

"I am ready," said the Emperor. "Don't the clothes fit well?" he asked,
giving a last glance into the mirror as though he were looking at all
his new finery.

The men who were to carry the train of the Emperor's cloak stooped down
to the floor as if picking up the train, and then held it high in the
air. They did not dare let it be known that they could see nothing.

So the Emperor marched along under the bright canopy. Everybody in the
streets and at the windows cried out: "How beautiful the Emperor's new
clothes are! What a fine train! And they fit to perfection!"

No one would let it be known that he could see nothing, for that would
have proved that he was unfit for office or that he was very, very
stupid. None of the Emperor's clothes had ever been as successful as
these.

"But he has nothing on!" said a little child.

"Just listen to the innocent!" said its father.

But one person whispered to another what the child had said. "He has
nothing on! A child says he has nothing on!"

"But he has nothing on!" at last cried all the people.

The Emperor writhed, for he knew that this was true. But he realized
that it would never do to stop the procession. So he held himself
stiffer than ever, and the chamberlains carried the invisible train.



194

        In his story "The Nightingale," Andersen
        suggests that the so-called upper class of
        society may become so conventionalized as to be
        unable to appreciate true beauty. Poor
        fishermen and the little kitchen girl in the
        story recognize the beauty of the exquisite
        song of the nightingale, and Andersen shows his
        regard for royalty by having the emperor
        appreciate it twice. The last part of the story
        is especially impressive. When Death approached
        the emperor and took from him the symbols that
        had made him rank above his fellows, the
        emperor saw the realities of life and again
        perceived the beauty of the nightingale's song.
        This contact with real life made Death shrink
        away. Then the emperor learned Andersen's
        message to artificial society: If you would
        behold true beauty, you must have it in your
        own heart.


THE NIGHTINGALE

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

In China, you must know, the Emperor is a Chinaman, and all whom he has
about him are Chinamen too. It happened a good many years ago, but
that's just why it's worth while to hear the story before it is
forgotten. The Emperor's palace was the most splendid in the world; it
was made entirely of porcelain, very costly, but so delicate and brittle
that one had to take care how one touched it. In the garden were to be
seen the most wonderful flowers, and to the costliest of them silver
bells were tied, which sounded, so that nobody should pass by without
noticing the flowers. Yes, everything in the Emperor's garden was
admirably arranged. And it extended so far that the gardener himself did
not know where the end was. If a man went on and on, he came into a
glorious forest with high trees and deep lakes. The wood extended
straight down to the sea, which was blue and deep; great ships could
sail, too, beneath the branches of the trees; and in the trees lived a
Nightingale, which sang so splendidly that even the poor fisherman, who
had many other things to do, stopped still and listened, when he had
gone out at night to throw out his nets, and heard the Nightingale.

"How beautiful that is!" he said; but he was obliged to attend to his
property, and thus forgot the bird. But when the next night the bird
sang again, and the fisherman heard it, he exclaimed again, "How
beautiful that is!"

From all the countries of the world travelers came to the city of the
Emperor, and admired it, and the palace and the garden, but when they
heard the Nightingale, they said, "That is the best of all!"

And the travelers told of it when they came home; and the learned men
wrote many books about the town, the palace, and the garden. But they
did not forget the Nightingale; that was placed highest of all; and
those who were poets wrote most magnificent poems about the Nightingale
in the wood by the deep lake.

The books went through all the world, and a few of them once came to the
Emperor. He sat in his golden chair, and read, and read: every moment he
nodded his head, for it pleased him to peruse the masterly descriptions
of the city, the palace, and the garden. "But the Nightingale is the
best of all," it stood written there.

"What's that?" exclaimed the Emperor. "I don't know the Nightingale at
all! Is there such a bird in my empire, and even in my garden? I've
never heard of that. To think that I should have to learn such a thing
for the first time from books!"

And hereupon he called his cavalier. This cavalier was so grand that if
anyone lower in rank than himself dared to speak to him, or to ask him
any question, he answered nothing but "P!"--and that meant nothing.

"There is said to be a wonderful bird here called a Nightingale," said
the Emperor. "They say it is the best thing in all my great empire. Why
have I never heard anything about it?"

"I have never heard him named," replied the cavalier. "He has never been
introduced at Court."

"I command that he shall appear this evening, and sing before me," said
the Emperor. "All the world knows what I possess, and I do not know it
myself!"

"I have never heard him mentioned," said the cavalier. "I will seek for
him. I will find him."

But where was he to be found? The cavalier ran up and down all the
staircases, through halls and passages, but no one among all those whom
he met had heard talk of the Nightingale. And the cavalier ran back to
the Emperor, and said that it must be a fable invented by the writers of
books.

"Your Imperial Majesty cannot believe how much is written that is
fiction, besides something that they call the black art."

"But the book in which I read this," said the Emperor, "was sent to me
by the high and mighty Emperor of Japan and therefore it cannot be a
falsehood. I _will_ hear the Nightingale! It must be here this evening!
It has my imperial favor; and if it does not come, all the Court shall
be trampled upon after the Court has supped!"

"Tsing-pe!" said the cavalier; and again he ran up and down all the
staircases, and through all the halls and corridors; and half the Court
ran with him, for the courtiers did not like being trampled upon.

Then there was a great inquiry after the wonderful Nightingale, which
all the world knew excepting the people at Court.

At last they met with a poor little girl in the kitchen, who said:

"The Nightingale? I know it well; yes, it can sing gloriously. Every
evening I get leave to carry my poor sick mother the scraps from the
table. She lives down by the strand; and when I get back and am tired,
and rest in the wood, then I hear the Nightingale sing. And then the
water comes into my eyes, and it is just as if my mother kissed me."

"Little kitchen girl," said the cavalier, "I will get you a place in the
Court kitchen, with permission to see the Emperor dine, if you will but
lead us to the Nightingale, for it is announced for this evening."

So they all went out into the wood where the Nightingale was accustomed
to sing; half the Court went forth. When they were in the midst of their
journey a cow began to low.

"Oh!" cried the Court pages, "now we have it! That shows a wonderful
power in so small a creature! I have certainly heard it before."

"No, those are cows lowing," said the little kitchen girl. "We are a
long way from the place yet."

Now the frogs began to croak in the marsh.

"Glorious!" said the Chinese Court preacher. "Now I hear it--it sounds
just like little church bells."

"No, those are frogs," said the little kitchen maid. "But now I think we
shall soon hear it."

And then the Nightingale began to sing.

"That is it!" exclaimed the little girl. "Listen, listen! and yonder it
sits."

And she pointed to a little gray bird up in the boughs.

"Is it possible?" cried the cavalier. "I should never have thought it
looked like that! How simple it looks! It must certainly have lost its
color at seeing such grand people around."

"Little Nightingale!" called the little kitchen maid, quite loudly, "our
gracious Emperor wishes you to sing before him."

"With the greatest pleasure!" replied the Nightingale, and began to sing
most delightfully.

"It sounds just like glass bells!" said the cavalier. "And look at its
little throat, how it's working! It's wonderful that we should never
have heard it before. That bird will be a great success at Court."

"Shall I sing once more before the Emperor?" inquired the Nightingale,
for it thought the Emperor was present.

"My excellent little Nightingale," said the cavalier, "I have great
pleasure in inviting you to a Court festival this evening, when you
shall charm his Imperial Majesty with your beautiful singing."

"My song sounds best in the green wood," replied the Nightingale; still
it came willingly when it heard what the Emperor wished.

The palace was festively adorned. The walls and the flooring, which were
of porcelain, gleamed in the rays of thousands of golden lamps. The most
glorious flowers, which could ring clearly, had been placed in the
passages. There was a running to and fro, and a thorough draught, and
all the bells rang so loudly that one could not hear one's self speak.

In the midst of the great hall, where the Emperor sat, a golden perch
had been placed, on which the Nightingale was to sit. The whole Court
was there, and the little cook-maid had got leave to stand behind the
door, as she had now received the title of a real Court cook. All were
in full dress, and all looked at the little gray bird, to which the
Emperor nodded.

And the Nightingale sang so gloriously that the tears came into the
Emperor's eyes, and the tears ran down over his cheeks; then the
Nightingale sang still more sweetly, that went straight to the heart.
The Emperor was so much pleased that he said the Nightingale should have
his golden slipper to wear round its neck. But the Nightingale declined
this with thanks, saying it had already received a sufficient reward.

"I have seen tears in the Emperor's eyes--that is the real treasure to
me. An Emperor's tears have a peculiar power. I am rewarded enough!" And
then it sang again with a sweet, glorious voice.

"That's the most amiable coquetry I ever saw!" said the ladies who stood
round about, and then they took water in their mouths to gurgle when
anyone spoke to them. They thought they should be nightingales too. And
the lackeys and chambermaids reported that they were satisfied also; and
that was saying a good deal, for they are the most difficult to please.
In short, the Nightingale achieved a real success.

It was now to remain at Court, to have its own cage, with liberty to go
out twice every day and once at night. Twelve servants were appointed
when the Nightingale went out, each of whom had a silken string fastened
to the bird's legs, which they held very tight. There was really no
pleasure in an excursion of that kind.

The whole city spoke of the wonderful bird, and whenever two people met,
one said nothing but "Nightin," and the other said "gale"; and then they
both sighed, and understood one another. Eleven pedlars' children were
named after the bird, but not one of them could sing a note.

One day the Emperor received a large parcel, on which was written, "The
Nightingale."

"There we have a new book about this celebrated bird," said the
Emperor.

But it was not a book, but a little work of art, contained in a box--an
artificial nightingale, which was to sing like a natural one, and was
brilliantly ornamented with diamonds, sapphires, and rubies. So soon as
the artificial bird was wound up, he could sing one of the pieces that
he really sang, and then his tail moved up and down, and shone with
silver and gold. Round his neck hung a little ribbon, and on that was
written, "The Emperor of China's nightingale is poor compared to that of
the Emperor of Japan."

"That is capital!" said they all, and he who had brought the artificial
bird immediately received the title, Imperial Head-Nightingale-Bringer.

"Now they must sing together; what a duet that will be!" cried the
courtiers.

And so they had to sing together; but it did not sound very well, for
the real Nightingale sang its own way, and the artificial bird sang
waltzes.

"That's not his fault," said the playmaster; "he's quite perfect, and
very much in my style."

Now the artificial bird was to sing alone. It had just as much success
as the real one, and then it was much handsomer to look at--it shone
like bracelets and breastpins.

Three and thirty times over did it sing the same piece, and yet was not
tired. The people would gladly have heard it again, but the Emperor said
that the living Nightingale ought to sing something now. But where was
it? No one had noticed that it had flown away out of the open window,
back to the green wood.

"But what has become of that?" asked the Emperor.

And all the courtiers abused the Nightingale, and declared that it was a
very ungrateful creature.

"We have the best bird after all," said they.

And so the artificial bird had to sing again, and that was the
thirty-fourth time that they listened to the same piece. For all that
they did not know it quite by heart, for it was so very difficult. And
the playmaster praised the bird particularly; yes, he declared that it
was better than a nightingale, not only with regard to its plumage and
the many beautiful diamonds, but inside as well.

"For you see, ladies and gentlemen, and above all, your Imperial
Majesty, with a real nightingale one can never calculate what is coming,
but in this artificial bird, everything is settled. One can explain it;
one can open it and make people understand where the waltzes come from,
how they go, and how one follows up another."

"Those are quite our own ideas," they all said.

And the speaker received permission to show the bird to the people on
the next Sunday. The people were to hear it sing too, the Emperor
commanded: and they did hear it, and were as much pleased as if they had
all got tipsy upon tea, for that's quite the Chinese fashion, and they
all said, "Oh!" and held up their forefingers and nodded. But the poor
fisherman, who had heard the real Nightingale, said:

"It sounds pretty enough, and the melodies resemble each other, but
there's something wanting, though I know not what!"

The real Nightingale was banished from the country and empire. The
artificial bird had its place on a silken cushion close to the
Emperor's bed; all the presents it had received, gold and precious
stones, were ranged about it; in title it had advanced to be the High
Imperial After-Dinner-Singer, and in rank to Number One on the left
hand; for the Emperor considered that side the most important on which
the heart is placed, and even in an Emperor the heart is on the left
side; and the playmaster wrote a work of five and twenty volumes about
the artificial bird; it was very learned and very long, full of the most
difficult Chinese words; but yet all the people declared that they had
read it and understood it, for fear of being considered stupid, and
having their bodies trampled on.

So a whole year went by. The Emperor, the Court, and all the other
Chinese knew every little twitter in the artificial bird's song by
heart. But just for that reason it pleased them best--they could sing
with it themselves, and they did so. The street boys sang,
"Tsi-tsi-tsi-glug-glug!" and the Emperor himself sang it too. Yes, that
was certainly famous.

But one evening, when the artificial bird was singing its best, and the
Emperor lay in bed listening to it, something inside the bird said,
"Whizz!" Something cracked. "Whir-r-r!" All the wheels ran round, and
then the music stopped.

The Emperor immediately sprang out of bed, and caused his body physician
to be called; but what could _he_ do? Then they sent for a watchmaker,
and after a good deal of talking and investigation, the bird was put
into something like order, but the watchmaker said that the bird must be
carefully treated, for the barrels were worn, and it would be impossible
to put new ones in in such a manner that the music would go. There was a
great lamentation; only once in the year was it permitted to let the
bird sing, and that was almost too much. But then the playmaster made a
little speech full of heavy words, and said this was just as good as
before--and so of course it was as good as before.

Now five years had gone by, and a real grief came upon the whole nation.
The Chinese were really fond of their Emperor, and now he was ill, and
could not, it was said, live much longer. Already a new Emperor had been
chosen, and the people stood out in the street and asked the cavalier
how the Emperor did.

"P!" said he, and shook his head.

Cold and pale lay the Emperor in his great, gorgeous bed; the whole
Court thought him dead, and each one ran to pay homage to the new ruler.
The chamberlains ran out to talk it over, and the ladies' maids had a
great coffee party. All about, in all the halls and passages, cloth had
been laid down so that no footstep could be heard, and therefore it was
quiet there, quite quiet. But the Emperor was not dead yet; stiff and
pale he lay on the gorgeous bed, with the long velvet curtains and the
heavy gold tassels; high up, a window stood open, and the moon shone in
upon the Emperor and the artificial bird.

The poor Emperor could scarcely breathe; it was just as if something lay
upon his chest; he opened his eyes, and then he saw that it was Death
who sat upon his chest, and had put on his golden crown, and held in one
hand the Emperor's sword, in the other his beautiful banner. And all
around, from among the folds of the splendid velvet curtains, strange
heads peered forth; a few very ugly, the rest quite lovely and mild.
These were all the Emperor's bad and good deeds, that stood before him
now that Death sat upon his heart.

"Do you remember this?" whispered one to the other. "Do you remember
that?" and then they told him so much that the perspiration ran from his
forehead.

"I did not know that!" said the Emperor. "Music! music! the great
Chinese drum!" he cried, "so that I need not hear all they say!"

And they continued speaking, and Death nodded like a Chinaman to all
they said.

"Music! music!" cried the Emperor. "You little precious golden bird,
sing, sing! I have given you gold and costly presents; I have even hung
my golden slipper around your neck--sing now, sing!"

But the bird stood still; no one was there to wind him up, and he could
not sing without that; but Death continued to stare at the Emperor with
his great, hollow eyes, and it was quiet, fearfully quiet.

Then there sounded from the window, suddenly, the most lovely song. It
was the little live Nightingale, that sat outside on a spray. It had
heard of the Emperor's sad plight, and had come to sing to him of
comfort and hope. As it sang the specters grew paler and paler; the
blood ran quicker and more quickly through the Emperor's weak limbs; and
even Death listened, and said:

"Go on, little Nightingale, go on!"

"But will you give me that splendid golden sword? Will you give me that
rich banner? Will you give me the Emperor's crown?"

And Death gave up each of these treasures for a song. And the
Nightingale sang on and on; and it sang of the quiet churchyard where
the white roses grow, where the elder blossoms smell sweet, and where
the fresh grass is moistened by the tears of survivors. Then Death felt
a longing to see his garden, and floated out at the window in the form
of a cold white mist.

"Thanks! thanks!" said the Emperor. "You heavenly little bird; I know
you well. I banished you from my country and empire, and yet you have
charmed away the evil faces from my couch, and banished Death from my
heart! How can I reward you?"

"You have rewarded me!" replied the Nightingale. "I have drawn tears
from your eyes, when I sang the first time--I shall never forget that.
Those are the jewels that rejoice a singer's heart. But now sleep, and
grow fresh and strong again. I will sing you something."

And it sang, and the Emperor fell into a sweet slumber. Ah! how mild and
refreshing that sleep was! The sun shone upon him through the windows
when he awoke refreshed and restored: not one of his servants had yet
returned, for they all thought he was dead; only the Nightingale still
sat beside him and sang.

"You must always stay with me," said the Emperor. "You shall sing as you
please; and I'll break the artificial bird into a thousand pieces."

"Not so," replied the Nightingale. "It did well as long as it could;
keep it as you have done till now. I cannot build my nest in the palace
to dwell in it, but let me come when I feel the wish; then I will sit in
the evening on the spray yonder by the window, and sing you something,
so that you may be glad and thoughtful at once. I will sing of those who
are happy and of those who suffer. I will sing of good and of evil that
remains hidden round about you. The little singing bird flies far
around, to the poor fisherman, to the peasant's roof, to everyone who
dwells far away from you and from your Court. I love your heart more
than your crown, and yet the crown has an air of sanctity about it. I
will come and sing to you--but one thing you must promise me."

"Every thing!" said the Emperor; and he stood there in his imperial
robes, which he had put on himself, and pressed the sword which was
heavy with gold to his heart.

"One thing I beg of you: tell no one that you have a little bird who
tells you everything. Then it will go all the better."

And the Nightingale flew away.

The servants came in to look at their dead Emperor, and--yes, there he
stood, and the Emperor said, "Good-morning!"



195

        This story is a favorite for the Christmas
        season. It is loosely constructed, and rambles
