had gone in head foremost, of course he could not have turned round. So
he used to turn his tail to it, and lay his long horns, which carry his
sixth sense in their tips (and nobody knows what that sixth sense is),
straight down his back to guide him, and twist his eyes back till they
almost came out of their sockets, and then made ready, present, fire,
snap!--and away he went, pop into the hole; and peeped out and twiddled
his whiskers, as much as to say, "You couldn't do that."

Tom asked him about water-babies. "Yes," he said. He had seen them
often. But he did not think much of them. They were meddlesome little
creatures, that went about helping fish and shells which got into
scrapes. Well, for his part, he should be ashamed to be helped by little
soft creatures that had not even a shell on their backs. He had lived
quite long enough in the world to take care of himself.

He was a conceited fellow, the old lobster, and not very civil to Tom;
and you will hear how he had to alter his mind before he was done, as
conceited people generally have. But he was so funny, and Tom so lonely,
that he could not quarrel with him; and they used to sit in holes in the
rocks, and chat for hours.

And about this time there happened to Tom a very strange and important
adventure--so important, indeed, that he was very near never finding the
water-babies at all; and I am sure you would have been sorry for that.

I hope that you have not forgotten the little white lady all this while.
At least, here she comes, looking like a clean white good little
darling, as she always was, and always will be. For it befell in the
pleasant short December days, when the wind always blows from the
south-west, till Old Father Christmas comes and spreads the great white
table-cloth, ready for little boys and girls to give the birds their
Christmas dinner of crumbs--it befell (to go on) in the pleasant
December days, that Sir John was so busy hunting that nobody at home
could get a word out of him. Four days a week he hunted, and very good
sport he had; and the other two he went to the bench and the board of
guardians, and very good justice he did; and, when he got home in time,
he dined at five; for he hated this absurd new fashion of dining at
eight in the hunting season, which forces a man to make interest with
the footman for cold beef and beer as soon as he comes in, and so spoil
his appetite, and then sleep in an arm-chair in his bedroom, all stiff
and tired, for two or three hours before he can get his dinner like a
gentleman. And do you be like Sir John, my dear little man, when you are
your own master; and, if you want either to read hard or ride hard,
stick to the good old Cambridge hours of breakfast at eight and dinner
at five; by which you may get two days' work out of one. But, of course,
if you find a fox at three in the afternoon and run him till dark, and
leave off twenty miles from home, why you must wait for your dinner till
you can get it, as better men than you have done. Only see that, if you
go hungry, your horse does not; but give him his warm gruel and beer,
and take him gently home, remembering that good horses don't grow on the
hedge like blackberries.

It befell (to go on a second time) that Sir John, hunting all day, and
dining at five, fell asleep every evening, and snored so terribly that
all the windows in Harthover shook, and the soot fell down the
chimneys. Whereon My Lady, being no more able to get conversation out of
him than a song out of a dead nightingale, determined to go off and
leave him, and the doctor, and Captain Swinger the agent, to snore in
concert every evening to their hearts' content. So she started for the
seaside with all the children, in order to put herself and them into
condition by mild applications of iodine. She might as well have stayed
at home and used Parry's liquid horse-blister, for there was plenty of
it in the stables; and then she would have saved her money, and saved
the chance, also, of making all the children ill instead of well (as
hundreds are made), by taking them to some nasty smelling undrained
lodging, and then wondering how they caught scarlatina and diphtheria:
but people won't be wise enough to understand that till they are dead of
bad smells, and then it will be too late; besides you see, Sir John did
certainly snore very loud.

But where she went to nobody must know, for fear young ladies should
begin to fancy that there are water-babies there! and so hunt and howk
after them (besides raising the price of lodgings), and keep them in
aquariums, as the ladies at Pompeii (as you may see by the paintings)
used to keep Cupids in cages. But nobody ever heard that they starved
the Cupids, or let them die of dirt and neglect, as English young ladies
do by the poor sea-beasts. So nobody must know where My Lady went.
Letting water-babies die is as bad as taking singing birds' eggs; for,
though there are thousands, ay, millions, of both of them in the world,
yet there is not one too many.

Now it befell that, on the very shore, and over the very rocks, where
Tom was sitting with his friend the lobster, there walked one day the
little white lady, Ellie herself, and with her a very wise man
indeed--Professor Ptthmllnsprts.

His mother was a Dutchwoman, and therefore he was born at Curacao (of
course you have learnt your geography, and therefore know why); and his
father a Pole, and therefore he was brought up at Petropaulowski (of
course you have learnt your modern politics, and therefore know why):
but for all that he was as thorough an Englishman as ever coveted his
neighbour's goods. And his name, as I said, was Professor Ptthmllnsprts,
which is a very ancient and noble Polish name.

He was, as I said, a very great naturalist, and chief professor of
_Necrobioneopalaeonthydrochthonanthropopithekology_ in the new university
which the king of the Cannibal Islands had founded; and, being a member
of the Acclimatisation Society, he had come here to collect all the
nasty things which he could find on the coast of England, and turn them
loose round the Cannibal Islands, because they had not nasty things
enough there to eat what they left.

But he was a very worthy kind good-natured little old gentleman; and
very fond of children (for he was not the least a cannibal himself); and
very good to all the world as long as it was good to him. Only one
fault he had, which cock-robins have likewise, as you may see if you
look out of the nursery window--that, when any one else found a curious
worm, he would hop round them, and peck them, and set up his tail, and
bristle up his feathers, just as a cock-robin would; and declare that he
found the worm first; and that it was his worm; and, if not, that then
it was not a worm at all.

He had met Sir John at Scarborough, or Fleetwood, or somewhere or other
(if you don't care where, nobody else does), and had made acquaintance
with him, and become very fond of his children. Now, Sir John knew
nothing about sea-cockyolybirds, and cared less, provided the fishmonger
sent him good fish for dinner; and My Lady knew as little: but she
thought it proper that the children should know something. For in the
stupid old times, you must understand, children were taught to know one
thing, and to know it well; but in these enlightened new times they are
taught to know a little about everything, and to know it all ill; which
is a great deal pleasanter and easier, and therefore quite right.

So Ellie and he were walking on the rocks, and he was showing her about
one in ten thousand of all the beautiful and curious things which are to
be seen there. But little Ellie was not satisfied with them at all. She
liked much better to play with live children, or even with dolls, which
she could pretend were alive; and at last she said honestly, "I don't
care about all these things, because they can't play with me, or talk
to me. If there were little children now in the water, as there used to
be, and I could see them, I should like that."

"Children in the water, you strange little duck?" said the professor.

"Yes," said Ellie. "I know there used to be children in the water, and
mermaids too, and mermen. I saw them all in a picture at home, of a
beautiful lady sailing in a car drawn by dolphins, and babies flying
round her, and one sitting in her lap; and the mermaids swimming and
playing, and the mermen trumpeting on conch-shells; and it is called
'The Triumph of Galatea'; and there is a burning mountain in the picture
behind. It hangs on the great staircase, and I have looked at it ever
since I was a baby, and dreamt about it a hundred times; and it is so
beautiful, that it must be true."

But the professor had not the least notion of allowing that things were
true, merely because people thought them beautiful. For at that rate, he
said, the Baltas would be quite right in thinking it a fine thing to eat
their grandpapas, because they thought it an ugly thing to put them
underground. The professor, indeed, went further, and held that no man
was forced to believe anything to be true, but what he could see, hear,
taste, or handle.

He held very strange theories about a good many things. He had even got
up once at the British Association, and declared that apes had
hippopotamus majors in their brains just as men have. Which was a
shocking thing to say; for, if it were so, what would become of the
faith, hope, and charity of immortal millions? You may think that there
are other more important differences between you and an ape, such as
being able to speak, and make machines, and know right from wrong, and
say your prayers, and other little matters of that kind; but that is a
child's fancy, my dear. Nothing is to be depended on but the great
hippopotamus test. If you have a hippopotamus major in your brain, you
are no ape, though you had four hands, no feet, and were more apish than
the apes of all aperies. But if a hippopotamus major is ever discovered
in one single ape's brain, nothing will save your great-great-great-great-
great-great-great-great-great-great-great-greater-greatest-grandmother
from having been an ape too. No, my dear little man; always remember
that the one true, certain, final, and all-important difference between
you and an ape is, that you have a hippopotamus major in your brain, and
it has none; and that, therefore, to discover one in its brain will be a
very wrong and dangerous thing, at which every one will be very much
shocked, as we may suppose they were at the professor.--Though really,
after all, it don't much matter; because--as Lord Dundreary and others
would put it--nobody but men have hippopotamuses in their brains; so, if
a hippopotamus was discovered in an ape's brain, why it would not be
one, you know, but something else.

But the professor had gone, I am sorry to say, even further than
that; for he had read at the British Association at Melbourne,
Australia, in the year 1999, a paper which assured every one who found
himself the better or wiser for the news, that there were not, never
had been, and could not be, any rational or half-rational beings
except men, anywhere, anywhen, or anyhow; that _nymphs_, _satyrs_,
_fauns_, _inui_, _dwarfs_, _trolls_, _elves_, _gnomes_, _fairies_,
_brownies_, _nixes_, _wilis_, _kobolds_, _leprechaunes_, _cluricaunes_,
_banshees_, _will-o'-the-wisps_, _follets_, _lutins_, _magots_, _goblins_,
_afrits_, _marids_, _jinns_, _ghouls_, _peris_, _deevs_, _angels_,
_archangels_, _imps_, _bogies_, or worse, were nothing at all, and pure
bosh and wind. And he had to get up very early in the morning to prove
that, and to eat his breakfast overnight; but he did it, at least to his
own satisfaction. Whereon a certain great divine, and a very clever
divine was he, called him a regular Sadducee; and probably he was quite
right. Whereon the professor, in return, called him a regular Pharisee;
and probably he was quite right too. But they did not quarrel in the
least; for, when men are men of the world, hard words run off them like
water off a duck's back. So the professor and the divine met at dinner
that evening, and sat together on the sofa afterwards for an hour, and
talked over the state of female labour on the antarctic continent (for
nobody talks shop after his claret), and each vowed that the other was
the best company he ever met in his life. What an advantage it is to be
men of the world!

From all which you may guess that the professor was not the least of
little Ellie's opinion. So he gave her a succinct compendium of his
famous paper at the British Association, in a form suited for the
youthful mind. But, as we have gone over his arguments against
water-babies once already, which is once too often, we will not repeat
them here.

Now little Ellie was, I suppose, a stupid little girl; for, instead of
being convinced by Professor Ptthmllnsprts' arguments, she only asked
the same question over again.

"But why are there not water-babies?"

I trust and hope that it was because the professor trod at that moment
on the edge of a very sharp mussel, and hurt one of his corns sadly,
that he answered quite sharply, forgetting that he was a scientific man,
and therefore ought to have known that he couldn't know; and that he was
a logician, and therefore ought to have known that he could not prove a
universal negative--I say, I trust and hope it was because the mussel
hurt his corn, that the professor answered quite sharply:

"Because there ain't."

Which was not even good English, my dear little boy; for, as you must
know from Aunt Agitate's Arguments, the professor ought to have said, if
he was so angry as to say anything of the kind--Because there are not:
or are none: or are none of them; or (if he had been reading Aunt
Agitate too) because they do not exist.

And he groped with his net under the weeds so violently, that, as it
befell, he caught poor little Tom.

He felt the net very heavy; and lifted it out quickly, with Tom all
entangled in the meshes.

"Dear me!" he cried. "What a large pink Holothurian; with hands, too! It
must be connected with Synapta."

And he took him out.

"It has actually eyes!" he cried. "Why, it must be a Cephalopod! This is
most extraordinary!"

"No, I ain't!" cried Tom, as loud as he could; for he did not like to be
called bad names.

"It is a water-baby!" cried Ellie; and of course it was.

"Water-fiddlesticks, my dear!" said the professor; and he turned away
sharply.

There was no denying it. It was a water-baby: and he had said a moment
ago that there were none. What was he to do?

He would have liked, of course, to have taken Tom home in a bucket. He
would not have put him in spirits. Of course not. He would have kept him
alive, and petted him (for he was a very kind old gentleman), and
written a book about him, and given him two long names, of which the
first would have said a little about Tom, and the second all about
himself; for of course he would have called him Hydrotecnon
Ptthmllnsprtsianum, or some other long name like that; for they are
forced to call everything by long names now, because they have used up
all the short ones, ever since they took to making nine species out of
one. But--what would all the learned men say to him after his speech at
the British Association? And what would Ellie say, after what he had
just told her?

There was a wise old heathen once, who said, "Maxima debetur pueris
reverentia"--The greatest reverence is due to children; that is, that
grown people should never say or do anything wrong before children, lest
they should set them a bad example.--Cousin Cramchild says it means,
"The greatest respectfulness is expected from little boys." But he was
raised in a country where little boys are not expected to be respectful,
because all of them are as good as the President:--Well, every one knows
his own concerns best; so perhaps they are. But poor Cousin Cramchild,
to do him justice, not being of that opinion, and having a moral
mission, and being no scholar to speak of, and hard up for an
authority--why, it was a very great temptation for him. But some people,
and I am afraid the professor was one of them, interpret that in a more
strange, curious, one-sided, left-handed, topsy-turvy, inside-out,
behind-before fashion than even Cousin Cramchild; for they make it mean,
that you must show your respect for children, by never confessing
yourself in the wrong to them, even if you know that you are so, lest
they should lose confidence in their elders.

Now, if the professor had said to Ellie, "Yes, my darling, it is a
water-baby, and a very wonderful thing it is; and it shows how little I
know of the wonders of nature, in spite of forty years' honest labour. I
was just telling you that there could be no such creatures; and,
behold! here is one come to confound my conceit and show me that Nature
can do, and has done, beyond all that man's poor fancy can imagine. So,
let us thank the Maker, and Inspirer, and Lord of Nature for all His
wonderful and glorious works, and try and find out something about this
one";--I think that, if the professor had said that, little Ellie would
have believed him more firmly, and respected him more deeply, and loved
him better, than ever she had done before. But he was of a different
opinion. He hesitated a moment. He longed to keep Tom, and yet he half
wished he never had caught him; and at last he quite longed to get rid
of him. So he turned away and poked Tom with his finger, for want of
anything better to do; and said carelessly, "My dear little maid, you
must have dreamt of water-babies last night, your head is so full of
them."

Now Tom had been in the most horrible and unspeakable fright all the
while; and had kept as quiet as he could, though he was called a
Holothurian and a Cephalopod; for it was fixed in his little head that
if a man with clothes on caught him, he might put clothes on him too,
and make a dirty black chimney-sweep of him again. But, when the
professor poked him, it was more than he could bear; and, between fright
and rage, he turned to bay as valiantly as a mouse in a corner, and bit
the professor's finger till it bled.

"Oh! ah! yah!" cried he; and glad of an excuse to be rid of Tom, dropped
him on to the seaweed, and thence he dived into the water and was gone
in a moment.

[Illustration: "The fairies came flying in at the window and brought her
such a pretty pair of wings."--_P. 126._]

"But it was a water-baby, and I heard it speak!" cried Ellie. "Ah, it is
gone!" And she jumped down off the rock to try and catch Tom before he
slipped into the sea.

Too late! and what was worse, as she sprang down, she slipped, and fell
some six feet, with her head on a sharp rock, and lay quite still.

The professor picked her up, and tried to waken her, and called to her,
and cried over her, for he loved her very much: but she would not waken
at all. So he took her up in his arms and carried her to her governess,
and they all went home; and little Ellie was put to bed, and lay there
quite still; only now and then she woke up and called out about the
water-baby: but no one knew what she meant, and the professor did not
tell, for he was ashamed to tell.

And, after a week, one moonlight night, the fairies came flying in at
the window and brought her such a pretty pair of wings that she could
not help putting them on; and she flew with them out of the window, and
over the land, and over the sea, and up through the clouds, and nobody
heard or saw anything of her for a very long while.

And this is why they say that no one has ever yet seen a water-baby. For
my part, I believe that the naturalists get dozens of them when they are
out dredging; but they say nothing about them, and throw them overboard
again, for fear of spoiling their theories. But, you see the
professor was found out, as every one is in due time. A very terrible
old fairy found the professor out; she felt his bumps, and cast his
nativity, and took the lunars of him carefully inside and out; and so
she knew what he would do as well as if she had seen it in a print book,
as they say in the dear old west country; and he did it; and so he was
found out beforehand, as everybody always is; and the old fairy will
find out the naturalists some day, and put them in the _Times_, and then
on whose side will the laugh be?

So the old fairy took him in hand very severely there and then. But she
says she is always most severe with the best people, because there is
most chance of curing them, and therefore they are the patients who pay
her best; for she has to work on the same salary as the Emperor of
China's physicians (it is a pity that all do not), no cure, no pay.

So she took the poor professor in hand: and because he was not content
with things as they are, she filled his head with things as they are
not, to try if he would like them better; and because he did not choose
to believe in a water-baby when he saw it, she made him believe in worse
things than water-babies--in _unicorns_, _fire-drakes_, _manticoras_,
_basilisks_, _amphisbaenas_, _griffins_, _ph[oe]nixes_, _rocs_, _orcs_,
_dog-headed men_, _three-headed dogs_, _three-bodied geryons_, and other
pleasant creatures, which folks think never existed yet, and which folks
hope never will exist, though they know nothing about the matter, and
never will; and these creatures so upset, terrified, flustered,
aggravated, confused, astounded, horrified, and totally flabbergasted
the poor professor that the doctors said that he was out of his wits for
three months; and perhaps they were right, as they are now and then.

So all the doctors in the county were called in to make a report on his
case; and of course every one of them flatly contradicted the other:
else what use is there in being men of science? But at last the majority
agreed on a report in the true medical language, one half bad Latin, the
other half worse Greek, and the rest what might have been English, if
they had only learnt to write it. And this is the beginning thereof--

"_The subanhypaposupernal anastomoses of peritomic diacellurite in the
encephalo digital region of the distinguished individual of whose
symptomatic ph[oe]nomena we had the melancholy honour (subsequently to a
preliminary diagnostic inspection) of making an inspectorial diagnosis,
presenting the interexclusively quadrilateral and antinomian diathesis
known as Bumpsterhausen's blue follicles, we proceeded_"--
