
Vincent Wingfield saw but little of the battle at Bull Run. As they were
impatiently waiting the order to charge while the desperate conflict
between Jackson's brigade and the enemy was at its fiercest, a shell
from one of the Federal batteries burst a few yards in front of the
troop, and one of the pieces striking Vincent on the side hurled him
insensible from his horse. He was at once lifted and carried by Dan and
some of the other men-servants, who had been told off for this duty, to
the rear, where the surgeons were busily engaged in dressing the wounds
of the men who straggled back from the front. While the conflict lasted
those unable to walk lay where they fell, for no provision had at
present been made for ambulance corps, and not a single man capable of
firing a musket could be spared from the ranks. The tears were flowing
copiously down Dan's cheeks as he stood by while the surgeons examined
Vincent's wound.

"Is he dead, sah?" he sobbed as they lifted him up from his stooping
position.

"Dead." the surgeon repeated. "Can't you see he is breathing, and did
you not hear him groan when I examined his side? He is a long way from
being a dead man yet. Some of his ribs are broken, and he has had a very
nasty blow; but I do not think there is any cause for anxiety about him.
Pour a little wine down his throat, and sprinkle his face with water.
Raise his head and put a coat under it, and when he opens his eyes and
begins to recover, don't let him move. Then you can cut up the side of
his jacket and down the sleeve, so as to get it off that side
altogether. Cut his shirt open, and bathe the wound with some water and
bit of rag of any sort; it is not likely to bleed much. When it has
stopped bleeding put a pad of linen upon it, and keep it wet. When we
can spare time we will bandage it properly."

But it was not until late at night that the time could be spared for
attending to Vincent; for the surgeons were overwhelmed with work, and
the most serious cases were, as far as possible, first attended to. He
had soon recovered consciousness. At first he looked with a feeling of
bewilderment at Dan, who was copiously sprinkling his face with water,
sobbing loudly while he did so. As soon as the negro perceived that his
master had opened his eyes he gave a cry of delight.

"Tank de Lord, Marse Vincent; dis child tought you dead and gone for
sure."

"What's the matter, Dan? What has happened?" Vincent said, trying to
move, and then stopping suddenly with a cry of pain.

"You knocked off your horse, sah, wid one of de shells of dem cussed
Yanks."

"Am I badly hurt, Dan?"

"Berry bad, sah; great piece of flesh pretty nigh as big as my hand come
out ob your side, and doctor says some of de ribs broken. But de doctor
not seem to make much ob it; he hard sort ob man dat. Say you get all
right again. No time to tend to you now. Hurry away just as if you some
poor white trash instead of Massa Wingfield ob de Orangery."

Vincent smiled faintly.

"It doesn't make much difference what a man is in a surgeon's eyes, Dan;
the question is how badly he is hurt, and what can be done for him?
Well, thank God it's no worse. Wildfire was not hurt, I hope?"

"No, sah; he is standing tied up by dat tree. Now, sah, de doctor say me
cut your jacket off and bave de wound."

"All right, Dan; but be a little careful with the water, you seem to be
pretty near drowning me as it is. Just wipe my face and hair, and get
the handkerchief from the pocket of my jacket, and open the shirt collar
and put the handkerchief inside round my neck. How is the battle going
on? The roar seems louder than ever."

Dan went forward to the crest a of slight rise of the ground whence he
could look down upon the field of battle, and made haste to return.

"Can't see berry well, sah; too much smoke. But dey in de same place
still."

"Look round, Dan, and see if there are any fresh troops coming up."

"Yes, sah; lot of men coming ober de hill behind."

"That's all right, Dan. Now you can see about this bathing my side."

As soon as the battle was over Major Ashley rode up to where Vincent and
five or six of his comrades of the cavalry were lying wounded.

"How are you getting on, lads? Pretty well I hope?" he asked the surgeon
as he dismounted.

"First rate, major," one of the men answered. "We all of us took a turn
as soon as we heard that the Yanks were whipped."

"Yes, we have thrashed them handsomely," the major said. "Ah, Wingfield,
I am glad to see you are alive. I thought when you fell it was all over
with you."

"I am not much hurt, sir," Vincent replied. "A flesh wound and some ribs
are broken, I hear; but they won't be long mending I hope."

"It's a nasty wound to look at," the major said, as Dan lifted the pad
of wet linen. "But with youth and health you will soon get round it,
never fear."

"Ah, my poor lad, yours is a worse case," he said as he bent over a
young fellow who was lying a few paces from Vincent.

"It's all up with me, major," he replied faintly; "the doctor said he
could do nothing for me. But I don't mind, now we have beaten them. You
will send a line to the old people, major, won't you, and say I died
doing my duty? I've got two brothers, and I expect they will send one on
to take my place."

"I will write to them, my lad," the major said, "and tell them all about
you." He could give the lad no false hopes, for already a gray shade was
stealing over the white face, and the end was close at hand; in a few
minutes he ceased to breathe.

Late in the evening the surgeons, having attended to more urgent cases,
came round. Vincent's wound was now more carefully examined than before,
but the result was the same. Three of the ribs were badly fractured, but
there was no serious danger.

"You will want quiet and good nursing for some time, my lad," the
principal surgeon said. "There will be a train of wounded going off for
Richmond the first thing in the morning, and you shall go by it. You had
better get a door, lads," he said to some of the troopers who had come
across from the spot where the cavalry were bivouacked to see how their
comrades were getting on, "and carry him down and put him in the train.
One has just been sent off, and another will be made up at once, so that
the wounded can be put in it as they are taken down. Now I will bandage
the wound, and it will not want any more attention until you get home."

A wad of lint was placed upon the wound and bandaged tightly round the
body.

"Remember you have got to be perfectly quiet, and not attempt to move
till the bones have knit. I am afraid that they are badly fractured, and
will require some time to heal up again."

A door was fetched from an out-house near, and Vincent and two of his
comrades, who were also ordered to be sent to the rear, were one by one
carried down to the nearest point on the railway, where a train stood
ready to receive them, and they were then laid on the seats.

All night the wounded kept arriving, and by morning the train was packed
as full as it would hold, and with two or three surgeons in charge
started for Richmond. Dan was permitted to accompany the train, at
Vincent's urgent request, in the character of doctor's assistant, and he
went about distributing water to the wounded, and assisting the surgeons
in moving such as required it.

It was night before the train reached Richmond. A number of people were
at the station to receive it; for as soon as the news of the battle had
been received, preparations had been made for the reception of the
wounded, several public buildings had been converted into hospitals, and
numbers of the citizens had come forward with offers to take one or more
of the wounded into their houses. The streets were crowded with people,
who were wild with joy at the news of the victory which, as they
believed, had secured the State from any further fear of invasion.
Numbers of willing hands were in readiness to carry the wounded on
stretchers to the hospitals, where all the surgeons of the town were
already waiting to attend upon them.

Vincent, at his own request, was only laid upon a bed, as he said that
he would go home to be nursed the first thing in the morning. This being
the case it was needless to put him to the pain and trouble of being
undressed. Dan had started as soon as he saw his master carried into the
hospital to take the news to the Orangery, being strictly charged by
Vincent to make light of his injury, and on no account whatever to alarm
them. He was to ask that the carriage should come to fetch him the first
thing in the morning.

It was indeed but just daybreak when Mrs. Wingfield drove up to the
hospital. Dan had been so severely cross-examined that he had been
obliged to give an accurate account of Vincent's injury. There was
bustle and movement even at that early hour, for another train of
wounded had just arrived. As she entered the hospital she gave an
exclamation of pleasure, for at the door were two gentlemen in
conversation, one of whom was the doctor who had long attended the
family at the Orangery.

"I am glad you are here, Dr. Mapleston; for I want your opinion before I
move Vincent. Have you seen him?"

"No, Mrs. Wingfield; I did not know he was here. I have charge of one of
the wards, and have not had time to see who are in the others. I
sincerely hope Vincent is not seriously hurt."

"That's want I want to find out, doctor. His boy brought us news late
last night that he was here. He said the doctors considered that he was
not in any danger; but as it seems that he had three ribs broken and a
deep flesh wound from the explosion of a shell, it seems to me that it
must be serious."

"I will go up and see him at once, Mrs. Wingfield, and find out from the
surgeon in charge of his ward exactly what is the matter with him." Dan
led the way to the bed upon which Vincent was lying. He was only dozing,
and opened his eyes as they came up.

"My poor boy," Mrs. Wingfield said, struggling with her tears at the
sight of his pale face, "this is sad indeed."

"It is nothing very bad, mother," Vincent replied cheerfully; "nothing
at all to fret about. The wound is nothing to the injuries of most of
those here. I suppose, doctor, I can be moved at once?"

Doctor Mapleston felt his pulse.

"You are feverish, my lad; but perhaps the best thing for you would be
to get you home while you can be moved. You will do far better there
than here. But I must speak to the surgeon in charge of you first, and
hear what he says."

"Yes, I think you can move him," the surgeon of the ward said. "He has
got a nasty wound, and the ticket with him said that three ribs were
badly fractured; but I made no examination, as he said he would be
fetched the first thing this morning. I only put on a fresh dressing and
bandaged it. The sooner you get him off the better, if he is to be
moved. Fever is setting in, and he will probably be wandering by this
evening. He will have a much better chance at home, with cool rooms and
quiet and careful nursing, than he can have here; though there would be
no lack of either comforts or nurses, for half the ladies in the town
have volunteered for the work, and we have offers of all the medical
comforts that could be required were the list of wounded ten times as
large as it is."

A stretcher was brought in, and Vincent was lifted as gently as possible
upon it. Then he was carried down-stairs and the stretcher placed in the
carriage, which was a large open one, and afforded just sufficient
length for it. Mrs. Wingfield took her seat beside him. Dan mounted the
box beside the coachman.

"I will be out in an hour, Mrs. Wingfield," Dr. Mapleston said. "I have
to go round the ward again, and will then drive out at once. Give him
lemonade and cooling drinks; don't let him talk. Cut his clothes off
him, and keep the room somewhat dark, but with a free current of air. I
will bring out some medicine with me."

The carriage drove slowly to avoid shaking, and when they approached the
house Mrs. Wingfield told Dan to jump down and come to the side of her
carriage. Then she told him to run on as fast as he could ahead, and to
tell her daughters not to meet them upon their arrival, and that all the
servants were to be kept out of the way, except three men to carry
Vincent upstairs. The lad was consequently got up to his room without
any excitement, and was soon lying on his bed with a sheet thrown
lightly over him.

"That is comfortable," he said, as his mother bathed his face and hands
and smoothed his hair. "Where are the girls, mother?"

"They will come in to see you now, Vincent; but you are to keep quite
quiet you know, and not to talk." The girls stole in and said a few
words, and left him alone again with Mrs. Wingfield. He did not look to
them so ill as they had expected, for there was a flush of fever on his
cheeks. Dr. Mapleston arrived in another half-hour, examined and
redressed the wound, and comforted Mrs. Wingfield with the assurance
that there was nothing in it likely to prove dangerous to life.

"Our trouble will be rather with the effect of the shock than with the
wound itself. He is very feverish now, and you must not be alarmed if by
this evening he is delirious. You will give him this cooling draught
every three hours; he can have anything in the way of cooling drinks he
likes. If he begins to wander, put cloths dipped in cold water and wrung
out on his head, and sponge his hands with water with a little eau de
Cologne in it. If he seems very hot set one of the women to fan him, but
don't let her go on if it seems to worry him. I will come round again at
half past nine this evening and will make arrangements to pass the night
here. We have telegrams saying that surgeons are coming from Charleston
and many other places, so I can very well be spared."

When the doctor returned in the evening, he found, as he had
anticipated, that Vincent was in a high state of fever. This continued
four or five days, and then gradually passed off; and he woke up one
morning perfectly conscious. His mother was sitting on a chair at the
bedside.

"What o'clock is it, mother?" he asked. "Have I been asleep long?"

"Some time, dear," she answered gently; "but you must not talk. You are
to take this draught and to go off to sleep again; when you wake you may
ask any questions you like." She lifted the lad's head, gave him the
draught and some cold tea, then darkened the room, and in a few minutes
he was asleep again.


CHAPTER VII. THE MERRIMAC AND THE MONITOR.

It was some weeks before Vincent was able to walk unaided. His
convalescence was somewhat slow, for the shock to the system had been a
severe one. The long railway journey had been injurious to him, for the
bandage had become somewhat loose and the broken pieces of bone had
grated upon each other, and were much longer in knitting together than
they would have been had he been treated on the spot.

As soon as he could walk he began to be anxious to rejoin his troop, but
the doctor said that many weeks must elapse before he would be ready to
undergo the hardships of campaign. He was reconciled to some extent to
the delay by letters from his friends with the troop and by the perusal
of the papers. There was nothing whatever doing in Virginia. The two
armies still faced each other, the Northerners protected by the strong
fortifications they had thrown up round Washington--fortifications much
too formidable to be attacked by the Confederates, held as they were by
a force immensely superior to their own, both in numbers and arms.

The Northerners were indeed hard at work, collecting and organizing an
army which was to crush out the rebellion. General Scott had been
succeeded by McClellan in the supreme command, and the new general was
indefatigable in organizing the vast masses of men raised in the North.
So great were the efforts that in a few months after the defeat of Bull
Run the North had 650,000 men in arms.

But while no move had at present been made against Virginia there was
sharp fighting in some of the border states, especially in Missouri and
Kentucky, in both of which public opinion was much divided, and
regiments were raised on both sides.

Various operations were now undertaken by the Federal fleet at points
along the coast, and several important positions were taken and
occupied, it being impossible for the Confederates to defend so long a
line of sea-coast. The South had lost rather than gained ground in
consequence of their victory at Bull Run. For a time they had been
unduly elated, and were disposed altogether to underrate their enemies
and to believe that the struggle was as good as over. Thus, then, they
made no effort at all corresponding to that of the North; but as time
went on, and they saw the vastness of the preparations made for their
conquest, the people of the Southern States again bestirred themselves.

Owing to the North having the command of the sea, and shutting up all
the principal ports, they had to rely upon themselves for everything,
while the North could draw arms and ammunition and all the requisites of
war from the markets of Europe. Foundries were accordingly established
for the manufacture of artillery, and factories for muskets, ammunition,
and percussion caps. The South had, in fact, to manufacture everything
down to the cloth for her soldiers uniforms and the leather for their
shoes; and, as in the past she had relied wholly upon the North for such
goods, it was for a time impossible to supply the troops with even the
most necessary articles.

The women throughout the States were set to work, spinning and weaving
rough cloth, and making uniforms from it. Leather, however, cannot be
produced all at once, and indeed with all their efforts the Confederate
authorities were never throughout the war able to provide a sufficient
supply of boots for the troops, and many a battle was won by soldiers
who fought almost barefooted and who reshod themselves for the most part
by stripping the boots from their dead foes. Many other articles could
not be produced in the Southern States, and the Confederates suffered
much from the want of proper medicines and surgical appliances.

For these and many other necessaries they had to depend solely upon the
ships which succeeded in making their way through the enemy's cruisers
and running the blockade of the ports. Wine, tea, coffee, and other
imported articles soon became luxuries beyond the means of all, even the
very wealthy. All sorts of substitutes were used; grain roasted and
ground being chiefly used as a substitute for coffee. Hitherto the South
had been principally occupied in raising cotton and tobacco, depending
chiefly upon the North for food; and it was necessary now to abandon the
cultivation of products for which they had no sale, and to devote the
land to the growth of maize and other crops for food.

By the time that the long period of inaction came to a close, Vincent
had completely recovered his strength, and was ready to rejoin the ranks
as soon as the order came from Colonel Stuart, who had promised to send
for him directly there was a prospect of active service.

One of Vincent's first questions as soon as he became convalescent was
whether a letter had been received from Tony. It had come, he was told,
among the last batch of letters that crossed the frontier before the
outbreak of hostilities, and Mrs. Wingfield, had, as he had requested,
opened it. As had been arranged, it had merely contained Tony's address
at a village near Montreal; for Vincent had warned him to say nothing in
the letter, for there was no saying, in the troubled times which were
approaching when Tony left, into whose hands it might fall.

Vincent had before starting told his mother of the share he had taken in
getting the negro safely away, and Mrs. Wingfield, brought up as she had
been to regard those who assisted runaway slaves to escape in the same
light as those who assisted to steal any other kind of property, was at
first greatly shocked when she heard that her son had taken part in such
an enterprise, however worthy of compassion the slave might be, and
however brutal the master from whose hands he had fled. However, as
Vincent was on the point of starting for the war to meet danger, and
possibly death, in the defense of Virginia, she had said little, and
that little was in reference rather to the imprudence of the course he
had taken than to what she regarded in her own mind as its folly, and
indeed its criminality.

She had, however, promised that as soon as Tony's letter arrived she
would, if it was still possible, forward Dinah and the child to him,
supplying her with money for the journey, and giving her the papers
freeing her from slavery which Vincent had duly signed in the presence
of a justice. When the letter came, however, it was already too late.
Fighting was on the point of commencing, all intercourse across the
border was stopped, the trains were all taken up for the conveyance of
troops, and even a man would have had great difficulty in passing
northward, while for an unprotected negress with a baby such a journey
would have been impossible.

Mrs. Wingfield had therefore written four times at fort-nightly
intervals to Tony, saying that it was impossible to send Dinah off at
present, but that she should be despatched as soon as the troubles were
over, upon receipt of another letter from him saying that his address
was unchanged, or giving a new one. These letters were duly posted, and
it was probable that one or other of them would in time reach Tony, as
mails were sent off to Europe whenever an opportunity offered for them
to be taken by a steamer running the blockade from a Southern port.
Dinah, therefore, still remained at the Orangery. She was well and
happy, for her life there was a delightful one indeed after her toil and
hardship at the Jackson's; and although she was anxious to join her
husband, the knowledge that he was well and safe from all pursuit, and
that sooner or later she would join him with her child, was sufficient
to make her perfectly contented.

During Vincent's illness she had been his most constant attendant; for
her child now no longer required her care, and passed much of its time
down at the nursery, where the young children of the slaves were looked
after by two or three aged negresses past active work. She had therefore
begged Mrs. Wingfield to be allowed to take her place by the bedside of
her young master, and, after giving her a trial, Mrs. Wingfield found
her so quiet, gentle, and patient that she installed her there, and was
able to obtain the rest she needed, with a feeling of confidence that
Vincent would be well attended to in her absence.

When Vincent was well enough to be about again, his sisters were
surprised at the change that had taken place in him since he had started
a few months before for the war. It was not so much that he had grown,
though he had done so considerably, but that he was much older in manner
and appearance. He had been doing man's work: work requiring vigilance,
