you can be traced."

When he had changed his clothes Harry extinguished all the lights in
the salon, for the marquis had long before ordered all the servants
to retire to rest. Then he opened the window looking into the street
and took his place close to it. Sleep under the circumstances was
impossible.

As the hours passed he thought over the events of the last few
days. He was fully aware that the task he had undertaken might be
full of danger; but to a healthy and active English lad a spice of
danger is by no means a deterrent. He could, of course, have left
his employment before the family left their chateau; but after
his arrival in Paris it would have been difficult for him to have
traversed the country and crossed the frontier, and he thought that
the danger which he now ran was not much greater than would have
been entailed by such a step.

In the next place he was greatly attached to the family of the
marquis; and the orgies of the mob had filled him with such horror
and disgust that he would have risked much to save any unfortunate, even
a stranger, from their hands; and lastly, he felt the fascination
of the wild excitement of the times, and congratulated himself
that he should see and perhaps be an actor in the astonishing drama
which was occupying the attention of the whole civilized world.

As he sat there he arranged his own plans. After seeing his charge
in safety he would take a room in some quiet locality, alleging
that he was the clerk of a notary, and would, in the dress of one
of that class, or the attire of one of the lower orders, pass his
days in the streets, gathering every rumour and watching the course
of events.

Morning was just breaking when he heard the sound of many feet
coming along the street, and looking out saw a crowd of men with
torches, headed by two whose red scarfs showed them to be officials.
As they reached the entrance gate the men at the head of the
procession stopped. Harry at once darted away to the long gallery,
and as he did so, heard a loud knocking at the door.

Scarcely had he reached the gallery when a door at the further end
opened, and three figures, the tallest carrying a lamp, appeared.
The girls, too, had been keeping watch with their father and
mother.  They were dressed in the attire of respectable peasant
girls. Virginie was weeping loudly, but the elder girls, although
their cheeks bore traces of many tears they had shed during the
night, restrained them now. When they reached Harry, the  lad,
without a word, took the lamp from Marie's hand, and led the way
along the corridor and down the stairs towards the back of the
house.

Everything was quiet. The knocking, loud as it was, had not yet
aroused the servants, and, drawing the bolt quietly, and blowing
out the lamp, Harry led the way into the garden behind the house.
Then for a moment he paused. There was a sound of axes hewing down
the gate which led from the garden into the street behind.

"Quick, mesdemoiselles!" he said. "There is no time to lose."

He took they key out of the door, and closed and locked it after
him. Then throwing the key among the shrubs he took Virginie's hand,
and led the way rapidly towards the gate, which was fortunately a
strong one.

"In here, mesdemoiselles," he said to Marie, pointing to some shrubs
close to the gate. "They will rush straight to the house when the
gate gives way, and we will slip out quietly."

For nearly five minutes the gate, which was strongly bound with iron,
resisted the attack upon it. Then there was a crash, and a number
of men with torches, and armed with muskets and pikes, poured in.
Virginie was clinging to Marie, who, whispering to her to be calm
and brave, pressed the child closely to her, while Jeanne stood
quiet and still by the side of Harry, looking through the bushes.

Some twenty men entered, and a minute later there was the sound of
battering at the door through which the fugitives had sallied out.

"Now," Harry said, "let us be going." Emerging from the shelter, a
few steps took them to the gate, and stepping over the door, which
lay prostrate on the ground, they turned into the lane.

"Let us run," Harry said; "we must get out of this lane as soon as
possible. We are sure to have the mob here before long, and should
certainly be questioned."

They hurried down the lane, took the first turning away from the
house, and then slackened their pace. Presently they heard a number
of footsteps clattering on the pavement; but fortunately they
reached another turning before the party came up. They turned down
and stood up in a doorway till the footsteps had passed, and then
resumed their way.

"It is still too early for us to walk through the streets without
exciting attention," Harry said. "We had better make down to the
river and wait there till the town is quite astir."

In ten minutes they reached the river, and Harry found a seat for
them at the foot of a pile of timber, where they were partially
screened from observation. Hitherto the girls had not spoken a
word since they had issued from the house. Virginie was dazed and
frightened by the events of the night, and had hurried along almost
mechanically holding Marie's hand. Marie's brain was too full to
talk; her thoughts were with her father and mother and with her
absent lover. She wondered that he had not come to her in spite of
everything. Perhaps he was already a captive; perhaps, in obedience
to his father's orders, he was in hiding, waiting events. That
he could, even had his father commanded him, have left Paris as a
fugitive without coming to see her, did not even occur to her as
possible.

With these thoughts there was mingled a vague wonder at her own
position. A few weeks since petted and cared for as the eldest
daughter of one of the noblest families of France, now a fugitive
in the streets under the sole care of this English boy. She had,
the evening before, silently sided with Ernest. It had seemed to
her wrong that he should be sent away, and the assertion of Harry
that he intended to stay and watch over her and her sisters seemed
at once absurd and presumptuous; but she already felt that she had
been wrong in that opinion.

The decision and coolness with which he had at once taken the
command from the moment he met them in the gallery, and the quickness
with which he had seized the only mode of escape, had surprised
and dominated her. Her own impulse, when on opening the door she
heard the attack that was being made on the gate, was to draw back
instantly and return to the side of her parents, and it was due to
Harry only that she and her sisters had got safely away.

Hitherto, although after the incident of the mad dog she had exchanged
her former attitude of absolute indifference to one of cordiality
and friendliness, she had regarded him as a boy. Indeed she had
treated and considered him as being very much younger than Ernest,
and in some respects she had been justified in doing so, for in
his light-hearted fun, his love of active exercise, and his entire
absence of any assumption of age, he was far more boyish than
Ernest. But although her thoughts were too busy  now to permit her
to analyse her feelings, she knew that she had been mistaken, and
felt a strange confidence in this lad who had so promptly and coolly
assumed the entire command of the party, and had piloted them with
such steady nerve through the danger.

As for Jeanne, she felt no surprise and but little alarm. Her
confidence in her protector was unbounded. Prompt and cool as he
was himself, she was ready on the instant to obey his orders, and
felt a certain sensation of pride at the manner in which her previous
confidence in him was being justified.

After placing the girls in their shelter Harry had left them and
stood leaning against the parapet of the quay as if carelessly
watching the water, but maintaining a vigilant look-out against
the approach of danger. The number of passers-by increased rapidly.
The washerwomen came down to the boats moored in the stream and
began their operation of banging the linen with wooden beaters.
Market-women came along with baskets, the hum and stir of life
everywhere commenced, and Paris was fairly awake.

Seeing that it was safe now to proceed, Harry returned to his
companions. He had scarcely glanced at them before, and now looked
approvingly at their disguises, to which the marquise had, during
the long hours of the night, devoted the most zealous attention.
Marie had been made to look much older than she was. A few dark
lines carefully traced on her forehead, at the corners of her eyes
and mouth, had added many years to her appearance, and she could
have passed, except to the closest observer, as the mother of
Virginie, whose dress was calculated to make her look even younger
than she was. The hands and faces of all three had been slightly
tinged with brown to give them a sun-burnt aspect in accordance
with their peasant dresses, and so complete was the transformation
that Harry could scarcely suppress a start of surprise as he looked
at the group.

"It would be safe now, mademoiselle," he said to Marie, "for us to
proceed. There are plenty of people about in the streets; but as
the news has, no doubt, already been spread that the daughters of
the Marquis de St. Caux had left the house before those charged
with their father's arrest arrived, it will be better for you not
to keep together. I would suggest that you should walk on with
Virginie.  I will follow with Jeanne a hundred yards behind, so
that I can keep you in sight, and will come up if anyone should
accost you."

Marie at once rose, and taking the child's hand set out. They had
to traverse the greater part of Paris to reach their destination.
It was a trial for Marie, who had never before been in the streets
of Paris except with her mother and closely followed by two domestics,
and even then only through the quiet streets of a fashionable
quarter.  However, she went steadily forward, tightly holding
Virginie's hand and trying to walk as if accustomed to them in the
thick heavy shoes which felt so strangely different to those which
she was in the habit of wearing.

From time to time she addressed an encouraging word to Virginie
as she felt her shrink as they approached groups of men lounging
outside the wine-shops, for there was but little work done in Paris,
and the men of the lower class spent their time in idleness, in
discussions of the events of the day, or in joining the mobs which,
under one pretext or another, kept the streets in an uproar.

Fortunately Marie knew the way perfectly and there was no occasion
for her to ask for directions, for she had frequently driven with
her mother to visit Louise Moulin. The latter occupied the upper
floor of a house in a quiet quarter near the fortifications in the
north-western part of the town. A message had been sent to her the
night before, and she was on the look-out for her visitors, but
she did not recognize them, and she uttered a cry of surprise as
Marie and Virginie entered the room.

"Is it you, mademoiselle?" she exclaimed in great surprise. "And
you, my little angel? My eyes must be getting old, indeed, that I
did not recognize you; but you are finely disguised. But where is
Mademoiselle Jeanne?"

"She will be here in a moment, Louise; she is just behind. But you
must not call me mademoiselle; you must remember that we are your
nieces Marie and Jeanne, and that you are our aunt Louise Moulin,
whom we have come to stay with."

"I shall remember in time," the old woman said. "I have been
talking about you to my neighbours for the last week, of how your
good father and mother have died, and how you were going to journey
to Paris under the charge of a neighbour, who was bringing a waggon
load of wine from Burgundy, and  how you were going to look after
me and help me in the house since I am getting old and infirm, and
the young ones were to stop with me till they were old enough to
go out to service. Ah, here is Mademoiselle Jeanne!"

"Here is Jeanne," Marie corrected; "thank God we have all got here
safely. This, Louise, is a young English gentleman who is going to
remain in Paris at present, and to whom we are indebted for having
got us safely here."

"And your mother," Louise Moulin exclaimed, "the darling lamb
I nursed, what of her and your father? I fear, from the message I
got last night, that some danger threatens them."

"They have, I fear, been arrested by the sans culottes," Marie said
mournfully as she burst into tears, feeling, now that the strain
was over, the natural reaction after her efforts to be calm. For
her mother's sake she had held up to the last, and had tried to
make the parting as easy as possible.

"The wretches!" the old woman said, stamping her foot. "Old as I am
I feel that I could tear them to pieces. But there I am chattering
away, and you must be faint with hunger. I have a nice soup ready
on the fire, a plate of that will do good to you all. And you too,
monsieur, you will join us, I hope?"

Harry was nothing loth, for his appetite was always a healthy one.
When he had finished he said:

"Madame Moulin, I have been thinking that it would be an advantage
if you would take a lodging for me. If you would say that a youth
whose friends are known to you has arrived from Dijon, to make his
way in Paris, and they have asked you to seek a lodging for him;
it will seem less strange than if I went by myself. I should like
it to be near, so that you can come to me quickly should anything
out of the way occur. I should like to look in sometimes to see that
all is well. You could mention to your neighbours that I travelled
up with the same waggon with your nieces.

"I will do that willingly," the old woman said; "but first, my dears,
you must have some rest; come in here." And she led the way to the
next room. "There is a bed for you, Mademoiselle Marie, and one for
the two young ones. The room is not like what you are accustomed
to, but I dared not buy finer things, though I had plenty of money
from your mother to have  furnished the rooms like a palace; but you
see it would have seemed strange to my neighbours; but, at least,
everything is clean and sweet."

Leaving the girls, who were worn out with weariness and anxiety,
to sleep, she rejoined Harry.

"Now, monsieur, I will do your business. It is a comfort to me to
feel that some one will be near of whom I can ask advice, for it is
a terrible responsibility for an old woman in such dreadful times
as these, when it seems to me that everyone has gone mad at once.
What sort of a chamber do you want?"

"Quite a small one," Harry answered, "just such a chamber as a
young clerk on the look-out for employment and with his pocket very
slenderly lined, would desire."

"I know just such a one," the old woman said. "It is a house a
few doors away and has been tenanted by a friend of mine, a young
workwoman, who was married four days ago--it is a quiet place,
and the people keep to themselves, and do not trouble about their
neighbours' affairs."

"That will just suit me," Harry said. "I suppose there is no porter
below, so that I can go in or out without being noticed."

"Oh, we have no porters in this quarter, and you can go in and out
as you like."

Half an hour later the matter was settled, and Harry was installed
in his apartment, which was a little room scantily furnished, at
the top of the house, the window looking into the street in front.




CHAPTER VI

An Anxious Time


Harry and the girls had brought bundles of clothes with them
in their flight, as it would have looked strange had they arrived
without any clothes save those they wore. Harry had brought with him
only underlinen, as he had nothing else which would be of service
to him now.  No sooner had Louise Moulin left him than he went out
and purchased, at a second-hand shop, a workman's suit. This he
carried home, and dressing himself in it descended the stairs again
and set out to retrace his steps across Paris.

When he reached the mansion of the marquis he found a crowd of
people going in and out. Those leaving the house were laden with
articles of furniture, clocks, pictures, bedding, and other things.
A complete sack of the mansion was indeed taking place. The servants
had all fled after the arrest of the marquis and his wife, and
the mob had taken possession of the house. The lofty mirrors were
smashed into fragments, the costly hangings torn down, and after
they had destroyed much of the elaborate furniture, every man and
woman began to lay hands upon whatever they fancied and the mansion
was already stripped of the greater part of its belongings.

With his hands in his pockets, whistling carelessly, Harry wandered
from room to room watching the proceedings. Several barrels of wine
had been brought up into the salon, and round these were gathered
a number of already drunken men, singing, shouting, and dancing.

"Drink, drink, my garcon," a woman said, holding a silver goblet
full of wine towards him, "drink confusion to the tyrants and
liberty and freedom to the people."

Harry drank the toast without hesitation, and then, heartsick
at the destruction and ruin, wandered out again into the streets.
Knowing the anxiety which Marie would be suffering as to the safety
of her lover he next took his way to the mansion of the Duke de
Gisons. The house was shut up, but groups of men were standing in
the road opposite talking.

Sauntering along Harry stopped near enough to one of these to hear
what they were saying. He learned that the duke had been arrested
