"Where are you, Trot? As like as not I've been forgot!"

Cap'n Bill jumped this way and Button-Bright that, and then there
alighted on Trot's shoulder the blue parrot that had been the pet of
the Princess Cerulia. Said the bird,

  "Gee! I've flown
  Here all alone.
  It's pretty far,
  But here we are!"

and then he barked like a dog and chuckled with glee at having found
his little friend.

In escaping the palace, Trot had been obliged to leave all the pets
behind her, but it seemed that the parrot had found some way to get
free and follow her. They were all astonished to hear the bird
talk--and in poetry, too--but Cap'n Bill told Trot that some parrots he
had known had possessed a pretty fair gift of language, and he added
that this blue one seemed an unusually bright bird. "As fer po'try,"
said he, "that's as how you look at po'try. Rhymes come from your head,
but real po'try from your heart, an' whether the blue parrot has a
heart or not, he's sure got a head."

Having decided not to venture into the Arch of Phinis, they again
started on, this time across the country straight toward the Fog Bank,
which hung like a blue-grey cloud directly across the center of the
island. They knew they were being followed by bands of the Blueskins,
for they could hear the shouts of their pursuers growing louder and
louder every minute, since their long legs covered the ground more
quickly than our friends could possibly go. Had the journey been much
farther, the fugitives would have been overtaken, but when the leaders
of the pursuing Blueskins were only a few yards behind them, they
reached the edge of the Fog Bank and without hesitation plunged into
its thick mist, which instantly hid them from view.

The Blueskins fell back, horrified at the mad act of the strangers. To
them the Fog Bank was the most dreadful thing in existence, and no
Blueskin had ever ventured within it even for a moment.

"That's the end of those short-necked Yellowskins," said one, shaking
his head. "We may as well go back and report the matter to the
Boolooroo."




THROUGH THE FOG BANK

CHAPTER 12


It was rather moist in the Fog Bank. "Seems like a reg'lar drizzle,"
said Trot. "I'll be soaked through in a minute." She had been given a
costume of blue silk in exchange for her own dress, and the silk was so
thin that the moisture easily wetted it.

"Never mind," said Cap'n Bill. "When it's a case of life 'n' death,
clo's don't count for much. I'm sort o' drippy myself."

Cried the parrot, fluttering his feathers to try to keep them from
sticking together,

  "Floods and gushes fill our path--
  This is not my day for a bath!
  Shut if off, or fear my wrath."

"We can't," laughed Trot. "We'll jus' have to stick it out till we get
to the other side."

"Had we better go to the other side?" asked Button-Bright anxiously.

"Why not?" returned Cap'n Bill. "The other side's the only safe side
for us."

"We don't know that, sir," said the boy. "Ghip-Ghisizzle said it was a
terrible country."

"I don't believe it," retorted the sailor stoutly. "Sizzle's never been
there, an' he knows nothing about it. 'The Sunset Country' sounds sort
o' good to me."

"But how'll we ever manage to get there?" inquired Trot. "Aren't we
already lost in this fog?"

"Not yet," said Cap'n Bill. "I've kep' my face turned straight ahead
ever since we climbed inter this bank o' wetness. If we don't get
twisted any, we'll go straight through to the other side."

It was no darker in the Fog Bank than it had been in the Blue Country.
They could see dimly the mass of fog, which seemed to cling to them,
and when they looked down, they discovered that they were walking upon
white pebbles that were slightly tinged with the blue color of the sky.
Gradually this blue became fainter until, as they progressed,
everything became a dull gray.

"I wonder how far it is to the other side," remarked Trot wearily.

"We can't say till we get there, mate," answered the sailor in a
cheerful voice. Cap'n Bill had a way of growing more and more cheerful
when danger threatened.

"Never mind," said the girl. "I'm as wet as a dishrag now, and I'll
never get any wetter."

  "Wet, wet, wet!
  It's awful wet, you bet!"

moaned the parrot on her shoulder.

  "I'm a fish-pond, I'm a well;
  I'm a clam without a shell!"

"Can't you dry up?" asked Cap'n Bill.

  "Not this evening, thank you, sir;
  To talk and grumble I prefer,"

replied the parrot dolefully.

They walked along more slowly now, still keeping hold of hands, for
although they were anxious to get through the Fog Bank, they were tired
with the long run across the country and with their day's adventures.
They had no sleep and it was a long time past midnight.

"Look out!" cried the parrot sharply; and they all halted to find a
monstrous frog obstructing their path. Cap'n Bill thought it was as big
as a whale, and as it squatted on the gray pebbles, its eyes were on a
level with those of the old sailor.

"Ker-chug, herk-choo!" grunted the frog. "What in the Sky is THIS
crowd?"

"W-we're strangers," stammered Trot, "an' we're tryin' to 'scape from
the Blueskins an' get into the Pink Country."

"I don't blame you," said the frog in a friendly tone. "I hate those
Blueskins. The Pinkies, however, are very decent neighbors."

"Oh, I'm glad to hear that!" cried Button-Bright. "Can you tell us,
Mister--Mistress--good Mr. Frog--eh, eh, your Royal Highness, if we're
on the right road to the Pink Country?"

The frog seemed to laugh, for he gurgled in his throat in a very funny
way. "I'm no Royal Highness," he said. "I'm just a common frog, and a
little wee tiny frog, too. But I hope to grow in time. This Fog Bank is
the Paradise of Frogs, and our King is about ten times as big as I am."

"Then he's a big 'un, an' no mistake," admitted Cap'n Bill. "I'm glad
you like your country, but it's a mite too damp for us, an' we'd be
glad to get out of it."

"Follow me," said the frog. "I'll lead you to the border. It's only
about six jumps." He turned around, made a mighty leap and disappeared
in the gray mist. Our friends looked at one another in bewilderment.

"Don't see how we can foller that lead," remarked Cap'n Bill, "but we
may as well start in the same direction."

  "Brooks and creeks,
  How it leaks!"

muttered the parrot.

  "How can we jog
  To a frog in the fog?"

The big frog seemed to understand their difficulty, for he kept making
noises in his throat to guide them to where he had leaped. When at last
they came up to him, he made a second jump--out of sight, as
before--and when they attempted to follow, they found a huge lizard
lying across the path. Cap'n Bill thought it must be a giant alligator
at first, it was so big, but he looked at them sleepily and did not
seem at all dangerous.

"O, Liz--you puffy Liz--Get out of our way and mind your biz," cried
the parrot.

  "Creep-a-mousie, crawl-a-mousie, please move on!
  We can't move a step till you are gone."

"Don't disturb me," said the lizard. "I'm dreaming about parsnips. Did
you ever taste a parsnip?"

"We're in a hurry, if it's the same to you, sir," said Cap'n Bill
politely.

"Then climb over me or go around, I don't care which," murmured the
lizard. "When they're little, they're juicy; when they're big, there's
more of 'em; but either way there's nothing so delicious as a parsnip.
There are none here in the Fog Bank, so the best I can do is dream of
them. Oh, parsnips, par-snips, p-a-r-snips!" He closed his eyes
sleepily and resumed his dreams.

Walking around the lizard, they resumed their journey and soon came to
the frog, being guided by its grunts and croaks. Then off it went
again, its tremendous leap carrying it far into the fog. Suddenly,
Cap'n Bill tripped and would have fallen flat had not Trot and
Button-Bright held him up. Then he saw that he had stumbled over the
claw of a gigantic land-crab, which lay sprawled out upon the pebbly
bottom.

"Oh, beg parding, I'm sure!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill, backing away.

"Don't mention it," replied the crab in a tired tone. "You did not
disturb me, so there is no harm done."

"We didn't know you were here," explained Trot.

"Probably not," said the crab. "It's no place for me, anyhow, for I
belong in the Constellations, you know, with Taurus and Gemini and the
other fellows. But I had the misfortune to tumble out of the Zodiac
some time ago. My name is Cancer, but I'm not a disease. Those who
examine the heavens in these days, alas! can find no Cancer there."

"Yes we can, sir, Mister Cancer!" said the parrot with a chuckle.

"Once," remarked Cap'n Bill, "I sawr a picter of you in an almanac."

"Ah, the almanacs always did us full justice," the crab replied, "but
I'm told they're not fashionable now."

"If you don't mind, we'd like to pass on," said Button-Bright.

"No, I don't mind, but be careful not to step on my legs. They're
rheumatic, it's so moist here."

They climbed over some of the huge legs and walked around others. Soon
they had left the creature far behind. "Aren't you rather slow?" asked
the frog when once more they came up to him.

"It isn't that," said Trot. "You are rather swift, I guess." The frog
chuckled and leaped again. They noticed that the fog had caught a soft
rose tint and was lighter and less dense than before, for which reason
the sailor remarked that they must be getting near to the Pink Country.

On this jump they saw nothing but a monstrous turtle, which lay asleep
with its head and legs drawn into its shell. It was not in their way,
so they hurried on and rejoined the frog, which said to them, "I'm
sorry, but I'm due at the King's Court in a few minutes, and I can't
wait for your short, weak legs to make the journey to the Pink Country.
But if you will climb upon my back, I think I can carry you to the
border in one more leap."

"I'm tired," said Trot, "an' this awful fog's beginnin' to choke me.
Let's ride on the frog, Cap'n."

"Right you are, mate," he replied, and although he shook a bit with
fear, the old man at once began to climb to the frog's back. Trot
seated herself on one side of him and Button-bright on the other, and
the sailor put his arms around them both to hold them tight together.

"Are you ready?" asked the frog.

"Ding-dong!" cried the parrot.

  "All aboard, let 'er go!
  Jump the best jump that you know."

"Don't--don't! Jump sort o' easy, please," begged Cap'n Bill.

But the frog was unable to obey his request. Its powerful hind legs
straightened like steel springs and shot the big body, with its
passengers, through the fog like an arrow launched from a bow. They
gasped for breath and tried to hang on, and then suddenly the frog
landed just at the edge of the Fog Bank, stopping so abruptly that his
three riders left his back and shot far ahead of him. They felt the fog
melt away and found themselves bathed in glorious rays of sunshine, but
they had no time to consider this change because they were still
shooting through the air, and presently--before they could think of
anything at all--all three were rolling heels over head on the soft
grass of a meadow.




THE PINK COUNTRY

CHAPTER 13


When the travelers could collect their senses and sit up, they stared
about them in bewilderment, for the transition from the sticky, damp
fog to this brilliant scene was so abrupt as to daze them at first.

It was a Pink Country indeed. The grass was a soft pink, the trees were
pink, all the fences and buildings which they saw in the near distance
were pink--even the gravel in the pretty paths was pink. Many shades of
color were there, of course, grading from a faint blush rose to deep
pink verging on red, but no other color was visible. In the sky hung a
pink glow, with rosy clouds floating here and there, and the sun was
not silvery white, as we see it from the Earth, but a distinct pink.

The sun was high in the sky just now, which proved the adventurers had
been a long time in passing through the Fog Bank. But all of them were
wonderfully relieved to reach this beautiful country in safety, for
aside from the danger that threatened them in the Blue Country, the
other side of the island was very depressing. Here the scene that
confronted them was pretty and homelike, except for the prevailing
color and the fact that all the buildings were round, without a single
corner or angle.

Half a mile distant was a large City, its pink tintings glistening
bravely in the pink sunshine, while hundreds of pink banners floated
from its numerous domes. The country between the Fog Bank and the city
was like a vast garden, very carefully kept and as neat as wax.

The parrot was fluttering its wings and pruning its feathers to remove
the wet of the fog. Trot and Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill were all
soaked to the skin and chilled through, but as they sat upon the pink
grass they felt the rays of the sun sending them warmth and rapidly
drying their clothes; so, being tired out, they laid themselves
comfortably down and first one and then another fell cozily asleep.

It was the parrot that aroused them.

  "Look out--look out--
  There's folks about!"

it screamed.

"The apple-dumplings, fat and pink, Will be here quicker than a wink!"

Trot stared up in alarm and rubbed her eyes; Cap'n Bill rolled over and
blinked, hardly remembering where he was; Button-Bright was on his feet
in an instant. Advancing toward them were four of the natives of the
Pink Country.

Two were men and two were women, and their appearance was in sharp
contrast to that of the Blueskins. For the Pinkies were round and
chubby--almost like "apple-dumplings," as the parrot called them--and
they were not very tall, the highest of the men being no taller than
Trot or Button-Bright. They all had short necks and legs, pink hair and
eyes, rosy cheeks and pink complexions, and their faces were
good-natured and jolly in expression.

The men wore picturesque pink clothing and round hats with pink
feathers in them, but the apparel of the women was still more gorgeous
and striking. Their dresses consisted of layer after layer of gauzy
tuck and ruffles and laces, caught here and there with bows of dainty
ribbon. The skirts--which of course were of many shades of pink--were
so fluffy and light that they stuck out from the fat bodies of the
Pinkie women like the skirts of ballet-dancers, displaying their chubby
pink ankles and pink kid shoes. They wore rings and necklaces and
bracelets and brooches of rose-gold set with pink gems, and all four of
the new arrivals, both men and women, carried sharp-pointed sticks made
of rosewood for weapons.

They halted a little way from our adventurers, and one of the women
muttered in a horrified voice, "Blueskins!"

  "Guess again! The more you guess
  I rather think you'll know the less,"

retorted the parrot, and then he added grumblingly in Trot's ear, "Blue
