"I am all wound up and work-ing fine-ly," said the clock-work man to
Dorothy.

"I can hear him tick," declared Button-Bright.

"You are quite the polished gentleman," said the Tin Woodman.  "Stand
up here beside the shaggy man, Tik-tok, and help receive the company."

Dorothy placed soft cushions in a corner for Billina and her chicks,
and had just returned to the Throne and seated herself when the playing
of the royal band outside the palace announced the approach of
distinguished guests.

And my, how they did stare when the High Chamberlain threw open the
doors and the visitors entered the Throne-Room!

First walked a gingerbread man neatly formed and baked to a lovely
brown tint.  He wore a silk hat and carried a candy cane prettily
striped with red and yellow.  His shirt-front and cuffs were white
frosting, and the buttons on his coat were licorice drops.

Behind the gingerbread man came a child with flaxen hair and merry blue
eyes, dressed in white pajamas, with sandals on the soles of its pretty
bare feet.  The child looked around smiling and thrust its hands into
the pockets of the pajamas.  Close after it came a big rubber bear,
walking erect on its hind feet.  The bear had twinkling black eyes, and
its body looked as if it had been pumped full of air.

Following these curious visitors were two tall, thin men and two short,
fat men, all four dressed in gorgeous uniforms.

Ozma's High Chamberlain now hurried forward to announce the names of
the new arrivals, calling out in a loud voice:

"His Gracious and Most Edible Majesty, King Dough the First, Ruler of
the Two Kingdoms of Hiland and Loland.  Also the Head Boolywag of his
Majesty, known as Chick the Cherub, and their faithful friend Para
Bruin, the rubber bear."

These great personages bowed low as their names were called, and
Dorothy hastened to introduce them to the assembled company.  They were
the first foreign arrivals, and the friends of Princess Ozma were
polite to them and tried to make them feel that they were welcome.

Chick the Cherub shook hands with every one, including Billina, and was
so joyous and frank and full of good spirits that John Dough's Head
Booleywag at once became a prime favorite.

"Is it a boy or a girl?" whispered Dorothy.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

"Goodness me! what a queer lot of people you are," exclaimed the rubber
bear, looking at the assembled company.

"So're you," said Button-Bright, gravely.  "Is King Dough good to eat?"

"He's too good to eat," laughed Chick the Cherub.

"I hope none of you are fond of gingerbread," said the King, rather
anxiously.

"We should never think of eating our visitors, if we were," declared
the Scarecrow; "so please do not worry, for you will be perfectly safe
while you remain in Oz."

"Why do they call you Chick?" the Yellow Hen asked the child.

"Because I'm an Incubator Baby, and never had any parents," replied the
Head Booleywag.

"My chicks have a parent, and I'm it," said Billina.

"I'm glad of that," answered the Cherub, "because they'll have more fun
worrying you than if they were brought up in an Incubator.  The
Incubator never worries, you know."

King John Dough had brought for Ozma's birthday present a lovely
gingerbread crown, with rows of small pearls around it and a fine big
pearl in each of its five points.  After this had been received by
Dorothy with proper thanks and placed on the table with the other
presents, the visitors from Hiland and Loland were escorted to their
rooms by the High Chamberlain.

They had no sooner departed than the band before the palace began to
play again, announcing more arrivals, and as these were doubtless from
foreign parts the High Chamberlain hurried back to receive them in his
most official manner.




22.  Important Arrivals


First entered a band of Ryls from the Happy Valley, all merry little
sprites like fairy elves.  A dozen crooked Knooks followed from the
great Forest of Burzee.  They had long whiskers and pointed caps and
curling toes, yet were no taller than Button-Bright's shoulder.  With
this group came a man so easy to recognize and so important and dearly
beloved throughout the known world, that all present rose to their feet
and bowed their heads in respectful homage, even before the High
Chamberlain knelt to announce his name.

"The most Mighty and Loyal Friend of Children, His Supreme
Highness--Santa Claus!"  said the Chamberlain, in an awed voice.

"Well, well, well!  Glad to see you--glad to meet you all!" cried Santa
Claus, briskly, as he trotted up the long room.

He was round as an apple, with a fresh rosy face, laughing eyes, and a
bushy beard as white as snow.  A red cloak trimmed with beautiful
ermine hung from his shoulders and upon his back was a basket filled
with pretty presents for the Princess Ozma.

"Hello, Dorothy; still having adventures?" he asked in his jolly way,
as he took the girl's hand in both his own.

"How did you know my name, Santa?" she replied, feeling more shy in the
presence of this immortal saint than she ever had before in her young
life.

"Why, don't I see you every Christmas Eve, when you're asleep?" he
rejoined, pinching her blushing cheek.

"Oh, do you?"

"And here's Button-Bright, I declare!" cried Santa Claus, holding up
the boy to kiss him.  "What a long way from home you are; dear me!"

"Do you know Button-Bright, too?" questioned Dorothy, eagerly.

"Indeed I do.  I've visited his home several Christmas Eves."

"And do you know his father?" asked the girl.

"Certainly, my dear.  Who else do you suppose brings him his Christmas
neckties and stockings?" with a sly wink at the Wizard.

"Then where does he live?  We're just crazy to know, 'cause
Button-Bright's lost," she said.

Santa laughed and laid his finger aside of his nose as if thinking what
to reply.  He leaned over and whispered something in the Wizard's ear,
at which the Wizard smiled and nodded as if he understood.

Now Santa Claus spied Polychrome, and trotted over to where she stood.

"Seems to me the Rainbow's Daughter is farther from home than any of
you," he observed, looking at the pretty maiden admiringly.  "I'll have
to tell your father where you are, Polly, and send him to get you."

"Please do, dear Santa Claus," implored the little maid, beseechingly.

"But just now we must all have a jolly good time at Ozma's party," said
the old gentleman, turning to put his presents on the table with the
others already there.  "It isn't often I find time to leave my castle,
as you know; but Ozma invited me and I just couldn't help coming to
celebrate the happy occasion."

"I'm so glad!" exclaimed Dorothy.

"These are my Ryls," pointing to the little sprites squatting around
him.  "Their business is to paint the colors of the flowers when they
bud and bloom; but I brought the merry fellows along to see Oz, and
they've left their paint-pots behind them.  Also I brought these
crooked Knooks, whom I love.  My dears, the Knooks are much nicer than
they look, for their duty is to water and care for the young trees of
the forest, and they do their work faithfully and well.  It's hard
work, though, and it makes my Knooks crooked and gnarled, like the
trees themselves; but their hearts are big and kind, as are the hearts
of all who do good in our beautiful world."

"I've read of the Ryls and Knooks," said Dorothy, looking upon these
little workers with interest.

Santa Claus turned to talk with the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, and
he also said a kind word to the shaggy man, and afterward went away to
ride the Saw-Horse around the Emerald City.  "For," said he, "I must
see all the grand sights while I am here and have the chance, and Ozma
has promised to let me ride the Saw-Horse because I'm getting fat and
short of breath."

"Where are your reindeer?" asked Polychrome.

"I left them at home, for it is too warm for them in this sunny
country," he answered.  "They're used to winter weather when they
travel."

In a flash he was gone, and the Ryls and Knooks with him; but they
could all hear the golden hoofs of the Saw-Horse ringing on the marble
pavement outside, as he pranced away with his noble rider.

Presently the band played again, and the High Chamberlain announced:

"Her Gracious Majesty, the Queen of Merryland."

They looked earnestly to discover whom this queen might be, and saw
advancing up the room an exquisite wax doll dressed in dainty fluffs
and ruffles and spangled gown.  She was almost as big as Button-Bright,
and her cheeks and mouth and eyebrow were prettily painted in delicate
colors.  Her blue eyes stared a bit, being of glass, yet the expression
upon her Majesty's face was quite pleasant and decidedly winning.  With
the Queen of Merryland were four wooden soldiers, two stalking ahead of
her with much dignity and two following behind, like a royal bodyguard.
The soldiers were painted in bright colors and carried wooden guns, and
after them came a fat little man who attracted attention at once,
although he seemed modest and retiring.  For he was made of candy, and
carried a tin sugar-sifter filled with powdered sugar, with which he
dusted himself frequently so that he wouldn't stick to things if he
touched them.  The High Chamberlain had called him "The Candy Man of
Merryland," and Dorothy saw that one of his thumbs looked as if it had
been bitten off by some one who was fond of candy and couldn't resist
the temptation.

The wax doll Queen spoke prettily to Dorothy and the others, and sent
her loving greetings to Ozma before she retired to the rooms prepared
for her.  She had brought a birthday present wrapped in tissue paper
and tied with pink and blue ribbons, and one of the wooden soldiers
placed it on the table with the other gifts.  But the Candy Man did not
go to his room, because he said he preferred to stay and talk with the
Scarecrow and Tik-tok and the Wizard and Tin Woodman, whom he declared
the queerest people he had ever met.  Button-Bright was glad the Candy
Man stayed in the Throne Room, because the boy thought this guest
smelled deliciously of wintergreen and maple sugar.

The Braided Man now entered the room, having been fortunate enough to
receive an invitation to the Princess Ozma's party.  He was from a cave
halfway between the Invisible Valley and the Country of the Gargoyles,
and his hair and whiskers were so long that he was obliged to plait
them into many braids that hung to his feet, and every braid was tied
with a bow of colored ribbon.

"I've brought Princess Ozma a box of flutters for her birthday," said
the Braided Man, earnestly; "and I hope she will like them, for they
are the finest quality I have ever made."

"I'm sure she will be greatly pleased," said Dorothy, who remembered
the Braided Man well; and the Wizard introduced the guest to the rest
of the company and made him sit down in a chair and keep quiet, for, if
allowed, he would talk continually about his flutters.

The band then played a welcome to another set of guests, and into the
Throne-Room swept the handsome and stately Queen of Ev.  Beside her was
young King Evardo, and following them came the entire royal family of
five Princesses and four Princes of Ev.  The Kingdom of Ev lay just
across the Deadly Desert to the North of Oz, and once Ozma and her
people had rescued the Queen of Ev and her ten children from the Nome
King, who had enslaved them.  Dorothy had been present on this
adventure, so she greeted the royal family cordially; and all the
visitors were delighted to meet the little Kansas girl again.  They
knew Tik-tok and Billina, too, and the Scarecrow and Tin Woodman, as
well as the Lion and Tiger; so there was a joyful reunion, as you may
imagine, and it was fully an hour before the Queen and her train
retired to their rooms.  Perhaps they would not have gone then had not
the band begun to play to announce new arrivals; but before they left
the great Throne-Room King Evardo added to Ozma's birthday presents a
diadem of diamonds set in radium.

The next comer proved to be King Renard of Foxville; or King Dox, as he
preferred to be called.  He was magnificently dressed in a new feather
costume and wore white kid mittens over his paws and a flower in his
button-hole and had his hair parted in the middle.

King Dox thanked Dorothy fervently for getting him the invitation to
come to Oz, which he all his life longed to visit.  He strutted around
rather absurdly as he was introduced to all the famous people assembled
in the Throne-Room, and when he learned that Dorothy was a Princess of
Oz the Fox King insisted on kneeling at her feet and afterward retired
backward--a dangerous thing to do, as he might have stubbed his paw and
tumbled over.

No sooner was he gone than the blasts of bugles and clatter of drums
and cymbals announced important visitors, and the High Chamberlain
assumed his most dignified tone as he threw open the door and said
proudly:

"Her Sublime and Resplendent Majesty, Queen Zixi of Ix!  His Serene and
Tremendous Majesty, King Bud of Noland.  Her Royal Highness, the
Princess Fluff."

That three such high and mighty royal personages should arrive at once
was enough to make Dorothy and her companions grow solemn and assume
their best company manners; but when the exquisite beauty of Queen Zixi
met their eyes they thought they had never beheld anything so charming.
Dorothy decided that Zixi must be about sixteen years old, but the
Wizard whispered to her that this wonderful queen had lived thousands
of years, but knew the secret of remaining always fresh and beautiful.

King Bud of Noland and his dainty fair-haired sister, the Princess
Fluff, were friends of Zixi, as their kingdoms were adjoining, so they
had traveled together from their far-off domains to do honor to Ozma of
Oz on the occasion of her birthday.  They brought many splendid gifts;
so the table was now fairly loaded down with presents.

Dorothy and Polly loved the Princess Fluff the moment they saw her, and
little King Bud was so frank and boyish that Button-Bright accepted him
as a chum at once and did not want him to go away.  But it was after
noon now, and the royal guests must prepare their toilets for the grand
banquet at which they were to assemble that evening to meet the
reigning Princess of this Fairyland; so Queen Zixi was shown to her
room by a troop of maidens led by Jellia Jamb, and Bud and Fluff
presently withdrew to their own apartments.

"My! what a big party Ozma is going to have," exclaimed Dorothy.  "I
guess the palace will be chock full, Button-Bright; don't you think so?"

"Don't know," said the boy.

"But we must go to our rooms, pretty soon, to dress for the banquet,"
continued the girl.

"I don't have to dress," said the Candy Man from Merryland.  "All I
need do is to dust myself with fresh sugar."

"Tik-tok always wears the same suits of clothes," said the Tin Woodman;
"and so does our friend the Scarecrow."

"My feathers are good enough for any occasion," cried Billina, from her
corner.

"Then I shall leave you four to welcome any new guests that come," said
Dorothy; "for Button-Bright and I must look our very best at Ozma's
banquet."

"Who is still to come?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Well, there's King Kik-a-bray of Dunkiton, and Johnny Dooit, and the
Good Witch of the North.  But Johnny Dooit may not get here until late,
he's so very busy."

"We will receive them and give them a proper welcome," promised the
Scarecrow.  "So run along, little Dorothy, and get yourself dressed."




23.  The Grand Banquet


I wish I could tell you how fine the company was that assembled that
evening at Ozma's royal banquet.  A long table was spread in the center
of the great dining-hall of the palace and the splendor of the
decorations and the blaze of lights and jewels was acknowledged to be
the most magnificent sight that any of the guests had ever seen.

The jolliest person present, as well as the most important, was of
course old Santa Claus; so he was given the seat of honor at one end of
the table while at the other end sat Princess Ozma, the hostess.

John Dough, Queen Zixi, King Bud, the Queen of Ev and her son Evardo,
and the Queen of Merryland had golden thrones to sit in, while the
others were supplied with beautiful chairs.

At the upper end of the banquet room was a separate table provided for
the animals.  Toto sat at one end of this table with a bib tied around
his neck and a silver platter to eat from.  At the other end was placed
a small stand, with a low rail around the edge of it, for Billina and
her chicks.  The rail kept the ten little Dorothys from falling off the
stand, while the Yellow Hen could easily reach over and take her food
from her tray upon the table.  At other places sat the Hungry Tiger,
the Cowardly Lion, the Saw-Horse, the Rubber Bear, the Fox King and the
Donkey King; they made quite a company of animals.

At the lower end of the great room was another table, at which sat the
Ryls and Knooks who had come with Santa Claus, the wooden soldiers who
had come with the Queen of Merryland, and the Hilanders and Lolanders
who had come with John Dough.  Here were also seated the officers of
the royal palace and of Ozma's army.

The splendid costumes of those at the three tables made a gorgeous and
glittering display that no one present was ever likely to forget;
perhaps there has never been in any part of the world at any time
another assemblage of such wonderful people as that which gathered this
evening to honor the birthday of the Ruler of Oz.

When all members of ethe company were in their places an orchestra of
five hundred pieces, in a balcony overlooking the banquet room, began
to play sweet and delightful music.  Then a door draped with royal
green opened, and in came the fair and girlish Princess Ozma, who now
greeted her guests in person for the first time.

As she stood by her throne at the head of the banquet table every eye
was turned eagerly upon the lovely Princess, who was as dignified as
she was bewitching, and who smiled upon all her old and new friends in
a way that touched their hearts and brought an answering smile to every
face.

Each guest had been served with a crystal goblet filled with lacasa,
which is a sort of nectar famous in Oz and nicer to drink than
soda-water or lemonade.  Santa now made a pretty speech in verse,
congratulating Ozma on having a birthday, and asking every one present
to drink to the health and happiness of their dearly beloved hostess.
This was done with great enthusiasm by those who were made so they
could drink at all, and those who could not drink politely touched the
rims of their goblets to their lips.  All seated themselves at the
tables and the servants of the Princess began serving the feast.

I am quite sure that only in Fairyland could such a delicious repast be
prepared.  The dishes were of precious metals set with brilliant jewels
and the good things to eat which were placed upon them were countless
in number and of exquisite flavor.  Several present, such as the Candy
Man, the Rubber Bear, Tik-tok, and the Scarecrow, were not made so they
could eat, and the Queen of Merryland contented herself with a small
dish of sawdust; but these enjoyed the pomp and glitter of the gorgeous
scene as much as did those who feasted.

The Woggle-Bug read his "Ode to Ozma," which was written in very good
rhythm and was well received by the company.  The Wizard added to the
entertainment by making a big pie appear before Dorothy, and when the
little girl cut the pie the nine tiny piglets leaped out of it and
danced around the table, while the orchestra played a merry tune.  This
amused the company very much, but they were even more pleased when
Polychrome, whose hunger had been easily satisfied, rose from the table
and performed her graceful and bewildering Rainbow Dance for them.
When it was ended, the people clapped their hands and the animals
clapped their paws, while Billina cackled and the Donkey King brayed
approval.

Johnny Dooit was present, and of course he proved he could do wonders
in the way of eating, as well as in everything else that he undertook
to do; the Tin Woodman sang a love song, every one joining in the
chorus; and the wooden soldiers from Merryland gave an exhibition of a
lightning drill with their wooden muskets; the Ryls and Knooks danced
the Fairy Circle; and the Rubber Bear bounced himself all around the
room.  There was laughter and merriment on every side, and everybody
was having a royal good time.  Button-Bright was so excited and
interested that he paid little attention to his fine dinner and a great
deal of attention to his queer companions; and perhaps he was wise to
do this, because he could eat at any other time.

The feasting and merrymaking continued until late in the evening, when
they separated to meet again the next morning and take part in the
birthday celebration, to which this royal banquet was merely the
introduction.




24.  The Birthday Celebration


A clear, perfect day, with a gentle breeze and a sunny sky, greeted
Princess Ozma as she wakened next morning, the anniversary of her
birth.  While it was yet early all the city was astir and crowds of
people came from all parts of the Land of Oz to witness the festivities
in honor of their girl Ruler's birthday.

The noted visitors from foreign countries, who had all been transported
to the Emerald City by means of the Magic Belt, were as much a show to
the Ozites as were their own familiar celebrities, and the streets
leading from the royal palace to the jeweled gates were thronged with
men, women, and children to see the procession as it passed out to the
green fields where the ceremonies were to take place.

And what a great procession it was!

First came a thousand young girls--the prettiest in the land--dressed
in white muslin, with green sashes and hair ribbons, bearing green
baskets of red roses.  As they walked they scattered these flowers upon
the marble pavements, so that the way was carpeted thick with roses for
the procession to walk upon.

Then came the Rulers of the four Kingdoms of Oz: the Emperor of the
Winkies, the Monarch of the Munchkins, the King of the Quadlings and
the Sovereign of the Gillikins, each wearing a long chain of emeralds
around his neck to show that he was a vassal of the Ruler of the
Emerald City.

Next marched the Emerald City Cornet Band, clothed in green-and-gold
uniforms and playing the "Ozma Two-Step."  The Royal Army of Oz
followed, consisting of twenty-seven officers, from the Captain-General
down to the Lieutenants.  There were no privates in Ozma's Army because
soldiers were not needed to fight battles, but only to look important,
and an officer always looks more imposing than a private.

While the people cheered and waved their hats and handkerchiefs, there
came walking the Royal Princess Ozma, looking so pretty and sweet that
it is no wonder her people love her so dearly.  She had decided she
would not ride in her chariot that day, as she preferred to walk in the
procession with her favored subjects and her guests.  Just in front of
her trotted the living Blue Bear Rug owned by old Dyna, which wobbled
clumsily on its four feet because there was nothing but the skin to
support them, with a stuffed head at one end and a stubby tail at the
other.  But whenever Ozma paused in her walk the Bear Rug would flop
down flat upon the ground for the princess to stand upon until she
resumed her progress.

Following the Princess stalked her two enormous beasts, the Cowardly
Lion and the Hungry Tiger, and even if the Army had not been there
these two would have been powerful enough to guard their mistress from
any harm.

Next marched the invited guests, who were loudly cheered by the people
of Oz along the road, and were therefore obliged to bow to right and
left almost every step of the way.  First was Santa Claus, who, because
he was fat and not used to walking, rode the wonderful Saw-Horse.  The
merry old gentleman had a basket of small toys with him, and he tossed
the toys one by one to the children as he passed by.  His Ryls and
Knooks marched close behind him.

Queen Zixi of Ix came after; then John Dough and the Cherub, with the
rubber bear named Para Bruin strutting between them on its hind legs;
then the Queen of Merryland, escorted by her wooden soldiers; then King
Bud of Noland and his sister, the Princess Fluff; then the Queen of Ev
and her ten royal children; then the Braided Man and the Candy Man,
side by side; then King Dox of Foxville and King Kik-a-bray of
Dunkiton, who by this time had become good friends; and finally Johnny
Dooit, in his leather apron, smoking his long pipe.

These wonderful personages were not more heartily cheered by the people
than were those who followed after them in the procession.  Dorothy was
a general favorite, and she walked arm in arm with the Scarecrow, who
was beloved by all.  Then came Polychrome and Button-Bright, and the
people loved the Rainbow's pretty Daughter and the beautiful blue-eyed
boy as soon as they saw them.  The shaggy man in his shaggy new suit
attracted much attention because he was such a novelty.  With regular
steps tramped the machine-man Tik-tok, and there was more cheering when
the Wizard of Oz followed in the procession.  The Woggle-Bug and Jack
Pumpkinhead were next, and behind them Glinda the Sorceress and the
Good Witch of the North.  Finally came Billina, with her brood of
chickens to whom she clucked anxiously to keep them together and to
hasten them along so they would not delay the procession.

Another band followed, this time the Tin Band of the Emperor of the
Winkies, playing a beautiful march called, "There's No Plate Like Tin."
Then came the servants of the Royal Palace, in a long line, and behind
them all the people joined the procession and marched away through the
emerald gates and out upon the broad green.

Here had been erected a splendid pavilion, with a grandstand big enough
to seat all the royal party and those who had taken part in the
procession.  Over the pavilion, which was of green silk and cloth of
gold, countless banners waved in the breeze.  Just in front of this,
and connected with it by a runway had been built a broad platform, so
that all the spectators could see plainly the entertainment provided
for them.

The Wizard now became Master of Ceremonies, as Ozma had placed the
conduct of the performance in his hands.  After the people had all
congregated about the platform and the royal party and the visitors
were seated in the grandstand, the Wizard skillfully performed some
feats of juggling glass balls and lighted candles.  He tossed a dozen
or so of them high in the air and caught them one by one as they came
down, without missing any.

Then he introduced the Scarecrow, who did a sword-swallowing act that
aroused much interest.  After this the Tin Woodman gave an exhibition
of Swinging the Axe, which he made to whirl around him so rapidly that
the eye could scarcely follow the motion of the gleaming blade.  Glinda
the Sorceress then stepped upon the platform, and by her magic made a
big tree grow in the middle of the space, made blossoms appear upon the
tree, and made the blossoms become delicious fruit called tamornas, and
so great was the quantity of fruit produced that when the servants
climbed the tree and tossed it down to the crowd, there was enough to
satisfy every person present.
