never experienced much. "He's a tip-top fellow."

"I believe he is a good boy," said Mr. Whitney. "I hope, my lad, you
will prosper and rise in the world. You know in this free country
poverty in early life is no bar to a man's advancement. I haven't
risen very high myself," he added, with a smile, "but have met with
moderate success in life; yet there was a time when I was as poor as
you."

"Were you, sir," asked Dick, eagerly.

"Yes, my boy, I have known the time I have been obliged to go
without my dinner because I didn't have enough money to pay for it."

"How did you get up in the world," asked Dick, anxiously.

"I entered a printing-office as an apprentice, and worked for some
years. Then my eyes gave out and I was obliged to give that up. Not
knowing what else to do, I went into the country, and worked on a
farm. After a while I was lucky enough to invent a machine, which
has brought me in a great deal of money. But there was one thing I
got while I was in the printing-office which I value more than
money."

"What was that, sir?"

"A taste for reading and study. During my leisure hours I improved
myself by study, and acquired a large part of the knowledge which I
now possess. Indeed, it was one of my books that first put me on the
track of the invention, which I afterwards made. So you see, my lad,
that my studious habits paid me in money, as well as in another
way."

"I'm awful ignorant," said Dick, soberly.

"But you are young, and, I judge, a smart boy. If you try to learn,
you can, and if you ever expect to do anything in the world, you
must know something of books."

"I will," said Dick, resolutely. "I aint always goin' to black boots
for a livin'."

"All labor is respectable, my lad, and you have no cause to be
ashamed of any honest business; yet when you can get something to do
that promises better for your future prospects, I advise you to do
so. Till then earn your living in the way you are accustomed to,
avoid extravagance, and save up a little money if you can."

"Thank you for your advice," said our hero. "There aint many that
takes an interest in Ragged Dick."

"So that's your name," said Mr. Whitney. "If I judge you rightly,
it won't be long before you change it. Save your money, my lad,
buy books, and determine to be somebody, and you may yet fill an
honorable position."

"I'll try," said Dick. "Good-night, sir."

"Wait a minute, Dick," said Frank. "Your blacking-box and old
clothes are upstairs. You may want them."

"In course," said Dick. "I couldn't get along without my best
clothes, and my stock in trade."

"You may go up to the room with him, Frank," said Mr. Whitney. "The
clerk will give you the key. I want to see you, Dick, before you
go."

"Yes, sir," said Dick.

"Where are you going to sleep to-night, Dick?" asked Frank, as they
went upstairs together.

"P'r'aps at the Fifth Avenue Hotel--on the outside," said Dick.

"Haven't you any place to sleep, then?"

"I slept in a box, last night."

"In a box?"

"Yes, on Spruce Street."

"Poor fellow!" said Frank, compassionately.

"Oh, 'twas a bully bed--full of straw! I slept like a top."

"Don't you earn enough to pay for a room, Dick?"

"Yes," said Dick; "only I spend my money foolish, goin' to the Old
Bowery, and Tony Pastor's, and sometimes gamblin' in Baxter Street."

"You won't gamble any more,--will you, Dick?" said Frank, laying his
hand persuasively on his companion's shoulder.

"No, I won't," said Dick.

"You'll promise?"

"Yes, and I'll keep it. You're a good feller. I wish you was goin'
to be in New York."

"I am going to a boarding-school in Connecticut. The name of the
town is Barnton. Will you write to me, Dick?"

"My writing would look like hens' tracks," said our hero.

"Never mind. I want you to write. When you write you can tell me how
to direct, and I will send you a letter."

"I wish you would," said Dick. "I wish I was more like you."

"I hope you will make a much better boy, Dick. Now we'll go in to my
uncle. He wishes to see you before you go."

They went into the reading-room. Dick had wrapped up his
blacking-brush in a newspaper with which Frank had supplied him,
feeling that a guest of the Astor House should hardly be seen
coming out of the hotel displaying such a professional sign.

"Uncle, Dick's ready to go," said Frank.

"Good-by, my lad," said Mr. Whitney. "I hope to hear good accounts
of you sometime. Don't forget what I have told you. Remember that
your future position depends mainly upon yourself, and that it will
be high or low as you choose to make it."

He held out his hand, in which was a five-dollar bill. Dick shrunk
back.

"I don't like to take it," he said. "I haven't earned it."

"Perhaps not," said Mr. Whitney; "but I give it to you because I
remember my own friendless youth. I hope it may be of service to
you. Sometime when you are a prosperous man, you can repay it in the
form of aid to some poor boy, who is struggling upward as you are
now."

"I will, sir," said Dick, manfully.

He no longer refused the money, but took it gratefully, and, bidding
Frank and his uncle good-by, went out into the street. A feeling of
loneliness came over him as he left the presence of Frank, for whom
he had formed a strong attachment in the few hours he had known him.



CHAPTER XII

DICK HIRES A ROOM ON MOTT STREET


Going out into the fresh air Dick felt the pangs of hunger. He
accordingly went to a restaurant and got a substantial supper.
Perhaps it was the new clothes he wore, which made him feel a
little more aristocratic. At all events, instead of patronizing the
cheap restaurant where he usually procured his meals, he went into
the refectory attached to Lovejoy's Hotel, where the prices were
higher and the company more select. In his ordinary dress, Dick
would have been excluded, but now he had the appearance of a very
respectable, gentlemanly boy, whose presence would not discredit
any establishment. His orders were therefore received with attention
by the waiter and in due time a good supper was placed before him.

"I wish I could come here every day," thought Dick. "It seems kind
o' nice and 'spectable, side of the other place. There's a gent at
that other table that I've shined boots for more'n once. He don't
know me in my new clothes. Guess he don't know his boot-black
patronizes the same establishment."

His supper over, Dick went up to the desk, and, presenting his
check, tendered in payment his five-dollar bill, as if it were one
of a large number which he possessed. Receiving back his change he
went out into the street.

Two questions now arose: How should he spend the evening, and where
should he pass the night? Yesterday, with such a sum of money in his
possession, he would have answered both questions readily. For the
evening, he would have passed it at the Old Bowery, and gone to
sleep in any out-of-the-way place that offered. But he had turned
over a new leaf, or resolved to do so. He meant to save his money
for some useful purpose,--to aid his advancement in the world. So he
could not afford the theatre. Besides, with his new clothes, he was
unwilling to pass the night out of doors.

"I should spile 'em," he thought, "and that wouldn't pay."

So he determined to hunt up a room which he could occupy regularly,
and consider as his own, where he could sleep nights, instead of
depending on boxes and old wagons for a chance shelter. This would
be the first step towards respectability, and Dick determined to
take it.

He accordingly passed through the City Hall Park, and walked
leisurely up Centre Street.

He decided that it would hardly be advisable for him to seek
lodgings in Fifth Avenue, although his present cash capital
consisted of nearly five dollars in money, besides the valuable
papers contained in his wallet. Besides, he had reason to doubt
whether any in his line of business lived on that aristocratic
street. He took his way to Mott Street, which is considerably less
pretentious, and halted in front of a shabby brick lodging-house
kept by a Mrs. Mooney, with whose son Tom, Dick was acquainted.

Dick rang the bell, which sent back a shrill metallic response.

The door was opened by a slatternly servant, who looked at him
inquiringly, and not without curiosity. It must be remembered that
Dick was well dressed, and that nothing in his appearance bespoke
his occupation. Being naturally a good-looking boy, he might readily
be mistaken for a gentleman's son.

"Well, Queen Victoria," said Dick, "is your missus at home?"

"My name's Bridget," said the girl.

"Oh, indeed!" said Dick. "You looked so much like the queen's picter
what she gave me last Christmas in exchange for mine, that I
couldn't help calling you by her name."

"Oh, go along wid ye!" said Bridget. "It's makin' fun ye are."

"If you don't believe me," said Dick, gravely, "all you've got to do
is to ask my partic'lar friend, the Duke of Newcastle."

"Bridget!" called a shrill voice from the basement.

"The missus is calling me," said Bridget, hurriedly. "I'll tell her
ye want her."

"All right!" said Dick.

The servant descended into the lower regions, and in a short time a
stout, red-faced woman appeared on the scene.

"Well, sir, what's your wish?" she asked.

"Have you got a room to let?" asked Dick.

"Is it for yourself you ask?" questioned the woman, in some surprise.

Dick answered in the affirmative.

"I haven't got any very good rooms vacant. There's a small room in
the third story."

"I'd like to see it," said Dick.

"I don't know as it would be good enough for you," said the woman,
with a glance at Dick's clothes.

"I aint very partic'lar about accommodations," said our hero. "I
guess I'll look at it."

Dick followed the landlady up two narrow stair-cases, uncarpeted
and dirty, to the third landing, where he was ushered into a room
about ten feet square. It could not be considered a very desirable
apartment. It had once been covered with an oilcloth carpet, but
this was now very ragged, and looked worse than none. There was a
single bed in the corner, covered with an indiscriminate heap of
bed-clothing, rumpled and not over-clean. There was a bureau, with
the veneering scratched and in some parts stripped off, and a small
glass, eight inches by ten, cracked across the middle; also two
chairs in rather a disjointed condition. Judging from Dick's
appearance, Mrs. Mooney thought he would turn from it in disdain.

But it must be remembered that Dick's past experience had not been
of a character to make him fastidious. In comparison with a box, or
an empty wagon, even this little room seemed comfortable. He decided
to hire it if the rent proved reasonable.

"Well, what's the tax?" asked Dick.

"I ought to have a dollar a week," said Mrs. Mooney, hesitatingly.

"Say seventy-five cents, and I'll take it," said Dick.

"Every week in advance?"

"Yes."

"Well, as times is hard, and I can't afford to keep it empty, you
may have it. When will you come?"

"To-night," said Dick.

"It aint lookin' very neat. I don't know as I can fix it up
to-night."

"Well, I'll sleep here to-night, and you can fix it up to-morrow."

"I hope you'll excuse the looks. I'm a lone woman, and my help is so
shiftless, I have to look after everything myself; so I can't keep
things as straight as I want to."

"All right!" said Dick.

"Can you pay me the first week in advance?" asked the landlady,
cautiously.

Dick responded by drawing seventy-five cents from his pocket, and
placing it in her hand.

"What's your business, sir, if I may inquire?" said Mrs. Mooney.

"Oh, I'm professional!" said Dick.

"Indeed!" said the landlady, who did not feel much enlightened by
this answer.

"How's Tom?" asked Dick.

"Do you know my Tom?" said Mrs. Mooney in surprise. "He's gone to
sea,--to Californy. He went last week."

"Did he?" said Dick. "Yes, I knew him."

Mrs. Mooney looked upon her new lodger with increased favor, on
finding that he was acquainted with her son, who, by the way, was
one of the worst young scamps in Mott Street, which is saying
considerable.

"I'll bring over my baggage from the Astor House this evening," said
Dick in a tone of importance.

"From the Astor House!" repeated Mrs. Mooney, in fresh amazement.

"Yes, I've been stoppin' there a short time with some friends," said
Dick.

Mrs. Mooney might be excused for a little amazement at finding that
a guest from the Astor House was about to become one of her
lodgers--such transfers not being common.

"Did you say you was purfessional?" she asked.

"Yes, ma'am," said Dick, politely.

"You aint a--a--" Mrs. Mooney paused, uncertain what conjecture to
hazard.

"Oh, no, nothing of the sort," said Dick, promptly. "How could you
think so, Mrs. Mooney?"

"No offence, sir," said the landlady, more perplexed than ever.

"Certainly not," said our hero. "But you must excuse me now, Mrs.
Mooney, as I have business of great importance to attend to."

"You'll come round this evening?"

Dick answered in the affirmative, and turned away.

"I wonder what he is!" thought the landlady, following him with her
eyes as he crossed the street. "He's got good clothes on, but he
don't seem very particular about his room. Well; I've got all my
rooms full now. That's one comfort."

Dick felt more comfortable now that he had taken the decisive step
of hiring a lodging, and paying a week's rent in advance. For seven
nights he was sure of a shelter and a bed to sleep in. The thought
was a pleasant one to our young vagrant, who hitherto had seldom
known when he rose in the morning where he should find a
resting-place at night.

"I must bring my traps round," said Dick to himself. "I guess I'll
go to bed early to-night. It'll feel kinder good to sleep in a
reg'lar bed. Boxes is rather hard to the back, and aint comfortable
