"I have another in this bundle, mother; and that isn't all. Do
you see this watch? I sha'n't mourn the loss of the Waterbury
any longer."

"Mr. Reed is certainly proving a kind friend, Luke. We have
much reason to be grateful."

"He has also provided me with employment for a time, mother."
And then Luke told his mother about the copying he had engaged to do.

It is hardy necessary to say that the heart of the widow was
unfeignedly thankful for the favorable change in their fortunes,
and she did not omit to give thanks to Providence for raising up
so kind and serviceable a friend.

About the middle of the afternoon Luke made his appearance in the
village street. Though I hope my readers will not suspect him of
being a dude, he certainly did enjoy the consciousness of being well
dressed. He hoped he should meet Randolph, anticipating the surprise
and disappointment of the latter at the evidence of his prosperity.

When Luke was arrested, Randolph rejoiced as only a mean and
spiteful boy would be capable of doing at the humiliation and
anticipated disgrace of a boy whom he disliked. He had indulged in
more than one expression of triumph, and sought every opportunity
of discussing the subject, to the disgust of all fair-minded
persons. Even Sam Noble protested, though a toady of Randolph.

"Look here, Randolph," he said, "I don't like Luke overmuch, and I
know he doesn't like me, but I don't believe he's a thief, and I am
sorry he is in trouble."

"Then you are no friend of mine," said Randolph, looking black.

"Oh, I say, Randolph, you know better than that. Haven't I always
stood up for you, and done whatever you wanted me to?"

"If you were my friend you wouldn't stand up for Luke."

"I am not a friend of his, and I am a friend of yours, but I don't
want him to go to prison."

"I do, if he deserves it."

"I don't believe he does deserve it."

"That is what I complain of in you."

"The fact is, Randolph, you expect too much. If you want to break
friendship, all right."

Randolph was amazed at this unexpected independence on the part of
one whom he regarded as his bond slave; but, being hardly prepared
to part with him, especially as his other follower, Tom Harper,
had partially thrown off his allegiance, thought it prudent to be
satisfied with Sam's expressions of loyalty, even if they did not
go as far as he wished.

Randolph missed Luke at school on the day after the trial. Of
course, he had no idea that our hero was out of school, and hastily
concluded that on account of his trial he was ashamed to show
himself.

"I don't wonder he doesn't want to show himself," he remarked to
Tom Harper.

"Why not? He has been acquitted."

"Never mind. He has been under arrest, and may yet be guilty in
spite of his acquittal. Have you seen him to-day?"

"No."

"Probably he is hiding at home. Well, it shows some sort of shame."

On his way home from school Randolph was destined to be surprised.
Not far from his own house he met Luke, arrayed in his new suit,
with a chain that looked like gold crossing his waistcoat. Instead
of looking confused and ashamed, Luke looked uncommonly bright and
cheerful.

Randolph was amazed. What could it all mean? He had intended not
to notice Luke, but to pass him with a scornful smile, but his
curiosity got the better of him.

"Why were you not at school to-day?" he asked, abruptly.

Luke smiled.

"I didn't think you would miss me, Randolph."

"I didn't, but wondered at your absence."

"I was detained by business. I expect to have the pleasure of seeing
you there to-morrow."

"Humph! You seem to have invested in a new suit."

"Yes; my old suit was getting decidedly shabby, as you kindly
remarked at Florence Grant's party."

"Where did you get them?"

"In New York."

"In New York!" repeated Randolph, in surprise. "When did you
go there?"

"This morning. It was that which detained me from school."

"I see you've got a new watch-chain, too."

Randolph emphasized the word "chain" satirically, being under
the impression that no watch was attached.

"Yes; you may like to see my new watch." And Luke, with pardonable
triumph, produced his new watch, which was a stem-winder, whereas
Randolph's was only a key-winder.

Randolph condescended to take the watch in his hands and examine it.

"Where was this bought?" he asked.

"At Benedict's."

"You seem to have plenty of money," he said, with unpleasant
significance.

"I should like more."

"Only you are rather imprudent in making such extensive purchases
so soon after your trial."

"What do you mean?" demanded Luke quickly.

"What should I mean? It is evident that you robbed the bank,
after all. I shall tell my father, and you may find your trouble is
not over."

"Look here, Randolph Duncan!" said Luke sternly, "I look upon that
as an insult, and I don't mean to be insulted. I am no more a thief
than you are, and that you know."

"Do you mean to charge me with being a thief?" fumed Randolph.

"No; I only say you are as much a thief as I am. If you repeat your
insult, I shall be obliged to knock you down."

"You impudent loafer!" screamed Randolph. "You'll be sorry for this.
I'll have you arrested over again."

"I have no doubt you would if you had the power. I sha'n't lie
awake nights thinking of it. If you have nothing more to say I will
leave you."

Randolph did not reply, probably because he was at a loss what to
say, but went home angry and mystified. Where could Luke have got
his watch and new suit? He asked himself this many times, but no
possible explanation suggested itself.

Scarcely had Luke parted with Randolph when he met his friend
Linton, who surveyed Luke's improved appearance with pleasure
and surprise.

"I say, Luke, are you setting up for a dude?"

"I thought a little of it," answered Luke, with a smile--and then he
explained the cause of his good fortune. "I have only one regret,"
he added, "Randolph seems to be grieved over it. He liked me better
in my old suit. Besides, I have a new watch, and it turns out to be
better than his."

Here he displayed his new silver watch. Linton felt a generous
pleasure in Luke's luck, and it may truly be said rejoiced more
at it than he would at any piece of good fortune to himself.

"By the way, Luke," he said, "I am going to give a party next
Thursday evening, and I give you the very first invitation. It is
my birthday, you know."

"I accept with pleasure, sir. I look upon you as my warmest friend,
and as long as I retain your friendship I shall not care for
Randolph's malice."



CHAPTER XVIII

MR. DUNCAN'S SECRET


About two weeks later, Prince Duncan sat at his desk with a troubled
look. Open before him were letters. One was post-marked London, and
ran as follows:


"MY DEAR SIR: I have decided to shorten my visit, and shall leave
Liverpool next Saturday en route for New York. You will see,
therefore, that I shall arrive nearly as soon as the letter I am
now writing. I have decided to withdraw the box of securities I
deposited in your bank, and shall place it in a safe-deposit vault
in New York. You may expect to see me shortly.

"Yours in haste,

"JOHN ARMSTRONG."


Drops of perspiration gathered on the brow of Prince Duncan as he
read this letter. What would Mr. Armstrong say when he learned that
the box had mysteriously disappeared? That he would be thoroughly
indignant, and make it very unpleasant for the president of
Groveton Bank, was certain. He would ask, among other things,
why Mr. Duncan had not informed him of the loss by cable, and no
satisfactory explanation could be given. He would ask, furthermore,
why detectives had not been employed to ferret out the mystery,
and here again no satisfactory explanation could be given. Prince
Duncan knew very well that he had a reason, but it was not one
that could be disclosed.

He next read the second letter, and his trouble was not diminished.
It was from a Wall Street broker, informing him that the Erie shares
bought for him on a margin had gone down two points, and it would be
necessary for him to deposit additional margin, or be sold out.

"Why did I ever invest in Erie?" thought Duncan ruefully. "I was
confidently assured that it would go up--that it must go up--and
here it is falling, and Heaven knows how much lower it will go."

At this point the door opened, and Randolph entered. He had a
special favor to ask. He had already given his father several hints
that he would like a gold watch, being quite dissatisfied with his
silver watch now that Luke Larkin possessed one superior to his. He
had chosen a very unfavorable moment for his request, as he soon
found out.

"Father," he said, "I have a favor to ask."

"What is it?" asked Prince Duncan, with a frown.

"I wish you would buy me a gold watch."

"Oh, you do!" sneered his father. "I was under the impression that
you had two watches already."

"So I have, but one is a Waterbury, and the other a cheap
silver one."

"Well, they keep time, don't they?"

"Yes."

"Then what more do you want?"

"Luke Larkin has a silver watch better than mine--a stem-winder."

"Suppose he has?"

"I don't want a working boy like him to outshine me."

"Where did he get his watch?"

"I don't know; he won't tell. Will you buy me a gold one, father?
Then I can look down upon him again."

"No, I can't. Money is very scarce with me just now."

"Then I don't want to wear a watch at all," said Randolph pettishly.

"Suit yourself," said his father coldly. "Now you may leave the
room. I am busy."

Randolph left the room. He would have slammed the door behind him,
but he knew his father's temper, and he did not dare to do so.

"What am I to do?" Prince Duncan asked himself anxiously. "I must
send money to the brokers, or they will sell me out, and I shall
meet with a heavy loss."

After a little thought he wrote a letter enclosing a check, but
dated it two days ahead.

"They will think it a mistake," he thought, "and it will give
me time to turn around. Now for money to meet the check when it
arrives."

Prince Duncan went up-stairs, and, locking the door of his chamber,
opened a large trunk in one corner of the room. From under a pile of
clothing he took out a tin box, and with hands that trembled with
excitement he extracted therefrom a dozen government bonds. One was
for ten thousand dollars, one for five, and the remainder were for
one thousand dollars each.

"If they were only sold, and the money deposited in the bank to my
credit," he thought. "I am almost sorry I started in this thing.
The risk is very great, but--but I must have money."

At this moment some one tried the door.

Prince Duncan turned pale, and the bonds nearly fell from his hands.

"Who's there?" he asked.

"It is I, papa," answered Randolph.

"Then you may go down-stairs again," answered his father angrily.
"I don't want to be disturbed."

"Won't you open the door a minute? I just want to ask a question."

"No, I won't. Clear out!" exclaimed the bank president angrily.

"What a frightful temper father has!" thought the discomfited
Randolph.

There was nothing for it but to go down-stairs, and he did so in a
very discontented frame of mind.

"It seems to me that something is going contrary," said Duncan to
himself. "It is clear that it won't do to keep these bonds here any
longer. I must take them to New York to-morrow--and raise money on
them."

On second thought, to-morrow he decided only to take the
five-thousand-dollar bond, and five of the one thousand, fearing
that too large a sale at one time might excite suspicion.

Carefully selecting the bonds referred to, he put them away in a
capacious pocket, and, locking the trunk, went down-stairs again.

"There is still time to take the eleven-o'clock train," he said,
consulting his watch. "I must do it."

Seeking his wife, he informed her that he would take the next train
for New York.

"Isn't this rather sudden?" she asked, in surprise.

"A little, perhaps, but I have a small matter of business to attend
to. Besides, I think the trip will do me good. I am not feeling
quite as well as usual."

"I believe I will go, too," said Mrs. Duncan unexpectedly. "I want
to make some purchases at Stewart's."

This suggestion was very far from agreeable to her husband.

"Really--I am"--he said, "I must disappoint you. My time will be
wholly taken up by matters of business, and I can't go with you."

"You don't need to. I can take care of myself, and we can meet at
the depot at four o'clock."

"Besides, I can't supply you with any money for shopping."

"I have enough. I might have liked a little more, but I can make
it do."

"Perhaps it will look better if we go in company," thought Prince
Duncan. "She needn't be in my way, for we can part at the station."

"Very well, Jane," he said quietly. "If you won't expect me to
dance attendance upon you, I withdraw my objections."

The eleven-o'clock train for New York had among its passengers Mr.
and Mrs. Duncan.

There was another passenger whom neither of them noticed--a small,
insignificant-looking man--who occasionally directed a quick glance
at the portly bank president.



CHAPTER XIX

EFFECTING A LOAN


Prince Duncan was unusually taciturn during the railroad journey--so
much so that his wife noticed it, and inquired the reason.

"Business, my dear," answered the bank president. "I am rather
perplexed by a matter of business."

"Business connected with the bank, Mr. Duncan?" asked his wife.

"No, private business."

"Have you heard anything yet of the stolen bonds?"

"Not yet."

"Have you any suspicion?"

"None that I am at liberty to mention," answered Duncan, looking
mysterious.

"I suppose you no longer suspect that boy Luke?"

"I don't know. The man who owns to having given him the tin box for
safe-keeping is, in my opinion, a suspicious character. I shouldn't
be at all surprised if he were a jailbird."

The small man already referred to, who occupied a seat just across
the aisle, here smiled slightly, but whether at the president's
remark, is not clear.

"What did he call himself?"

"Roland Reed--no doubt an alias."

"It seems to me you ought to follow him up, and see if you can't
convict him of the theft."

"You may be sure, Jane, that the president and directors of the
Groveton Bank will do their duty in this matter," said Mr. Duncan
rather grandiloquently. "By the way, I have received this morning
a letter from Mr. Armstrong, the owner of the stolen bonds, saying
that he will be at home in a few days."

"Does he know of the loss?"

"Not yet."

