
"I don't know," answered Philip.

"Don't know?" was repeated in surprise.

"I am in search of work."

"Oh, that's it! Are you a musician?" asked the young man, looking at the
violin.

"Yes; a little of one."

"Are you looking for a job at fiddling?" asked the young man.

"Yes, if I can find one," answered Philip, smiling.

"Can you play dancing-music?"

"Yes."

"Then I guess I can get you a job for this evening."

"I wish you could," said Philip hopefully, catching at a way out of his
troubles.

"You see, there's to be a little dance in School-house Hall to-night,"
said the farmer; "or there was to be one, but the fiddler's took sick,
and we was afraid we'd have to give it up. Now, if you'll take his
place, we can have it, after all."

"I'll do it," said Philip promptly.

"What'll you charge?"

"How much was the other one going to charge?"

"Five dollars. You see, he would have to come six miles."

"I'll come for three dollars and my supper and lodging," said Philip.

"All right! You shall have supper and lodging at our house. There it is,
down that lane. Come right along, for supper must be on the table. After
supper I'll go and tell the committee I've engaged you."

Philip's spirits rose. Help had come from an unexpected quarter. He felt
that a new career was opening before him.



CHAPTER XIX. NEW ACQUAINTANCES.



On his way to the farmhouse, Philip ascertained that his companion's
name was Abner Webb, and that he and his brother Jonas carried on a farm
of about a hundred acres. Abner appeared to be about twenty-five years
old.

"You seem pretty young to be a fiddler," said the young man, surveying
Philip with a glance of curiosity.

"I am almost sixteen."

"I am twenty-five, and I can't play at all."

"It isn't all in the age," returned our hero. "Did you ever try to
learn?"

"Yes, I took one or two lessons, but I had to give it up for a bad job.
I couldn't get into it somehow."

"You didn't try very long," said Philip, smiling.

"I reckon I'd never do much at it. How long have you been a fiddler?"

"I've been playing three or four years."

"Sho! You don't say so! Do you like it?"

"Yes; very much."

"Well, I'm glad you happened along. It would have been a pity to have
our dance spoiled."

By this time they had reached the farmhouse, and Abner went in, followed
by our hero.

A young woman, his brother's wife, looked at Philip in some surprise.

"You see, I've got a fiddler, after all," said Abner gleefully. "We
won't have to put off the dance."

As he spoke, his brother Jonas came into the room, and the explanation
was repeated.

"That's good," said Jonas heartily. "You'd better go down to the store
after supper, Abner, and tell the boys, for they've just heard that Paul
Beck can't come."

"You just save me some supper, and I'll go now. The boy'll stay with us
to-night. That's the bargain I made with him."

"He's heartily welcome," said Jonas Webb, a pleasant-faced man, with
sandy complexion, who was probably from two to three years older than
his brother. "You've happened along just at the right time."

"I am glad of it," said Philip; and there is no doubt he was sincere,
for we know how much he stood in need of employment, though he naturally
did not care to let his new friends know of his destitution.

"My brother didn't tell me your name," said Jonas.

"My name is Philip Gray," answered our hero.

"Do you go round playing for dances?" inquired Jonas.

"I have only just begun."

Philip didn't think it necessary to say that the idea of making money in
this way had never occurred to him till this very day.

"Sit right up to supper, Jonas, and you, too, Mr. Gray," said Mrs. Webb.

Philip was by no means loath, for the dishes which he saw on the table
had had the effect of stimulating his appetite, already sharpened by his
long walk and long fast.

Philip, as the guest, was first helped to a bountiful supply of cold
meat, a hot biscuit, and some golden butter, not to mention two kinds
of preserves, for the Webbs always lived well. He was not slow in doing
justice to the good supper spread before him. He was almost afraid to
eat as much as he wanted, lest his appetite should attract attention,
and, therefore, was pleased to see that Jonas quite kept pace with him.

Indeed, when he had already eaten as much as he dared, Mrs. Webb said,
hospitably:

"I am afraid, Mr. Gray, you won't make out a supper."

"I don't think there is any danger of that," said Philip, smiling. "I
have enjoyed my supper very much."

The young woman looked gratified by this tribute to her cooking, and
just then Abner came in.

"Did you see the boys, Abner?" asked Jonas.

"Yes, I saw them all. They were awfully glad we could have the dance,
after all. You see, we've been lookin' forward to it, and didn't like
to be disappointed. And now I must hurry down my supper, for I've got to
slick up and go for Mary Ann Temple. Are you goin', Lucy?"

"Of course she is," answered Jonas. "I don't have so far to go for my
girl as you do," he added slyly.

"You used to go farther once, Jonas--six miles, where I have only to go
two."

When supper was over, Philip inquired:

"How early will the dance commence?"

"About eight. We keep early hours in the country, and we like to get our
money's worth."

"If you have no objection, I will go out to the barn and try my violin a
little to see if it is in good tune."

"Try it in the next room," said the farmer's wife.

"Yes, do!" said her husband. "We'd like to hear you."

He was a little afraid, judging from Philip's youth, that he could not
play very well, and this would give him an opportunity of deciding how
competent the boy was to take the place of Paul Beck, of Pomfret, who
had quite a reputation in the towns around.

Philip went into the next room and began to prepare himself for his
evening's task. Though lus training had by no means been confined to
dancing-tunes, he was quite proficient in that department, having more
than once been called upon in Norton to officiate in a similar capacity.

When Jonas had listened for five minutes to Philip, he turned to Abner
with a satisfied look.

"He understands his business," he said, nodding with emphasis. "He ain't
no new beginner."

"I think he beats Paul Beck," said Abner, delighted to find his choice
approved.

"I don't know but he does. I feel as if I wanted to start off now."

"I don't see how he does it," said Abner, with a puzzled look. "I never
could do anything at it, though I'm almost twice as old."

He passed into the room where Philip was practising.

"You're a tip-top player," said he, to Philip admiringly. "Why, you beat
Paul Beck."

"Is he the one you expected to have?"

"Yes. Paul's got a big name for fiddlin'."

"I am glad you like my playing," said Philip, who was naturally pleased
to find that he was likely to give satisfaction in his new business.

"The boys will be pleased, I can tell you."

"I will do all I can to give them satisfaction," said Philip modestly.

"Oh, you will! there's no doubt about that. How much did you pay for
your fiddle?"

"I believe it cost twenty-five dollars. My father gave it to me."

"Sho! I didn't think fiddles cost so much."

"Some cost a great deal more."

"Seems a good deal to lay out, but you'll get your money back, if you
can get enough to do."

"I hope so."

"Well, you must excuse me now. I've got to slick up, and go after Mary
Ann Temple. She'd have been awfully disappointed if we'd had to give it
up."

"Is she fond of dancing?"

"You'd better believe she is. Why, that girl could dance for four hours
stiddy--without wiltin'!"

"How late do you keep it up?"

"Till eleven or twelve. You won't be sleepy, will you?"

"If I am, I will get up later to-morrow morning."

"That's all right. You can get up jest as late as you like. Lucy will
save you some breakfast. We don't allow no one to go hungry here. But I
must be off. You will go to the hall along with Jonas and Lucy.
They'll introduce you round and see that you are taken care of." Philip
congratulated himself on being so well provided for, at least for one
night. The future was uncertain, but with the money which he was to
receive for his services, he would be able to get along for two or
three days, and he might, perhaps, if successful, obtain another similar
engagement.

He had a new reason for being thankful that Squire Pope had not
succeeded in depriving him of his violin, for this was likely to prove a
breadwinner.

He continued to practice till it was time to go over to the hall.



CHAPTER XX. A LIVELY EVENING.



Schoolhouse Hall, as may be inferred, was a large hall, occupying
the second story of the Center Schoolhouse, and though not originally
intended for dancing-parties, answered very well for that purpose.

The hall was tolerably well filled when Philip entered in company with
Jonas Webb and his wife.

Philip had effaced, as well as he could, the stains of travel, had
arrayed himself in a clean shirt and collar, brushed his hair neatly,
and, being naturally a very good-looking boy, appeared to very good
advantage, though he certainly did look young.

As he walked through the hall, with his violin under his arm, he
attracted the attention of all, it having been already made known that
in place of the veteran Paul Beck--a man of fifty or more--an unknown
boy would furnish the music for the evening.

Philip could not avoid hearing some of the remarks which his appearance
excited. "What! that little runt play the fiddle?" said one countrified
young man, in a short-waisted blue coat, and tow-colored hair, plastered
down on either side of his head with tallow. "I don't believe he can
play any more than I can."

"I hope he can," retained his partner--a plump, red-cheeked, young
farmer's daughter. "He's very good-looking, anyhow."

"He isn't anything to brag of," said her partner jealously.

"Oh, how can you say so, Jedidiah. I See what beautiful black hair and
eyes he's got, and such a lovely color on his cheeks!"

Now, Jedidiah, in appearance, was just the reverse of Philip. His hair,
as already stated, was tow-color, his face was tanned, and the color
rather resembled brick-dust than the deep red of our hero's cheeks.

His partner was a rustic flirt, and he was disposed to be jealous, not
being certain how far she favored him. He, therefore, took offense at
his partner's admiration of the young fiddler.

"He looks very common to me," said Jedidiah pettishly. "You've got a
strange taste, Maria."

"Perhaps I have, and perhaps I haven't," retorted Maria, tossing her
head.

"Perhaps you're in love with him?" continued Jedidiah, in a tone meant
to be sarcastic.

"I should be if he was a little older," said the young lady, rather
enjoying her lover's displeasure.

"I don't believe he can play at all," growled Jedidiah. "He's fooled
Abner Webb, like as not. It's a pity we couldn't have Paul Beck."

"Very likely he can play better than Paul Beck," said Maria--not because
she thought so, but because she knew it would tease her partner.

"Don't be a fool, Maria," said Jedidiah, scarcely conscious of the
impoliteness of his speech.

The young lady, however, resented it at once.

"I am sure you are very polite, Mr. Jedidiah Burbank--so polite that I
think you had better find another partner!"

"Excuse me, Maria," said Jedidiah hastily, alarmed at the prospect of
being left without a partner. "Of course, I didn't mean anything."

"If you didn't mean it, what made you say it?" retorted Maria, tossing
her head. "I ain't used to being called a fool. I never knew a gentleman
to make such a remark to a lady. I think you'd better find some other
partner."

"I take it all back," said Jedidiah, in alarm. "I was only in fun."

"I don't like that kind of fun," said Maria, in a tone of dignified
coldness.

"Then I won't joke you again. I guess he can play well enough, if Abner
says so."

Miss Maria Snodgrass allowed herself to be propitiated, more especially
as she herself might have been left without a partner, had she adhered
to her determination and sent Jedidiah adrift.

He took his place in a quadrille, not exactly wishing Philip to fail,
but rather hoping that he would prove a poor performer, in order that he
might have a little triumph over Maria, who had the bad taste to prefer
the young musician's appearance to his.

Meanwhile Philip, following Jonas Webb across the room, had been
introduced to Frank Ingalls, who acted as manager.

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Gray," said Ingalls. "I hope we sha'n't make
you work too hard. We are very fond of dancing here."

"I don't get tired very easily," answered Philip. "I hope you will be
satisfied with my playing."

"No fear of that, Mr. Ingalls, I've heerd him play at home, and I tell
you he can do it."

"Thank you, Mr. Webb," said Philip, bowing his acknowledgment of the
compliment.

"I guess we may as well commence, Mr. Gray," said Mr. Ingalls. "The
boys seem to be getting impatient. Here's the order of dances for the
evening."

"Very well, Mr. Ingalls."

The manager raised his voice, and said, "Gentlemen and ladies, you
already know that Beck is sick, and cannot be with us this evening, as
he engaged to do. In his place we have engaged a young musician, who has
already gained a great reputation in his profession--"

Philip was rather surprised to hear this, but it was not for him to
gainsay it.

"Let me introduce to you Mr. Philip Gray."

Philip bowed and smiled, and, putting his violin in position,
immediately commenced a lively air.

In less than five minutes the manager felt perfectly at ease concerning
the young musician. It was clear that Philip understood his business.
Philip himself entered into the spirit of his performance. His cheek
flushed, his eyes sparkled, and he almost outdid himself.

When the first dance was concluded, there was a murmur of approval
throughout the ballroom. The dancers were both surprised and pleased.

"He's a smart boy!" said more than one. "He plays as well as Paul Beck,
and Paul's been play-in' for more'n twenty years."

"As well? I never heard Paul Beck play as well as that," said another.

Among those who were most pleased was Miss Maria Snodgrass.

"What do you think now, Mr. Burbank?" she said, addressing her partner.
"Do you think the boy can play now?"

"Yes, he can play most as well as Paul Beck," admitted Jedidiah.

"Most as well? Paul Beck can't begin to play as well as him," returned
Maria, who was not educated, and occasionally made slips in grammar.

"Just as you say, Maria," answered Jedidiah, submissively; "only don't
call me Mr. Burbank."

"Why? Ain't that your name?" asked the young lady demurely.

"Not to you, Maria."

"Well, I won't, if you'll take me up and introduce me to Mr. Gray."

"What for?" asked Jedidiah jealously.
