thank him."

"Yas, Missy," responded Aunt Connie, "but I reckons we wouldn't be
thankin' him if 'twan't fer yo'. Massa Robert HE knows dat all his
niggers gwine to be free jes' as soon as de Yankees come. Yas, indeedy,
he knows. But we shuahly go long wid yo', Missy, an' thanks him. We
knows our manners."

Many eyes turned to watch the smiling colored woman and the delighted
little negro girl who walked down King Street that afternoon, one on
each side of a little white girl who looked as well pleased as her
companions, for Sylvia decided that no time should be lost in telling
Mr. Robert Waite of how greatly his generosity was appreciated.

He welcomed Sylvia with his usual cordiality, and told Aunt Connie that
he wished her good fortune, and sent her and Estralla home.

"I will walk back with your young mistress," he said, and Sylvia felt
that it was the proudest day of her life when she walked up King Street
beside the friendly southerner.

"He talks just as if I were grown up," thought Sylvia gratefully, when
Mr. Waite spoke of the forts, and of the possibilities of war between
the northern and southern states.

"Tell your father not to hasten his preparations to leave Charleston;
you are among friends, and these difficulties may be adjusted," Mr.
Waite said as he bade Sylvia good-bye, and wished her a happy Christmas.




CHAPTER XIX

SYLVIA MAKES A PROMISE


"It doesn't seem a bit like Christmas," declared Sylvia, as she stood
at the sitting-room window looking out at the falling rain.

Christmas day of 1860 was a gloomy, rainy day in Charleston, and many
people felt exactly as Sylvia did, that it was not like Christmas.

Grace came over in the morning bringing a little chased gold ring for
Sylvia, which the little girl promised always to wear. She wished that
she could tell Grace about the lockets, but decided it would be better
to surprise Grace with the locket itself.

As soon as Grace returned home Sylvia ran to find her mother.

"We will go down street and buy the lockets to-morrow morning, won't
we, Mother?" she asked, and Mrs. Fulton promised that they would start
early.

Sylvia resolved that, if the lockets and pictures did not take all her
money, she would buy a doll for Estralla. She knew that nothing else
would please the little colored girl as much as a "truly" doll.

But the morning of December twenty-sixth found the city of Charleston
angry and excited. Crowds collected in the streets, and Mr. Fulton
received a message from Mr. Robert Waite asking him to remain at home
until Mr. Waite arrived.

"What is the matter, Father?" Sylvia asked.

"He isn't coming to take back Estralla, is he?"

"No, of course not, child. It is trouble over the forts," responded her
father. And in a short time Mr. Waite arrived. But he was not smiling
this morning. He was very grave and serious.

"Major Anderson has evacuated Moultrie, and he and his men are at Fort
Sumter," said Mr. Waite. "I came to assure you that whatever action
Charleston takes that I will protect your household and property as far
as possible."

Then Sylvia heard him say that Governor Pickens had seized Castle
Pinckney, and that troops had been sent to Sullivan's Island to occupy
Fort Moultrie, and the United States Arsenal, situated in the midst of
the city of Charleston, was also in possession of the secessionists.

Sylvia listened to every word, but without much idea of what it all
meant.

"Can't we buy the lockets to-day, Mother?" she asked.

"No, we must not go on the streets to-day," Mrs. Fulton answered; but
Mr. Waite smiled at the little girl and said:

"I will gladly accompany Miss Sylvia if she has errands to do," so
Sylvia told him about the pictures and lockets for Grace and Flora, and
Mr. Waite assured her mother and father that he could easily spare the
time to go with her upon so pleasant an errand. The friendly man
realized that the little household were troubled and anxious, and that
it would reassure them if their little girl could safely carry out her
plan. So the two set forth together.

Mr. Robert Waite was too well known for any southerner to doubt his
loyalty to South Carolina, and his visit to Mr. Fulton's house was in
itself a protection to the family. As they walked along Sylvia told him
how kind Grace and Flora had been to her.

"If we should go away the lockets will remind them how much I think of
them," she said, and Mr. Waite smiled and said: "Yes, indeed," but it
seemed to Sylvia that he was not really thinking about the lockets.

She held close to his hand, for there were crowds on every corner, and
loud and violent threats against Major Anderson were heard from nearly
every group. Sylvia heard one man declare that it was the duty of
Charleston men to fire upon Fort Sumter at once; and before they
reached the shop where she was to purchase the lockets Sylvia began to
fear that she would never see Captain Carleton again.

The lockets were purchased, and Mr. Waite took Sylvia to a studio to
sit for the pictures for the lockets. There was enough money left to
purchase a fine doll for Estralla, and Mr. Waite gave her a box filled
with candy of many kinds, shapes and flavors. All these things occupied
her thoughts so pleasantly that for a time she quite forgot the
disturbance in the streets, and all the trouble that seemed so near to
her and to her Charleston friends.

"I will call to-morrow," said Mr. Waite, as he left the little girl at
her own door. "And tell your father that he had best not go on the
streets unless he goes with my brother or myself."

This last message made Sylvia very sober. She came into the
sitting-room holding her packages, and found her mother and Mrs.
Carleton busy with their sewing, while her father was at his desk
writing. She repeated Mr. Waite's message, and her father nodded
silently.

Then Sylvia told them that the lockets and pictures would be ready the
following day. "And I have a doll for Estralla," she concluded.

"Why not make the doll a fine dress and mantle?" suggested Mrs.
Carleton. "Come up to my room and I will help you," and Sylvia agreed
smilingly.

Mrs. Carleton had a roll of crimson silk in her work-bag and before
supper time the new doll was dressed and ready for Estralla.

"This is for you, Estralla," Sylvia said, when Estralla came up to her
room, as she often did in the late afternoon.

"Fer me, Missy! He, he, I knows w'en you's jokin'; but 'tis a fine lady
doll," responded the little girl, wishing with all her heart that the
beautiful doll in the gorgeous silken dress which Sylvia was holding
toward her might really be hers.

"Take it, Estralla! It is for you. Truly it is," and Sylvia's tone was
so serious that Estralla came slowly forward and took the doll.

For a moment the two little girls stood looking at each other in
silence, Sylvia smiling, but Estralla with a surprised, half-anxious
expression.

"Don't be afraid of it. Can't you have a doll of your own?" said Sylvia.

"Mebbe I can," replied Estralla, and then two big tears ran down her
black cheeks.

"I'se got so much now, Missy Sylvia, dat I dunno as 'tis safe fer me to
hev a doll," she whispered; but in a moment she was all smiles, and ran
off to show her new treasure to her mother.

The pictures and the lockets proved all that Sylvia had hoped, and on
New Year's day, when Grace came in for her daily visit, Sylvia gave her
a small package.

"Please open it, Gracie!" she said, all eagerness to see her friend's
delight.

Mr. Fulton had purchased a slender chain for each locket, and as Grace
held up the pretty gift she exclaimed delightedly: "Oh, Sylvia! It is
lovely, and I'll always wear it," and looked at the tiny picture of her
friend with smiling satisfaction.

Sylvia had written a letter to Flora, and Grace promised to see that
the locket and letter should reach her safely.

Every day Mr. Robert Waite or his brother escorted Mr. Fulton upon any
errand of business to which he was obliged to attend. News had reached
Charleston that a steamer with supplies and reinforcements for Major
Anderson was on its way, and Mr. Robert Waite declared that the
Confederates would never permit it to reach the fort.

Mrs. Carleton was very anxious. She had not received any message from
her husband.

"If I could sail a boat I would go to Fort Sumter myself," she said one
morning as she and Sylvia stood at a window overlooking the harbor.

"I can sail a boat," responded Sylvia.

Mrs. Carleton turned and looked at the little girl.

"If all this trouble ends in war, if the Confederates really dare fire
upon the flag of the United States, I do not know how I can get any
word from my husband," she said.

Sylvia thought that her friend's voice sounded as if she were about to
cry, and the little girl slipped her hand into Mrs. Carleton's. She
wished there was something she could say to comfort her. Then she
thought quickly that there was something.

"I'll sail you over to the fort to see him whenever you ask me to," she
said impulsively.

"Dear child, I may have to ask you, but I hope not. 'Twould be a
dangerous undertaking," she said, leaning over to kiss Sylvia's cheek.

That was the sixth of January, 1861, and on the ninth a steamer, The
Star of the West, with supplies and reinforcements for Major Anderson,
entered Charleston harbor and was fired upon by a Confederate battery
concealed in the sand-hills at Sullivan Island.

And now for many days the Fultons heard only discouraging news.
Everywhere there was great activity among the Confederates. Mrs.
Carleton became more and more anxious for news of Captain Carleton, but
she did not remind Sylvia of her promise.

Grace and Sylvia were together a great deal, and every morning Sylvia
would run out to the front porch to wave a good-bye to Grace on her way
to school. Then there was Estralla's lesson hour, her own studies, and
Mrs. Carleton was teaching her to crochet a silk purse as a gift to Mr.
Robert Waite, so that Sylvia did not think very much about the soldiers
at Fort Sumter.

"What do you think about starting for Boston with us, Mrs. Carleton?"
Mr. Fulton said one night just as Sylvia was going up-stairs. "I really
think the time has come for me to take Sylvia and her mother to Boston,
and I am sure Captain Carleton would want you to go with us."

"And Estralla and Aunt Connie will go, too; won't they, Father?" said
Sylvia, running back to her father's side.

"Yes, child. But I thought you were upstairs," responded Mr. Fulton.
"Do not speak of our leaving Charleston to anyone. Remember. Not to
Grace or Estralla, until your mother or I give you permission."

Sylvia promised. It seemed to her the best of good news that they would
soon see Grandmother Fulton, and she went happily off to bed thinking
of all she would have to tell her grandmother, and of the long letters
she would write to Flora and Grace. "And when summer comes they must
both come and make me a visit," she thought, little knowing that when
summer came no little southern girl would be allowed to visit a Boston
girl.




CHAPTER XX

"TWO LITTLE DARKY GIRLS"


"When will Mr. Lincoln be President?" Sylvia asked a few mornings after
her father's announcement of his intention to return to Boston.

"He was inaugurated yesterday," replied her mother.

"Then can't Captain Carleton go north with us?" asked Sylvia, who had
convinced herself that when Mr. Lincoln was in charge of the Government
that all the troubles over Charleston's forts would end.

But Mrs. Fulton shook her head.

"Captain Carleton must stay and perhaps fight to defend the flag," she
replied. "I wish we could leave at once, but we must stay as long as we
can."

Sylvia listened soberly. She wondered what her mother would say if she
knew of her promise to Mrs. Carleton to take a message to Fort Sumter
if Mrs. Carleton should ask her to do so.

The warm days of early March made the southern city full of fragrance
and beauty. Many flowers were in bloom, the hedges were green, and the
air soft and warm. Sylvia and Grace often spoke of Flora, and wished
that they could again visit the plantation.

Philip had brought Sylvia a letter from Flora, thanking her for the
locket, and hoping that they would see each other again. Philip had not
come into the house. He seemed much older to Sylvia than he did on her
visit to the plantation in October. He said that Ralph was in the
Confederate army. "I'd be a soldier if I was only a little older," he
declared; and Sylvia did not even ask him about Dinkie, or the ponies.
She wished that she could tell him that very soon she was going to
Boston, but she knew that she must not; so she said good-bye, and
Philip walked down the path, and waved his cap to her as he reached the
gate.

It had been many weeks since the Butterfly had sailed about Charleston
harbor. But the little boat was in the charge of an old negro who took
good care of it. The negro knew Sylvia, and he knew that it was through
her interest in Estralla that the little negro girl and her mother had
been given their freedom. Now and then he appeared at Aunt Connie's
kitchen, and one warm day toward the last of March, when Sylvia was
wandering about the garden, she saw Uncle Peter going up the walk to
the rear of the house.

"Oh, Uncle Peter! Wait!" she called and ran to ask him about the boat.

Uncle Peter had a great deal of news to tell. He said that unless Major
Anderson and his soldiers left Fort Sumter at once that all the forts,
and the new batteries built by the Confederates, would open fire upon
Sumter and destroy it.

"I hears a good deal, Missy, 'deed I does," he declared, "but I doan'
let on as I hears. Massa Linkum he's gwine to send a lot o' big ships
down here 'fore long. Yas, indeed."

"I wish I could have a sail in the Butterfly again," said Sylvia, a
little wistfully.

"Do you, Missy? Well, I reckons you can. I doan' believe any body'd
stop me a-givin' yo' a little sail 'roun' de harbor," said Uncle Peter.
"I 'spec's Major Anderson is a-waitin' an' a-watchin' fer dem ships of
Massa Linkum to come a-sailin' in," continued the old negro; for it was
a time when the colored people were eager and hopeful for some news
that might promise them their freedom.

Sylvia knew that Mrs. Carleton was worried and unhappy. It was known in
Charleston that Fort Sumter was near the end of its food supplies, and
that unless the Government at Washington sent reinforcements and
provisions very soon by ships that the little garrison would be at the
mercy of the Confederates, who were daily growing in strength.

As Sylvia left Uncle Peter and walked back to the house she was
thinking of her promise to Mrs. Carleton.

"Perhaps she won't ask me. But if I could go and see Captain Carleton,
and tell him that she was going to Boston with us, and then bring her
back a message, I know she'd be happier," thought the little girl. And
she thought, too, of the pleasure it would be to once more sail the
Butterfly to Fort Sumter.

She sat down on the porch steps, and a moment later Estralla appeared
bringing a plate of freshly baked sugar cookies from Aunt Connie.

"Mammy says she made these 'special for you, Missy," declared Estralla
smilingly.

"I'll go and thank her myself," said Sylvia, taking the plate, and
offering one of the cookies to Estralla.

"Uncle Pete he say as de soldiers at Fort Sumter mus' be gettin'
hungry," said the little colored girl. "I wish you and I could take
Captain Carleton some of these cookies," responded Sylvia.

"If you was black like I is we could go a-sailin' right off to de fort
in plain daylight," said Estralla.

Sylvia sprang to her feet so quickly that she nearly upset the plate of
cookies.

"Could we? Oh, Estralla, could we really?" she exclaimed.

Estralla looked at her little mistress with wondering eyes.

"Yas, course; nobody'd mind two leetle nigger gals. But you ain't
black, Missy."

"But, Estralla, listen. I could be black. You could rub soot from the
chimney all over my face and hands. And I could pin my hair close on
top of my head and twist one of your mammy's handkerchiefs tight over
it. Then nobody would know me." Sylvia had quite forgotten the fine
cookies. She was holding Estralla by the arm, and talking very rapidly.
Estralla was almost frightened at Sylvia's eagerness.

"Yas, Missy; but what for do you wanter go?" she asked.

"Oh, Estralla! If the men are hungry we could carry them something to
eat. But most of all I want to see Captain Carleton, and get some
message for his wife. She is so unhappy to go away without a word."

"Come 'long down in de garden," said Estralla, now as interested as
Sylvia herself, "an' tells me more whar' nobody'll be hearin'," and the
two little girls hurried off to a far corner of the pleasant garden.

"Uncl' Peter won' let us take the boat," Estralla objected as Sylvia
told her how easy the plan would be; "an' how be you gwine to get all
blacked up without folks knowin' it?"

But Sylvia had an answer for every objection.

"I'll come to your cabin and dress up there, and I will ask your mammy
to give me some food for a poor man. Some cookies and a cake," she
said. "We will start early to-morrow morning. And, Estralla, we will
have to tell Uncle Peter, or he won't let us have the boat."

"Lan', Missy, I'll do jes' w'at yo' says. But I reckon Uncle Pete won'
let us. Wat yo' mammy gwine to think w'en you ain't home to your
dinner?" responded Estralla. But she was finally convinced that Missy
Sylvia could carry out the plan, and agreed to have a large quantity of
soot ready at her mother's cabin the next morning.

Sylvia was glad that she had eaten only one of the cookies. She carried
the remainder to her room and then went to the kitchen.

"Will you make me a fine big cake, Aunt Connie?" she asked.

"Lan', course I will, chile! But, w'at you wan' it fer?" answered Aunt
Connie, smiling down at the little girl whom she loved so dearly.

"It's a secret, Aunt Connie! I want to give it away, and I don't want
to tell even my mother until--well," and Sylvia hesitated a moment, and
then continued, "until next week. Then I will tell her, and you too."

"Dat's right, Missy. I'll make yo' de finest cake I knows how. Le's
see! I'll put citron, an' raisins, an' currants in it. An' butter! Yas,
thar'll be a fine lot o' things in dat cake!" and Aunt Connie rolled
her eyes, and lifted her hands as if she could already taste its
richness.

All that afternoon Sylvia could think of nothing but the proposed trip.
She sat with Mrs. Carleton a little while before supper, and told her
of what Uncle Peter had said: that ships from the north were on the way
to the aid of Fort Sumter.

"Oh! I do wish I could send the news to Sumter. It would give them all
courage," said Mrs. Carleton.

Sylvia was for a moment tempted to tell her friend that she would carry
the message, but she kept silent, thinking to herself that here was
another reason for her to carry out her plan.

"If you could send a message to Captain Carleton what would you say?"
questioned Sylvia, and Mrs. Carleton smiled at Sylvia's serious voice.

"Why, if I could only let him know that I was safe and well and going
to Boston with you, in case Sumter really is attacked; I know that is
what he wants to hear."

Mrs. Carleton's smile vanished. Sylvia realized that this kind friend
was troubled, and wished with all her heart that she could say:
"To-morrow I will tell you all about Captain Carleton." But she knew
that she must keep silent until she had carried out her plan.

Sylvia was the first one at the breakfast table the next morning, and
was delighted when her mother said that she and Mrs. Carleton were
invited to luncheon at the house of a friend.

"Aunt Connie and Estralla will take good care of you," Mrs. Fulton
added, and Sylvia felt her face flush. But she made no reply, and soon
hurried to the cabin where Estralla was waiting for her.

It was still early in the forenoon when two little negro girls, one
carrying a large package wrapped in a newspaper, appeared at the wharf
where the Butterfly was moored. Uncle Peter was not to be seen. But he
had just left the boat, whose sail had not even been lowered, and the
two girls hurried on board. In a moment Sylvia had unfastened the rope,
pushed the boat clear of the landing, and rudder in hand was steering
the boat out toward the channel.

Two or three men in uniform watched the little "darkies," as they
supposed both the girls to be, with amusement. Negro children were
always playing about, and no attention was paid to them.

"My landy," whispered Estralla, "dat was jes' as easy. W'at Uncle Pete
do w'en he fin's de boat gone?"

But it happened that Uncle Peter had been sent on an errand to a
distant part of the town, and before he returned the Butterfly was well
down the harbor.

Once or twice a guard-boat passed them closely enough to make sure that
there were only two colored children in the boat, and they came up
under the walls of Fort Sumter without a hindrance. The sentries at the
fort had watched the little craft with anxious eyes, wondering if it
could be bringing any message. But when the soldiers looked down at the
two little negro girls they laughed, in spite of their disappointment.
When Sylvia said that her name was Sylvia Fulton, and that she had come
to see Captain Carleton, a sentry exclaimed: "That girl has blacked her
face. She is white."

But Captain Carleton could hardly believe that it was his little friend
Sylvia. And he was eager to hear all that she could tell him. Estralla
held the cake and cookies, which she had carefully wrapped in a
newspaper, and the Captain seemed as much pleased with the paper as
with the cake.

"You can write a letter to Mrs. Carleton and we will take it,"
suggested Sylvia, and then she told him Uncle Peter's news: that the
President was sending ships to the aid of the fort.

"That is great news," said the Captain; "if it is only true we may keep
the fort for the Union."

Within the hour of their arrival Sylvia and Estralla were on their way
home. The Captain had praised and thanked Sylvia for the loyal
friendship that had prompted her visit.

"Mrs. Carleton and I will always remember your courage," he said, as he
handed her the letter.

"I am so glad I thought about it; but it was really Estralla. She said
if I was black we could come," Sylvia had replied.

Then the boat swung clear and headed toward Charleston.

"I am not going to land at the big wharves," said Sylvia. "I am going
to that wharf near Miss Patten's garden. And then we'll tell Uncle
Peter where the Butterfly is."

It was early in the afternoon when Estralla appeared at the cloor of
her mammy's kitchen.

"Whar on airth you been? An' whar's yo' missy?" demanded Aunt Connie.
"Didn' I makes her a fine om'lit fer her dinner, an' it's ruinated."

"Missy wants a big pitcher of hot water," replied Estralla, dancing
about just beyond Aunt Connie's reach.

"Missy Sylvia say to tell you we been carryin' de cake to her fr'en',
an' she gwine to tell you, Mammy," explained Estralla when her mammy
had finally grasped her firmly by the shoulders.

"W'y didn' yo' say dat firs' place? H'ar's de hot water," and Estralla
hurried off to help Sylvia scrub off the sticky soot which had so well
disguised her; and when Mrs. Fulton and Mrs. Carleton returned they
found a very rosy-faced smiling little girl on the porch all ready to
tell them of her trip to Fort Sumter, and to give Mrs. Carleton the
longed-for news from her husband.




CHAPTER XXI
