"That," said the stranger, pointing out a large, somber building to the
left, "is the courthouse. The last time I entered it was to be present
at the trial of a young man of my acquaintance who had fallen into evil
courses, and, yielding to temptation, had stolen from his employer. It
was a sad sight," said the stranger, shaking his head.

"I should think it must have been," said Herbert.

"Oh, why, why will young men yield to the seductions of pleasure?"
exclaimed the stranger, feelingly.

"Was he convicted?" asked Herbert.

"Yes, and sentenced to a three years term in the State prison," answered
his companion. "It always makes me feel sad when I think of the fate of
that young man."

"I should think it would, sir."

"I have mentioned it as a warning to one who is just beginning life,"
continued the stranger. "But here is our car."

A Charlestown car, with an outside sign, Bunker Hill, in large letters,
came by, and the two got on board.

They rode down Cornhill, and presently the stranger pointed out Faneuil
Hall.

"Behold the Cradle of Liberty," he said. "Of course, you have heard of
Faneuil Hall?"

"Yes, sir," and Herbert gazed with interest at the building of which he
had heard so much.

It was but a short ride to Charlestown. They got out at the foot of a
steep street, at the head of which the tall, granite column which crowns
the summit of Bunker Hill stood like a giant sentinel ever on guard.




CHAPTER XVI. A NEW BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL.



Just opposite the monument is a small, one-story structure, where views
of the shaft may be purchased and tickets obtained.

"There is a small admission fee," said Herbert's companion.

"How much is it?" asked our hero.

"Twenty cents."

As Herbert thrust his hand into his pocket for the necessary money, his
companion said:

"You had better let me pay for both tickets."

Though he said this, he didn't make any motion to do so.

"No, I will pay for both," said Herbert.

"But I really cannot permit you to pay for mine."

And still the speaker made no movement to purchase his ticket.

Herbert settled the matter by laying half a dollar on the desk,
and asking for two tickets. He began to see that, in spite of his
disclaimer, his guide intended him to do so. On the whole, this didn't
please him. He would rather have had his offer frankly accepted.

"I didn't mean to have you pay," said the young man, as they passed
through the door admitting them to an inner apartment, from which there
was an exit into a small, inclosed yard, through which they were to
reach the entrance to a spiral staircase by which the ascent was made.

Herbert did not answer, for he understood that his guide was not telling
the truth, and he did not like falsehood or deceit.

They entered the monument and commenced the ascent.

"We have a tiresome ascent before us," said the other.

"How many steps are there?" asked Herbert.

"About three hundred," was the reply.

At different points in the ascent they came to landings where they could
catch glimpses of the outward world through long, narrow, perpendicular
slits in the sides of the monument.

At last they reached the top.

Herbert's guide looked about him sharply, and seemed disappointed to
find a lady and gentleman and child also enjoying the view.

Herbert had never been so high before. Indeed, he had never been in any
high building, and he looked about him with a novel sense of enjoyment.

"What a fine view there is here!" he said.

"True," assented his companion. "Let me point out to you the different
towns visible to the naked eye."

"I wish you would," said the boy.

So his guide pointed out Cambridge, Chelsea, Malden, the Charles and
Mystic Rivers, gleaming in the sunshine, the glittering dome of the
Boston State House and other conspicuous objects. Herbert felt that it
was worth something to have a companion who could do him this service,
and he felt the extra twenty cents he had paid for his companion's
ticket was a judicious investment.

He noticed with some surprise that his companion seemed annoyed by the
presence of the other party already referred to. He scowled and shrugged
his shoulders when he looked at them, and in a low voice, inaudible to
those of whom he spoke, he said to Herbert: "Are they going to stay here
all day?"

"What does it matter to me if they do?" returned Herbert, in surprise.

Indeed, to him they seemed very pleasant people, and he was especially
attracted by the sweet face of the little girl. He wished he had been
fortunate enough to possess such a sister.

At last, however, they finished their sightseeing, and prepared to
descend. Herbert's companion waited till the sound of their descending
steps died away, and then, turning to Herbert, said in a quick, stern
tone: "Now give me the money you have in your pocket."

"What do you mean?" he said.

Herbert recoiled, and stared at the speaker in undisguised astonishment.

"I mean just what I say," returned the other. "You have one hundred and
fifty dollars in your pocket. You need not deny it, for I saw you draw
it from the bank and put it away."

"Are you a thief, then?" demanded Herbert.

"No matter what I am, I must have that money," said the stranger. "I
came over with you exclusively to get it, and I mean business."

He made a step towards Herbert, but the boy faced him unflinchingly, and
answered resolutely: "I mean business, too. The money is not mine, and I
shall not give it up."

"Take care!" said the other, menacingly, "we are alone here. You are a
boy and I am a man."

"I know that; but you will have to fight to get the money," said
Herbert, without quailing.

He looked to the staircase, but his treacherous guide stood between him
and it, and he was practically a prisoner at the top of the monument.

"Don't be a fool!" said the stranger. "You may as well give up the money
to me first as last."

"I don't propose to give it up to you at all," said Herbert. "My
employer trusted me with it, and I mean to be true to my trust."

"You can tell him that it was taken from you--that you could not help
yourself. Now hand it over!"

"Never!" exclaimed Herbert, resolutely.

"We'll see about that," said his companion, seizing the boy and
grappling with him.

Herbert was a strong boy for his age, and he accepted the challenge.
Though his antagonist was a man, he found that the boy was powerful, and
not to be mastered as easily as he anticipated.

"Confound you!" he muttered, "I wish I had a knife!"

Though Herbert made a vigorous resistance, his opponent was his superior
in strength, and would ultimately have got the better of him. He had
thrown Herbert down, and was trying to thrust his hand into his coat
pocket, when a step was heard, and a tall man of Western appearance
stepped on the scene.

"Hello!" he said, surveying the two combatants in surprise. "What's all
this? Let that boy alone, you skunk, you!"

As he spoke, he seized the man by the collar and jerked him to his feet.

"What does all this mean?" he asked, turning from one to the other.

"This boy has robbed me of one hundred and fifty dollars," said the man,
glibly. "I fell in with him in the Boston cars, and he relieved me of a
roll of bills which I had drawn from a bank in Boston."

"What have you got to say to this?" asked the Western man, turning to
Herbert, who was now on his feet.

"Only this," answered Herbert, "that it is a lie. It was I who drew
the money from the Merchants' Bank in Boston. This man saw me cash the
check, followed me, and offered to come here with me, when I asked him
for directions."

"That's a likely story!" sneered the young man. "My friend here is too
sharp to believe it."

"Don't call me your friend!" said the Western man, bluntly. "I'm more
than half convinced you're a scamp."

"I don't propose to stay here and be insulted. Let the boy give me my
money, and I won't have him arrested."

"Don't be in too much of a hurry, young man! I want to see about this
thing. What bank did you draw the money from?"

"From the Merchants' Bank--the boy has got things reversed. He saw me
draw it, inveigled himself into my confidence, and picked my pocket."

"Look here--stop right there! Your story doesn't hang together!" said
the tall Westerner, holding up his finger. "You said you met this boy in
a horse car."

"We came over together in a Charlestown horse car," said the rogue,
abashed.

"You've given yourself away. Now make yourself scarce! Scoot!"

The rascal looked in the face of the tall, resolute man from the
West, and thought it prudent to obey. He started to descend, but a
well-planted kick accelerated his progress, and he fell down several
steps, bruising his knees.

"Thank you, sir!" said Herbert, gratefully. "It was lucky you came up
just as you did. The rascal had got his hand on the money."

"He is a miserable scamp!" answered Herbert's new friend. "If there'd
been a police-man handy, I'd have given him in charge. I've come clear
from Wisconsin to see where Warren fell, but I didn't expect to come
across such a critter as that on Bunker Hill."

Herbert pointed out to his new friend the objects in view, repeating
the information he had so recently acquired. Then, feeling that he could
spare no more time, he descended the stairs and jumped on board a horse
car bound for Boston.




CHAPTER XVII. AN ACCEPTABLE PRESENT.



As the clock at the Old South Church struck one, Herbert ascended
the steps of Parker's Hotel, and walked into the reading room. George
Melville was already there.

"You are on time, Herbert," he said, with a smile, as our hero made his
appearance.

"Yes, sir; but I began to think I should miss my appointment."

"Where have you been?"

"To Bunker Hill."

"Did you ascend the monument?"

"Yes, sir, and had a fight at the summit."

Mr. Melville looked at Herbert in amazement.

"Had a fight at the top of Bunker Hill Monument?" he ejaculated.

"Yes, sir; let me tell you about it."

When the story was told, Mr. Melville said: "That was certainly a
remarkable adventure, Herbert. Still, I am not sorry that it occurred."

It was Herbert's turn to look surprised.

"I will tell you why. It proves to me that you are worthy of my
confidence, and can be trusted with the care of money. It has also
taught you a lesson, to beware of knaves, no matter how plausible they
may be."

"I haven't got over my surprise yet, sir, at discovering the real
character of the man who went with me. I am sorry I met him. I don't
like to distrust people."

"Nor I. But it is not necessary to distrust everybody. In your
journey through the world you will make many agreeable and trustworthy
acquaintances in whom it will be safe to confide. It is only necessary
to be cautious and not give your confidence too soon."

"Oh, I didn't mention that I met somebody from Wayneboro," said Herbert.

"Was it Eben Graham?"

"Yes."

"I met him myself on Washington Street. Did you speak to him?"

"Yes, sir."

"I suppose he goes back to-night?"

"I don't think he will go back at all, Mr. Melville."

His employer looked at him inquiringly.

"I saw him buy a ticket to Chicago, though he does not know it,"
continued Herbert. "When he spoke with me he didn't admit it, but spoke
of going back by an afternoon train."

"I am afraid he has appropriated some of his father's funds," said
Melville. "I doubt if Ebenezer Graham would voluntarily furnish him the
means of going West."

"That was just what occurred to me," said Herbert; "but I didn't like to
think that Eben would steal."

"Perhaps he has not. We shall be likely to hear when we return. But you
must be hungry. We will go in to dinner."

Herbert followed Mr. Melville into the dining room, where a good dinner
was ordered, and partaken of. Herbert looked over the bill of fare,
but the high prices quite startled him. He was not used to patronizing
hotels, and it seemed to him that the price asked for a single dish
ought to be enough to pay for a whole dinner for two. He knew about what
it cost for a meal at home, and did not dream that it would amount to so
much more at a hotel.

When the check was brought Herbert looked at it.

"Two dollars and a half!" he exclaimed.

"It costs an awful amount to live in Boston."

"Oh a dinner can be got much cheaper at most places in Boston," said
George Melville, smiling, "but I am used to Parker's, and generally come
here."

"I am glad it doesn't cost so much to live in Wayneboro," said Herbert.
"We couldn't afford even one meal a day."

"You haven't asked me what the doctor said," remarked Melville, as they
left the dining room.

"Excuse me, Mr. Melville. It wasn't from any lack of interest."

"He advises me to go West by the first of October, either to Colorado or
Southern California."

Herbert's countenance fell. The first of October would soon come, and
his pleasant and profitable engagement with Mr. Melville would close.

"I am sorry," he said, gravely.

"I am not so sorry as I should have been a few weeks ago," said
Melville. "Then I should have looked forward to a journey as lonely and
monotonous. Now, with a companion, I think I may have a pleasant time."

"Who is going with you, Mr. Melville?" asked Herbert, feeling, it must
be confessed, a slight twinge of jealousy.

"I thought perhaps you would be willing to accompany me," said Melville.

"Would you really take me, Mr. Melville?" cried Herbert, joyfully.

"Yes, if you will go."

"I should like nothing better. I have always wanted to travel. It quite
takes my breath away to think of going so far away."

"I should hardly venture to go alone," continued George Melville. "I
shall need some one to look after the details of the journey, and to
look after me if I fall sick. Do you think you would be willing to do
that?"

"I hope you won't fall sick, Mr. Melville; but if you do, I will take
the best care of you I know how."

"I am sure you will, Herbert, and I would rather have you about me than
a man. Indeed, I already begin to think of you as a younger brother."

"Thank you, Mr. Melville," said Herbert, gratefully. "I am glad you do."

"Do you think your mother will object to your leaving home, Herbert?"

"Not with you. She knows I shall be well provided for with you. Can I
arrange to send money regularly to mother?" asked the boy. "I shouldn't
like to think of her as suffering for want of it."

"Yes, but to guard against emergencies, we can leave her a sum of money
before you start."

After dinner Mr. Melville proposed to Herbert to accompany him on a
walk up Washington Street, They walked slowly, Herbert using his eyes
