Captain Clark's party went down the Yellowstone River to the Missouri
River.
Here they met two white men.
These were the first white men besides themselves that they had seen for
a year and four months.
They were glad to hear news from the East.
Soon after they met these white men, Captain Lewis and the other
soldiers came down to them.
This was in August.
Captain Lewis had been shot by one of his best men.
The man thought that Captain Lewis was an elk, because his clothes were
brown.
The man was very sorry for having shot him.
Captain Lewis soon got well.
The soldiers were happy to be together again.
They forgot their troubles.
They went down the Missouri, singing.

[Illustration: THE WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE AS DRAWN BY CAPTAIN LEWIS IN HIS
JOURNAL]

They were glad they had gone West.
They had taken the country for the Americans.
They had made friends with the Indians.
They knew where food could be found.
They knew about the animals and plants.
Now other people could find the way from the maps the captains had made.



dol lars     vil lage


SACAJAWEA SAYS GOOD-BYE TO THE SOLDIERS.

Sacajawea's husband would not go to the captains' home.
He wanted to live with the Mandans.

[Illustration: A MANDAN EARTH LODGE]

So Sacajawea had to say good-bye to the soldiers.
The captains gave her husband five hundred dollars.
They did not give Sacajawea any money.
In those days, people did not think of paying women.
All the party were sorry to leave Sacajawea and the baby.
Sacajawea was sorry to stay behind.
She stood on the bank of the river watching the soldiers as long as she
could see them.
The soldiers went down the Missouri to its mouth.
When they saw the village there, they fired off all their guns.
The people came out to see them and cheered that they were home again.




Cen ten nial     Port land     Or e gon
for est ry       build ing     not ed
fair      hon or     stat ue   suc cess


THE CENTENNIAL.

The American people have always been glad that Lewis and Clark made this
long, hard journey.
That was just one hundred years ago.
In this year of 1905, the American people are holding a centennial fair
in honor of the Lewis and Clark journey.
The Fair is at Portland, Oregon, because Lewis and Clark reached the
Pacific Ocean in Oregon.
At the Fair, there is a statue of Sacajawea and her baby.
This statue is put there because Lewis and Clark wrote in their books:
"The wonderful Bird-Woman did a full man's share to make the trip a
success, besides taking care of her baby. She was one of the best of
mothers."
Some day, you can read these books for yourself, and learn more about
Sacajawea and Captains Lewis and Clark.

[Illustration: THE FORESTRY BUILDING, LEWIS AND CLARK CENTENNIAL]

The forestry building is made from the large trees for which Oregon is
noted.
Fort Clatsop was built from the large trees of Oregon, too, but the
soldiers did not know how to make such a fine building as this one
hundred years ago.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Bird-Woman of the Lewis and Clark
Expedition, by Katherine Chandler

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BIRD-WOMAN ***

This file should be named 5742.txt or 5742.zip

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
