world, and that no one can ever set me right," was Cornelli's truthful
information. Then she added: "She says that no child on earth looks
as ugly as I do and that nobody in the world will ever like me. I know
that it is true, and I only wish nobody were coming to you; then I
could always be alone with you."

"Cornelli, I am quite sure that you would do right in obeying the
ladies," said Martha. "If you did what they say, they would love you
as well as everybody else does."

"No, no, Martha, you don't know how it is," Cornelli said, quite
frightened. "I'll do everything they say, but I can never push my hair
away, for then it would be worse still and everybody could see it."

Martha shook her head.

"I do not know what you mean, Cornelli. Please come to me just as often
as you can. I shall always love you more than anybody who might ever
come here. If you did not come, it would hurt me dreadfully. Then I
would rather not have the rector's son here, glad as I am now that he
is coming."

"All right, Martha, then I shall come," Cornelli promised. "We can
easily be alone together in the kitchen, for I want to see you alone.
I shall not come on Monday, for that is the day they arrive. On Tuesday,
though, I'll come. Then we'll go together to the kitchen."

Martha promised this and Cornelli went home in the same way as she had
come. Not once did she run to the meadow to pick forget-me-nots or
other flowers that were sparkling there.

When Monday came, she was wondering if a carriage would arrive with
a proud city boy and a lady with a high feather hat, both of whom would
look down on her with disdain. Cornelli settled down beside the garden
fence, for from there she could conveniently survey the road. But she
saw no carriage, though she watched through both the morning and the
afternoon. She really was very glad, for she was quite sure that nobody
had arrived. Next day when the time came for her to be free, she walked
over to Martha's little house.

"Oh, I am so glad that nobody has come. Now I can be alone with you
and don't have to go to the kitchen--"

Cornelli had said these words on entering, but she suddenly stopped.
A boy she had never seen sat at the table in the room and Martha was
just clearing away the supper things. So he had come after all and had
even heard what she had said. Oh, it was dreadful! But the boy was
laughing.

Cornelli wanted to withdraw quickly, but the boy called out: "Please
come in and let us get acquainted. Mrs. Martha has already told me
about you. Just come in," he continued, when he saw that Cornelli still
hesitated. "If you want to be alone with Mrs. Wolf I can easily go to
my own room."

Cornelli felt that it was very nice of the boy not to resent her words
and to be willing to give place to her. She therefore entered. Martha
had already put a chair in readiness for her and greeted her heartily.

"I expected you, Cornelli," she said. "Just sit down here a little
with our guest. His name is Dino Halm and he already knows your name.
I am sure you will have a good time together. I'll go up in the meantime
and if you need me you can find me in the room upstairs."

Martha, thinking that the children could get acquainted better if they
were left alone, had planned to unpack her new arrival's things while
they were together. She put his belongings neatly away in the wardrobe
and the drawers in order to make him feel at home in his tidy little
chamber.

"Why did you think that we did not come?" asked Dino as soon as Martha
had left the room and Cornelli was sitting beside him silently.

"Because I did not see the carriage," she replied.

"The carriage? Well, I can believe you," said Dino. "We walked more
than an hour, in fact, nearly two, before we got here from the station.
Do you just hop into a carriage when you go to the station?"

"Yes, I do; I always go there with Papa," replied Cornelli.

"But where do the horses always come from?" Dino wanted to know.

"From our stable," was the answer.

"Have you your own carriage and two horses of your own, just to be
able to drive about?" Dino questioned, full of astonishment.

"Yes, we have the two brown ones and six others to carry away the iron
from the foundry."

"Good gracious, eight horses!" Dino exclaimed. "You are lucky to be
able to sit in a carriage with your father and drive around!"

"Can't you do that?" asked Cornelli.

"Never in my life," Dino replied in a voice full of conviction. "First
of all, I do not have a father. Besides that, we do not own a stable
and horses. How lucky you are! Have you anything else in the stable?"

"Oh yes, lots more. Six cows and a large gray stable cat," Cornelli
informed him. "Then there is an old nanny goat and a young snow white
kid, about whose neck I tied a red ribbon. You are going to drink milk
from our cow, did you know that?"

"Oh, I shall love to do that!" Dino exclaimed. "Do you think I'll be
allowed to go to the stable and look at the horses?"

"Certainly you will; Matthew will love to show them to you, and Martha
will willingly let you go. If I only could go with you!" And Cornelli
uttered a deep sigh.

"Well, I should think you certainly could do that, when the stable
belongs to you. Who would hinder you, I'd like to know?" Dino said.
"Do you know what we'll do? We'll hitch the little kid to a cart. Won't
that be lovely? It can pull you and I shall be the coachman. I once
saw such a little carriage on a promenade in town."

Cornelli had already had that thought herself, but she knew now that
she could never again go to the stable. It was suddenly clear to her
that she could not run about as before and that she could not be happy
any more. The chief reason for it all was clear to her, the reason
that prevented her from being carefree and bright as in the old times.
She did not answer, but gave forth a profound sigh, profounder than
the one she had uttered before.

"Why do you sigh, as if you had to carry a mountain about with you--a
load that keeps you from going forward? Why do you do it?" asked Dino.

"I can't tell anyone. You couldn't, either, if you had the trouble I
have," replied the little girl.

"Oh, yes, I could. There is nothing in the world I couldn't tell,"
Dino asserted. "If you can't confide in other people, you can always
tell your mother, for she can always smooth everything out for you.
Just go to her and tell her about it. That will relieve you and
everything will come right."

"Yes, and now I can say what you said to me before. You are lucky and
much luckier than I am," said Cornelli with a trembling voice. "I never
can go to my mother because I have none. Now you see how well off I
am! I am sure you would never exchange with me, would you?"

Dino looked quite frightened.

"I did not know that you had no mother," he said, full of pity. In his
mind he saw his own mother, the way she looked at him, so full of love
that it always lightened his heart whenever anything troubled him. And
poor Cornelli had to miss all that!

Even the stable with the horses, the large garden with all the fruit,
about which Martha had told him so much, appeared to him now in a
different light.

Full of decision he said: "No indeed, I would not change with you."

But a great pity for the motherless child welled up in Dino's heart
and he longed to be her protector. He could understand now why Cornelli
looked so strange; he had even noticed it as soon as he had seen her.
There was no mother to fix everything the way it should be.

"We'll try to be friends, Cornelli! But you must push your hair back
from your forehead first of all; one can hardly see your eyes. Nobody
wears hair like that. I don't see how such long hair can stay there
without blowing off. What on earth did you paste it on with?"

"With glue," replied Cornelli.

"How nasty! Come, I'll cut it all off, and then your eyes and your
forehead will be clear. You can hardly see that way."

Dino had seized the scissors that were lying beside Martha's work
basket, but Cornelli, struggling against him with both hands, fairly
screamed: "Let it be. It has to be that way. Put the scissors away!"

"I won't hurt you. But don't scream so loud!" said Dino quietly, putting
down the scissors again. "I only wanted to do you a favor. If my two
sisters, Agnes and Nika, could see you, they would laugh at you; they
would not like the way you pasted on those locks."

"I know that. But they do not need to see me at all," said Cornelli
crossly. "Nobody needs to see me. I know that nobody likes me, but I
don't care."

With these words Cornelli ran away. Dino was terribly astonished and
stood looking at the door through which Cornelli had disappeared without
even a word of farewell.

When Martha again entered the little room and was looking at Cornelli's
empty chair, Dino said: "What a queer child she is. I never thought
she would be so unfriendly."

He related how they had passed the time together and how Cornelli had
suddenly run off without even saying good-bye. He had not wanted to
offend her.

Martha shook her head and said: "Cornelli never was that way before.
I am so worried about her, for she is absolutely changed. You must not
think that she is queer and runs away like that and suddenly gets
cross. She never was that way at all; this is something new. If I only
could hear her sing and laugh again as of old. I hoped that her old
gaiety would come back with such a good playfellow as you are. Maybe
it will; after all, this is only the first day of your acquaintance.

"I am sure Cornelli will not come back to me," said Dino, still quite
puzzled. "She ran away so full of anger."

When Cornelli had exclaimed, "I don't care," it probably was not true.
On reaching home she quietly stole to her room. Sitting down on a
stool, she put her head in both hands and began to cry bitterly.




CHAPTER VI

A FRIEND IS FOUND



Cornelli had not appeared at Martha's cottage for quite a number of
days, and so Martha was filled with grief and anxiety. There were many
reasons for this. First of all, she loved the child as if she had been
her own and missed her daily visits terribly. She also knew that there
was something the matter with Cornelli and that this was the reason
why she did not come. From the time the child was small, she had run
over to her old friend every single day and had told her everything.
Martha was also sorry for her guest's sake that Cornelli stayed away.
She had told Dino how merry and bright the child could be and how he
would enjoy her as a daily companion. Now it had all come to nothing.

In the meantime Dino and Martha had become firm friends, and the old
woman was very eager to make everything cosy and comfortable for her
polite and friendly housemate. After his daily walks and after he had
done his school work conscientiously, Dino loved always to sit down
beside Martha. Then she would talk to him and tell him many things
which Dino loved to hear.

She generally told about Cornelli's father and mother, for Martha had
known the latter as a small child. Before long, though, she would
always begin to talk about Cornelli, for she never tired of that
subject. She assured Dino that she had never known a more bright or
amusing little girl. Dino always assured her that he could not believe
this and when Martha even asserted that Cornelli was more attractive
than any child she had ever seen, Dino laughed.

"She looks exactly like a little owl," he always said. "One can hardly
see her eyes. I should love her to come again, though," he added, for
he was curious to see Cornelli when she was funny and bright, as Martha
described her.

When Dino had gone to his room that evening, Martha quickly put on a
better apron, took the big shawl from her cupboard, and putting it on
her shoulders, went quietly out of the house and over to the Director's
residence. She looked up at the kitchen windows and saw a light there,
as well as in the room that overlooked the garden. On entering the
kitchen Martha saw Esther and Miss Mina sitting down to a plentiful
supper. The latter was just getting up to answer a bell which had rung
in the dining room, but Esther offered the empty seat to her old
acquaintance.

"Sit down, Martha. I am sure you have earned a rest, the same as I
have," she said, and with these words moved three platters and a bottle
over to the new arrival. "Just take it. There is a lot left and I am
glad when it is gone, for then I can plan something new for to-morrow."

"Thank you, Esther," Martha replied. "I have already eaten supper. It
is very nice of you to invite me to share it with you, but I really
can't."

"How can you refuse? I simply won't have it. Anybody can eat what I
cook, even the Emperor of Russia himself. I am sure you are not yet
quite as mighty as that," Esther proceeded eagerly, loading a plate
with macaroni and stewed plums.

"Please, Martha, don't make a fuss; just eat this and drink this glass
of wine. I don't know why you shouldn't. Why shouldn't you eat supper
twice, if it is good?" Martha did not dare to refuse Esther's offering
any more, so she began to eat her second supper, which was much more
abundant than the first had been.

"What brings you here so late, Martha; what is it?" asked Esther
curiously, for this visit was quite unusual.

"I was going to ask you something, Esther, and I thought that I would
interfere less with your work in the evening than at any other time,"
Martha answered. "Cornelli, who used to come to me every day has not
been to see me all week. I thought that the ladies might have objected
to her going to such a humble old woman as I am. I could understand
that well enough. Do you think they have?"

"Oh no, they don't object at all," Esther replied. "Miss Mina has told
them that our master thinks well of you. But you have no idea how
changed the child is in all her ways. One hardly knows her any more.
Three or four times a morning she used to come running in and out of
the kitchen. She was always singing and flying about the garden like
a little bird, at all hours of the day.

"Who picked all the fine berries and the yellow plums, the juicy, dark
red cherries from the young trees over there, so that it was a pleasure
to see her? Cornelli, of course! And now she won't even look at
