where he found his friend the Fairy, who at once presented him with
a magic pebble like his own. As may be imagined, he lost no time in
setting out to deliver Rosalie, and travelled so fast that he soon
arrived at the forest, in the midst of which she lay a captive. But
though he found the palace he did not find Rosalie. He hunted high and
low, but there was no sign of her, and his despair was so great that
he was ready, a thousand times over, to take his own life. At last he
remembered the conversation of the two Princes about the cabinets of the
years, and that if he could manage to reach the oak tree, he would be
certain to discover what had become of Rosalie. Happily, he soon found
out the secret of the passage and entered the cabinet of the present,
where he saw reflected in the mirrors the unfortunate Rosalie sitting
on the floor weeping bitterly, and surrounded with genii, who never left
her night or day.

This sight only increased the misery of the Prince, for he did not
know where the castle was, nor how to set about finding it. However,
he resolved to seek the whole world through till he came to the right
place. He began by setting sail in a favourable wind, but his bad luck
followed him even on the sea. He had scarcely lost sight of the land
when a violent storm arose, and after several hours of beating about,
the vessel was driven on to some rocks, on which it dashed itself
to bits. The Prince was fortunate enough to be able to lay hold of a
floating spar, and contrived to keep himself afloat; and, after a long
struggle with the winds and waves, he was cast upon a strange island.
But what was his surprise, on reaching the shore, to hear sounds of the
most heartrending distress, mingled with the sweetest songs which had
ever charmed him! His curiosity was instantly roused, and he advanced
cautiously till he saw two huge dragons guarding the gate of a wood.
They were terrible indeed to look upon. Their bodies were covered with
glittering scales; their curly tails extended far over the land; flames
darted from their mouths and noses, and their eyes would have made the
bravest shudder; but as the Prince was invisible and they did not see
him, he slipped past them into the wood. He found himself at once in a
labyrinth, and wandered about for a long time without meeting anyone; in
fact, the only sight he saw was a circle of human hands, sticking out
of the ground above the wrist, each with a bracelet of gold, on which
a name was written. The farther he advanced in the labyrinth the more
curious he became, till he was stopped by two corpses lying in the
midst of a cypress alley, each with a scarlet cord round his neck and a
bracelet on his arm on which were engraved their own names, and those of
two Princesses.

The invisible Prince recognised these dead men as Kings of two large
islands near his own home, but the names of the Princesses were unknown
to him. He grieved for their unhappy fate, and at once proceeded to bury
them; but no sooner had he laid them in their graves, than their hands
started up through the earth and remained sticking up like those of
their fellows.

The Prince went on his way, thinking about this strange adventure, when
suddenly at the turn of the walk he perceived a tall man whose face was
the picture of misery, holding in his hands a silken cord of the exact
colour of those round the necks of the dead men. A few steps further
this man came up with another as miserable to the full as he himself;
they silently embraced, and then without a word passed the cords round
their throats, and fell dead side by side. In vain the Prince rushed to
their assistance and strove to undo the cord. He could not loosen it; so
he buried them like the others and continued his path.

He felt, however, that great prudence was necessary, or he himself might
become the victim of some enchantment; and he was thankful to slip past
the dragons, and enter a beautiful park, with clear streams and sweet
flowers, and a crowd of men and maidens. But he could not forget
the terrible things he had seen, and hoped eagerly for a clue to the
mystery. Noticing two young people talking together, he drew near
thinking that he might get some explanation of what puzzled him. And so
he did.

'You swear,' said the Prince, 'that you will love me till you die, but I
fear your faithless heart, and I feel that I shall soon have to seek the
Fairy Despair, ruler of half this island. She carries off the lovers
who have been cast away by their mistresses, and wish to have done with
life. She places them in a labyrinth where they are condemned to walk
for ever, with a bracelet on their arms and a cord round their necks,
unless they meet another as miserable as themselves. Then the cord is
pulled and they lie where they fall, till they are buried by the first
passer by. Terrible as this death would be,' added the Prince, 'it would
be sweeter than life if I had lost your love.'

The sight of all these happy lovers only made the Prince grieve the
more, and he wandered along the seashore spending his days; but one day
he was sitting on a rock bewailing his fate, and the impossibility
of leaving the island, when all in a moment the sea appeared to raise
itself nearly to the skies, and the caves echoed with hideous screams.
As he looked a woman rose from the depths of the sea, flying madly
before a furious giant. The cries she uttered softened the heart of
the Prince; he took the stone from his mouth, and drawing his sword
he rushed after the giant, so as to give the lady time to escape. But
hardly had he come within reach of the enemy, than the giant touched him
with a ring that he held in his hand, and the Prince remained immovable
where he stood. The giant then hastily rejoined his prey, and, seizing
her in his arms, he plunged her into the sea. Then he sent some tritons
to bind chains about the Prince of the Golden Isle, and he too felt
himself borne to the depths of the ocean, and without the hope of ever
again seeing the Princess.

Now the giant whom the invisible had so rashly attacked was the Lord
of the Sea, and the third son of the Queen of the Elements, and he had
touched the youth with a magic ring which enabled a mortal to live under
water. So the Prince of the Golden Isle found, when bound in chains by
the tritons, he was carried through the homes of strange monsters
and past immense seaweed forests, till he reached a vast sandy space,
surrounded by huge rocks. On the tallest of the rocks sat the giant as
on a throne.

'Rash mortal,' said he, when the Prince was dragged before him, 'you
have deserved death, but you shall live only to suffer more cruelly. Go,
and add to the number of those whom it is my pleasure to torture.'

At these words the unhappy Prince found himself tied to a rock; but he
was not alone in his misfortunes, for all round him were chained Princes
and Princesses, whom the giant had led captive. Indeed, it was his chief
delight to create a storm, in order to add to the list of his prisoners.

As his hands were fastened, it was impossible for the Prince of the
Golden Isle to make use of his magic stone, and he passed his nights and
days dreaming of Rosalie. But at last the time came when the giant took
it into his head to amuse himself by arranging fights between some
of his captives. Lots were drawn, and one fell upon our Prince, whose
chains were immediately loosened. The moment he was set free, he
snatched up his stone, and became invisible.

The astonishment of the giant at the sudden disappearance of the Prince
may well be imagined. He ordered all the passages to be watched, but it
was too late, for the Prince had already glided between two rocks. He
wandered for a long while through the forests, where he met nothing but
fearful monsters; he climbed rock after rock, steered his way from tree
to tree, till at length he arrived at the edge of the sea, at the foot
of a mountain that he remembered to have seen in the cabinet of the
present, where Rosalie was held captive.

Filled with joy, he made his way to the top of the mountain which
pierced the clouds, and there he found a palace. He entered, and in the
middle of a long gallery he discovered a crystal room, in the midst of
which sat Rosalie, guarded night and day by genii. There was no door
anywhere, nor any window. At this sight the Prince became more puzzled
than ever, for he did not know how he was to warn Rosalie of his return.
Yet it broke his heart to see her weeping from dawn till dark.

One day, as Rosalie was walking up and down her room, she was surprised
to see that the crystal which served for a wall had grown cloudy, as if
some one had breathed on it, and, what was more, wherever she moved
the brightness of the crystal always became clouded. This was enough to
cause the Princess to suspect that her lover had returned. In order
to set the Prince of the Air's mind at rest she began by being very
gracious to him, so that when she begged that her captivity might be a
little lightened she should not be refused. At first the only favour she
asked was to be allowed to walk for one hour every day up and down the
long gallery. This was granted, and the Invisible Prince speedily took
the opportunity of handing her the stone, which she at once slipped
into her mouth. No words can paint the fury of her captor at her
disappearance. He ordered the spirits of the air to fly through all
space, and to bring back Rosalie wherever she might be. They instantly
flew off to obey his commands, and spread themselves over the whole
earth.

Meantime Rosalie and the Invisible Prince had reached, hand in hand,
a door of the gallery which led through a terrace into the gardens. In
silence they glided along, and thought themselves already safe, when
a furious monster dashed itself by accident against Rosalie and the
Invisible Prince, and in her fright she let go his hand. No one can
speak as long as he is invisible, and besides, they knew that the
spirits were all around them, and at the slightest sound they would
be recognised; so all they could do was to feel about in the hope that
their hands might once more meet.

But, alas! the joy of liberty lasted but a short time. The Princess,
having wandered in vain up and down the forest, stopped at last on the
edge of a fountain. As she walked she wrote on the trees: 'If ever the
Prince, my lover, comes this way, let him know that it is here I dwell,
and that I sit daily on the edge of this fountain, mingling my tears
with its waters.'

These words were read by one of the genii, who repeated them to his
master. The Prince of the Air, in his turn making himself invisible, was
led to the fountain, and waited for Rosalie. When she drew near he
held out his hand, which she grasped eagerly, taking it for that of her
lover; and, seizing his opportunity, the Prince passed a cord round her
arms, and throwing off his invisibility cried to his spirits to drag her
into the lowest pit.

It was at this moment that the Invisible Prince appeared, and at the
sight of the Prince of the Genii mounting into the air, holding a silken
cord, he guessed instantly that he was carrying off Rosalie.

He felt so overwhelmed by despair that he thought for an instant of
putting an end to his life. 'Can I survive my misfortunes?' he cried. 'I
fancied I had come to an end of my troubles, and now they are worse than
ever. What will become of me? Never can I discover the place where this
monster will hide Rosalie.'

The unhappy youth had determined to let himself die, and indeed his
sorrow alone was enough to kill him, when the thought that by means
of the cabinets of the years he might find out where the Princess was
imprisoned, gave him a little ray of comfort. So he continued to walk
on through the forest, and after some hours he arrived at the gate of a
temple, guarded by two huge lions. Being invisible, he was able to enter
unharmed. In the middle of the temple was an altar, on which lay a book,
and behind the altar hung a great curtain. The Prince approached the
altar and opened the book, which contained the names of all the lovers
in the world: and in it he read that Rosalie had been carried off by the
Prince of the Air to an abyss which had no entrance except the one that
lay by way of the Fountain of Gold.

Now, as the Prince had not the smallest idea where this fountain was to
be found, it might be thought that he was not much nearer Rosalie than
before. This was not, however, the view taken by the Prince.

'Though every step that I take may perhaps lead me further from her,'
he said to himself, 'I am still thankful to know that she is alive
somewhere.'

On leaving the temple the Invisible Prince saw six paths lying before
him, each of which led through the wood. He was hesitating which to
choose, when he suddenly beheld two people coming towards him, down
the track which lay most to his right. They turned out to be the Prince
Gnome and his friend, and the sudden desire to get some news of his
sister, Princess Argentine, caused the Invisible Prince to follow them
and to listen to their conversation.

'Do you think,' the Prince Gnome was saying, 'do you think that I would
not break my chains if I could? I know that the Princess Argentine will
never love me, yet each day I feel her dearer still. And as if this
were not enough, I have the horror of feeling that she probably loves
another. So I have resolved to put myself out of my pain by means of the
Golden Fountain. A single drop of its water falling on the sand around
will trace the name of my rival in her heart. I dread the test, and yet
this very dread convinces me of my misfortune.'

It may be imagined that after listening to these words the Invisible
Prince followed Prince Gnome like his shadow, and after walking some
time they arrived at the Golden Fountain. The unhappy lover stooped down
with a sigh, and dipping his finger in the water let fall a drop on
the sand. It instantly wrote the name of Prince Flame, his brother. The
shock of this discovery was so real, that Prince Gnome sank fainting
into the arms of his friend.

Meanwhile the Invisible Prince was turning over in his mind how he could
best deliver Rosalie. As, since he had been touched by the Giant's ring,
he had the power to live in the water as well as on land, he at once
dived into the fountain. He perceived in one corner a door leading into
the mountain, and at the foot of the mountain was a high rock on which
was fixed an iron ring with a cord attached. The Prince promptly guessed
that the cord was used to chain the Princess, and drew his sword and cut
it. In a moment he felt the Princess's hand in his, for she had
always kept her magic pebble in her mouth, in spite of the prayers and
entreaties of the Prince of the Air to make herself visible.

So hand in hand the invisible Prince and Rosalie crossed the mountain;
but as the Princess had no power of living under water, she could not
pass the Golden Fountain. Speechless and invisible they clung together
on the brink, trembling at the frightful tempest the Prince of the Air
had raised in his fury. The storm had already lasted many days when
tremendous heat began to make itself felt. The lightning flashed, the
thunder rattled, fire bolts fell from heaven, burning up the forests and
even the fields of corn. In one instant the very streams were dried up,
and the Prince, seizing his opportunity, carried the Princess over the
Golden Fountain.

It took them a long time still to reach the Golden Isle, but at last
they got there, and we may be quite sure they never wanted to leave it
any more.




 THE CROW(13)

(13) From the Polish. Kletke.

Once upon a time there were three Princesses who were all three young
and beautiful; but the youngest, although she was not fairer than the
other two, was the most loveable of them all.

About half a mile from the palace in which they lived there stood a
castle, which was uninhabited and almost a ruin, but the garden which
surrounded it was a mass of blooming flowers, and in this garden the
youngest Princess used often to walk.

One day when she was pacing to and fro under the lime trees, a black
crow hopped out of a rose-bush in front of her. The poor beast was all
torn and bleeding, and the kind little Princess was quite unhappy about
it. When the crow saw this it turned to her and said:

'I am not really a black crow, but an enchanted Prince, who has been
doomed to spend his youth in misery. If you only liked, Princess, you
could save me. But you would have to say good-bye to all your own people
and come and be my constant companion in this ruined castle. There is
one habitable room in it, in which there is a golden bed; there you will
have to live all by yourself, and don't forget that whatever you may see
or hear in the night you must not scream out, for if you give as much as
a single cry my sufferings will be doubled.'

The good-natured Princess at once left her home and her family and
hurried to the ruined castle, and took possession of the room with the
golden bed.

When night approached she lay down, but though she shut her eyes tight
sleep would not come. At midnight she heard to her great horror some one
coming along the passage, and in a minute her door was flung wide open
and a troop of strange beings entered the room. They at once proceeded
to light a fire in the huge fireplace; then they placed a great cauldron
of boiling water on it. When they had done this, they approached the
bed on which the trembling girl lay, and, screaming and yelling all
the time, they dragged her towards the cauldron. She nearly died with
fright, but she never uttered a sound. Then of a sudden the cock crew,
and all the evil spirits vanished.

At the same moment the crow appeared and hopped all round the room with
joy. It thanked the Princess most heartily for her goodness, and said
that its sufferings had already been greatly lessened.

Now one of the Princess's elder sisters, who was very inquisitive, had
found out about everything, and went to pay her youngest sister a visit
in the ruined castle. She implored her so urgently to let her spend the
night with her in the golden bed, that at last the good-natured little
Princess consented. But at midnight, when the odd folk appeared, the
elder sister screamed with terror, and from this time on the youngest
Princess insisted always on keeping watch alone.

So she lived in solitude all the daytime, and at night she would have
been frightened, had she not been so brave; but every day the crow came
and thanked her for her endurance, and assured her that his sufferings
were far less than they had been.

And so two years passed away, when one day the crow came to the Princess
and said: 'In another year I shall be freed from the spell I am under
at present, because then the seven years will be over. But before I
can resume my natural form, and take possession of the belongings of
my forefathers, you must go out into the world and take service as a
maidservant.'

The young Princess consented at once, and for a whole year she served as
a maid; but in spite of her youth and beauty she was very badly treated,
and suffered many things. One evening, when she was spinning flax, and
had worked her little white hands weary, she heard a rustling beside her
and a cry of joy. Then she saw a handsome youth standing beside her; who
knelt down at her feet and kissed the little weary white hands.

'I am the Prince,' he said, 'who you in your goodness, when I was
wandering about in the shape of a black crow, freed from the most awful
torments. Come now to my castle with me, and let us live there happily
together.'

So they went to the castle where they had both endured so much. But when
they reached it, it was difficult to believe that it was the same, for
it had all been rebuilt and done up again. And there they lived for a
hundred years, a hundred years of joy and happiness.




HOW SIX MEN TRAVELLED THROUGH THE WIDE WORLD

There was once upon a time a man who understood all sorts of arts; he
served in the war, and bore himself bravely and well; but when the war
was over, he got his discharge, and set out on his travels with three
farthings of his pay in his pocket. 'Wait,' he said; 'that does not
please me; only let me find the right people, and the King shall yet
give me all the treasures of his kingdom.' He strode angrily into the
forest, and there he saw a man standing who had uprooted six trees as
if they were straws. He said to him, 'Will you be my servant and travel
with me?'

'Yes,' he answered; 'but first of all I will take this little bundle
of sticks home to my mother,' and he took one of the trees and wound
it round the other five, raised the bundle on his shoulders and bore it
off. Then he came back and went with his master, who said, 'We two ought
to be able to travel through the wide world!' And when they had gone a
little way they came upon a hunter, who was on his knees, his gun on his
shoulder, aiming at something. The master said to him, 'Hunter, what are
you aiming at?'

He answered, 'Two miles from this place sits a fly on a branch of an
oak; I want to shoot out its left eye.'

'Oh, go with me,' said the man; 'if we three are together we shall
easily travel through the wide world.'

The hunter agreed and went with him, and they came to seven windmills
whose sails were going round quite fast, and yet there was not a breath
of wind, nor was a leaf moving. The man said, 'I don't know what is
turning those windmills; there is not the slightest breeze blowing.' So
he walked on with his servants, and when they had gone two miles they
saw a man sitting on a tree, holding one of his nostrils and blowing out
of the other.

'Fellow, what are you puffing at up there?' asked the man.

