
"I suppose not. Why should you be?" replied Phoebe, who was rather old
and rather cross. "If you mount the ladder that you will see against
the wall, you will find a good bed when you are at the top of it."

Oswald was about to remonstrate, but Edward held up his finger and no
more was said.

As soon as they had finished their supper, Phoebe proposed that they
should go to bed. It was late, and she would sit up no longer. Edward
rose and went out, followed by Oswald, who had given up the keeper's
house to the intendant and his daughter, and slept in the cottage of
one of the rangers, about a quarter of a mile off. After some
conversation, they shook hands and parted, as Edward intended returning
very early the next morning, being anxious about old Jacob.

Edward went up the ladder into the loft. There was no door to shut out
the wind, which blew piercingly cold and after a time he found himself
so chilled that he could not sleep. He rose to see if he could not find
some protection from the wind by getting more into a corner; for
although Phoebe had told him that there was plenty of straw, it proved
that there was very little indeed in the loft, barely enough to lie
down upon. Edward, after a time, descended the ladder to walk in the
yard, that by exercise he might recover the use of his limbs. At last,
turning to and fro, he cast his eyes up to the window of the bedroom
above the kitchen, where he perceived a light was still burning. He
thought it was Phoebe, the maid, going to bed; and with no very
gracious feelings toward her for having deprived him of his own night's
rest, he was wishing that she might have the toothache or something
else to keep her awake, when suddenly through the white window curtain
he perceived a broad light in the room--it increased every moment--and
he saw the figure of a female rush past it, and attempt to open the
window--the drawing of the curtains showed him that the room was on
fire. A moment's thought, and he ran for the ladder by which he had
ascended to the loft, and placed it against the window. The flames were
less bright, and he could not see the female who had been at the window
when lie went for the ladder. He ascended quickly, and burst open the
casement--the smoke poured out in such volumes that it neatly
suffocated him, but he went in; and as soon as he was inside, he
stumbled against the body of the person who had attempted to open the
window, but who had fallen down senseless. As he raised the body, the
fire, which had been smothered from want of air when all the windows
and doors were closed, now burst out, and he was scorched before he
could get on the ladder again, with the body in his arms; but he
succeeded in getting it down safe. Perceiving that the clothes were on
fire, he held them till they were extinguished, and then for the first
time discovered that he had brought down the daughter of the intendant
of the forest. There was no time to be lost, so Edward carried her into
the stable and left her there, still insensible, upon the straw, in a
spare stall, while he hastened to alarm the house. The watering-butt
for the horses was outside the stable; Edward caught up the pail,
filled it, and hastening up the ladder, threw it into the room, and
then descended for more.

By this time Edward's continual calls of "Fire! fire!" had aroused the
people of the house, and also of the cottages adjacent. Mr.
Heatherstone came out half dressed, and with horror on his countenance.
Phoebe followed screaming, and the other people now hastened from the
cottages.

"Save her! my daughter is in the room!" exclaimed Mr. Heatherstone.
"Oh, save her, or let me do so!" cried the poor man, in agony; but the
fire burst out of the window in such force, that any attempt would have
been in vain.

"Oswald," cried Edward to him, "let the people pass the water up to me
as fast as possible. They can do no good looking on."

Oswald set the men to work, and Edward was now supplied with water so
fast that the fire began to diminish. The window was now approachable,
and a few more buckets enabled him to put one foot into the room, and
then every moment the flames and smoke decreased.

Meanwhile it would be impossible to describe the agony of the
intendant, who would have rushed up the ladder into the flames, had he
not been held by some of the men. "My daughter! my
child!--burned--burned to death!" exclaimed he, clasping his hands.

At that moment a voice in the crowd called out, "There were four burned
at Arnwood!"

"God of Heaven!" exclaimed Mr. Heatherstone, falling down in a swoon,
in which state he was carried to a neighboring cottage.

Meanwhile the supply of water enabled Edward to put out the fire
altogether: the furniture of the room was burned, but the fire had
extended no farther; and when Edward was satisfied that there was no
more danger, he descended the ladder, and left it to others to see that
all was safe. He then called Oswald to him, and desired that he would
accompany him to the stable.

"Oh, sir," replied Oswald, "this is dreadful! and such a sweet young
lady too."

"She is safe and well," replied Edward, "I think so, at least. I
brought her down the ladder, and put her in the stable before I
attempted to put out the fire. See, there she is; she has not recovered
yet from her swoon. Bring some water. She breathes! thank God! There,
that will do, Oswald, she is recovering. Now let us cover her up in
your cloak, and carry her to your cottage. We will recover her there."

Oswald folded up the still unconscious girl in his cloak, and earned
her away in his arms, followed by Edward.

As soon as they arrived at the cottage, the inmates of which were all
busy at the keeper's lodge, they put her on a bed, and very soon
restored her to consciousness.

"Where is my father?" cried Patience, as soon as she was sufficiently
recovered.

"He is safe and well, miss," replied Oswald.

"Is the house burned down?"

"No. The fire is all out again."

"Who saved me? tell me."

"Young Armitage, miss."

"Who is he? oh, I recollect now; but I must go to my father. Where is
he?"

"In the other cottage, miss."

Patience attempted to stand, but found that she was too much exhausted,
and she fell back again on the bed. "I can't stand," said she. "Bring
my father to me."

"I will, miss," replied Oswald. "Will you stay here, Edward?"

"Yes," replied Edward. He went out of the cottage door, and remained
there while Oswald went to Mr. Heatherstone.

Oswald found him sensible, but in deep distress, as may be imagined.
"The fire is all out, sir," said Oswald.

"I care not for that. My poor, poor child!"

"Your child is safe, sir," replied Oswald.

"Safe, did you say?" cried Mr. Heatherstone, starting up. "Safe!
where'?"

"In my cottage. She has sent me for you."

Mr. Heatherstone rushed out, passed by Edward, who was standing at the
door of the other cottage, and was in his daughter's arms. Oswald came
out to Edward, who then detailed to him the way in which he had saved
the girl.

"Had it not been for the ill-nature of that woman Phoebe, in sending me
to sleep where there was no straw, they would all have been burned,"
observed Edward.

"She gave you an opportunity of rewarding good for evil," observed
Oswald.

"Yes, but I am burned very much in my arm," said Edward. "Have you any
thing that will be good for it?"

"Yes, I think I have: wait a moment."

Oswald went into the cottage and returned with some salve, with which
he dressed Edward's arm, which proved to be very severely burned.

"How grateful the intendant ought to be--and will be, I have no doubt!"
observed Oswald.

"And for that very reason I shall saddle my pony and ride home as fast
as I can; and, do you hear, Oswald, do not show him where I live."

"I hardly know how I can refuse him, if he requires it."

"But you must not. He will be offering me a situation in the forest, by
way of showing his gratitude, and I will accept of none. I have no
objection to save his daughter, as I would save the daughter of my
worst enemy, or my worst enemy himself, from such a dreadful death; but
I do not want their thanks or offers of service. I will accept nothing
from a Roundhead; and as for the venison in the forest, it belongs to
the king, and I shall help myself whenever I think proper. Good-by,
Oswald, you will call and see us when you have time?"

"I will be with you before the week is out, depend upon it," replied
Oswald.

Edward then asked Oswald to saddle his pony for him, as his arm
prevented him from doing it himself, and, as soon as it was done, he
rode away from the cottage.

Edward rode fast, for he was anxious to get home and ascertain the
state of poor old Jacob; and, moreover, his burned arm was very
painful. He was met by Humphrey about a mile from the cottage, who told
him that he did not think that the old man could last many hours, and
that he was very anxious to see him. As the pony was quite tired with
the fast pace that Edward had ridden, Edward pulled up to a walk, and
as they went along acquainted Humphrey with what had passed.

"Is your arm very painful?"

"Yes, it is, indeed," replied Edward; "but it can't be helped."

"No, of course not, but it may be made more easy. I know what will do
it some good; for I recollect, when Benjamin burned his hand at
Arnwood, what they applied to it, and it gave him great relief."

"Yes, very likely; but I am not aware that we have any drugs or
medicine in the cottage. But here we are: will you take Billy to the
stable, while I go on to old Jacob?

"Thank God that you are come, Edward," said the old forester, "for I
was anxious to see you before I die; and something tells me that I have
but a short time to remain here."

"Why should you say so! Do you fed very ill?"

"No, not ill; but I feel that I am sinking fast. Recollect that I am an
old man, Edward."

"Not so very old, Jacob; Oswald said that you were not more than sixty
years old."

"Oswald knows nothing about it. I am past seventy-six, Edward; and you
know, Edward, the Bible says that the days of man are threescore years
and ten; so that I am beyond the mark. And now, Edward, I have but few
words to say. Be careful--if not for your own sake, at least for your
little sisters'. You are young, but you are strong and powerful above
your years, and can better protect them than I could. I see darker days
yet coming--but it is His will, and who shall doubt that that is right?
I pray you not to make your birth and lineage known as yet--it can do
no good, and it may do harm--and if you can be persuaded to live in the
cottage, and to live on the farm, which will now support you all, it
will be better. Do not get into trouble about the venison, which they
now claim as their own. You will find some money in the bag in my
chest, sufficient to buy all you want for a long while--but take care
of it; for there is no saying but you may require it. And now, Edward,
call your brother and sisters to me, that I may bid them farewell. I
am, as we all are, sinful, but I trust in the mercy of God through
Jesus Christ. Edward, I have done my duty toward you, as well as I have
been able; but promise me one thing--that you will read the Bible and
prayers every morning and evening, as I have always done, after I am
gone; promise me that, Edward."

"I promise you that it shall be done, Jacob," replied Edward, "and I
will not forget your other advice."

"God bless you, Edward. Now call the children."

Edward summoned his sisters and Humphrey.

"Humphrey, my good boy," said Jacob, "recollect, that in the midst of
life we are in death; and that there is no security for young or old.
You or your brother may be cut off in your youth; one may be taken, and
the other left. Recollect, your sisters depend upon you, and do not
therefore be rash: I fear that you will run too much risk after the
wild cattle, for you are always scheming after taking them. Be careful,
Humphrey, for you can ill be spared. Hold to the farm as it now is: it
will support you all. My dear Alice and Edith, I am dying; very soon I
shall be laid by your brothers in my grave. Be good children, and look
up to your brothers for every thing. And now kiss me, Alice; you have
been a great comfort to me, for you have read the Bible to me when I
could no longer read myself. May your death-bed be as well attended as
mine has been, and may you live happily, and die the death of a
Christian! Good-by, and may God bless you. Bless you, Edith; may you
grow up as good and as innocent as you are now. Farewell,
Humphrey--farewell, Edward--my eyes are dim--pray for me, children. O
God of mercy, pardon my many sins, and receive my soul, through Jesus
Christ. Amen, Amen."

These were the last words spoken by the old forester. The children, who
were kneeling by the side of the bed, praying as he had requested, when
they rose up, found that he was dead. They all wept bitterly, for they
dearly loved the good old man. Alice remained sobbing in Edward's arms,
and Edith in Humphrey's, and it was long before the brothers could
console them. Humphrey at last said to Alice, "You hurt poor Edward's
arm--you don't know how painful it is! Come, dears, let us go into the
other room, and get something to take the pain away."

These requests diverted the attention, at the same time that it roused
fresh sympathy in the little girls--they all went into the
sitting-room. Humphrey gave his sisters some potatoes to scrape upon a
piece of linen, while he took off Edward's coat, and turned up his
shirt sleeves. The scraped potatoes were then laid on the burn, and
Edward said they gave him great relief. Some more were then scraped by
the little girls, who could not, however, repress their occasional
sobs. Humphrey then told them that Edward had had nothing to eat, and
that they must get him some supper. This again occupied them for some
time; and when the supper was ready, they all sat down to it. They went
to bed early, but not before Edward had read a chapter out of the
Bible, and the prayers, as old Jacob had always done; and this again
caused their tears to flow afresh.

"Come, Alice, dear, you and Edith must go to bed," said Humphrey.

The little girls threw themselves into their brothers' arms; and having
wept for some time, Alice reused herself, and taking Edith by the hand,
led her away to her bedroom.




CHAPTER X.


"Humphrey," said Edward, "the sooner all this is over the better. As
long as poor Jacob's body remains in the cottage there will be nothing
but distress with the poor girls."

"I agree with you," replied Humphrey; "where shall we bury him?"

"Under the great oak-tree, at the back of the cottage," replied Edward.
"One day the old man said to me, that he should like to be buried under
one of the oaks of the forest."

"Well then, I will go and dig his grave to-night," replied Humphrey;
"the moon is bright, and I shall have it finished before morning."

"I am sorry that I can not help you, Humphrey."

"I am sorry that you are hurt; but I want no help, Edward. If you will
lie down a little, perhaps you will be able to sleep. Let us change the
potato poultice before you go on."

Humphrey put the fresh dressing on Edward's arm; and Edward, who was
very much exhausted, lay down in his clothes on the bed. Humphrey went
out, and having found his tools, set to his task--he worked hard, and,
before morning, had finished. He then went in, and took his place on
the bed, by the side of Edward, who was in a sound sleep. At daylight
Humphrey rose, and waked Edward. "All is ready, Edward; but I fear you
must help me to put poor Jacob in the cart: do you think you can?"

"Oh, yes; my arm is much easier, and I feel very different from what I
did last night. If you will go and get the cart, I will see what I can
do in the mean time."

When Humphrey returned, he found Edward had selected a sheet to wind
the body in, but could not do more till Humphrey came to help him. They
then wrapped it round the body, and earned it out of the cottage, and
put it into the cart.

"Now, Edward, shall we call our sisters?"

"No, not yet; let us have the body laid in the grave first, and then we
will call them."

They dragged the body on the cart to the grave, and laid it in it, and
then returned back and put the pony in the stable again.

"Are there not prayers proper for reading over the dead?" said Humphrey.

"I believe that there are, but they are not in the Bible, so we must
read some portion of the Bible," said Edward.

"Yes, I think there is one of the Psalms which it would be right to
read, Edward," said Humphrey, turning over the leaves; "here it is, the
ninetieth, in which you recollect it says, 'that the days of man are
threescore years and ten.'"

"Yes," replied Edward, "and we will read this one also, the 146th."

"Are our sisters risen, do you think?"

"I am sure that they are," replied Humphrey, "and I will go to them."

Humphrey went to the door, and said, "Alice--Alice and Edith--come out
immediately." They were both ready dressed.

Edward took the Bible under his arm, and Alice by the hand. Humphrey
led Edith until they arrived at the grave, when the two little girls
saw the covered body of Jacob lying in it.

"Kneel down," said Edward, opening the Bible. And they all knelt down
by the grave. Edward read the two Psalms, and then closed the book. The
little girls took one last look at the body, and then turned away
weeping to the cottage. Edward and Humphrey filled up the grave, and
then followed their sisters home.

"I'm glad it's over," said Humphrey, wiping his eyes. "Poor old Jacob!
I'll put a paling round his grave."

"Come in, Humphrey," said Edward.

Edward sat down upon old Jacob's chair, and took Alice and Edith to
him. Putting his arm round each, he said--

"Alice and Edith, my dear little sisters, we have lost a good friend,
and one to whose memory we can not be too grateful. He saved us from
perishing in the flames which burned down our father's house, and has
protected us here ever since. He is gone, for it has pleased God to
summon him to him, and we must bow to the will of Heaven; and here we
are, brother and sisters, orphans, and with no one to look to for
protection but Heaven. Here we are away from the rest of the world,
living for one another. What, then, must we do? We must love one
another dearly, and help one another. I will do my part, if my life is
spared, and so will Humphrey, and so will you my dear sisters. I can
answer for all. Now it is no use to lament--we must all work, and work
cheerfully; and we will pray every morning and every night that God
will bless our endeavors and enable us to provide for ourselves, and
live here in peace and safety. Kiss me, dear Alice and Edith, and kiss
Humphrey, and kiss one another. Let these kisses be the seals to our
bond; and let us put our trust in Him who only is a father to the widow
and the orphan. And now let us pray."

Edward and the children repeated the Lord's Prayer, and then rose up.
They went to their respective employments, and the labor of the day
soon made them composed, although then, for many days afterward, it was
but occasionally that a smile was seen upon their lips.

Thus passed a week, by which time Edward's arm was so far well that it
gave him no pain, and he was able to assist Humphrey in the work on the
farm. The snow had disappeared, and the spring, although it had been
checked for a time, now made rapid advances. Constant occupation, and
the return of fine weather, both had the effect of returning the
serenity of their minds; and while Humphrey was preparing the paling to
fix round the grave of old Jacob, Alice and Edith collected the wild
violets which now peeped forth on sheltered spots, and planted the
roots over the grave. Edward also procured all the early flowers he
could collect, and assisted his sisters in their task; and thus, in
planting it, and putting up the paling, the grave of the old man became
the constant work-ground; and when their labor was done, they would
still remain there and talk over his worth. The Sunday following the
burial, the weather being fine and warm, Edward proposed that they
should read the usual service, which had been selected by old Jacob, at
the grave, and not in the cottage, as formerly; and this they continued
afterward to do, whenever the weather would permit: thus did old
Jacob's resting-place become their church, and overpower them with
those feelings of love and devotion which gave efficacy to prayer. As
soon as the paling was finished, Humphrey put up a board against the
