message to his father and mother, he went aboard the ship and sailed
away.

Robinson Crusoe met with many strange adventures at sea. On his first
voyage, the ship was wrecked in a fearful storm, and the crew was saved
by sailors from another ship.

Next, Crusoe went on a voyage to Africa. On the way there the ship was
captured by pirates. The captain of the pirates made a slave of the boy.
The man took Crusoe to his home and made him dig in the garden and work
in the house.

One day Crusoe hid some food in a small boat and managed to escape, with
a boy. They sailed for many long days and nights, keeping close to
shore. They did not dare to land, because of the lions and other wild
animals.

After a time they saw a Portuguese vessel. The captain allowed them to
go aboard. This ship was bound for South America. They finally landed in
Brazil.

Robinson Crusoe lived on a plantation in Brazil for several years. He
raised sugar and tobacco. For a time he was happy and made money.

But Robinson Crusoe was never contented anywhere for very long. When a
merchant asked him to go on another voyage to the coast of Africa, he
consented, and he had soon started on this new venture.

At first the weather was very hot. Then one day, without warning, a
hurricane burst upon them. The wind raged for twelve days, and the ship
was nearly torn to pieces. No one expected to escape.

After a time the wind abated somewhat. The captain ordered the course of
the ship changed, but soon another storm followed, even worse than the
first.

Early one morning, while the wind was still roaring and the ship was
rolling from side to side, a sailor who was peering through the fog
suddenly cried out, "Land! Land!"

At the same moment, the vessel struck on a sand bar, with a grating
sound. The waves dashed over the deck of the ship.

With great difficulty, the boats were lowered at the side of the ship.
All the sailors climbed into the boats, for they knew not at what moment
the ship would break to pieces.

The men rowed bravely toward the shore, but suddenly a mountain-like
wave rolled over them and upset the boats.

Crusoe was a very fine swimmer, but no one could swim in such a sea. It
was only good fortune and his alertness that landed him safely ashore.

Wave after wave washed him further and further upon the beach. At last a
wave left him beside a rock, to which he clung until the water flowed
back to the sea. Then he jumped up and ran for his life.

Robinson Crusoe was the only person from the ship who was not drowned.
He was thankful indeed for his escape.

After resting for a time, Crusoe looked about him. He was wet, cold, and
hungry. It was growing very dark, and he was afraid of wild animals.

He found his knife still in his pocket, so he cut a stick with which to
protect himself. Then he climbed into a tree and hid among the branches.
He was soon sound asleep.

When Crusoe awoke in the morning, the storm was over, and the sea was
calm. He found that the ship had been driven by the waves much nearer to
the shore. By noon the water was low. The tide had ebbed so far out that
he could walk almost to the ship.

He swam for a short distance. When lie reached the vessel, he could find
no way to climb up, but at last he discovered a rope hanging over the
side. By the help of the rope, he managed to pull himself to the deck.

Everything in the stern of the ship was safe and dry, and the food was
not spoiled. Crusoe filled his pockets with biscuits and ate them as he
went about his work. He had no time to spare.

Crusoe needed a boat, to carry to the shore many necessary things.

"It is of no use to wish for a boat," he thought, "I must set to work to
make one."

First he took some spars of wood and a topmast or two, that were on the
deck, and threw them overboard, tying each with a rope so that it would
not drift away.

Then he climbed down the side of the ship, and fastened the spars
together to make a raft. It was a long time before he was able to make
the raft strong enough to hold the things that he wished to take ashore.

Crusoe loaded the raft with three seamen's chests. He had filled these
chests with bread, rice, cheese, dried goat's flesh, and other articles
of food. He also took all the clothing he could find.

Then Crusoe dragged a carpenter's tool chest to the side of the ship. He
placed this on the raft. Nothing on the ship was of more use to him than
the tools in this chest.

He secured guns, pistols, and shot, also two barrels of dry gunpowder.

The trouble now was to land his cargo safely.

Crusoe had only a broken oar, but he rigged up a sail, and the tide
helped him. At last he reached the mouth of a little river. The strong
tide carried him to land.

He was able to push the raft into a little bay. When the tide flowed
out, the raft was left high and dry on the sand, and everything was
taken safely ashore.

Then Crusoe thought he would look about the country. He climbed to the
top of a high hill. He found that he was on an island, and that there
was no sign of people, and nothing living in sight excepting great
flocks of birds.

Day after day, Crusoe returned to the ship. He built more rafts and
brought from the vessel everything that he considered useful.

He made a tent of sails to protect the things that could be spoiled by
the sun or rain.

After several weeks, the weather changed, and a high wind began to blow.

One morning, when Crusoe awoke, he found that the ship had broken to
pieces and was no longer to be seen. However, he had saved from the
wreck everything that he needed.

Then Robinson Crusoe decided to find a better place for his tent. There
was a little plain on the bide of a hill. At the further end was a rock
with a hollow place like the entrance to a cave; but there was really
not any cave or way into the rock at all. Here he placed his tent.

In a half circle, in front of the tent, Crusoe drove two rows of strong
stakes sharpened at the top, about six inches apart. He laid pieces of
rope between the stakes. The fence was about five arid a half feet high
and so strong that no one could enter.

There was no door, so Crusoe climbed in and out by means of a ladder
which he always drew up after him.

Before closing up the end of the fence, Crusoe carried within all the
articles that he had saved from the wreck. He rigged a double tent
inside the fence, to protect all from the sun and rain.

When this was finished, Crusoe began to dig out the rock. It was not
very hard, and soon, behind his tent, he had a cave in which he placed
his powder, in small parcels.

Robinson Crusoe was very comfortable. He had saved from the wreck two
cats and a dog. He had ink, pens, and paper, so that he could write down
all that happened.

"But what shall I do when the ink is gone?" thought Crusoe. "I must find
some way of keeping track of the time."

He set up a wooden cross, upon which he cut with a knife the date of his
landing. Each day he cut another notch in the wood.

Every seventh notch was twice as long as those for the days between, and
the notch for every first day of the month was twice as long again. Thus
Crusoe kept a calendar, or weekly, monthly, and yearly reckoning of
time.

By and by, he found that there were many goats on the island, and many
pigeons which he could obtain for food.

After a time, Crusoe decided that his cave was too small.

As he was sure that there were no wild beasts on the island, he began to
make his cave larger, and he finally built a tunnel through the rock
outside his fence.

Then he began to hang his belongings upon the sides of the cave, and to
arrange them in order. He even built shelves on the walls, and made a
door for the entrance. He also made a table and some chairs.

During all this time, Robinson Crusoe climbed the hill daily.

He looked over the lonely waters hoping--always hoping--to see the sail
of a ship. At last he gave up all hope of ever leaving the island.
Several years passed by. The clothing that Crusoe had saved from the
ship was worn out. He made himself clothes from the skins of the goats
on the island. He made also an umbrella of goat skins, to shield him
from the hot rays of the sun.

Though the food which he had taken from the ship had long since been
eaten, he raised plenty of barley from seed which he had found in a
little bag on the ship. The goats and pigeons on the island supplied him
with meat.

He had become very tired of never hearing a voice. There were many green
parrots among the trees and he decided to catch one and teach it to
talk. He found it difficult to obtain one, but finally he did catch a
young parrot.

At first he could not teach it to say a word, but at last when he came
back to his tent from a day on the island, the parrot called, "Robin,
Robin Crusoe! Poor Robin Crusoe, where have you been?"

One morning, as Crusoe started for his canoe, a strange thing happened.
He was walking along, and what do you suppose he saw? The print of a
man's foot in the sand! The sight made him cold all over. He looked
around.

He listened, but there was not a sound, yet there in the sand was the
print of a man's foot--the toes, the heel, and the sole.

He did not go to the boat. Instead he hastened back to his cave. He was
so frightened that it was some time before he ventured out again.

About a year after this, Crusoe was surprised one morning to see a
bonfire on the shore. He looked through his spyglass and saw a company
of savages who had landed in canoes and had built a fire.

They had two prisoners whom they were about to kill. One of them saw a
chance to escape, and he made a sudden dash for his life, running with
great speed straight toward Robinson Crusoe.

Crusoe rescued this man. The man was very grateful.

Crusoe made him understand, after a time, that his name was to be
Friday. It was on Friday that the man had been saved.

Crusoe taught him to say "Yes," and "No," and also to say "Master."

Friday became the faithful servant and companion of Robinson Crusoe.

Many more years passed.

One morning Friday came running toward Crusoe, shouting, "Master!
Master! They come!"

Crusoe ran to the beach and looked toward the sea. There he saw a large
sailing vessel making for the shore.

The sailing vessel proved to be an English ship.

Crusoe's stay on the desert island had come to an end. When he took
leave of the island, he carried on board the sailing vessel his goat
skin cap and umbrella, also the parrot.

So after twenty-eight long years Robinson Crusoe and his faithful
servant, Friday, sailed away.

The voyage was long and hard, but at last they reached the coast of
England.




THE WONDERFUL WORLD


Great, wide, beautiful, wonderful World,
With the wonderful water round you curled,
And the wonderful grass upon your breast,
World, you are beautifully dressed!
The wonderful air is over me,
And the wonderful wind is shaking the tree;
It walks on the water, and whirls the mills,
And talks to itself on the tops of the hills.
You friendly Earth, how far do you go,
With wheat fields that nod, and rivers that flow,
And cities and gardens and oceans and isles,
And people upon you for thousands of miles?

Ah! you are so great, and I am so small,
I hardly can think of you, World, at all;
And yet, when I said my prayers to-day,
A whisper within me seemed to say:
You are more than the Earth,
Though you are such a dot;
You can love and think, and the Earth cannot.




THE MAGIC GIRDLE


Once upon a time, a little cobbler sat at his bench mending a pair of
shoes. He whistled a merry tune as he worked.

The day was very warm, and the wax which he had been using began to
melt. In less time than it takes to tell it, a swarm, of flies lighted
upon the melting wax.

"Ho, ho!" exclaimed the little cobbler. "Who invited you to a feast?"

He threw the shoe that he was mending, at the flies, and many fell dead
from the blow. The cobbler counted the flies as they lay dead, and he
said, "Not so bad! That blow should make me famous."

Then the cobbler took a girdle and painted this rhyme upon it:

   Ha, ha! Ho, ho!
   Ten at one blow.

"Now I shall travel around the world wearing this girdle, and it will
make me famous," said the cobbler.

So the queer little man put on the girdle and started out to seek his
fortune.

As he was entering a forest, he saw a bear walking along a narrow path.
The cobbler was frightened. There was no way of escape. He waited to see
what would happen.

The bear growled and ran toward him. The cobbler stood with his girdle
in sight.

The bear read the words on the girdle:

   Ha, ha! Ho, ho!
   Ten at one blow.

"Is it possible that this little man can kill TEN BEARS at one blow?"
thought the bear, "I will be careful not to offend him."

So the bear stood still and said, "Where are you going, my friend?"

"Around the world to seek my fortune," proudly replied the cobbler.

"Stay here for a time and dine with me. I know where there is some
choice honey," said the bear, and he led the way to a hollow tree where
the bees had stored their honey.

But a hunter had set a trap in the tree, and as the bear reached for the
honey--snap! His paw was caught fast in the trap. And that was the end
of Mr. Bear!

The cobbler quickly stripped off the skin of the animal, saying, "This
will make a fine, warm blanket."

Then he walked away, carrying the skin over his arm and whistling a
merry tune.

At last the cobbler reached the edge of the forest and began to climb a
hill. Sitting on a rock overlooking the valley below was a giant.

The cobbler's heart beat fast with fear.

He walked bravely up to the giant, with his girdle in plain sight.

"Good-day, friend," said the cobbler.

"Here you sit at your ease. Do you not wish to travel with me to see the
world?" the cobbler added.

When the giant saw the little stranger walking up to him so boldly, he
was greatly surprised.

"How dare you enter the land of the giants!" he was about to exclaim.

At that moment, he saw the girdle and read the words:

   Ha, ha! Ho, ho!
   Ten at one blow.

"Is it possible that this little man can kill TEN GIANTS at one blow?"
thought the giant. "I will be careful not to offend him."

So the giant said, "Good-day, my friend. I see that though you are a
little man, you have great strength. Let us prove which of us is the
stronger."

Then the giant led the cobbler to a great oak tree that had fallen to
the ground.

"Help me carry this tree to yonder cave," he said.

"Certainly," said the cobbler. "You take the trunk on your shoulder, and
I will carry the top and branches of the tree, which, of course, are the
heaviest part."

The giant laid the trunk of the tree on his shoulder, but the cobbler
sat at his ease among the branches, enjoying the ride.

So the giant, who could not see what was going on behind him, had to
carry the whole tree, and the little man in the bargain. There the
cobbler sat, in the best of spirits, whistling a merry tune as though
carrying a tree was mere sport.

At last the giant could bear the weight no longer, and he shouted, "Hi,
hi! I must let the tree fall."

Then the cobbler sprang nimbly down, seized the tree with both hands, as
if he had carried it all the way, and called to the giant, "Think of a
big fellow like you not being able to carry a tree!"

"Well," said the giant, "I will admit that you are the stronger. Come
and spend the night in my cave."

The cobbler followed the giant into the cave. There, sitting around a
fire, were a number of giants. They were laughing and talking in a noisy
manner, and they scarcely noticed the little man.

The cobbler spread the bear's skin upon the floor near the fire. Then he
lay down and pretended to sleep, but all the time he was watching to
find a way of escape.

At about midnight, the giants went to bed, and they were soon sleeping
soundly.

The cobbler seized a club which belonged to one of the giants, placed
the bear's skin over his arm, and tiptoed out of the cave. He was soon
far away from the giants.

After many days, the cobbler reached the courtyard of the king's palace.
He was very tired, so he spread the bear's skin upon the grass and lay
down upon it. He placed the giant's club by his side.

Soon he was fast asleep.

Presently one of the king's soldiers came near. He was surprised to find
the little man sleeping there, with a giant's club by his side. Then he
spied the girdle and read the words:

   Ha, ha! Ho, ho!
   Ten at one blow.

"Indeed!" thought the soldier. "This little man must have killed TEN
BEARS at one blow, and TEN GIANTS besides."

Then the soldier hurried away and told every one he met about the queer
little man. The news spread until it reached the king.

"Bring this mighty man to me," the king commanded.

When the king read the words upon the girdle, he said, "You are the very
one I wish to have fight for me in time of war."

"I am ready to fight for you, O King!" said the cobbler.

The king at once appointed the cobbler commander of his army.

Not long after this, a war broke out. The king promised the hand of his
