
"Sit down again, Nora," she said. "What is the matter with you? You know
I don't allow these manners at table."

"But it is the post, mammy," said the girl.

"Well, my dear, if you will be patient, Margaret will bring the post
in."

Nora sat down again, trembling. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan gave her a cold stare,
and helped herself languidly to a small snippet of leathery toast.

"Our cook gets worse and worse," she said as she broke it. "Dear, dear!
I think I must make a change. I have heard of an excellent cook just
about to leave some people of the name of Wilson in the town. They are
English people, which accounts for their having a good servant."

At that moment the redoubtable Pegeen did thrust in her head, holding
the post-bag at arm's length away from her.

"Here's the post, Miss Nora," she said; "maybe you'll fetch it, miss.
I'm a bit dirty."

Nora could not restrain herself another moment. She rushed across the
room, seized the bag, and laid it by her father's side. As a rule, the
post-bag was quickly opened, and its small contents dispersed. These
consisted of the local paper for the Squire, which was always put up
with the letters, a circular or two, and, at long intervals, a letter
for Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, and perhaps one from an absent friend for the
Squire. No one was excited, as a rule, about the post at the Castle, and
Nora's ill-suppressed anxiety was sufficiently marked now to make even
her father look at her in some surprise. To the girl's relief, her
mother unexpectedly came to the rescue.

"She thinks, perhaps, Terence will write," she said; "but I told him not
to worry himself writing too often. Stamps cost money, and the boy will
need every penny to keep up a decent appearance at my brother's."

"All the same, perhaps he will be an Irish boy enough to write a letter
to his own sister," said the Squire. "So here goes; we'll look and see
if there is anything inside here for you, my little Norrie."

The Squire unlocked the bag and emptied the contents on the table. They
were very meager contents; nothing but the newspaper and one letter. The
Squire took it up and looked at it.

"Here we are," he said; "it is for you, my dear."

"For me," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, holding out her hand. "Pass it across,
Nora."

"No, it is not for you, my lady, as it happens. It is for Nora. Here,
Norrie, take it."

Nora took it up. She was shivering now, and her hand could scarcely hold
it. It was addressed to her, beyond doubt: "Miss O'Shanaghgan, Castle
O'Shanaghgan," etc.

"Read it at once, Nora," said her mother. "I have not yet had any letter
to speak of from Terry myself. If you read it aloud it will entertain
us. It seems to be a thick letter."

"I don't think--I don't think it--it is from Terence," answered Nora.

"Nonsense, my dear."

"Open it, Norrie, and tell us," said the Squire. "It will be refreshing
to hear a bit of outside news."

Nora now opened the envelope, and took a very thick sheet of paper out.
The contents of the letter ran as follows:

"My Dear Nora--Your brother Terence came here a week ago, and has told
us a great deal about you. We are enjoying having him extremely; but he
has made us all anxious to know you also. I write now to ask if you will
come and pay us a visit at once, while your brother is here. Ask your
mother to spare you. You can return with Terence whenever you are tired
of us and our ways. I have business at Holyhead next Tuesday, and could
meet you there, if you could make it convenient to cross that day.
I inclose a paper with the hours that the boats leave, and when they
arrive at Holyhead. I could then take you up with me to London, and we
could reach here that same evening. Ask my sister to spare you. You will
be heartily welcome, my little Irish niece.--Your affectionate uncle,

"George Hartrick."

Nora could scarcely read the words aloud. When she had finished she let
the sheet of paper flutter to the floor, and looked at her mother with
glowing cheeks and sparkling eyes.

"I may go? I must go," she said.

"My dear Nora," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, "why that must?"

"Oh, mammy! oh, daddy! don't disappoint me," cried the girl. "Do--do let
me go, please, please."

"Nora," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan again, "I never saw you so unreasonable
in your life; you are quite carried away. Your uncle, after long years,
has condescended to send you an invitation, and you speak in this
impulsive, unrestrained fashion. Of course, it would be extremely nice
for you to go; but I doubt for a single moment if it can be afforded."

"Oh, daddy, daddy! please take my part!" cried Nora. "Please let me go,
daddy--oh, daddy!" She rushed up to her father, flung her arms round his
neck, and burst into tears.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan rose from the table in cold displeasure. "Give me your
uncle's letter," she said.

Nora did not glance at her; she was past speaking. So much hung on this;
all the future of the O'Shanaghgans; the Castle, the old Castle, the
home of her ancestors, the place in which she was born, the land she
loved, the father she adored--all, all their future hung upon Nora's
accepting the invitation which she had asked her uncle to give her. Oh!
if they ever found out, what would her father and mother say? Would they
ever speak to her again? But they must not find out, and she must go;
yes, she must go.

"What is it, Nora? Do leave her alone for a moment, wife," said the
Squire. "There is something behind all this. I never saw Light o' the
Morning give way to pure selfishness before."

"It isn't--it isn't," sobbed Nora, her head buried on the Squire's
shoulder.

"My darling, light of my eyes, colleen asthore, acushla machree!" said
the Squire. He lavished fond epithets upon the girl, and finally took
her into his arms, and clasped her tight to his breast.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, after staring at the two in speechless indignation
for a moment, left the room. When she reached the door she turned round.

"I cannot stand Irish heroics," she said. "This is a disgraceful scene.
Nora, I am thoroughly ashamed of you."

She carried her brother's letter away with her, however, and retired
into the drawing room. There she read it carefully.

How nice it would be if Nora could go! And Nora was a beauty, too--an
Irish beauty; the sort of girl who always goes down in England. She
would want respectable dress; and then--with her taking ways and those
roguish, dark-blue eyes of hers, with that bewitching smile which showed
a gleam of the whitest and most pearly teeth in the world, with the
light, lissome figure, and the blue-black hair--what could not Irish
Nora achieve? Conquests innumerable; she might make a match worthy of
her race and name; she might--oh, she might do anything. She was only a
child, it is true; but all the same she was a budding woman.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan sat and pondered.

"It seems a great pity to refuse," she said to herself. "And Nora
does need discipline badly; the discipline of England and my brother's
well-ordered home will work wonders with her. Poor child, her father
will miss her. I really sometimes think the Squire is getting into his
dotage. He makes a perfect fool of that girl; to see her there speaking
in that selfish way, and he petting her, and calling her ridiculous
names, with no meaning in them, and folding her in his arms as if she
were a baby, and all for pure, downright selfishness, is enough to make
any sensible person sick. Nora, too, who has always been spoken of as
the unselfish member of the family, who would not spend a penny to save
her life if she thought the Squire was going to suffer. Now she wants
him to put his hand into his pocket for a considerable amount; for
the child cannot go to my brother without suitable clothes--that is a
foregone conclusion. But, dear me! all women are selfish when it comes
to mere pleasure, and Nora is no better than the rest. For my part,
I admire dear Terence's downright method of asking for so-and-so, and
getting it. Nora is deceitful. I am much disappointed in her."




CHAPTER XI.


THE DIAMOND CROSS.

But although Mrs. O'Shanaghgan spoke of her daughter to herself as
deceitful, she did not at all give up the idea of her accepting her
uncle's invitation. George Hartrick had always had an immense influence
over his sister Ellen. He and she had been great friends long ago, when
the handsome, bright girl had been glad to take the advice of her elder
brother. They had almost quarreled at that brief period of madness in
Ellen Hartrick's life, when she had fallen in love with handsome Squire
O'Shanaghgan; but that quarrel had long been made up. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan
had married the owner of O'Shanaghgan Castle, and had rued her brief
madness ever since. But her pride had prevented her complaining to her
brother George. George still imagined that she kept her passionate love
intact for the wild Irishman. Only one thing she had managed ever since
their parting, many years ago, and that was, that her English brother
should not come to see her in her Irish home. One excuse after the other
she had offered, and at last she had told him frankly that the ways of
the Irish were not his ways; and that, when he really wanted to see his
sister, he must invite her to come to England to visit him.

Hartrick was hurt at Ellen's behavior, and as he himself had married
about the same time, and his own young family were growing up around
him, and the making of money and the toil of riches were claiming him
more and more, he did not often think of the sister who was away in the
wilds of Ireland. She had married one of the proud old Irish chiefs.
She had a very good position in her way; and when her son and daughter
required a little peep into the world, Hartrick resolved that they
should have it. He had invited Terence over; and now Nora's letter, with
its perplexity, its anguish, its bold request, and its final tenderness,
had come upon him with a shock of surprise.

George Hartrick was a much stronger character than his sister. He was a
very fine man, indeed, with splendid principles and downright ways; and
there was something about this outspoken and queer letter which touched
him in spite of himself. He was not easily touched; but he respected the
writer of that letter. He felt that if he knew her he could get on with
her. He resolved to treat her confidence with the respect it seemed
to him it deserved; and, without hesitation, he wrote her the sort of
letter she had asked him to write. She should pay him a visit, and
he would find out for himself the true state of things at Castle
O'Shanaghgan. Whether he would help the Squire or not, whether there was
any need to help him, he could not say, for Nora had not really revealed
much of the truth in her passionate letter. She had hinted at it, but
she had not spoken; she would wait for that moment of outpouring of her
heart until she arrived at The Laurels.

Now, Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, standing alone in her big, empty drawing room,
and looking out at the summer landscape, thought of how Nora might enter
her brother's house. Fond as Mrs. O'Shanaghgan was of Terence--he was in
truth a son after her own heart--she had a queer kind of pride about her
with regard to Nora. Wild and untutored as Nora looked, her mother knew
that few girls in England could hold a candle to her, if justice were
done her. There was something about the expression in Nora's eyes which
even Mrs. O'Shanaghgan could scarcely resist at times, and there were
tones and inflections of entreaty in Nora's voice which had a strange
power of melting the hearts of those who listened to her.

After about an hour Mrs. O'Shanaghgan went very slowly upstairs. Her
bedroom was over the drawing room. It was just as large as the drawing
room--a great bare apartment. The carpet which covered the floor was
so threadbare that the boards showed through in places; the old, faded
chintz curtains which hung at the windows were also in tatters; but they
were perfectly clean, for Mrs. O'Shanaghgan did her best to retain that
English cleanliness and order which she felt were so needed in the land
of desolation, as she was pleased to call Ireland.

A huge four-post bedstead occupied a prominent place against one of the
walls; there was an enormous mahogany wardrobe against another; but the
whole center of the room was bare. The dressing-table, however,
which stood right in the center of the huge bay, was full of pretty
things--silver appointments of different kinds, brushes and combs
heavily mounted in silver, glass bottles with silver stoppers, perfume
bottles, pretty knick-knacks of all sorts. When Nora was a little child
she used to stand fascinated, gazing at her mother's dressing-table. It
was the one spot where any of the richness of the Englishwoman's early
life could still be found. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan went up now and looked at
her dressing-table, sweeping her eyes rapidly over its contents.
The brushes and combs, the bottles of scent, the button-hooks, the
shoe-horns, the thousand-and-one little nothings, polished and bright,
stood upon the dressing-table; and besides these there was a large,
silver-mounted jewel-case.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan was not at all afraid to leave this jewel-case out,
exposed to view day after day, for no one all round the place would have
touched so much as a pin which belonged to the Squire's lady. The people
were poor, and would think nothing of stealing half a bag of potatoes,
or helping themselves to a good sack of fruit out of the orchard; but
to take the things from the lady's bedroom or anything at all out of
the house they would have scorned. They had their own honesty, and they
loved the Squire too much to attempt anything of the sort.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan now put a key into the lock of the jewel-case and
opened it. When first she was married it was full of pretty things--long
strings of pearls, a necklet of very valuable diamonds, a tiara of the
same, rings innumerable, bracelets, head ornaments of different kinds,
buckles for shoes, clasps for belts, pins, brooches. Mrs. O'Shanaghan,
when Nora was a tiny child, used on every one of the little girl's
birthdays to allow her to overhaul the jewel case; but of late years
Nora had never looked inside it, and Mrs. O'Shanaghgan had religiously
kept it locked. She opened it now with a sigh. The upper tray was quite
empty; the diamonds had long ago been disposed of. They had gone to
pay for Terence's schooling, for Terence's clothes, for one thing and
another that required money. They had gone, oh! so quickly; had melted
away so certainly. That first visit of her son's to England had cost
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan her long string of pearls, which had come to her as an
heirloom from her mother before her. They were very valuable pearls,
and she had sold them for a tenth, a twentieth part of their value. The
jeweler in Dublin, who was quite accustomed to receiving the poor lady's
trinkets, had sent her a check for fifty pounds for the pearls, knowing
well that he could sell them himself for at least three hundred pounds.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan now once more rifled the jewel case. There were some
things still left--two or three rings and a diamond cross. She had never
wanted to part with that cross. She had pictured over and over how
it would shine on Nora's white neck; how lovely Nora would look when
dressed for her first ball, having that white Irish cross, with its
diamonds and its single emerald in the center, shining on her breast.
But would it not be better to give Nora the chance of spending three
or four months in England, the chance of educating herself, and let the
cross go by? It was so valuable that the good lady quite thought that
she ought to get seventy pounds for it. With seventy pounds she could
fit Nora up for her English visit, and have a little over to keep in
her own pocket. Only Nora must not go next Tuesday; that was quite
impossible.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan quickly determined to make the sacrifice. She could
still supply Nora with a little, very simple pearl necklet, to wear with
her white dress during her visit; and the cross would have to go. There
would be a few rings still left; after that the jewel case would be
empty.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan packed the precious cross into a little box, and took
it out herself to register it, and to send it off to the jeweler who
always bought the trinkets she sent him. She told him that she expected
him to give her, without the smallest demur, seventy pounds for the
cross, and hoped to have the money by the next day's post.

Having done this and dispatched her letter, she walked briskly back to
the Castle. She saw Nora wandering about in the avenue. Nora, hatless
and gloveless, was playing with the dogs. She seemed to have forgotten
all about her keen disappointment of the morning. When she saw her
mother coming up the avenue she ran to meet her.

"Why, mammy," she said, "how early you are out! Where have you been?"

"I dislike extremely that habit you have, Nora, of calling me mammy;
mother is the word you should address your parent with. Please remember
in future that I wish to be called mother."

"Oh, yes, mother!" answered Nora. The girl had the sweetest temper in
the world, and no amount of reproof ever caused her to answer angrily.
"But where have you been?" she said, her curiosity getting the better of
her prudence.

"Again, Nora, I am sorry to say I must reprove you. I have been to the
village on business of my own. It is scarcely your affair where I choose
to walk in the morning."

"Oh, of course not, mam--I mean mother."

"But come with me down this walk. I have something to say to you."

Nora eagerly complied. There was something in the look of her mother's
eyes which made her guess that the usual subject of conversation--her
own want of deportment, her ignorance of etiquette--was not to be the
theme. She felt her heart, which had sunk like lead within her, rise
again to the surface. Her eyes sparkled and smiles played round her rosy
lips.

"Yes, mother," she said; "yes."

"All impulse," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan--she laid her hand on Nora's
arm--"all impulse, all Irish enthusiasm."

"I cannot help it, you know," said Nora. "I was born that way. I am
Irish, you know, mammy."

"You are also English, my dear," replied her mother. "Pray remember that
fact when you see your cousins."

"My cousins! My English cousins! But am I to see them? Mother, mother,
do you mean it?"

"I do mean it, Nora. I intend you to accept your uncle's invitation.
No heroics, please," as the girl was about to fling her arms round her
mother's neck; "keep those for your father, Nora; I do not wish for
them. I intend you to go and behave properly; pray remember that when
you give way to pure Irishism, as I may express your most peculiar
manners, you disgrace me, your mother. I mean you to go in order to have
you tamed a little. You are absolutely untamed now, unbroken in."

"I never want to be broken in," whispered Nora, tears of mingled
