
"We started at once across the island, Mr. Earnshaw keeping the line by
a pocket compass. It was rough work, though, and at last the lieutenant
said:

"'We make such a noise going through the bushes that we had better wait
till daylight, so just halt where you are, lads.'

"As soon as the first ray of light showed we were off again, and an hour
later reached the edge of the slope down to the cove.

"'Now, remember,' the lieutenant said, 'that no woman is to be hurt.
All the men who resist are to be shot or cut down; but you are to take
prisoners all who throw down their arms. Some of them may be able to
prove themselves less guilty than the rest. At any rate, there is no
fear of the Spanish authorities being too merciful. These pirates have
been the scourge of these seas for the last six years.'

"Well, lad, there ain't much more to tell you. We took them completely
by surprise, and the men in the village were all knocked down and bound,
without firing a shot. The men in the batteries tried to slew their guns
round, but we didn't give 'em time. They fought desperately, for they
knew what their doom was, and there weren't any prisoners taken there.
As soon as the village was taken I went straight with Mr. Escombe to
the captain's house. His wife was standing at the door, and she gave
a little cry as she saw the British uniforms, and ran a step or two to
meet us, then she stopped, and her arms dropped by her side.

"'What! you, Peter!' she said as we came up. 'Is it you who led them
here?'

"'Yes, ma'am, it was me,' says I, 'and the best thing I could do for
you, for you could not wish to stay here all your life with just the
people that are here.'

"'But what has happened?' she said. 'How is it you are here? What has
become of the schooner?'

"'The schooner is sunk, ma'am, and the brig is captured.'

"'And my husband?'

"'Well, ma'am, don't you take on, but your husband went down with the
schooner.'

"She tottered, and I thought she would have fallen, but Mr. Escombe put
his arm round her and led her to the house and left her there, putting
two sailors on guard to see as she wasn't disturbed. An hour or two
later the frigate was off the cove, and the captain landed. We stopped
a week there, and carried off all there was worth taking; and I tell
you there was enough to give every man Jack on board a handsome share of
prize money when the things came to be sold afterward.

"Money, there was lots of it, all stored away in what they called the
treasure house, for money was no good there. Jewels and ornaments,
watches, and the things which they uses in them Catholic churches, and
all kinds of valuable things, and stores of silks and velvets and all
kinds of materials; and as to wine and such like, there was enough
to have lasted them for years, for from first to last it was shown
afterward that those fellows must have captured more nor fifty vessels.
Why they shouldn't have stopped ashore and enjoyed what they got was a
mystery to me. But I suppose they couldn't do without excitement, and
though every man talked of the time when the treasure would be divided
and they were to scatter, I don't suppose as one ever expected as the
time would really come.

"Well, arter everything was on board, and the women and children, the
place was burned, and we sailed for the nearest Spanish port. We had
had a sort of court martial on board the frigate, and two or three young
chaps like myself, and two men as was proved to have been captured in
the pirates' last cruise, and who hadn't been to sea with them or taken
part in any of their bloody doings, was kept on board ship, and the rest
was handed over to the Spanish authorities. Most of them was garroted,
and a few was condemned to work on the roads for life. I and the others
was taken back to England in the frigate, whose foreign time was up,
and when we got to Portsmouth we was drafted into a regiment there, and
lucky we thought ourselves to get off so easy. The captain's wife and
some of the other white women came home to England on board the frigate.
She was very low at first, but she brightened up a good deal toward
the end of the voyage, which lasted two months. She grieved over her
husband, you see, but she couldn't but have felt that it was all for the
best. I heard afterward as how two years after she married Mr. Earnshaw,
who by that time had got to be a captain. So that, you see, my lad, is
how I came to fight under the black flag first and then to be a soldier
of the queen. I didn't mean it to be sich a long yarn, but when I once
began it all came back to me, and you see, I haven't spoken of it for
years. You don't think altogether as I was very wrong, I hope."

"I thank you very much for your story, sergeant," Jack replied. "I only
wish it had been longer; and although it's very easy to say that a man
ought to die rather than consent to be a pirate, I don't think there are
many lads who would choose death if they were placed as you were."

"I am glad you think that, young un; it's always been a sore point with
me, I have done my duty since, and no one can say as he's ever seen
Sergeant Edwards show the white feather. But the thought that that once
I did not act as a brave man would have done has always troubled me."

The next day, as the sea went down, and the recruits recovered from the
effects of the confinement and sickness, they again began to talk among
themselves. The fact that all the other vessels of the fleet were out of
sight naturally encouraged them. Jack observed, however, that the call
to parade on deck was answered with more quickness than before, and the
exercises were gone through with a painstaking steadiness greater than
had been shown since the embarkation. When the men were dismissed from
parade Jack remarked this to the sergeant.

"Ay, ay, lad, I noticed it too," the sergeant said, shaking his head,
"and in my opinion it's a bad sign. They want to throw the officers
off their guard. It's a pity you have been seen talking so much to me,
because, of course, they won't say anything when you are listening; but
one or two of the men who came into the regiment with me have dropped
a word as they happened to pass this morning that they wanted to have
a word if they could get one without being noticed, so I hope to hear a
little more tonight."

That evening, before going below, Jack had an hour's talk with Sergeant
Edwards.

"It's just as I thought," the latter said, "they've got an idea of
seizing the ship. The men I spoke of managed to get a few words with me
this evening. They don't know anything about piracy. All they have heard
is that there is a proposal to seize the ship and to carry her into
one of the northern ports of Spain, where the men will land and give up
their arms to the Spanish authorities, and then either disperse and make
their way home by twos and threes as best they can, or they will take
service with the King of Spain, who, they think, will pay them a deal
better than the English government.

"A part of the crew are in the scheme. These, the men tell me, do not
intend to land, but only tell the others that they shall sail away.
That's about what I thought would be. The greater part of these fellows
only wants to get quickly home again, while the sailors, who may want to
go abuccaneering, would not care about having the soldiers with them.
I shall give a hint to the captain of my company tonight as to what
is going on, but I don't much expect he will pay any attention to it.
Officers never believe these things till it is too late, and you see
I can't give them any names yet or prove what I say; besides, likely
enough, any inquiry set on foot would only bring the matter to a head.
We must wait till we know something sure.

"You keep your ears open, my boy, and your eyes too, and I will do the
same. If it comes, and you see a chance of warning the captain of the
ship or the first lieutenant in time, you do it; but don't you do it if
you don't think there's time enough, or if you can't do it without being
seen. If it's too late, and you are found out, they would just chuck you
overboard or knock you on the head, and you will have done no good
after all, and perhaps only caused bloodshed. Like enough, if matters
go quietly, there won't be no bloodshed, and the officers and those who
stick to them will just be turned adrift in the boats, or maybe handed
over to the Spanish at the port they go into as prisoners."

Jack promised to follow the sergeant's instructions, and went below. He
thought that the men were unusually quiet, and taking his blanket--for
although some of the soldiers slept in hammocks, the majority lay on the
deck wrapped in their blankets--he lay down by the side of a gun whose
port had been opened to admit air between decks. After thinking the
matter over for some time, and wondering what would be the end of it, he
dropped off into a light sleep.

Presently he was aroused by a confused sound. Looking round cautiously,
he saw by the dim light of the lantern that most of the men were on
their feet. Some of them were taking down their firearms from the arm
racks; small groups were stooping over some of the sleeping figures; and
to the mast, close to which one of the lanterns hung, two or three
men were bound, and two soldiers with pikes were standing by them. The
crisis, then, had come, and Jack at once proceeded to carry out the plan
he had thought out after he lay down.

Very quietly he crawled out through the porthole, and then raised
himself and stood on the muzzle of the gun. There he could reach the
foot of the shrouds of the foremast, which happened to be immediately
above the port. He swung himself up, and, placing his hands on the edge
of the bulwark, cautiously looked over.

At present all was quiet there; the signal from below had not been
given, and the troops on deck--for, owing to the numbers on board,
one fourth were always on deck in fine weather--were standing about or
sitting in groups. Keeping his feet on the ledge which ran round level
with the deck, and his fingers on the top of the bulwark, Jack managed
to edge his way aft until he reached the line of the quarterdeck. Here
the line of the bulwark ceased, the cabins of the officers rising, as
was usual in those days, in a double tier high about the waist.

The nearest porthole, which was open, was but three feet long, and Jack,
reaching forward, put one hand in it and continued his way. The porthole
was but just large enough for him to squeeze through. Looking in before
he attempted it he saw an officer asleep immediately below him. It was
the ensign of his own company. Leaning in he touched him gently. After
one or two attempts, the young officer opened his eyes, saying, "What is
it? It's not morning yet."

"Hush, sir," Jack said earnestly; "I am Jack Stilwell of your company.
There is a mutiny, sir, forward. Please help me in, I want to warn the
captain of the ship, and he will know what to do."

The young officer leaped from his bunk and assisted Jack to enter.

"I will come with you," he said, hastily dragging on his trousers and
coat. "Are you sure of what you say?"

"Quite sure, sir; the noncommissioned officers are bound; it may begin
at any moment."

The ensign led the way to the captain's cabin, which he opened and
entered without ceremony.

"What is it?" the captain exclaimed. The ensign said who he was, and
Jack repeated his story.

"The dogs!" the captain said, "we will teach them a lesson. Let me see,
the second lieutenant is on duty; rouse all the other officers;" and he
himself assisted them to do so. In a minute or two they were gathered
hastily attired, with sword and pistol, in the captain's cabin.

"Do you, Mr. Hartwell," the captain said, addressing the first
lieutenant, "go below and rouse the boatswain and petty officers,
and bid them get together all the men they can depend upon, arm them
quietly, and be ready to rush on deck the instant a stir is heard
forward among the soldiers. Any man who disobeys orders, shoot him
instantly. Do you, sir," he said to the second officer, "go to the
magazine with four of the midshipmen, open it and bring up charges of
grape for the guns on the quarterdeck. Be as quick as you can. Now,
gentlemen, the rest of us will make our way up quietly, one by one,
to the quarterdeck. Go well aft, so that the men in the waist will not
notice you. Directly the cartridges come up we will load the guns, and
be in readiness to slew them across the deck; and in the mean time, if
they should attack before we are ready, we must hold the ladders to the
last."

One by one the officers stole out from the cabin with bare feet, and
made their way up to the quarterdeck, until some thirty of them were
gathered there, being all the officers of the regiment, the naval
officers, and midshipmen. The night was a dark one, and this was
accomplished without the movement being noticed by any of those in the
waist of the ship.



CHAPTER VI: A COMMISSION


The moments passed slowly and anxiously, for if the mutineers were to
pour up from below before the cartridges arrived and the lieutenant had
got the petty officers and men on whom they could rely ready for action,
it was improbable that the officers would be able successfully to oppose
the rush of the men, armed as these would be with matchlock and pike.

The mutineers, however, believing that there was no occasion to hurry,
were quietly carrying out their intentions. The noncommissioned officers
had all been seized, tied, and placed under sentries, whose orders were
to pike them if they uttered a word. A strong guard had been placed at
the foot of the gangway to prevent any of the soldiers who were not in
the plan from going on deck and giving the alarm. The muskets were not
loaded, as on embarkation all ball cartridges had, as usual, been stowed
away in the magazine; but they reckoned upon obtaining possession of
this at the first rush. The ringleaders proceeded to form the men in
fours, so that they could pour on to the deck in military order. The men
of each company were told off to separate work. Two companies were to
clear the decks, where, on their appearance, they would be joined by
their comrades there, and to overpower any sailors who might offer
resistance.

Another company was to run down and secure the magazine, and, breaking
it open, to serve out cartridges to all. Two other companies were to
rush aft and overpower the officers; the sixth and seventh were to form
round the head of the hatchway leading to the decks where the sailors
slept, and to allow only those to come on deck who had entered into the
plot. The other three companies were already on deck. The arrangements
were excellent, but the care taken in preparing for them, and the
necessity for doing this in silence lest the stir should be heard and an
alarm be given on deck, occupied time which the officers were turning to
advantage.

As soon as the captain and naval men had gained the quarterdeck they
threw off the lashings of the guns, and had all in readiness for running
them in and taking them aft to the edge of the quarterdeck. There was
a deep sensation of relief as one after another the midshipmen joined
them, each carrying three cartridges of grape, and followed by the
gunner with four more. The lieutenant was to stay below to lead the
sailors on to the deck.

The gunner brought a message saying that all was well. Many of
the sailors were found to have turned into their hammocks without
undressing, and to have hand pikes or cutlasses concealed beneath
the clothes. These, however, had been surprised and taken without the
slightest noise; as, on finding a lantern on one side of their heads
and a pistol on the other, each had submitted without the slightest
resistance. All these had been sent down to the hold below, and a guard
placed over them. The guns were loaded and the whole of the officers
divided among them in readiness to run them forward. Four or five
minutes passed, then a shout was heard forward and a low rush of many
feet.

In an instant the four guns on the quarterdeck were run across. While
this was being done there was a clashing of swords, shouts, and a noise
of conflict heard forward, and at the same time a loud cheer arose,
while from the after hatchway a dark body of men rushed up on to the
deck and formed across it. Some midshipmen, who had been told off for
the duty, ran up from the officers' cabin with lighted lanterns, which
were ranged along at the edge of the quarterdeck.

There was a rush aft of the mutineers, but these recoiled astonished at
the sight of the pikes which confronted them, and the line of sailors
four deep across the deck, while at the same moment the light of the
lanterns showed them the officers on the quarterdeck, and the four
guns pointed threateningly toward them. For a moment a silence of
astonishment and dismay succeeded the uproar which had preceded it, then
the captain's voice was heard:
