The horses had already had an extra feed, and the Kaffirs were warned
of the hour at which they were going to start. The pack-horses were
able to keep up with the rest, for their loads were by no means
heavy--in fact, they carried less weight than the others. The two
hundred pounds of biscuits given to the hussars made no difference in
their baggage, for this had been bought at Dundee, as the lads decided
to keep their stores as far as possible intact for a time when they
might for some days be away scouting in a district where no provisions
could be obtained.

At four o'clock the sentries roused the others, and having taken a cup
of coffee and some cold meat and bread, and led the horses down to the
stream while the Kaffirs were loading up the packets and bundles, they
mounted at five o'clock and set off at a trot, Jack and Japhet, a name
suggested by Field, who was the wag of the party, were allowed to ride
on two of the horses that carried the lightest burdens. All the lads
were provided with compasses, but these were not necessary, as both the
natives were well acquainted with the country, which was wild and
mountainous.

When they reached Wessels station, nine miles from Elandslaagte, they
heard the sound of guns. At this proof that there was still a force
there, they turned off from the road, and riding west, struck the point
where the main road to Meran crossed the Sundays River, and then, still
keeping a mile west of the line of railway, found themselves abreast of
the station. Just as they did so, a body of mounted volunteers galloped
up towards them. As soon as they were seen, they exchanged their hats
for forage-caps, and some of them, by Chris's orders, hoisted their
union-jacks on their rifles.

"It is well that you raised those flags," the officer in command said.
"We made sure by your appearance that you were Boers, and rather took
your change of caps as one of their slim devices, and had our rifles
ready to give you a warm reception. I suppose you come from Dundee? We
heard news yesterday evening of the battle, and were sorry to hear how
heavy the losses were, and particularly of General Symons' wound. I
suppose you have no later news?"

"No, beyond that we heard he was very dangerously hit indeed. He is
either at the church or town-hall. Both have been turned into
hospitals."

"There is a good deal of anxiety at Ladysmith," the officer said. "The
general opinion is that, with the Boers closing in all round it, the
position is a very serious one."

"I am afraid so, sir. There is nothing to prevent the Boers from
returning to their position on Talana Hill to-day; and soon after we
left the town this morning we heard the sound of guns away on the
right, and supposed that the Free Staters had approached Glencoe. As
mounted men are of very little use there, and our party is too small to
be able to do any good, we thought it would be best to come back here,
especially as there was a native report that there was firing in this
direction."

"Yes; a party of our cavalry under French came up with a battery of
field artillery. There was a little skirmishing, but in the evening the
Boers were strongly reinforced, and our cavalry returned to Ladysmith.
It was only a reconnaissance to ascertain the general situation. To-day
we are stronger. Squadrons of the 5th Dragoon Guards, 5th Lancers, the
Natal mounted, battery, and several detachments of mounted volunteers,
including the Imperial Light Horse, and half the Manchester Regiment,
are coming up in an armoured train. I suppose you are not attached to
any other corps?"

"Yes; we form a section of Captain Brookfield's corps of Maritzburg
Scouts. As you see, we are not in uniform; it being thought that, as we
are all from Johannesburg, and speak Dutch and Kaffir, we should be of
more use for scouting if able to appear as Boers."

"A very good idea," the officer said, "but somewhat dangerous; for if
they caught you they would assuredly shoot you as spies."

"We don't mean to be caught if we can help it, as you see we are very
well mounted."

"Uncommonly well. Brookfield's subscriptions must have come in
handsomely for him to be able to buy such horses as those."

"We provide our own mounts and equipments," Chris said, "and consider
ourselves very lucky in getting hold of this batch of horses from Mr.
Duncan on the day he arrived at Maritzburg. I really think they were
very cheap at sixty pounds each."

"They were not dear, certainly; and the fact that they came from him is
in itself a sufficient recommendation. We have got some thirty from
him, but they are a different stamp of animal and did not cost half
that figure. And now we must be riding to join the rest of our fellows.
We made you out when you were a couple of miles away, and were sent off
to ascertain what you were. By the way, you will find Brookfield there.
He arrived with his men by rail last evening." Riding on, they soon
came upon the mounted corps, and were warmly received by Captain
Brookfield.

"You are back just in time," he said. "I suppose that you saw something
of the fight yesterday, but, as I see your number still complete, you
can scarcely have been in the thick of it?"

"We were with two squadrons of Hussars, and captured a good many
waggons and did a little fighting, but nothing very serious. There were
only a few casualties. We heard, however, from Colonel Yule, who has
succeeded poor Symons, that up to ten o'clock last night, another of
the squadrons of the Hussars and a company of mounted infantry with
them had not returned, and nothing was known of their whereabouts."

"Had they not got into camp when you started?"

"I did not hear, sir. In fact, we set off by daylight. But last night
it was hoped that the squadron, which was acting independently, had
lost their way, and would come in this morning. Where is the Boer force
now?"

"Our batteries have shelled them out of the station. They were wholly
unprepared for it, and bolted at once to those hills a mile and half
east of the line. Their camp lies at the bottom of that conical hill.
You can make them out from here with your glass. There, French is
moving forward."

The order had indeed been given to advance, the artillery accompanying
the cavalry, and halting every two or three minutes to deliver their
fire. The ground was flat, but cut up by gullies. As soon as they came
within range, the colonials dismounted and added their fire to that of
the guns. An immense confusion was seen to reign in the Boer camp, and
thirty-seven British subjects, including the officials and staff at the
railway-station, and some of the coal-miners, took advantage of this
and ran forward to join their friends. They were at once sent back into
Ladysmith, after having given the information that General Koch was in
command of the Boers, and that Commandant Miellof and the German
Colonel Shiel, with many of the Johannesburg commando, were there.
Chris and his comrades felt great satisfaction at the news.

"We have a chance of paying off old scores on the right persons now,"
Chris said. "I do hope that the fellows who insulted us when we were
coming down are here, and that we shall manage to get among them."

For the time, however, this wish was not gratified. The Boers now
seeing that they had such a small force opposed to them, steadied
themselves and opened fire with some guns, Maxims, and rifles from the
crest of the hill, while a swarm of horsemen and dismounted men poured
out to threaten the flanks of the British. The odds were too great; the
comparatively heavy guns of the enemy were well aimed and served, and
quite overpowered the fire of the light cannon of the field and
mountain batteries. The order was given to fall back, which was done in
good order, though the troops were harassed by a hot fire from the
enemy concealed in the gullies. On reaching the high ground near Modder
Spruit, the country was more in favour of the British, who were now
extended on each flank. The Boers were unable or unwilling to move
their heavy guns from their position on the hill, and being now beyond
their range, and exposed to the fire of four batteries as well as the
infantry, those pressing forward fell back. General French had brought
out a signalling apparatus with him, and the telegraph wires were
tapped, and a message sent to General White asking him for
reinforcements in order to carry the Boer position.

The fight now ceased for a time. A party of the Boers occasionally
crept forward and opened fire, but the Colonial Horse dashed forward
and sent them flying back to the hills. From nine o'clock till a
quarter to two the troops remained idle, but the reinforcements then
arrived, a battery of field artillery, several squadrons of Dragoons,
Lancers, and Colonials, and the Devonshire regiment and Gordon
Highlanders, the infantry being brought up by train. These were under
the command of Colonel Ian Hamilton, who had a thorough knowledge of
Boer tactics, and knew how to handle his troops. It was well that it
was so, for, led by a less experienced commander, they would have
suffered terribly in their advance. While the infantry detrained, the
Colonials, followed by the 5th Lancers, rode towards some low hills,
whence some parties of Boers had maintained a distant fire. These were
at once scattered. The infantry marched along some ridges parallel with
the railway, but a mile away, while the Devonshire regiment kept along
the low ground by the line. The 5th Dragoon Guards, with some troops of
Colonials and one of the field batteries, moved forward on the left.

The Manchesters were on the right of the infantry, the Gordons in the
centre, and the Devons on the left, as they set their faces towards the
Boer position. At three o'clock the action began, the Boer riflemen
opening a heavy fire. It was still too distant, however, to do any
serious execution, and the British moved forward as regularly and
unconcernedly as if it had been a field day. The Boer fire grew in
intensity, and one of our batteries opened with shrapnel to drive them
from the lower ridges. At half-past three the Boer artillery joined
their deeper roar to the rattle of musketry and the sharp cracks of the
British guns. Although it was still early the light was indistinct, for
a heavy thunder-storm had been for some time brewing, and this burst
before the heat of the action really began. The darkness was all in
favour of the advancing infantry, who in their khaki uniforms were
almost invisible to the Boers.

The troops were now in extended open order, and advanced towards the
foot of the hill by rushes, taking advantage of the ant-hills that
studded the plain and afforded an excellent cover, being high enough to
cover them while lying down, and thick and compact enough to resist the
passage of a Mauser bullet. The Highlanders were suffering the most
heavily, their dark kilts showing up strongly against the light sandy
soil, and while the Devons and Manchesters sustained but few
casualties, they were dropping fast. They and the Manchesters were
somewhat in advance of the Devons, who were guarding their flank, which
was threatened by a large number of Boers gathered on the ridges on
that side.

The storm was now at its height, the thunder for a time deadening the
roar of the battle, but through the driving rain the infantry pressed
on until they reached the foot of the Boers' hill. Large numbers of the
enemy were on the slope, hidden from sight by the boulders, but these
could not long maintain their position, for the British marksmen shot
as straight as the Boer. Our batteries, which had almost silenced those
of the enemy, scattered their shrapnel among those higher up the hill,
and as the Boers rose to fly before the bayonets of our cheering
troops, they were swept away by volleys of the Lee-Metfords. So, with
short pauses when shelter was obtainable, our troops bore upwards,
cheering and even joking, until they reached the last shoulder of the
hill. The Boers made a short but plucky struggle, numbers pushing up
from behind to help their comrades, but nothing could check the
impetuosity of our troops. The magazines of the rifles were now for the
first time set in action, and the Boer force withered away under the
terrible storm of shot.

The men of the Imperial Light Horse, who had dismounted and joined in
the advance, were fighting side by side with the Highlanders and
Manchesters. The pace was now increased to a run, and shouting and
cheering the men went forward with levelled bayonets. Many of the
Boers, lying behind rocks, maintained their fire until the troops were
within two yards of them, and then rising, called for quarter. The men,
furious at seeing their comrades shot down when all hope of resistance
was over, would have spared none, had not the officers with the
greatest difficulty restrained them from bayoneting the Boers, and many
of these were in fact killed. As the troops, now joined by the Devons,
were rushing down upon the camp, the Boers raised a white flag, and the
bugle sounded "Cease firing". The men halted for a moment and then were
advancing quietly when a tremendous fire broke out from the Boers, who
were scattered over the ridges of the hillside and a slope leading to
its summit.

Hitherto the British loss had been wonderfully small considering the
storm of bullets through which they had passed, but numbers now
dropped, and taken wholly by surprise, the troops ran up the hill
again. But not for long. Halting when they reached the crest, and
furious at the treachery that had been practised with such success upon
them, they turned again, and rushed down the hill, scattering the
Boers, who still clung to their shelters, with their fire. It was just
six o'clock when the Devons carried the last defence of the Boers and
then with the Manchesters swept down into the camp. It was now the turn
of the cavalry. These had in the darkness moved forward unnoticed, and
the Lancers and Dragoons, with a few of the Colonials, among whom were
the Maritzburg Scouts, fell upon the flying Boers and cut them up with
great slaughter, and, although it was now quite dark, followed them for
upwards of two miles, and then returned to camp.

The losses were heavy. The Gordons had lost four officers killed and
seven wounded, and a total of a hundred and fifteen casualties among
the four hundred and twenty-five men led into action. The Imperial
Light Horse lost their colonel and had seven officers wounded, and
eight men killed and forty wounded. Two hundred of the Boers lay dead
upon the field. Their wounded were vastly more numerous, and most of
the principal officers were killed or captured. General Koch, two of
his brothers, a son, and a nephew were all wounded; Shiel, Viljoen, and
many others killed or captured. Everything had been left behind. Three
guns, all their baggage, their waggons, a great quantity of arms and
ammunition, and many horses fell into the hands of the victors. Several
battle flags were also captured, and two hundred prisoners were brought
in by the cavalry. The night was a dreadful one, the rain still
continued to come down, the cold was bitter, and it was next to
impossible to find, still less to bring down, the wounded. Nevertheless
the soldiers carried on the work during the greater part of the night.
Boer waggons were turned for a time into hospital tents, and here by
the light of their lanterns the surgeons laboured unweariedly in giving
what aid was possible to those brought in, whether Boers or Britons.
Chris and his band worked as hard as the rest, and carried down a great
number of wounded; but in spite of all the exertions of the troops many
remained on the hillside all night, the sufferings from the wounds
being as nothing to that caused by the wet and cold. The lads' flasks
were of great use now, and enabled many a man, too badly wounded to be
carried down the rough hillside, to hold on till morning. General White
had arrived from Ladysmith while the battle was going on, but he left
the command in the hands of General French. On the following morning
orders came for General French to retire, as strong parties of the
enemy had been seen further south, and it was hourly becoming more and
more evident that it would be impossible to hold the country beyond
Ladysmith, and many were of opinion that even this position was too far
advanced.

The splendid valour shown by our soldiers at Dundee and Elandslaagte,
and the heavy losses they suffered, had been practically thrown away.
The coal-fields of Northern Natal had been lost, the loyal settlers had
been plundered and ruined. Colonel Yule's force was in imminent peril,
and all that had been obtained was the temporary possession of the two
heights, both of which had to be relinquished on the following morning.
Beyond showing the Boers how enormously they had underrated the
fighting powers of the British troops, no advantage whatever had been
gained by the advance beyond Ladysmith.

Three of the Johannesburg Scouts had been wounded in the charge among
the Boers. None of the injuries were severe, being merely flesh wounds,
of which they were hardly conscious during the fighting, and which
would not be likely to keep them long from the saddle. None of them
applied for medical assistance, as the surgeons were so fully occupied
with serious cases. Their comrades bound up the wounds and placed them
in the most sheltered position they could find, five of their comrades
remaining in charge of them and the horses, there being no possibility
of finding the two Kaffirs and the spare animals in the confusion and
darkness.

"We have had one lesson," Chris said, as at seven in the morning the
party assembled, worn out by the long night's work, "and that is, that
blankets are well enough against a passing shower, but that when there
is any probability of wet we must carry our waterproof sheets with us.
Of course they would have been no good last night, but on occasions
when there is no need for us to be using our hands they will be an
immense comfort."

"But we should have been wet through before we lay down, Chris."

"Yes, they would not have kept us dry, but they would have gone a long
way towards keeping us warm. It would be like putting oilskin over wet
lint; we should have felt as if we were in a hot poultice in a short
time. And even while riding it would have been very comfortable, if we
had worn them as we did the blankets, with a hole in the middle to put
our heads through."

"But that would spoil them for tents," Carmichael said.

"Well, we could have flaps sewn so as to cover the hole."

"Our blankets were very useful last night," Horrocks remarked. "I don't
know how we could have got many of those poor fellows down the hill if
we had not carried them in the blankets. It was infinitely easier for
them and a great deal easier for us. I saw lots of soldiers using
theirs in the same way."

"Are you sure you will be able to sit your horses down to Ladysmith?"
Chris asked Brown, Capper, and Harris, the three wounded.

All laughed. "One would think that we were babies, Chris," Harris said.
"We could ride to Maritzburg if necessary, though I feel my arm rather
stiff, and no doubt it will be stiffer still to-morrow. I felt a bit
miserable at sunrise after lying there shivering, and envied you
fellows who could keep yourselves warm by working; but I am beginning
to thaw out now, and the sight of the Kaffirs coming towards us with
the horses half an hour ago, and the thought of hot coffee, did even
more than the sun to warm me."

"It will be ready soon," Willesden, who was specially in charge of the
stores, said. "It was a capital idea bringing that large spirit stove
and the paraffin with us; even a native could not find any dry sticks
this morning."

"Except as the soldiers have done," Chris said, pointing to where, a
quarter of a mile from the spot where they had gathered, a dozen fires
were blazing, the soldiers having utilized some of the Boer waggons
that had been smashed by the shell for the purpose of firewood.

"Yes, but if we were by ourselves, Chris, there would be no broken
waggons; besides, after all I should not care to go down and scramble
with the soldiers for a place to put a kettle on. At any rate, the
stove will be invaluable out on the veldt."

"We all agree with you, Willesden," Peters said, "and it was because
you were the one who suggested it that we promoted you to the office of
superintendent of the kitchen. It is a comfort, too, that we have some
clear water instead of having to get it from one of these muddy
streams. The storm has done good anyhow, for if it had not been for
that there would have been no breakfast for the troops until they had
moved to the river."

In another twenty minutes they were drinking hot coffee and munching
biscuits. At ten o'clock the bugle sounded the assembly, and the troops
formed up, the wounded were placed in ambulance waggons or carried on
stretchers, and all returned to Elandslaagte station. Here the wounded
were sent on by train, while the infantry and cavalry returned by road.
Talking to some of the officers of the Imperial Horse, several of whom
were friends of his father, and had only left Johannesburg a short time
before the declaration of war, Chris learned that the principal object
in fighting the battle was to drive the Boers off the line by which the
Dundee force would retreat; for Colonel Yule in his telegraphic
despatch had stated, that although a victory had been won he felt that
the position was untenable, and that he might at any moment be forced
to evacuate it. He also learned that the safety of the line beyond
Ladysmith was already threatened, but whether Sir George White would
decide upon falling back towards Pietermaritzburg or would hold
Ladysmith no one knew. Certainly nothing could be determined upon until
General Yule rejoined with the division from Dundee.

The position there was indeed growing worse every hour. While the
battle of Elandslaagte was being fought the Boers had opened fire from
the hills above Glencoe on the British camp, and had compelled it to
shift its position. The next day they were again obliged to move by
artillery on the Impati mountain, and it was then that General Yule
decided to retire at once on Ladysmith. A cavalry reconnaissance which
was sent out found that the Boers were in great strength in the pass of
Glencoe, and it was therefore determined to move by the roundabout way
through Helpmakaar. Some stores of ammunition that had been left under
a guard in the other camp were fetched, and with full pouches the
little army started on its long and perilous march at nine o'clock on
the evening of the 22nd. The camp was abandoned as it stood. The
