wrong, she would rather go through with it alone.  She put on her
shoes under the iron veranda, on the red-and-yellow shining tiles,
and then she ran straight to the sand-pit, and found the Psammead's
place, and dug it out; it was very cross indeed.

'It's too bad,' it said, fluffing up its fur like pigeons do their
feathers at Christmas time.  'The weather's arctic, and it's the
middle of the night.'

'I'm so sorry,' said Anthea gently, and she took off her white
pinafore and covered the Sand-fairy up with it, all but its head,
its bat's ears, and its eyes that were like a snail's eyes.

'Thank you,' it said, 'that's better.  What's the wish this
morning?'

'I don't know,' said she; 'that's just it.  You see we've been very
unlucky, so far.  I wanted to talk to you about it.  But - would
you mind not giving me any wishes till after breakfast?  It's so
hard to talk to anyone if they jump out at you with wishes you
don't really want!'

'You shouldn't say you wish for things if you don't wish for them.
In the old days people almost always knew whether it was
Megatherium or Ichthyosaurus they really wanted for dinner.'

'I'll try not,' said Anthea, 'but I do wish -'

'Look out!' said the Psammead in a warning voice, and it began to
blow itself out.

'Oh, this isn't a magic wish - it's just - I should be so glad if
you'd not swell yourself out and nearly burst to give me anything
just now.  Wait till the others are here.'

'Well, well,' it said indulgently, but it shivered.

'Would you,' asked Anthea kindly - 'would you like to come and sit
on my lap?  You'd be warmer, and I could turn the skirt of my frock
up round you.  I'd be very careful.'

Anthea had never expected that it would, but it did.

'Thank you,' it said; 'you really are rather thoughtful.'  It crept
on to her lap and snuggled down, and she put her arms round it with
a rather frightened gentleness.  'Now then!' it said.

'Well then,' said Anthea, 'everything we have wished has turned out
rather horrid.  I wish you would advise us.  You are so old, you
must be very wise.'

'I was always generous from a child,' said the Sand-fairy.  'I've
spent the whole of my waking hours in giving.  But one thing I
won't give - that's advice.'

'You see,' Anthea went on, it's such a wonderful thing - such a
splendid, glorious chance.  It's so good and kind and dear of you
to give us our wishes, and it seems such a pity it should all be
wasted just because we are too silly to know what to wish for.'

Anthea had meant to say that - and she had not wanted to say it
before the others.  It's one thing to say you're silly, and quite
another to say that other people are.

'Child,' said the Sand-fairy sleepily, 'I can only advise you to
think before you speak -'

'But I thought you never gave advice.'

'That piece doesn't count,' it said.  'You'll never take it!
Besides, it's not original.  It's in all the copy-books.'

'But won't you just say if you think wings would be a silly wish?'

'Wings?' it said.  'I should think you might do worse.  Only, take
care you aren't flying high at sunset.  There was a little Ninevite
boy I heard of once.  He was one of King Sennacherib's sons, and a
traveller brought him a Psammead.  He used to keep it in a box of
sand on the palace terrace.  It was a dreadful degradation for one
of us, of course; still the boy was the Assyrian King's son.  And
one day he wished for wings and got them.  But he forgot that they
would turn into stone at sunset, and when they did he fell slap on
to one of the winged lions at the top of his father's great
staircase; and what with HIS stone wings and the lions' stone wings
- well, it's not a pretty story!  But I believe the boy enjoyed
himself very much till then.'

'Tell me,' said Anthea, 'why don't our wishes turn into stone now?
Why do they just vanish?'

'Autres temps, autres moeurs,' said the creature.

'Is that the Ninevite language?' asked Anthea, who had learned no
foreign language at school except French.

'What I mean is,' the Psammead went on, 'that in the old days
people wished for good solid everyday gifts - Mammoths and
Pterodactyls and things - and those could be turned into stone as
easy as not.  But people wish such high-flying fanciful things
nowadays.  How are you going to turn being beautiful as the day, or
being wanted by everybody, into stone?  You see it can't be done.
And it would never do to have two rules, so they simply vanish.  If
being beautiful as the day COULD be turned into stone it would last
an awfully long time, you know - much longer than you would.  just
look at the Greek statues.  It's just as well as it is.  Good-bye.
I AM so sleepy.'

It jumped off her lap - dug frantically, and vanished.

Anthea was late for breakfast.  It was Robert who quietly poured a
spoonful of treacle down the Lamb's frock, so that he had to be
taken away and washed thoroughly directly after breakfast.  And it
was of course a very naughty thing to do; yet it served two
purposes - it delighted the Lamb, who loved above all things to be
completely sticky, and it engaged Martha's attention so that the
others could slip away to the sand-pit without the Lamb.

They did it, and in the lane Anthea, breathless from the scurry of
that slipping, panted out -

'I want to propose we take turns to wish.  Only, nobody's to have
a wish if the others don't think it's a nice wish.  Do you agree?'

'Who's to have first wish?' asked Robert cautiously.

'Me, if you don't mind,' said Anthea apologetically.  'And I've
thought about it - and it's wings.'

There was a silence.  The others rather wanted to find fault, but
it was hard, because the word 'wings' raised a flutter of joyous
excitement in every breast.

'Not so dusty,' said Cyril generously; and Robert added, 'Really,
Panther, you're not quite such a fool as you look.'

Jane said, 'I think it would be perfectly lovely.  It's like a
bright dream of delirium.'
They found the Sand-fairy easily.  Anthea said:

'I wish we all had beautiful wings to fly with.'

The Sand-fairy blew himself out, and next moment each child felt a
funny feeling, half heaviness and half lightness, on its shoulders.
The Psammead put its head on one side and turned its snail's eyes
from one to the other.

'Not so dusty,' it said dreamily.  'But really, Robert, you're not
quite such an angel as you look.'  Robert almost blushed.

The wings were very big, and more beautiful than you can possibly
imagine - for they were soft and smooth, and every feather lay
neatly in its place.  And the feathers were of the most lovely
mixed changing colours, like the rainbow, or iridescent glass, or
the beautiful scum that sometimes floats on water that is not at
all nice to drink.

'Oh - but can we fly?'Jane said, standing anxiously first on one
foot and then on the other.

'Look out!' said Cyril; 'you're treading on my wing.'

'Does it hurt?' asked Anthea with interest; but no one answered,
for Robert had spread his wings and jumped up, and now he was
slowly rising in the air.  He looked very awkward in his
knickerbocker suit - his boots in particular hung helplessly, and
seemed much larger than when he was standing in them.  But the
others cared but little how he looked - or how they looked, for
that matter.  For now they all spread out their wings and rose in
the air.  Of course you all know what flying feels like, because
everyone has dreamed about flying, and it seems so beautifully easy
- only, you can never remember how you did it; and as a rule you
have to do it without wings, in your dreams, which is more clever
and uncommon, but not so easy to remember the rule for.  Now the
four children rose flapping from the ground, and you can't think
how good the air felt running against their faces.  Their wings
were tremendously wide when they were spread out, and they had to
fly quite a long way apart so as not to get in each other's way.
But little things like this are easily learned.

All the words in the English Dictionary, and in the Greek Lexicon
as well, are, I find, of no use at all to tell you exactly what it
feels like to be flying, so I Will not try.  But I will say that to
look DOWN on the fields and woods, instead of along at them, is
something like looking at a beautiful live map, where, instead of
silly colours on paper, you have real moving sunny woods and green
fields laid out one after the other.  As Cyril said, and I can't
think where he got hold of such a strange expression, 'It does you
a fair treat!'  It was most wonderful and more like real magic than
any wish the children had had yet.  They flapped and flew and
sailed on their great rainbow wings, between green earth and blue
sky; and they flew right over Rochester and then swerved round
towards Maidstone, and presently they all began to feel extremely
hungry.  Curiously enough, this happened when they were flying
rather low, and just as they were crossing an orchard where some
early plums shone red and ripe.

They paused on their wings.  I cannot explain to you how this is
done, but it is something like treading water when you are
swimming, and hawks do it extremely well.

'Yes, I daresay,' said Cyril, though no one had spoken.  'But
stealing is stealing even if you've got wings.'

'Do you really think so?' said Jane briskly.  'If you've got wings
you're a bird, and no one minds birds breaking the commandments.
At least, they MAY mind, but the birds always do it, and no one
scolds them or sends them to prison.'

It was not so easy to perch on a plum-tree as you might think,
because the rainbow wings were so very large; but somehow they all
managed to do it, and the plums were certainly very sweet and
juicy.

Fortunately, it was not till they had all had quite as many plums
as were good for them that they saw a stout man, who looked exactly
as though he owned the plum-trees, come hurrying through the
orchard gate with a thick stick, and with one accord they
disentangled their wings from the plum-laden branches and began to
fly.

The man stopped short, with his mouth open.  For he had seen the
boughs of his trees moving and twitching, and he had said to
himself, 'The young varmints - at it again!'  And he had come out
at once, for the lads of the village had taught him in past seasons
that plums want looking after.  But when he saw the rainbow wings
flutter up out of the plum-tree he felt that he must have gone
quite mad, and he did not like the feeling at all.  And when Anthea
looked down and saw his mouth go slowly open, and stay so, and his
face become green and mauve in patches, she called out:

'Don't be frightened,' and felt hastily in her pocket for a
threepenny-bit with a hole in it, which she had meant to hang on a
ribbon round her neck, for luck.  She hovered round the unfortunate
plum-owner, and said, 'We have had some of your plums; we thought
it wasn't stealing, but now I am not so sure.  So here's some money
to pay for them.'

She swooped down towards the terror-stricken grower of plums, and
slipped the coin into the pocket of his jacket, and in a few flaps
she had rejoined the others.

The farmer sat down on the grass, suddenly and heavily.

'Well - I'm blessed!' he said.  'This here is what they call
delusions, I suppose.  But this here threepenny' - he had pulled it
out and bitten it - 'THAT'S real enough.  Well, from this day forth
I'll be a better man.  It's the kind of thing to sober a chap for
life, this is.  I'm glad it was only wings, though.  I'd rather see
birds as aren't there, and couldn't be, even if they pretend to
talk, than some things as I could name.'

He got up slowly and heavily, and went indoors, and he was so nice
to his wife that day that she felt quite happy, and said to
herself, 'Law, whatever have a-come to the man!' and smartened
herself up and put a blue ribbon bow at the place where her collar
fastened on, and looked so pretty that he was kinder than ever.  So
perhaps the winged children really did do one good thing that day.
If so, it was the only one; for really there is nothing like wings
for getting you into trouble.  But, on the other hand, if you arc
in trouble, there is nothing like wings for getting you out of it.

This was the case in the matter of the fierce dog who sprang out at
them when they had folded up their wings as small as possible and
were going up to a farm door to ask for a crust of bread and
cheese, for in spite of the plums they were soon just as hungry as
ever again.

Now there is no doubt whatever that, if the four had been ordinary
wingless children, that black and fierce dog would have had a good
bite out of the brown-stockinged leg of Robert, who was the
nearest.  But at first growl there was a flutter of wings, and the
dog was left to strain at his chain and stand on his hind-legs as
if he were trying to fly too.

They tried several other farms, but at those where there were no
dogs the people were far too frightened to do anything but scream;
and at last when it was nearly four o'clock, and their wings were
getting miserably stiff and tired, they alighted on a church-tower
and held a council of war.

'We can't possibly fly all the way home without dinner or tea,'
said Robert with desperate decision.

'And nobody will give us any dinner, or even lunch, let alone tea,'
said Cyril.

'Perhaps the clergyman here might,' suggested Anthea.  'He must
know all about angels -'

'Anybody could see we're not that,' said Jane.  'Look at Robert's
boots and Squirrel's plaid necktie.'

'Well,' said Cyril firmly, 'if the country you're in won't SELL
provisions, you TAKE them.  In wars I mean.  I'm quite certain you
do.  And even in other stories no good brother would allow his
little sisters to starve in the midst of plenty.'

'Plenty?' repeated Robert hungrily; and the others looked vaguely
round the bare leads of the church- tower, and murmured, 'In the
midst of?'

'Yes,' said Cyril impressively.  'There is a larder window at the
side of the clergyman's house, and I saw things to eat inside -
custard pudding and cold chicken and tongue - and pies - and jam.
It's rather a high window - but with wings -'

'How clever of you!' said Jane.

'Not at all,' said Cyril modestly; 'any born general - Napoleon or
the Duke of Marlborough - would have seen it just the same as I
did.'

'It seems very wrong,' said Anthea.

'Nonsense,' said Cyril.  'What was it Sir Philip Sidney said when
the soldier wouldn't stand him a drink? - "My necessity is greater
than his".'

'We'll club our money, though, and leave it to pay for the things,
won't we?'  Anthea was persuasive, and very nearly in tears,
because it is most trying to feel enormously hungry and unspeakably
sinful at one and the same time.

'Some of it,' was the cautious reply.

Everyone now turned out its pockets on the lead roof of the tower,
where visitors for the last hundred and fifty years had cut their
own and their sweethearts' initials with penknives in the soft
lead.  There was five-and-sevenpence-halfpenny altogether, and even
the upright Anthea admitted that that was too much to pay for four
peoples dinners.  Robert said he thought eighteen pence.

And half-a-crown was finally agreed to be 'hand- some'.

So Anthea wrote on the back of her last term's report, which
happened to be in her pocket, and from which she first tore her own
name and that of the school, the following letter:


DEAR REVEREND CLERGYMAN,
