"One could make such a mistake, but in this case it was not possible.
I saw my own cousin, Harry Kenton, riding with them. I recognized them
perfectly."

"Then that settles it. The Confederate scouts and cavalry are abroad
to-night also, and on our side of the river. But they must be few who
dare to ride in such a storm."

"That's surely true, sir."

But both Dick and his commanding officer were mistaken. They still
underrated the daring and resolution of the Confederate leaders,
the extraordinary group of men who were the very bloom and flower of
Virginia's military glory, the equal of whom--two at least being in the
very first rank in the world's history--no other country with so small a
population has produced in so short a time.

Earlier in the day Stuart, full of enterprise, and almost insensible to
fatigue, had crossed the Rappahannock much higher up and at the head
of a formidable body of his horsemen, unseen by scouts and spies, was
riding around the Union right. They galloped into Warrenton where the
people, red hot as usual for the South, crowded around them cheering and
laughing and many of the women crying with joy. It was like Jackson and
Stuart to drop from the clouds this way and to tell them, although the
land had been occupied by the enemy, that their brave soldiers would
come in time.

News, where a Northern force could not have obtained a word, was poured
out for the South. They told Stuart that none of the Northern cavalry
was about, and that Pope's vast supply train was gathered at a little
point only ten miles to the southeast. Stuart shook his plumed head
until his long golden hair flew about his neck. Then he laughed aloud
and calling to his equally fiery young officers, told them of the great
spoil that waited upon quickness and daring.

The whole force galloped away for the supply train, but before it
reached it the storm fell in all its violence upon Stuart and his men.
Despite rain and darkness Stuart pushed on. He said afterward that it
was the darkest night he had ever seen. A captured negro guided them on
the final stage of the gallop and just when Dick was riding back to
camp behind Colonel Winchester, Stuart fell like a thunderbolt upon the
supply train and its guard.

Stuart could not drive wholly away the Northern guard, which though
surprised, fought with great courage, but he burned the supply train,
then galloped off with prisoners, and Pope's own uniform, horses,
treasure chest and dispatch book. He found in the dispatch book minute
information about the movements of all the Union troops, and Pope's
belief that he ought to retreat from the river on Washington. Doubtless
the Confederate horseman shook his head again and again and laughed
aloud, when he put this book, more precious than jewels, inside his gold
braided tunic, to be taken to Lee and Jackson.

But these things were all hidden from the little group of weary men
who rode into Pope's camp. Colonel Winchester carried the news of the
crossing--Early had made it--to the commander, and the rest sought the
best shelter to be found. Dick was lucky enough to be taken into a tent
that was thoroughly dry, and the sergeant who had followed him managed
to obtain a supply of dry clothing which would be ready for him when he
awoke.

Dick did not revive as usual. He threw all of his clothing aside and
water flew where it fell, put on dry undergarments and crept between
warm blankets. Nevertheless he still felt cold, and he was amazed at his
own lack of interest in everything. He might have perished out there in
the stream, but what did it matter? He would probably be killed in some
battle anyway. Besides, their information about the crossing of the
rebels was of no importance either. The rebels might stay on their side
of the Rappahannock, or they might go back. It was all the same either
way. All things seemed, for the moment, useless to him.

He began to shiver, but after a while he became so hot that he wanted to
throw off all the cover. But he retained enough knowledge and will
not to do so, and he sank soon into a feverish doze from which he was
awakened by the light of a lantern shining in his face.

He saw Colonel Winchester and another man, a stranger, who held a small
leather case in his hand. But Dick was in such a dull and apathetic
state that he had no curiosity about them and he shut his eyes to keep
out the light of the lantern.

"What is it, doctor?" he heard Colonel Winchester asking.

"Chill and a little fever, brought on by exposure and exhaustion. But
he's a hardy youth. Look what a chest and shoulders! With the aid of
these little white pills of mine he'll be all right in the morning.
Colonel, Napoleon said that an army fights on its stomach, which I
suppose is true, but in our heavily watered and but partly settled
country, it must fight sometimes on a stomach charged with quinine."

"I was afraid it might be worse. A dose or two then will bring him
around?"

"Wish I could be so sure of a quick cure in every case. Here, my lad,
take two of these. A big start is often a good one."

Dick raised his head obediently and took the two quinine pills. Soon he
sank into a condition which was as near stupor as sleep. But before he
passed into unconsciousness he heard the doctor say:

"Wake him soon enough in the morning, Colonel, to take two more. What a
wonderful thing for our armies that we can get all the quinine we want!
The rebel supply, I know, is exhausted. With General Quinine on our side
we're bound to win."

"But that isn't the only reason, doctor. Now--" Their voices trailed
away as Dick sank into oblivion. He had a dim memory of being awakened
the next morning and of swallowing two more pills, but in a minute or
two he sank back into a sleep which was neither feverish nor troubled.
When he awoke the dark had come a second time. The fever was wholly
gone, and his head had ceased to ache.

Dick felt weak, but angry at himself for having broken down at such
a time, he sat up and began to put on the dry uniform that lay in the
tent. Then he was astonished to find how great his weakness really was,
but he persevered, and as he slipped on the tunic Warner came into the
tent.

"You've been asleep a long time," he said, looking at Dick critically.

"I know it. I suppose I slept all through the night as well as the day."

"And the great battle was fought without you."

Dick started, and looked at his comrade, but Warner's eyes were
twinkling.

"There's been no battle, and you know it," Dick said.

"No, there hasn't been any; there won't be any for several days at
least. That whopping big rain last night did us a service after all. It
was Early who crossed the river, and now he is in a way cut off from the
rest of the Southern army. We hear that he'll go back to the other side.
But Stuart has curved about us, raided our supply train and destroyed
it. And he's done more than that. He's captured General Pope's important
papers."

"What does it mean for us?"

"A delay, but I don't know anything more. I suppose that whatever is
going to happen will happen in its own good time. You feel like a man
again, don't you Dick? And you can have the consolation of knowing that
nothing has happened all day long when you slept."

Dick finished his dressing, rejoined his regiment and ate supper with
the other officers around a fine camp fire. He found that he had a good
appetite, and as he ate strength flowed rapidly back into his veins. He
gathered from the talk of the older officers that they were still hoping
for a junction with McClellan before Lee and Jackson could attack. They
expected at the very least to have one hundred and fifty thousand men in
line, most of them veterans.

But Dick saw Shepard again that evening. He had come from a long journey
and he reported great activity in the Southern camp. When Dick said
that Lee and Jackson would have to fight both Pope and McClellan the spy
merely replied:

"Yes, if Pope and McClellan hurry."

But Dick learned that night that Pope was not discouraged. He had an
army full of fighting power, and eager to meet its enemy. He began the
next day to move up the river in order that he might face Lee's whole
force as it attempted to cross at the upper fords. Their spirits
increased as they learned that Early, through fear of being cut off, was
going back to join the main Southern army.

The ground had now dried up after the great storm, but the refreshed
earth took on a greener tinge, and the air was full of sparkle and life.
Dick had not seen such elasticity among the troops in a long time. As
they marched they spoke confidently of victory. One regiment took up a
song which had appeared in print just after the fall of Sumter:


          "Men of the North and West,
              Wake in your might.
           Prepare as the rebels have done
              For the fight.
           You cannot shrink from the test;
           Rise!  Men of the North and West."


Another regiment took up the song, and soon many thousands were singing
it; those who did not know the words following the others. Dick felt
his heart beat and his courage mount high, as he sang with Warner and
Pennington the last verse:


          "Not with words; they laugh them to scorn,
              And tears they despise.
           But with swords in your hands
              And death in your eyes!
           Strike home!  Leave to God all the rest;
           Strike!  Men of the North and West!"


The song sung by so many men rolled off across the fields, and the woods
and the hills gave back the echo.

"We will strike home!" exclaimed Dick, putting great emphasis on the
"will." "Our time for victory is at hand."

"The other side may think they're striking home; too," said Warner,
speaking according to the directness of his dry mathematical mind. "Then
I suppose it will be a case of victory for the one that strikes the
harder for home."

"That's a fine old mind of yours. Don't you ever feel any enthusiasm?"

"I do, when the figures warrant it. But I must reckon everything with
care before I permit myself to feel joy."

"I'm glad I'm not like you, Mr. Arithmetic, Mr. Algebra, Mr. Geometry
and Mr. Trigonometry."

"You mustn't make fun of such serious matters, Dick. It would be a noble
thing to be the greatest professor of mathematics in the world."

"Of course, George, but we wouldn't need him at this minute. But here
we are back at those cottages in which I saw the Southern officers
sheltering themselves. Well, they're ours again and I take it as a good
omen."

"Yes, here we rest, as the French general said, but I don't know that I
care about resting much more. I've had about all I want of it."

Nevertheless they spent the day quietly at the Sulphur Springs, and lay
down in peace that night. But the storm cloud, the blackest storm cloud
of the whole war so far, was gathering.

Lee, knowing the danger of the junction between Pope and McClellan had
resolved to hazard all on a single stroke. He would divide his army.
Jackson, so well called "the striking arm," would pass far around
through the maze of hills and mountains and fall like a thunderbolt
upon Pope's flank. At the sound of his guns Lee himself would attack in
front.

As Dick and his young comrades lay down to sleep this march, the
greatest of Stonewall Jackson's famous turning movements, had begun
already. Jackson was on his horse, Little Sorrel, his old slouch hat
drawn down over his eyes, his head bent forward a little, and the great
brain thinking, always thinking. His face was turned to the North.

Just a little behind Jackson rode one of his most trusted aides, Harry
Kenton, a mere youth in years, but already a veteran in service. Not
far away was the gallant young Sherburne at the head of his troop of
cavalry, and in the first brigade was the regiment of the Invincibles
led by Colonel Leonidas Talbot and Lieutenant Colonel Hector St.
Hilaire. Never had the two colonels seemed more prim and precise, and
not even in youth had the fire of battle ever burned more brightly in
their bosoms.

Jackson meant to pass around his enemy's right, crossing the Bull Run
Mountain at Thoroughfare Gap, then strike the railway in Pope's rear.
Longstreet, one of the heaviest hitters of the South, meanwhile was
to worry Pope incessantly along the line of the Rappahannock, and when
Jackson attacked they were to drive him toward the northeast and away
from McClellan.

The hot August night was one of the most momentous in American history,
and the next few days were to see the Union in greater danger than it
has ever stood either before or since. Perhaps it was not given to the
actors in the drama to know it then, but the retrospect shows it now.
The North had not attained its full fighting strength, and the genius of
the two great Southern commanders was at the zenith, while behind them
stood a group of generals, full of talent and fearless of death.

Jackson had been directly before Sulphur Springs where Dick lay with the
division to which he belonged. But Jackson, under cover of the darkness,
had slipped away and the division of Longstreet had taken its place so
quietly that the Union scouts and spies, including Shepard himself, did
not know the difference.

Jackson's army marched swiftly and silently, while that of Pope slept.
The plan of Lee was complicated and delicate to the last degree, but
Jackson, the mainspring in this organism, never doubted that he could
carry it out. His division soon left the rest of the army far behind, as
they marched steadily on over the hills, the fate of the nation almost
in the hollow of their hands.

The foot cavalry of Jackson were proud of their ability that night. They
carried only three days' rations, expecting to feed off the enemy at
the end of that time. Near midnight they lay down and slept a while,
but long before dawn they were in line again marching over the hills and
across the mountains. There were skirmishers in advance on either side,
but they met no Union scouts. The march of Jackson's great fighting
column was still unseen and unsuspected. A single Union scout or a
message carried by a woman or child might destroy the whole plan, as a
grain of dust stops all the wheels and levers of a watch, but neither
the scout, the woman nor the child appeared.

Toward dawn the marching Southerners heard far behind them the thunder
of guns along the Rappahannock. They knew that Longstreet had opened
with his batteries across the river, and that those of Pope were
replying. The men looked at one another. There was a deep feeling of
excitement and suspense among them. They did not know what all this
marching meant, but they had learned to trust the man who led them. He
had led them only to victory, and they did not doubt that he was doing
so again.

The march never paused for an instant. On they went, and the sound of
the great guns behind them grew fainter and fainter until it faded away.
Where were they going? Was it a raid on Washington? Were they to hurl
themselves upon Pope's rear, or was there some new army that they were
to destroy?

Up swept the sun and the coolness left by the storm disappeared. The
August day began to blaze again with fierce burning heat, but there was
no complaint among Jackson's men. They knew now that they were on one of
his great turning movements, on a far greater scale than any hitherto,
and full of confidence, they followed in the wake of Little Sorrel.

In the daylight now Jackson had scouts and skirmishers far in front and
on either flank. They were to blaze the way for the army and they made
a far out-flung line, through which no hostile scout could pass and
see the marching army within. At the close of the day they were still
marching, and when the sun was setting Jackson stood by the dusty
roadside and watched his men as they passed. For the first time in that
long march they broke through restraint and thundering cheers swept
along the whole line as they took off their caps to the man whom they
deemed at once their friend and a very god of war. The stern Jackson
giving way so seldom to emotion was heard to say to himself:

"Who can fail to win battles with such men as these?"

Jackson's column did not stop until midnight. They had been more than
twenty-four hours on the march, and they had not seen a hostile soldier.
Harry Kenton himself did not know where they were going. But he lay down
and gratefully, like the others, took the rest that was allowed to him.
But a few hours only and they were marching again under a starry sky.
Morning showed the forest lining the slopes of the mountains and then
all the men seemed to realize suddenly which way they were going.

This was the road that led to Pope. It was not Washington, or
Winchester, or some unknown army, but their foe on the Rappahannock that
they were going to strike. A deep murmur of joy ran through the ranks,
and the men who had now been marching thirty hours, with but little
rest, suddenly increased their speed. Knowledge had brought them new
strength.

They entered the forest and passed into Thoroughfare Gap, which leads
through Bull Run Mountain. The files narrowed now and stretched out in a
longer line. This was a deep gorge, pines and bushes lining the summits
