inquiring of the servant if she knew where the woman who sold cakes to
the boys lived.

"Yes, sir; she lives in a little house in Mill Street; it's not a
regular shop, but there are a few cakes in one of the windows; I have
bought things there for the kitchen, knowing that she dealt with the
young gentlemen."

Mr. Porson made his way to Mill Street and easily found the house he
was in search of. On being questioned the old woman at first showed some
reluctance in answering his questions, but Mr. Porson said sharply:

"Now, dame, I want no nonsense; I am acquainted with the whole affair,
but wish to have it from your own lips. Unless you tell me the whole
truth not a cake will you sell my boys in future."

Thus pressed Mrs. Brown at once related the story of Mather having
borrowed some money of her; of her threats to report him unless he paid,
and of his having given her five shillings on the following Saturday,
saying that he would give her the rest in a few days, but could pay no
more then; and how, after repeated disappointments, she had now given
him till Saturday to settle the debt.

"If he didn't pay, sir, I meant to have come to ye and telled ye all
about it, for I hate lies, and Master Mather has lied to me over and
over again about it; but seeing that Saturday hasn't come I don't like
telling ye the story, as he may have meant to keep his word to me this
time."

"Here are the five shillings which he borrowed of you; as to the other
money, you will never get it, and I hope it will be a lesson to you; and
mind, if I find that you ever allow the boys to run an account with you
further than the following Saturday after it is incurred, you will never
come into my field or playground again."

Mr. Porson then went to the chief constable's, and after a short
conversation with him a constable was told off to accompany him. He and
the master took their station at a short distance from the shop of the
man White and waited quietly. A little after nine a figure was seen
coming down the street from the other end. He passed quickly into the
shop.

"That is the boy," Mr. Porson said.

"Wouldn't it be better, sir," the constable asked, "to wait till the
deed is completed, then we can lay our hands on White as a receiver?"

"No," Mr. Porson replied, "for in that case the boy would have to appear
with him in the dock, and that I wish of all things to avoid."

So saying he walked quickly on and entered the shop.

Mather was leaning across the counter while the man was examining the
pencil case by the light of the candle.

"Five shillings," the man said, "and no more. I was nearly getting into
trouble over that last job of yours."

"But it's worth a great deal more than that," Mather said. "You might
give me ten."

"Well, take it back then," the man said, pushing it across the counter.

"Thank you, I will take it myself," Mr. Porson said quietly, as he
advanced and stretched out his hand.

Mather turned round with a sudden cry, and then stood the picture of
silent terror.

"As for you," the master said indignantly to the dealer, "you scoundrel,
if you had your deserts I would hand you over to the constable, who is
outside the door, as a receiver of stolen goods, and for inciting this
boy to theft. I heard you offer him a sum of money for it which shows
that you knew it was stolen; but your time will come, sir, and you will
hang over the gate of York prison as many a poor wretch far less guilty
than yourself has done;" for in those days death was the punishment
of receivers of stolen goods, as well as of these convicted of highway
robbery and burglary.

"Have mercy, sir, oh, spare me!" Mather exclaimed, falling on his knees.
"Don't give me in charge."

"I am not going to do so," the master said. "Get up and come with me."

Not a word was spoken on the way back to the school.

Mr. Porson then took Mather into his study, where they remained for half
an hour. What passed between them was never known. In the morning the
boys who slept in the room with Mather were surprised to find that his
bed was empty and the window open. He had gone to bed at half past eight
as usual, and saying he was sleepy had threatened to punch the head of
any boy who spoke, so that all had gone off to sleep in a very short
time. A stout ivy grew against the wall, and some fallen leaves on the
ground showed them that he had climbed down with the assistance of its
stem. But why he should have gone, and what on earth possessed him to
run away, none could imagine. The news ran rapidly through the other
bedrooms, and brimful of excitement all went down when the bell rang for
prayers before breakfast. The list of names was called out by the master
as usual, and the excitement grew breathless as the roll of the third
class was called; but to the astonishment of all, Mather's name was
omitted. When the list was concluded Mr. Porson said:

"Mather has left; I grieve to say that I have discovered that it was he
who stole the book and pencil case. He has confessed the whole to me,
and he is, I trust, sincerely penitent. He slept last night on the sofa
in my study, and has gone off this morning by the coach. I have written
to his parents stating the whole circumstances under which he was driven
to commit the theft, and that although I could not permit him to remain
here, I trusted and believed that his repentance was sincere, and that
it would be a lesson to him through life, and I urged them to give him a
further trial, and not to drive him to desperation by severity.

"There is a lesson which you may all learn from this. Mather committed
these crimes because he had borrowed money which he could not repay.
Most foolishly and mistakenly the woman who supplies you with cakes had
lent him money and when he could not repay it according to his promise
to her, threatened to report the case to me, and it was to prevent
the matter coming to my ears that he took these things. Let this be a
warning to you, boys, through life. Never borrow money, never spend
more than your means afford. An extravagance may seem to you but a small
fault, but you see crime and disgrace may follow upon it. Think this
well over, and be lenient in your hearts to your late schoolfellow.
He was tempted, you see, and none of us can tell what he may do when
temptation comes, unless we have God's help to enable us to withstand
it, and to do what is right. Now let us fall to at our breakfast."

It was a strangely silent meal. Scarce a word was spoken, even in a
whisper. It came as a shock to everybody there, that after all the
dictionary should have been taken by one of their number, and that the
master's kindness on that occasion should have been requited by another
robbery seemed a disgrace to the whole school. That Mather, too, always
loud, noisy, and overbearing, should have been the thief was surprising
indeed. Had it been some quiet little boy, the sort of boy others are
given to regard as a sneak, there would have been less surprise, but
that Mather should do such a thing was astounding. These were probably
the first reflections which occurred to every boy as he sat down to
breakfast.

The next impression was how good Mr. Porson had been about it. He might
have given Mother in charge, and had him punished by law. He might have
given him a terrific flogging and a public expulsion before all the
school. Instead of that he had sent him quietly away, and seemed sorry
for rather than angry with him. By the time the meal was finished there
was probably not a boy but had taken an inward resolution that there was
nothing he would not do for his master, and although such resolutions
are generally but transient, Mr. Porson found that the good effect of
his treatment of Mather was considerable and permanent. Lessons were
more carefully learned, obedience was not perhaps more prompt, but
it was more willing, and the boys lost no opportunity of showing how
anxious they were to please in every respect.

Ned and his brother were not present when Mr. Porson explained the cause
of Mather's absence to the others, but they were surrounded by their
schoolfellows, all eager to tell the news upon their arrival in the
playground a few minutes before the school began.

Before breaking up in June, Porson's played their first cricket match
with a strong village team, and beat them handsomely, although, as the
boys said, it was to their master's bowling that their success was due.
Still the eleven all batted fairly, and made so long a score that they
won in one innings; and Mr. Porson promised them that before the season
ended they should have a whole holiday, and play the Marsden eleven.

Ned enjoyed his holiday rambles, taking several long walks across the
moors accompanied by Bill Swinton, who had now perfectly recovered. The
discontent among the croppers, and indeed among the workers in the mills
generally through the country was as great as ever; but the season was a
good one; bread had fallen somewhat in price, and the pinch was a little
less severe than it had been. The majority of the masters had been
intimidated by the action of their hands from introducing the new
machinery, and so far the relations between master and men, in that part
of Yorkshire at any rate, remained unchanged. But although Ned enjoyed
his rambles he was glad when the holidays were over. He had no friends
of his own age in Marsden; his brother was too young to accompany him
in his long walks, and Bill obtained a berth in one of the mills shortly
after the holidays began, and was no longer available. Therefore Ned
looked forward to meeting his schoolfellows again, to the fun of the
cricket field and playground, and even to lessons, for these were no
longer terrible.

The school reopened with largely increased numbers. The reports which
the boys had taken home of the changed conditions of things and of their
master's kindness excited among all their friends an intense longing to
go to a school where the state of things was so different to that which
prevailed elsewhere; and the parents were equally satisfied with the
results of the new master's teaching. Such as took the trouble to ask
their boys questions found that they had acquired a real grasp of the
subjects, and that they were able to answer clearly and intelligently.
The consequence was, the house was filled with its full complement of
fifty boarders, and indeed Mr. Porson was obliged to refuse several
applications for want of room. As he had not the same objection as
his predecessor to receive home boarders, the numbers were swelled by
eighteen boys whose parents resided in Marsden.

To meet the increased demands upon his teaching powers Mr. Porson
engaged two ushers, both of them young men who had just left Durham.
They were both pleasant and gentlemanly young fellows; and as Mr. Porson
insisted that his own mode of teaching should be adopted, the change did
not alter the pleasant state of things which had prevailed during the
past half year. Both the ushers were fond of cricket, and one turned
out to be at least equal to Mr. Porson as a bowler. Therefore the boys
looked forward to their match with Marsden with some confidence.

Captain Sankey saw with great pleasure the steady improvement which was
taking place in Ned's temper. It was not to be expected that the boy
would at once overcome a fault of such long standing, but the outbursts
were far less frequent, and it was evident that he was putting a steady
check upon himself; so that his father looked forward to the time when
he would entirely overcome the evil consequences engendered by his
unchecked and undisciplined childhood.




CHAPTER VII: A TERRIBLE SHOCK


Ned had been looking forward with great anticipations to Michaelmas
day, upon which the great match was to take place; for he was one of
the eleven, being the youngest of the boys included in it. An event,
however, happened which deprived him of his share in the match, and
caused the day to pass almost unnoticed. On the 20th of September the
servant came in to Mr. Porson during morning school to say that he was
wanted. A minute or two later she again re-entered and said that Ned
and his brother were to go to the master's study. Much surprised at this
summons they followed her. Mr. Porson was looking exceedingly grave.

"My dear boys," he said, "I have bad news for you. Very bad news. You
must bear it bravely, looking for support and consolation to Him who
alone can give it. Dr. Green's boy has just been here. He was sent
down by his master to say that there has been a serious accident in the
town."

The commencement of the master's speech and the graveness of his tone
sent a serious thrill through the hearts of the boys. Mr. Porson would
never have spoken thus had not the news been serious indeed.

When he paused Ned gave a little gasp and exclaimed, "My father!"

"Yes, Ned, I am grieved to say that it is your brave father who has
suffered from the accident. It seems that as he was walking down the
High Street one of Ramsay's heavy wagons came along. A little girl ran
across the street ahead, but stumbled and fell close to the horses. Your
father, forgetful of the fact of his wooden leg, rushed over to lift
her; but the suddenness of the movement, he being a heavy man, snapped
the wooden leg in sunder, and he fell headlong in the street. He was
within reach of the child, and he caught her by the clothes and jerked
her aside; but before he could, in his crippled condition, regain
his feet, the wheel was upon him, and he has suffered very serious
injuries."

"He is not dead, sir?" Ned gasped, while his brother began to cry
piteously.

"No, Ned, he is not dead," Mr. Porson said; "but I fear, my dear boy,
that it would be cruel kindness did I not tell you to prepare yourself
for the worst. I fear from what I hear that he is fatally injured, and
that there is but little hope. Get your hats, my boys, and I will walk
home with you at once."

There were but few words exchanged during that dismal walk, and these
were addressed by Mr. Porson to Ned.

"Try to calm yourself, my boy," he said, putting his hand on his
shoulder, which was shaking with the boy's efforts to keep down his
convulsive sobs; "try and nerve yourselves for the sake of your father
himself, of your mother, and the little ones. The greatest kindness you
can show to your father new is by being calm and composed."

"I will try, sir," Ned said as steadily as he could; "but you don't know
how I loved him!"

"I can guess it, my boy; for I, too, lost my father when I was just your
age. God's ways are not our ways, Ned; and be sure, although you may not
see it now, that he acts for the best."

A little crowd stood gathered near the door. They were talking in low
tones of the gallant way in which the crippled officer had sacrificed
himself to save the child. They made way silently for the boys to pass.
Ned opened the door and entered.

Abijah was in the hall. She was tearless, but her face was white and
set.

"My poor boy," she said to Ned, "he is in the parlor; he has just been
asking for you. I am glad you have come. Your mother is in hysterics in
her bedroom, and is going on like a mad woman. You must be calm, dear,
for your father's sake."

Ned gave a little nod, and, taking his brother's hand, opened the door
of the parlor.

Captain Sankey was lying on the hearth rug, his head propped up with
pillows from the sofa; his face was an ashen pallor, and his eyes were
closed. The doctor was kneeling beside him, pouring some liquid from a
glass between his lips. A strong friendship had sprung up between
the two men, and tears were running fast down the doctor's cheeks. He
motioned to the boys to approach. They fell on their knees by their
father's side.

"Sankey," the doctor said in a steady voice, "here are your boys, Ned
and Charlie."

The eyes of the dying man opened slowly, and he looked at his sons, and
Ned felt a slight pressure of the hand which he had taken in his own.

"God bless you, my boys!" he said, in a faint whisper. "Ned, be kind to
your mother; care for her always. She will need all your kindness."

"I will, father," the boy said steadily. "I will take care of mother, I
promise you."

A faint smile passed over the pale face; then the eyes closed again, and
there was silence for five minutes, broken only by the sobbing of the
younger boy. The doctor, who had his fingers on the pulse of Captain
Sankey, leaned closely over him; then he laid his arm gently down, and
putting his hand on Ned's shoulder said softly:

"Come, my boy, your father is out of pain now."

Ned gave one loud and bitter cry, and threw himself down by the side of
the corpse, and gave way to his pent up emotion.

The doctor led the younger boy from the room, and gave him into the care
of Abijah. Then he returned and stood for awhile watching Ned's terrible
outburst of grief; then he poured some wine into a glass.

"My boy," he said tenderly, "you must not give way like this or you will
make yourself ill. Drink this, Ned, and then go up and lie down on your
bed until you feel better. Remember you must be strong for the sake of
the others. You know you will have to bear your mother's burdens as well
as your own."

He helped Ned to his feet and held the glass to his lips, for the boy's
hand was shaking so that he could not have held it. After drinking it
Ned stumbled upstairs and threw himself on the bed, and there cried
silently for a long time; but the first passion of grief had passed, and
he now struggled with his tears, and in an hour rose, bathed his flushed
and swollen face, and went downstairs.

"Abijah," he said, in a voice which he struggled in vain to steady,
"what is there for me to do? How is my mother?"

"She has just cried herself off to sleep, Master Ned, and a mercy it is
for her, poor lady, for she has been going on dreadful ever since he was
brought in here; but if you go in to Master Charlie and Miss Lucy and
try and comfort them it would be a blessing. I have not been able
to leave your mother till now, and the poor little things are broken
hearted. I feel dazed myself, sir. Think of the captain, who went out so
strong and well this morning, speaking so kind and bright just as usual,
lying there!" and here Abijah broke down and for the first time since
Captain Sankey was carried into the house tears came to her relief, and
throwing her arms round Ned's neck she wept passionately.

Ned's own tears flowed too fast for him to speak for some time. At last
he said quietly, "Don't cry so, Abijah. It is the death of all others
that was fitted for him, he, so brave and unselfish, to die giving his
life to save a child. You told me to be brave; it is you who must be
brave, for you know that you must be our chief dependence now."
