The Famous Fellowship of Fairies


After a short walk through very beautiful gardens they came to the
castle and followed Tubekins through the entrance and into a great
domed chamber, where he commanded them to be seated.

From the crown which he wore, Betsy had thought this man must be the
King of the country they were in, yet after he had seated all the
strangers upon benches that were ranged in a semicircle before a high
throne, Tubekins bowed humbly before the vacant throne and in a flash
became invisible and disappeared.

The hall was an immense place, but there seemed to be no one in it
beside themselves. Presently, however, they heard a low cough near
them, and here and there was the faint rustling of a robe and a slight
patter as of footsteps. Then suddenly there rang out the clear tone of
a bell and at the sound all was changed.

Gazing around the hall in bewilderment they saw that it was filled with
hundreds of men and women, all with beautiful faces and staring blue
eyes and all wearing scarlet robes and jeweled crowns upon their heads.
In fact, these people seemed exact duplicates of Tubekins and it was
difficult to find any mark by which to tell them apart.

"My! what a lot of Kings and Queens!" whispered Betsy to Polychrome,
who sat beside her and appeared much interested in the scene but not a
bit worried.

"It is certainly a strange sight," was Polychrome's reply; "but I
cannot see how there can be more than one King, or Queen, in any one
country, for were these all rulers, no one could tell who was Master."

One of the Kings who stood near and overheard this remark turned to her
and said: "One who is Master of himself is always a King, if only to
himself. In this favored land all Kings and Queens are equal, and it is
our privilege to bow before one supreme Ruler--the Private Citizen."

"Who's he?" inquired Betsy.

As if to answer her, the clear tones of the bell again rang out and
instantly there appeared seated in the throne the man who was lord and
master of all these royal ones. This fact was evident when with one
accord they fell upon their knees and touched their foreheads to the
floor.

The Private Citizen was not unlike the others, except that his eyes
were black instead of blue and in the centers of the black irises
glowed red sparks that seemed like coals of fire. But his features were
very beautiful and dignified and his manner composed and stately.
Instead of the prevalent scarlet robe, he wore one of white, and the
same dragon's head that decorated the others was embroidered upon its
bosom.

"What charge lies against these people, Tubekins?" he asked in quiet,
even tones.

"They came through the forbidden Tube, O Mighty Citizen," was the reply.

"You see, it was this way," said Betsy. "We were marching to the Nome
King, to conquer him and set Shaggy's brother free, when on a sudden--"

"Who are you?" demanded the Private Citizen sternly.

"Me? Oh, I'm Betsy Bobbin, and--"

"Who is the leader of this party?" asked the Citizen.

"Sir, I am Queen Ann of Oogaboo, and--"

"Then keep quiet," said the Citizen. "Who is the leader?"

No one answered for a moment. Then General Bunn stood up.

"Sit down!" commanded the Citizen. "I can see that sixteen of you are
merely officers, and of no account."

"But we have an Army," said General Clock, blusteringly, for he didn't
like to be told he was of no account.

"Where is your Army?" asked the Citizen.

"It's me," said Tik-Tok, his voice sounding a little rusty. "I'm the
on-ly Pri-vate Sol-dier in the par-ty."

Hearing this, the Citizen rose and bowed respectfully to the Clockwork
Man.

"Pardon me for not realizing your importance before," said he. "Will
you oblige me by taking a seat beside me on my throne?"

Tik-Tok rose and walked over to the throne, all the Kings and Queens
making way for him. Then with clanking steps he mounted the platform
and sat on the broad seat beside the Citizen.

Ann was greatly provoked at this mark of favor shown to the humble
Clockwork Man, but Shaggy seemed much pleased that his old friend's
importance had been recognized by the ruler of this remarkable country.
The Citizen now began to question Tik-Tok, who told in his mechanical
voice about Shaggy's quest of his lost brother, and how Ozma of Oz had
sent the Clockwork Man to assist him, and how they had fallen in with
Queen Ann and her people from Oogaboo. Also he told how Betsy and Hank
and Polychrome and the Rose Princess had happened to join their party.

"And you intended to conquer Ruggedo, the Metal Monarch and King of the
Nomes?" asked the Citizen.

"Yes. That seemed the on-ly thing for us to do," was Tik-Tok's reply.
"But he was too cle-ver for us. When we got close to his cav-ern he
made our path lead to the Tube, and made the op-en-ing in-vis-i-ble, so
that we all fell in-to it be-fore we knew it was there. It was an eas-y
way to get rid of us and now Rug-gedo is safe and we are far a-way in a
strange land."

The Citizen was silent a moment and seemed to be thinking. Then he said:

"Most noble Private Soldier, I must inform you that by the laws of our
country anyone who comes through the Forbidden Tube must be tortured
for nine days and ten nights and then thrown back into the Tube. But it
is wise to disregard laws when they conflict with justice, and it seems
that you and your followers did not disobey our laws willingly, being
forced into the Tube by Ruggedo. Therefore the Nome King is alone to
blame, and he alone must be punished."

"That suits me," said Tik-Tok. "But Rug-ge-do is on the o-ther side of
the world where he is a-way out of your reach."

The Citizen drew himself up proudly.

"Do you imagine anything in the world or upon it can be out of the
reach of the Great Jinjin?" he asked.

"Oh! Are you, then, the Great Jinjin?" inquired Tik-Tok.

"I am."

"Then your name is Ti-ti-ti-Hoo-choo?"

"It is."

Queen Ann gave a scream and began to tremble. Shaggy was so disturbed
that he took out a handkerchief and wiped the perspiration from his
brow. Polychrome looked sober and uneasy for the first time, while
Files put his arms around the Rose Princess as if to protect her. As
for the officers, the name of the great Jinjin set them moaning and
weeping at a great rate and every one fell upon his knees before the
throne, begging for mercy. Betsy was worried at seeing her companions
so disturbed, but did not know what it was all about. Only Tik-Tok was
unmoved at the discovery.

"Then," said he, "if you are Ti-ti-ti-Hoo-choo, and think Rug-ge-do is
to blame, I am sure that some-thing queer will hap-pen to the King of
the Nomes."

"I wonder what 'twill be," said Betsy.

The Private Citizen--otherwise known as Tititi-Hoochoo, the Great
Jinjin--looked at the little girl steadily.

"I will presently decide what is to happen to Ruggedo," said he in a
hard, stern voice. Then, turning to the throng of Kings and Queens, he
continued: "Tik-Tok has spoken truly, for his machinery will not allow
him to lie, nor will it allow his thoughts to think falsely. Therefore
these people are not our enemies and must be treated with consideration
and justice. Take them to your palaces and entertain them as guests
until to-morrow, when I command that they be brought again to my
Residence. By then I shall have formed my plans."

No sooner had Tititi-Hoochoo spoken than he disappeared from sight.
Immediately after, most of the Kings and Queens likewise disappeared.
But several of them remained visible and approached the strangers with
great respect. One of the lovely Queens said to Betsy:

"I trust you will honor me by being my guest. I am Erma, Queen of
Light."

"May Hank come with me?" asked the girl.

"The King of Animals will care for your mule," was the reply. "But do
not fear for him, for he will be treated royally. All of your party
will be reunited on the morrow."

"I--I'd like to have some one with me," said Betsy, pleadingly.

Queen Erma looked around and smiled upon Polychrome.

"Will the Rainbow's Daughter be an agreeable companion?" she asked.

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed the girl.

So Polychrome and Betsy became guests of the Queen of Light, while
other beautiful Kings and Queens took charge of the others of the party.

The two girls followed Erma out of the hall and through the gardens of
the Residence to a village of pretty dwellings. None of these was so
large or imposing as the castle of the Private Citizen, but all were
handsome enough to be called palaces--as, in fact, they really were.




Chapter Twelve

The Lovely Lady of Light


The palace of the Queen of Light stood on a little eminence and was a
mass of crystal windows, surmounted by a vast crystal dome. When they
entered the portals Erma was greeted by six lovely maidens, evidently
of high degree, who at once aroused Betsy's admiration. Each bore a
wand in her hand, tipped with an emblem of light, and their costumes
were also emblematic of the lights they represented. Erma introduced
them to her guests and each made a graceful and courteous
acknowledgment.

First was Sunlight, radiantly beautiful and very fair; the second was
Moonlight, a soft, dreamy damsel with nut-brown hair; next came
Starlight, equally lovely but inclined to be retiring and shy. These
three were dressed in shimmering robes of silvery white. The fourth was
Daylight, a brilliant damsel with laughing eyes and frank manners, who
wore a variety of colors. Then came Firelight, clothed in a fleecy
flame-colored robe that wavered around her shapely form in a very
attractive manner. The sixth maiden, Electra, was the most beautiful of
all, and Betsy thought from the first that both Sunlight and Daylight
regarded Electra with envy and were a little jealous of her.

But all were cordial in their greetings to the strangers and seemed to
regard the Queen of Light with much affection, for they fluttered
around her in a flashing, radiant group as she led the way to her regal
drawing-room.

This apartment was richly and cosily furnished, the upholstery being of
many tints, and both Betsy and Polychrome enjoyed resting themselves
upon the downy divans after their strenuous adventures of the day.

The Queen sat down to chat with her guests, who noticed that Daylight
was the only maiden now seated beside Erma. The others had retired to
another part of the room, where they sat modestly with entwined arms
and did not intrude themselves at all.

The Queen told the strangers all about this beautiful land, which is
one of the chief residences of fairies who minister to the needs of
mankind. So many important fairies lived there that, to avoid rivalry,
they had elected as their Ruler the only important personage in the
country who had no duties to mankind to perform and was, in effect, a
Private Citizen. This Ruler, or Jinjin, as was his title, bore the name
of Tititi-Hoochoo, and the most singular thing about him was that he
had no heart. But instead of this he possessed a high degree of Reason
and Justice and while he showed no mercy in his judgments he never
punished unjustly or without reason. To wrong-doers Tititi-Hoochoo was
as terrible as he was heartless, but those who were innocent of evil
had nothing to fear from him.

All the Kings and Queens of this fairyland paid reverence to Jinjin,
for as they expected to be obeyed by others they were willing to obey
the one in authority over them.

The inhabitants of the Land of Oz had heard many tales of this
fearfully just Jinjin, whose punishments were always equal to the
faults committed. Polychrome also knew of him, although this was the
first time she had ever seen him face to face. But to Betsy the story
was all new, and she was greatly interested in Tititi-Hoochoo, whom she
no longer feared.

Time sped swiftly during their talk and suddenly Betsy noticed that
Moonlight was sitting beside the Queen of Light, instead of Daylight.

"But tell me, please," she pleaded, "why do you all wear a dragon's
head embroidered on your gowns?"

Erma's pleasant face became grave as she answered:

"The Dragon, as you must know, was the first living creature ever made;
therefore the Dragon is the oldest and wisest of living things. By good
fortune the Original Dragon, who still lives, is a resident of this
land and supplies us with wisdom whenever we are in need of it. He is
old as the world and remembers everything that has happened since the
world was created."

"Did he ever have any children?" inquired the girl.

"Yes, many of them. Some wandered into other lands, where men, not
understanding them, made war upon them; but many still reside in this
country. None, however, is as wise as the Original Dragon, for whom we
have great respect. As he was the first resident here, we wear the
emblem of the dragon's head to show that we are the favored people who
alone have the right to inhabit this fairyland, which in beauty almost
equals the Fairyland of Oz, and in power quite surpasses it."

"I understand about the dragon, now," said Polychrome, nodding her
lovely head. Betsy did not quite understand, but she was at present
interested in observing the changing lights. As Daylight had given way
to Moonlight, so now Starlight sat at the right hand of Erma the Queen,
and with her coming a spirit of peace and content seemed to fill the
room. Polychrome, being herself a fairy, had many questions to ask
about the various Kings and Queens who lived in this far-away, secluded
place, and before Erma had finished answering them a rosy glow filled
the room and Firelight took her place beside the Queen.

Betsy liked Firelight, but to gaze upon her warm and glowing features
made the little girl sleepy, and presently she began to nod. Thereupon
Erma rose and took Betsy's hand gently in her own.

"Come," said she; "the feast time has arrived and the feast is spread."

"That's nice," exclaimed the small mortal. "Now that I think of it, I'm
awful hungry. But p'raps I can't eat your fairy food."

The Queen smiled and led her to a doorway. As she pushed aside a heavy
drapery a flood of silvery light greeted them, and Betsy saw before her
a splendid banquet hall, with a table spread with snowy linen and
crystal and silver. At one side was a broad, throne-like seat for Erma
and beside her now sat the brilliant maid Electra. Polychrome was
placed on the Queen's right hand and Betsy upon her left. The other
five messengers of light now waited upon them, and each person was
supplied with just the food she liked best. Polychrome found her dish
of dewdrops, all fresh and sparkling, while Betsy was so lavishly
served that she decided she had never in her life eaten a dinner half
so good.

"I s'pose," she said to the Queen, "that Miss Electra is the youngest
of all these girls."

"Why do you suppose that?" inquired Erma, with a smile.

"'Cause electric'ty is the newest light we know of. Didn't Mr. Edison
discover it?"

"Perhaps he was the first mortal to discover it," replied the Queen.
"But electricity was a part of the world from its creation, and
therefore my Electra is as old as Daylight or Moonlight, and equally
