faced the road, the boys found themselves in a large gravelled
quadrangle surrounded on all sides by high walls, broken by what
appeared at first sight to be an almost countless number of windows,
while the red brick was relieved in many places by a thick growth of
ivy.

"That's the gymnasium on the left," said Carton, "and above it are
studies; and that row of big windows on the right, with the coloured
glass in the top, is the big schoolroom."

Crossing the gravel they passed through another archway, in which were
two folding-doors, and emerged upon an open space covered with asphalt,
upon which stood a giant-stride and two double fives-courts.

This formed but a small corner of a large level field, in which a number
of boys were to be seen wandering about arm in arm, or standing chatting
together in small groups, pausing every now and then in their
conversation to give chase to a football which was being kicked about in
an aimless fashion by a number of their more energetic companions.

"The goal-posts aren't up yet," said Carton, "and this is only what's
called the junior field; the one beyond is where the big fellows play.
The pavilion is over the hedge there, with the flagstaff by the side
of it.  That's the match ground, and there's room for another game
besides."

"Where do all the fellows go when they aren't out of doors?" asked
Diggory.

"Well, the Sixth all have studies; then comes Remove, and those chaps
have a room to themselves; all the rest have desks in the big school,
and you hang about there, though of course, if you like, there's the
gymnasium, or the box-room--that's where a lot of fellows spend most of
their time."

"What sort of a place is that?"

"Oh, it's where the play-boxes are kept.  Come along; we'll go there
next."

They passed once more through the double doors, and were crossing the
quadrangle, when a certain incident attracted their notice, unimportant
in itself, but indicating a strong contrast in the manner of life at
Ronleigh to what they had always been accustomed to at The Birches.
A youngster was tearing up a piece of paper and scattering the fragments
about on the gravel.

"Hi, you there!" cried a voice; "pick that up.  What d'you mean by
making that mess here?"

The small boy grabbed up the bits of paper, stuffed them in his pocket,
and hurried away towards the schoolroom.

"Is that one of the masters?" asked Mugford.

"No," answered Carton, "that's Oaks; he's one of the prefects.
Don't you see he's got a blue tassel to his mortar-board?"

"But what's a prefect?"

"Whew!" laughed the other, "you'll soon find out if you play the fool,
and don't mind what you're about.  Why, there are fourteen of them, all
fellows in the Sixth, and they keep order and give you lines, and all
that sort of thing."

"Why, I thought it was only masters did that," said Jack Vance.

"Well, you'll find the prefects do it here," answered Carton; "and when
they tell you to do a thing, I'd advise you to look alive and do it, for
they don't reckon to speak twice."

The evening passed quickly enough.  After tea came an interview with the
head-master in his study, and then what was perhaps a still more trying
ordeal--a long spell of sitting in the big schoolroom answering an
incessant fire of questions such as, "What's your name?"--"Where d'you
come from?" etc., etc.

At length the signal was given for passing on to bed, and the Triple
Alliance were not sorry to gain the shelter of No. 16 dormitory.

The room contained seven other beds besides their own, two of which were
as yet still vacant, waiting the arrival of boys who had not turned up
on the first day.  The remainder were occupied by a couple of other
new-comers, and three oldsters, Carton, Hart, and Bayley.

It was very different from the cosy little bedrooms at The Birches; but
the three friends were glad to be allowed to undress in peace and quiet,
and had scrambled safely into bed some time before the prefect put in an
appearance to turn out the light.

"I tell you what," said Hart, a few moments later: "you new kids may
think yourselves lucky that you're in a quiet room for a start.  I know
when I came first there used to be christenings and all kinds of
humbug."

"What was that?" asked Diggory.

"Why, fellows used always to christen you with a nickname: they stuck
your head in a basin and poured water over you, and if you struggled you
got it all down your back."

"Yes," continued Carton, "and they hid your clothes, and had bull-fights
and all sorts of foolery.  That was in _Nineteen_: old 'Thirsty' was the
prefect for that passage, and he doesn't care tu'pence what fellows do.
But Allingford's put a stop to almost all that kind of thing: he's
captain of the school, and he's always awfully down on anything of that
sort."

By the time breakfast was over on the following morning, Diggory and his
two companions were beginning to recover a little from their first state
of bewilderment amid their strange surroundings.  They donned the school
cap of black flannel, with the crest worked in silk upon the front, and
went out to enjoy some fresh air and sunshine in the playground.

It was a bright, frosty day, and the whole place seemed full of life and
activity.  There was plenty to engage their attention, and much that was
new and singular after their comparatively quiet playground at The
Birches.  But whatever there was to awaken their interest out of doors,
a thing was destined to happen during their first morning school which
would be a still greater surprise than anything they had yet encountered
during their short residence at Ronleigh.

At nine o'clock the clanging of the big bell summoned them to the
general assembly in the big schoolroom.  They took their places at a
back desk pointed out to them by the master on duty, and sat watching
the stream of boys that poured in through the open doors, wondering how
long it would take them to become acquainted with the names of such a
multitude.

The forms passed on in their usual order, and the new boys were
conducted to a vacant classroom, where they received a set of
examination papers which were intended to test the amount of their
knowledge, and determine the position in which they were to start work
on the following day.

Jack Vance, Diggory, and Mugford sat together at the first desk, just in
front of the master's table, and were soon busy in proving their
previous acquaintance with the Latin grammar.  Presently the door
opened, and a voice, which they at once recognized as Dr. Denson's,
said, "Mr. Ellesby, may I trouble you to step here for a moment?"
None of the trio raised their eyes from their work.  There was a
muttered conversation in the passage, and then the door was once more
closed.

The master returned to his desk, dipped his pen in the ink, and
addressing some one at the back of the room, inquired,--

"What did Dr. Denson say your name was?"

"Noaks, sir."

The Triple Alliance gave a simultaneous start as though they had
received an electric shock, and their heads turned round like three
weathercocks.

There, sure enough, at the back desk of all, sat the late leader of the
Philistines, with a rather sheepish expression on his face, somewhat
similar to the one it had worn when the marauders from Horace House had
been ushered into Mr. Welsby's study.

Jack Vance looked at Mugford, and Mugford looked at Diggory.  "Well, I'm
jiggered!" whispered the latter, and once more returned to his
examination paper.

At eleven o'clock there was a quarter of an hour's interval.  Being
still, as it were, strangers in a strange land, the three friends kept
pretty close together.  They were walking arm in arm about the
quadrangle, giving expression to their astonishment at this latest
arrival at Ronleigh, when Diggory suddenly exclaimed,  "Look out! here
he comes!"

After so many encounters of a decidedly hostile nature, it was difficult
to meet their old enemy on neutral ground without some feeling of
embarrassment.  Young Noaks, however, walked up cool as a cucumber, and
holding out his hand said,--

"Hullo, you fellows, who'd have thought of seeing you here! How are
you?"

The three boys returned the salutation in a manner which, to say the
least, was not very cordial, and made some attempt to pass on their way;
but the new-comer refused to see that he was not wanted, and insisted on
taking Mugford's arm and accompanying them on their stroll.

"I say," he continued, addressing Jack Vance, "were you at Todderton
these holidays?  I don't think I saw you once."

"The last time I saw you," returned Jack, in rather a bitter tone, "was
when you came to spoil our fireworks, and we collared you in the shed."

Noaks clinched his fist, and for a moment his brow darkened; the next
instant, however, he laughed as though the recollection of the incident
afforded him an immense amount of amusement.

"Ha, ha!  Yes, awful joke that, wasn't it? almost as good as the time
when that fool of a master of yours, Lake, or Blake, or whatever you
call him, had me sent off the field so that you could win the match."

"It was no such thing," answered Jack. "You know very well why it was
Blake interfered; and he's not a fool, but a jolly good sort."

"Oh, don't get angry," returned the other.  "I'm sure I shouldn't fly
into a wax if you called Fox or old Phillips a fool.  I got sick of that
beastly little school, as I expect you did of yours, and so I made my
uncle send me here.--Hullo! I suppose that's the bell for going back to
work; see you again later on."

"I say," whispered Diggory, as soon as they had regained their seat in
the examination-room, "I vote we give that chap the cold shoulder."

The following morning the three friends heard their names read out as
forming part of the Third Form, to which their friend Carton already
belonged.  Young Noaks was placed in the Upper Fourth, and they were
not destined therefore to have him as a class-mate.

The Third Form at Ronleigh had, for some reason or other, received the
title of "The Happy Family."  They certainly were an amusing lot of
little animals, and Diggory and his companions coming into the classroom
rather late, and before the entrance of the master, saw them for the
first time to full advantage.  Out of the two-and-twenty juveniles
present, only about six seemed to be in their proper places.

One young gentleman sitting close to the blackboard cried, "Powder,
sir!" and straightway scrubbed his neighbour's face with a very chalky
duster.  The latter, by way of retaliation, smote the former's pile
of books from the desk on to the ground--a little attention which was
immediately returned by boy number one; while as they bent down to pick
up their scattered possessions, a third party, sitting on the form
behind, made playful attempts to tread upon their fingers.  Two rival
factions in the rear of the room were waging war with paper darts; while
a small, sandy-haired boy, whose tangled hair and disordered attire gave
him the appearance, as the saying goes, of having been dragged through a
furze-bush backwards, rapped vigorously with his knuckles upon the
master's table, and inquired loudly how many more times he was to say
"Silence!"

The entrance of the three new-comers caused a false alarm, and in a
moment every one was in his proper seat.

"Bother it!" cried the small, sandy-haired boy, who had bumped his knee
rushing from the table to his place; "why didn't you make more noise
when you came in?"

"But I thought you were asking for silence," answered Diggory.

"Shut up, and don't answer back when you are spoken to by a prefect,"
retorted the small boy.  "Look here, you haven't written your name on
Watford's slate.--They must, mustn't they, Maxton?" he added, turning to
a boy who sat at the end of one of the back seats.

"Of course they must," answered Maxton, who, with both elbows on the
desk, was blowing subdued railway whistles through his hands; "every new
fellow has to write his name on that little slate on Mr. Watford's
table, and he enters them from there into his mark-book.  I'm head boy,
and I've got to see you do it.  Look sharp, or he'll be here in a
minute, and there'll be a row."

Diggory, Vance, and Mugford hastily signed their names, one under the
other, upon the slate.  There was a good deal of tittering while they
did so; but as a new boy is laughed at for nearly everything he does,
they took no notice of it, and had hardly got back to their places when
the master entered the room, and the work began in earnest.

About a quarter of an hour later the boys were busy with a Latin
exercise, when silence was broken by a shuffle and an exclamation from
the back desk.  "You again, Maxton," said the master, looking up
with a frown.  "I suppose you are determined to idle away your time and
remain bottom of the class this term as you were last.  I shall put your
name down for some extra work.  Let's see," he continued, taking up the
slate: "I appear to have three boys' names down already--'Vance,'
'Mugford,' and 'Trevanock.'  What's the meaning of this?  This is not
my writing.  How came these names here?"

"Please, sir," faltered Mugford, "we put them there ourselves."

"Put them there yourselves!  What d'you want to put your names down on
my punishment slate for?  I suppose some one told you to, didn't they?"

"Please, sir," answered Diggory warily, "we thought we had to, so that
you might have our names to enter in your mark-book."

There was a burst of laughter, but that answer went a long way towards
setting the Alliance on a good footing with their class-mates.

"That young Trevanock's the right sort," said Maxton, "and so are the
others.  I thought they'd sneak about that slate, but they didn't."

Mr. Noaks, junior, on the other hand, was destined to find that he was
not going to carry everything before him at Ronleigh as he had done
among the small fry at Horace House, The Upper Fourth voted him a
"bounder," and nicknamed him "Moke."  After morning school he repeated
his attempt to ally himself with his former foes, but the result was
decidedly unsatisfactory.

Down in the box-room, a good-sized apartment boarded off from the
gymnasium, Jack Vance was serving out a ration of plum-cake to a select
party, consisting of his two chums and Carton, when the ex-Philistine
strolled up and joined himself to the group.

"Hullo!" he said, "are you chaps having a feed?  D'you remember that
pork-pie we bagged from one of your kids at Chatford?  Ha, ha! it was a
lark."
