to fear a great disaster, and his experienced eye perceived at once the
defenseless state of the valley. He remembered the council of the great
Indian force in the deep woods, and the terrible face of Queen Esther
was again before him.

"These people ought to be in blockhouses, every one uv 'em," he said.
"It ain't no time to be plowin' land."

Yet peace seemed to brood still over the valley. It was a fine river,
beautiful with changing colors. The soil on either side was as deep and
fertile as that of Kentucky, and the line of the mountains cut the sky
sharp and clear. Hills and slopes were dark green with foliage.

"It must have been a gran' huntin' ground once," said Shif'less Sol.

The alarm that the five gave spread fast, and other hunters and scouts
came in, confirming it. Panic seized the settlers, and they began to
crowd toward Forty Fort on the west side of the river. Henry and his
comrades themselves arrived there toward the close of evening, just as
the sun had set, blood red, behind the mountains. Some report of them
had preceded their coming, and as soon as they had eaten they were
summoned to the presence of Colonel Zebulon Butler, who commanded the
military force in the valley. Singularly enough, he was a cousin of
"Indian" Butler, who led the invading army.

The five, dressed in deerskin hunting shirts, leggins, and moccasins,
and everyone carrying a rifle, hatchet, and knife, entered a large low
room, dimly lighted by some wicks burning in tallow. A man of middle
years, with a keen New England face, sat at a little table, and several
others of varying ages stood near.

The five knew instinctively that the man at the table was Colonel
Butler, and they bowed, but they did not show the faintest trace of
subservience. They had caught suspicious glances from some of the
officers who stood about the commander, and they stiffened at once.
Colonel Butler looked involuntarily at Henry-everybody always took him,
without the telling, for leader of the group.

"We have had report of you," he said in cool noncommittal tones, "and
you have been telling of great Indian councils that you have seen in the
woods. May I ask your name and where you belong?"

"My name," replied Henry with dignity, "is Henry Ware, and I come from
Kentucky. My friends here are Paul Cotter, Solomon Hyde, Tom Ross, and
Jim Hart. They, too, come from Kentucky."

Several of the men gave the five suspicious glances. Certainly they
were wild enough in appearance, and Kentucky was far away. It would
seem strange that new settlers in that far land should be here in
Pennsylvania. Henry saw clearly that his story was doubted.

"Kentucky, you tell me?" said Colonel Butler. "Do you mean to say
you have come all that tremendous distance to warn us of an attack by
Indians and Tories?"

Several of the others murmured approval, and Henry flushed a little, but
he saw that the commander was not unreasonable. It was a time when
men might well question the words of strangers. Remembering this, he
replied:

"No, we did not come from Kentucky just to warn you. In fact, we
came from a point much farther than that. We came from New Orleans to
Pittsburgh with a fleet loaded with supplies for the Continental armies,
and commanded by Adam Colfax of New Hampshire."

The face of Colonel Butler brightened.

"What!" he exclaimed, "you were on that expedition? It seems to me that
I recall hearing of great services rendered to it by some independent
scouts."

"When we reached Pittsburgh," continued Henry, "it was our first
intention to go back to Kentucky, but we heard that a great war movement
was in progress to the eastward, and we thought that we would see what
was going on. Four of us have been captives among the Iroquois. We know
much of their plans, and we know, too, that Timmendiquas, the great
chief of the Wyandots, whom we fought along the Ohio, has joined them
with a hand of his best warriors. We have also seen Thayendanegea, every
one of us."

"You have seen Brant?" exclaimed Colonel Butler, calling the great
Mohawk by his white name.

"Yes," replied Henry. "We have seen him, and we have also seen the woman
they call Queen Esther. She is continually urging the Indians on."

Colonel Butler seemed convinced, and invited them to sit down. He also
introduced the officers who were with him, Colonel John Durkee, Colonel
Nathan Dennison, Lieutenant Colonel George Dorrance, Major John Garrett,
Captain Samuel Ransom, Captain Dethrie Hewitt, and some others.

"Now, gentlemen, tell us all that you saw," continued Colonel Butler
courteously. "You will pardon so many questions, but we must be careful.
You will see that yourselves. But I am a New England man myself, from
Connecticut, and I have met Adam Colfax. I recall now that we have heard
of you, also, and we are grateful for your coming. Will you and your
comrades tell us all that you have seen and heard?"

The five felt a decided change in the atmosphere. They were no longer
possible Tories or renegades, bringing an alarm at one point when it
should be dreaded at another. The men drew closely around them, and
listened as the tallow wicks sputtered in the dim room. Henry spoke
first, and the others in their turn. Every one of them spoke tersely but
vividly in the language of the forest. They felt deeply what they had
seen, and they drew the same picture for their listeners. Gradually the
faces of the Wyoming men became shadowed. This was a formidable tale
that they were hearing, and they could not doubt its truth.

"It is worse than I thought it could be," said Colonel Butler at last.
"How many men do you say they have, Mr. Ware?"

"Close to fifteen hundred."

"All trained warriors and soldiers. And at the best we cannot raise more
than three hundreds including old men and boys, and our men, too, are
farmers."

"But we can beat them. Only give us a chance, Colonel!" exclaimed
Captain Ransom.

"I'm afraid the chance will come too soon," said Colonel Butler, and
then turning to the five: "Help us all you can. We need scouts and
riflemen. Come to the fort for any food and ammunition you may need."

The five gave their most earnest assurances that they would stay, and
do all in their power. In fact, they had come for that very purpose.
Satisfied now that Colonel Butler and his officers had implicit faith in
them they went forth to find that, despite the night and the darkness,
fugitives were already crossing the river to seek refuge in Forty Fort,
bringing with them tales of death and devastation, some of which were
exaggerated, but too many true in all their hideous details. Men had
been shot and scalped in the fields, houses were burning, women and
children were captives for a fate that no one could foretell. Red ruin
was already stalking down the valley.

The farmers were bringing their wives and children in canoes and dugouts
across the river. Here and there a torch light flickered on the surface
of the stream, showing the pale faces of the women and children, too
frightened to cry. They had fled in haste, bringing with them only the
clothes they wore and maybe a blanket or two. The borderers knew too
well what Indian war was, with all its accompaniments of fire and the
stake.

Henry and his comrades helped nearly all that night. They secured a
large boat and crossed the river again and again, guarding the fugitives
with their rifles, and bringing comfort to many a timid heart. Indian
bands had penetrated far into the Wyoming Valley, but they felt sure
that none were yet in the neighborhood of Forty Fort.

It was about three o'clock in the morning when the last of the fugitives
who had yet come was inside Forty Fort, and the labors of the five, had
they so chosen, were over for the time. But their nerves were tuned to
so high a pitch, and they felt so powerfully the presence of danger,
that they could not rest, nor did they have any desire for sleep.


The boat in which they sat was a good one, with two pairs of oars. It
had been detailed for their service, and they decided to pull up the
river. They thought it possible that they might see the advance of the
enemy and bring news worth the telling. Long Jim and Tom Ross took the
oars, and their powerful arms sent the boat swiftly along in the shadow
of the western bank. Henry and Paul looked back and saw dim lights at
the fort and a few on either shore. The valley, the high mountain wall,
and everything else were merged in obscurity.

Both the youths were oppressed heavily by the sense of danger, not for
themselves, but for others. In that Kentucky of theirs, yet so new,
few people lived beyond the palisades, but here were rich and scattered
settlements; and men, even in the face of great peril, are always loth
to abandon the homes that they have built with so much toil.

Tom Ross and Long Jim continued to pull steadily with the long strokes
that did not tire them, and the lights of the fort and houses sank out
of sight. Before them lay the somber surface of the rippling river, the
shadowy hills, and silence. The world seemed given over to the night
save for themselves, but they knew too well to trust to such apparent
desertion. At such hours the Indian scouts come, and Henry did not doubt
that they were already near, gathering news of their victims for the
Indian and Tory horde. Therefore, it was the part of his comrades and
himself to use the utmost caution as they passed up the river.

They bugged the western shore, where they were shadowed by banks and
bushes, and now they went slowly, Long Jim and Tom Ross drawing their
oars so carefully through the water that there was never a plash to
tell of their passing. Henry was in the prow of the boat, bent forward
a little, eyes searching the surface of the river, and ears intent upon
any sound that might pass on the bank. Suddenly he gave a little signal
to the rowers and they let their oars rest.

"Bring the boat in closer to the bank," he whispered. "Push it gently
among those bushes where we cannot be seen from above."

Tom and Jim obeyed. The boat slid softly among tall bushes that shadowed
the water, and was hidden completely. Then Henry stepped out, crept
cautiously nearly up the bank, which was here very low, and lay pressed
closely against the earth, but supported by the exposed root of a tree.
He had heard voices, those of Indians, he believed, and he wished to
see. Peering through a fringe of bushes that lined the bank he saw seven
warriors and one white face sitting under the boughs of a great oak.
The face was that of Braxton Wyatt, who was now in his element, with a
better prospect of success than any that he had ever known before. Henry
shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had spared Wyatt's life
when he might have taken it.


But Henry was lying against the bank to hear what these men might be
saying, not to slay. Two of the warriors, as he saw by their paint, were
Wyandots, and he understood the Wyandot tongue. Moreover, his slight
knowledge of Iroquois came into service, and gradually he gathered the
drift of their talk. Two miles nearer Forty Fort was a farmhouse one of
the Wyandots had seen it-not yet abandoned by its owner, who believed
that his proximity to Forty Fort assured his safety. He lived there with
his wife and five children, and Wyatt and the Indians planned to raid
the place before daylight and kill them all. Henry had heard enough. He
slid back from the bank to the water and crept into the boat.

"Pull back down the river as gently as you can," he whispered, "and then
I'll tell you."

The skilled oarsmen carried the boat without a splash several hundred
yards down the stream, and then Henry told the others of the fiendish
plan that he had heard.

"I know that man," said Shif'less Sol. "His name is Standish. I was
there nine or ten hours ago, an' I told him it wuz time to take his
family an' run. But he knowed more'n I did. Said he'd stay, he wuzn't
afraid, an' now he's got to pay the price."

"No, he mustn't do that," said Henry. "It's too much to pay for just
being foolish, when everybody is foolish sometimes. Boys, we can yet
save that man an' his wife and children. Aren't you willing to do it?"

"Why, course," said Long Jim. "Like ez not Standish will shoot at us
when we knock on his door, but let's try it."

The others nodded assent.

"How far back from the river is the Standish house, Sol?" asked Henry.

"'Bout three hundred yards, I reckon, and' it ain't more'n a mile down."

"Then if we pull with all our might, we won't be too late. Tom, you and
Jim give Sol and me the oars now."

Henry and the shiftless one were fresh, and they sent the boat shooting
down stream, until they stopped at a point indicated by Sol. They leaped
ashore, drew the boat down the bank, and hastened toward a log house
that they saw standing in a clump of trees. The enemy had not yet come,
but as they swiftly approached the house a dog ran barking at them. The
shiftless one swung his rifle butt, and the dog fell unconscious.

"I hated to do it, but I had to," he murmured. The next moment Henry was
knocking at the door.

"Up! Up!" he cried, "the Indians are at hand, and you must run for your
lives!"

How many a time has that terrible cry been heard on the American border!

The sound of a man's voice, startled and angry, came to their ears, and
then they heard him at the door.

"Who are you?" he cried. "Why are you beating on my door at such a
time?"

"We are friends, Mr. Standish," cried Henry, "and if you would save your
wife and children you must go at once! Open the door! Open, I say!"

The man inside was in a terrible quandary. It was thus that renegades
or Indians, speaking the white man's tongue, sometimes bade a door to be
opened, in order that they might find an easy path to slaughter. But the
voice outside was powerfully insistent, it had the note of truth; his
wife and children, roused, too, were crying out, in alarm. Henry knocked
again on the door and shouted to him in a voice, always increasing in
earnestness, to open and flee. Standish could resist no longer. He took
down the bar and flung open the door, springing back, startled at the
five figures that stood before him. In the dusk he did not remember
Shif'less Sol.

"Mr. Standish," Henry said, speaking rapidly, "we are, as you can see,
white. You will be attacked here by Indians and renegades within half
an hour. We know that, because we heard them talking from the bushes.
We have a boat in the river; you can reach it in five minutes. Take your
wife and children, and pull for Forty Fort."

Standish was bewildered.

"How do I know that you are not enemies, renegades, yourselves?" he
asked.

"If we had been that you'd be a dead man already," said Shif'less Sol.

It was a grim reply, but it was unanswerable, and Standish recognized
the fact. His wife had felt the truth in the tones of the strangers,
and was begging him to go. Their children were crying at visions of the
tomahawk and scalping knife now so near.

"We'll go," said Standish. "At any rate, it can't do any harm. We'll get
a few things together."

"Do not wait for anything!" exclaimed Henry. "You haven't a minute to
spare! Here are more blankets! Take them and run for the boat! Sol and
Jim, see them on board, and then come back!"

Carried away by such fire and earnestness, Standish and his family ran
for the boat. Jim and the shiftless one almost threw them on board,
thrust a pair of oars into the bands of Standish, another into the hands
of his wife, and then told them to pull with all their might for the
fort.

"And you," cried Standish, "what becomes of you?"

Then a singular expression passed over his face-he had guessed Henry's
plan.

"Don't you trouble about us," said the shiftless one. "We will come
later. Now pull! pull!"

Standish and his wife swung on the oars, and in two minutes the boat and
its occupants were lost in the darkness. Tom Ross and Sol did not pause
to watch them, but ran swiftly back to the house. Henry was at the door.

"Come in," he said briefly, and they entered. Then he closed the door
and dropped the bar into place. Shif'less Sol and Paul were already
inside, one sitting on the chair and the other on the edge of the bed.
Some coals, almost hidden under ashes, smoldered and cast a faint light
in the room, the only one that the house had, although it was divided
into two parts by a rough homespun curtain. Henry opened one of the
window shutters a little and looked out. The dawn had not yet come, but
it was not a dark night, and he looked over across the little clearing
to the trees beyond. On that side was a tiny garden, and near the wall
of the house some roses were blooming. He could see the glow of pink and
red. But no enemy bad yet approached. Searching the clearing carefully
with those eyes of his, almost preternaturally keen, he was confident
that the Indians were still in the woods. He felt an intense thrill of
satisfaction at the success of his plan so far.

He was not cruel, he never rejoiced in bloodshed, but the borderer alone
knew what the border suffered, and only those who never saw or felt the
torture could turn the other cheek to be smitten. The Standish house had
made a sudden and ominous change of tenants.

"It will soon be day," said Henry, "and farmers are early risers. Kindle
up that fire a little, will you, Sol? I want some smoke to come out of
the chimney."

The shiftless one raked away the ashes, and put on two or three pieces
of wood that lay on the hearth. Little flames and smoke arose. Henry
looked curiously about the house. It was the usual cabin of the
frontier, although somewhat larger. The bed on which Shif'less Sol sat
was evidently that of the father and mother, while two large ones behind
the curtain were used by the children. On the shelf stood a pail half
full of drinking water, and by the side of it a tin cup. Dried herbs
hung over the fireplace, and two or three chests stood in the corners.
The clothing of the children was scattered about. Unprepared food for
breakfast stood on a table. Everything told of a hasty flight and its
terrible need. Henry was already resolved, but his heart hardened within
him as he saw.

He took the hatchet from his belt and cut one of the hooks for the
door bar nearly in two. The others said not a word. They had no need
to speak. They understood everything that he did. He opened the window
again and looked out. Nothing yet appeared. "The dawn will come in three
quarters of an hour," he said, "and we shall not have to wait long for
what we want to do."

He sat down facing the door. All the others were sitting, and they, too,
faced the door. Everyone had his rifle across his knees, with one hand
upon the hammer. The wood on the hearth sputtered as the fire spread,
and the flames grew. Beyond a doubt a thin spire of smoke was rising
from the chimney, and a watching eye would see this sign of a peaceful
and unsuspecting mind.

"I hope Braxton Wyatt will be the first to knock at our door," said
Shif'less Sol.

"I wouldn't be sorry," said Henry.

Paul was sitting in a chair near the fire, and he said nothing. He hoped
the waiting would be very short. The light was sufficient for him to see
the faces of his comrades, and he noticed that they were all very tense.
This was no common watch that they kept. Shif'less Sol remained on the
bed, Henry sat on another of the chairs, Tom Ross was on one of the
chests with his back to the wall. Long Jim was near the curtain. Close
by Paul was a home-made cradle. He put down his hand and touched it. He
was glad that it was empty now, but the sight of it steeled his heart
anew for the task that lay before them.

