chase the fox, although Harry knew that their cries were intended to
rouse the farmers who might head him off.

The chase grew hotter, but he felt better with the shotgun.  It was a
fine double-barreled weapon of the latest make, and he hoped that it
was loaded with buckshot.  He was a sharpshooter, and he could give a
good account of any one who came too near.

Yet with the trumpet shrilling continually behind him the huntsmen
gathered fast on either flank.  It was yet the day when nearly every
house in America, outside a town, contained a rifle, and bullets fired
from a distance began to patter around Harry and his horse.  The
riflemen were too far away to be reached with the shotgun, and it
seemed inevitable to him that in time a bullet would strike him.  He
was truly the fox, and he knew that nothing could save him but forest.

It was in his favor that the country was so broken and wooded so
heavily, and fixing his eyes on trees a half-mile ahead he raced for
them. If none of this yelling pack dragged him down he felt sure that
he might escape again in the forest.  The trees swiftly came nearer,
but the shots on either flank increased.  More than ever he felt like
the fox with the hounds all about him, and just one slender chance to
reach the burrow ahead.

He felt his horse shake and knew that he had been hit.  Yet the brave
animal ran on as well as ever, despite the triumphant shout behind,
which showed that he must be leaving a trail of blood.  But the woods,
thick and inviting, were near, and he believed that he would reach
them. The horse shook again, much more violently than before, and then
fell to his knees.  Harry leaped off, still clutching the shotgun, just
as the brave animal fell over on his side and began to breathe out his
life.

He heard again that shout of triumph, but he was one who never gave up.
He had alighted easily on his feet.  The trees were not more than
fifteen yards away and he disappeared among them as bullets clipped
bark and twigs about him.

He breathed a deep sigh of thankfulness when he entered the forest. It
was so dense, and there was so much undergrowth that the horsemen could
not follow him there.  If they came on foot, and spread out, as they
must, to hunt him, he had the double-barreled shotgun and it was a
deadly weapon.  The fox had suddenly become the panther, alert,
powerful, armed with claws that killed.

Harry went deep into the thickets before he sat down.  He had no doubt
that they would follow him, but at present he was out of their sight
and hearing.  He felt a mixture of elation and sadness, elation over
his temporary escape, and sadness over the loss of his gallant horse.
But one could not dwell long on regrets at such a time, and, advancing
a little farther, he sat down among the densest bushes that he could
find with the shotgun across his knees.

Now Harry saw that the horse had really done all that it was possible
for him to do.  He had brought him to the wood, and within he would
have been a drawback.  A man on foot could conceal himself far more
easily. Everything favored him.  There were bushes and vines everywhere
and he could be hidden like a deer in its covert.

He looked up at the sun shining through the tops of the trees and saw
that he had kept to his true course.  His flight had taken him directly
toward Lee at a much faster pace than he would have come otherwise. The
enemy had driven him on his errand at double speed.  He felt that he
could spare a little time now, while he waited to see what the pursuit
would do.

His feeling of exultation was now unalloyed.  Deep in the forest with
his foes looking for him in vain, the spirit of Henry Ware was once
more strong within him.  He was the reincarnation of the great hunter.
He lay so still, clasping the shotgun, that the little creatures of the
woods were deceived.  A squirrel ran up the trunk of an oak six feet
away, and stood fearlessly in a fork with his bushy tail curved over
his back. A small gray bird perched on a bough just over Harry's head
and poured out a volume of song.  Farther away sounded the tap tap of a
woodpecker on the bark of a dead tree.

Harry, although he did not move, was watching and listening with
intense concentration, but his ears now would be his surest signals.
He could not see deep in the thickets, but he could hear any movement
in the underbrush a hundred yards away.  So far there was nothing but
the hopping of a rabbit.  The bird over his head sang on.  There was no
wind among the branches, not even the flutter of leaves to distract his
attention from anything that might come on the ground.

He rejoiced in this period of rest, of the nerves, rather than purely
physical.  He had been keyed so high that now he relaxed entirely, and
soon lay perfectly flat, but with the shotgun still clasped in his
arms.  He had a soft couch.  Under him were the dead leaves of last
year, and over him was the pleasant gloom of thick foliage, already
turning brown.  The bird sang on.  His clear and beautiful note came
from a point directly over his head, but Harry could not see his tiny
body among the leaves.  He became, for a little while, more interested
in trying to see him than in hearing his pursuers.

It was annoying that such a volume of sound should come from a body
that could be hidden by a leaf.  If a man could shout in proportion to
his own size he might be heard eight to ten miles away.  It was an
interesting speculation and he pursued it.  While he was pursuing it
his mind relaxed more and more and traveled farther and farther away
from his flight and hiding.  Then his heavy eyelids pulled down, and,
while his pursuers yet searched the thickets for him, he slept.

But his other self, which men had thought of as far back as Socrates,
kept guard.  When he had slept an hour a tiny voice in his ear, no
louder than the ticking of a watch, told him to awake, that danger was
near. He obeyed the call, sleep was lifted from him and he opened his
eyes. But with inherited caution he did not move.  He still lay flat in
his covert, trusting to his ears, and did not make a leaf move about
him.

His ears told him that leaves were rustling not very far away, not more
than a hundred feet.  His power of hearing was great, and the forest
seemed to make it uncommonly sensitive and delicate.

He knew that the rustling of the leaves was made by a man walking. By
and by he heard his footfalls, and he knew that he wore heavy boots, or
his feet would not have crushed down in such a decisive manner. He was
looking for something, too, because the footfalls did not go straight
on, but veered about.

Harry was well aware that it was a Union soldier, and that he was the
object of his search.  He was a clumsy man, not used to forests,
because Harry heard him stumble twice, when his feet caught on vines.
Nor was any comrade near, or he would have called to him for the sake
of companionship.  Harry judged that he was originally a mill hand, and
he did not feel the least alarm about him, laughing a little at his
clumsiness and awkwardness, as he trod heavily among the bushes,
tripped again on the vines, and came so near falling that he could hear
the rifle rattle when it struck a tree.  He did not have the slightest
fear of the man, and at last, raising his head, he took a look.

All his surmises were justified.  He saw a great hulking youth of heavy
and dull countenance, carrying a rifle awkwardly, his place obviously
around some town and not in the depths of a forest, looking for a wary
enemy, who knew more of the wilderness than he could ever learn in all
his life.  Harry saw that he was perspiring freely and that he looked
more like the hunted than the hunter.  His eyes expressed bewilderment.
He was obviously lonely and apprehensive, not because he was a coward,
but because the situation was so strange to him.

Besides his rifle he carried a large knapsack, so much distended that
Harry knew it to be full of food.  It was this that decided him.  A
soldier, like an army, must travel on his stomach, and he wanted that
knapsack.  Moreover he meant to get it.  He leveled his shotgun and
called in a low tone, but a tone so sharp that it could be heard
distinctly by the one to whom it was addressed:

"Throw up your hands at once!"

The man threw them up so abruptly that the rifle fell from his shoulder
into the bushes, and he turned around, staring face toward the point
from which the command had come.  Harry saw at once that he was of
foreign birth, probably.  The features inclined to the Slav type,
although Slavs were not then common in this country, even in the mill
towns of the North.

"Are you an American?" asked Harry, standing up.

"All but two years of my life."

"The first two years then, as I see you speak good English.  What's
your name?"

"Michael Stanislav."

"Do you think that anybody named Michael Stanislav has the right to
interfere in the quarrel of the Northern and Southern states?  Don't
the Stanislavs have trouble enough in the country where the Stanislavs
grow?"

The big youth stared at him without understanding.

"Do you know who I am?" asked Harry, severely.

"The running rebel that we all look for."

"Rebels don't run.  Besides, there are no rebels.  Anyway I'm not the
man you're looking for.  My name is Robin Hood."

"Robin Hood?"

"Yes, Robin Hood!  Didn't you ever hear of him?"

"Never."

"Then you have the honor of hearing of him and meeting him at the same
time.  As I said, my name is Robin Hood and my trade is that of a
benevolent robber.  I lie around in the greenwood, and I don't work.
I've a lot of followers, Friar Tuck and others, but they're away for a
while.  They're as much opposed to work as I am.  That's why they're my
followers.  We're the friends of the poor, because they have nothing we
want, and we're the enemies of the rich because they have a lot we do
want and that we often take.  Still, we couldn't get along very well,
if there were no rich for us to rob.  It's like taking sugar water from
a maple tree.  We won't take too much, because it would kill the tree
and we want to take its sugar water again, and many times.  Do you
understand?"

"Yes," replied the big youth, but Harry knew he didn't.  Harry
meanwhile was listening keenly to all that was passing in the forest,
and he was sure that no other soldier had wandered near.  It was
perhaps partly a feeling of loneliness on his own part that caused him
to linger in his talk with Michael Stanislav.

"Michael," he continued, "you appreciate our respective positions,
don't you?"

"Ah!" said Michael, in a puzzled voice.

"I've explained carefully to you that I'm Robin Hood, and you at the
present moment represent the rich."

"I am not rich.  Before I turn soldier I work in a mill at Bridgeport."

"That's all very well, but you can't get out of it by referring to your
past.  Just now you are a proxy of the rich, and it's my duty to rob
you."

The mouth of the big fellow expanded into a wide grin.

"You won't rob me," he said.  "I have not a cent."

"But I'm going to rob you just the same.  Don't you dare to drop a hand
toward the pistols in your belt.  If you do I'll blow your head off.
I'm covering you with a double-barreled shotgun.  Each barrel contains
about twenty buckshot, and at close range their blast would be so
terrific that you'd make an awful looking corpse."

"I hold up my hands a long time.  Don't want to be any kind of a
corpse."

"That's the good boy.  Steady now.  Don't move a muscle.  I'm going to
rob you.  It's a brief and painless operation, much easier than pulling
a tooth."

He deftly removed the two pistols and the accompanying ammunition from
the man's belt, placing them in his own.  His belt of cartridges he put
on the ground beside the fallen rifle, and then as he felt a glow of
triumph he passed the well-filled knapsack from the stalwart shoulders
of the other to his own shoulders, equally stalwart.

"Is everything in it first class, Michael?" he demanded with much
severity.

"The best.  Our army feeds well."

"It's a good thing for you that it's so.  Robin Hood is never satisfied
with anything second class, and he's likely to be offended if you offer
it to him.  On the whole, Michael, I think I like you and I'm glad you
came this way.  But do you care for good advice?"

"Yes, sir."

"That's right.  Say 'sir' to me.  It pleases my robber's heart.  Then,
my advice to you is never again to go into the woods alone.  All the
forest looks alike to those who don't know it, and you're lost in a
minute.  Besides, it's filled with strange and terrible creatures,
Robin Hood--that's me, though I have some redeeming qualities--the
Erymanthean boar, the Hydra-headed monster, Medusa of the snaky locks,
Cyclops, Polyphemus with one awful eye, the deceitful Sirens, the Old
Man of the Mountain, Wodin and Osiris, and, last and most terrible of
all, the Baron Munchausen."

A flicker of fear appeared in the eyes of the captive.

"But I'll see that none of these monsters hurt you," said Harry
consolingly.  "The open is directly behind you, about a mile.  Right
about!  Wheel!  Well done!  Now, you won't see me again, but you'll
hear me giving commands.  Forward, march!  Quit stumbling!  No true
forester ever does!  Nor is it necessary for you to run into more than
three trees!  Keep going!  No, don't curve!  Go straight ahead, and
remember that if you look back I shoot!"

Michael walked swiftly enough.  He deemed that on the whole he had
fared well.  The great brigand, Robin Hood, had spared his life and he
had lost nothing.  The army would replace his weapons and ammunition
and he was glad enough to escape from that terrible forest, even if he
were driven out of it.

Harry watched him until he was out of sight, and then picking up the
rifle and belt of cartridges he fled on soundless feet deeper into the
forest.  Two or three hundred yards away he stopped and heard a great
shouting.  Michael, no longer covered by a gun, had realized that
something untoward had happened to him, and he was calling to his
comrades.  Harry did not know whether Michael would still call the man
who had held him up, Robin Hood, nor did he care.  He had secured an
excellent rifle which would be much more useful to him than a shotgun,
and his course still led straight toward the point where he should find
Lee's army on the march.  He felt that he ought to throw away the
shotgun, as two weapons were heavy, but he could not make up his mind
to do so.

A hundred yards farther and he heard replies to Michael's shouts, and
then several shots, undoubtedly fired by the Union troops themselves,
as signals of alarm.  He laughed to himself.  Could such men as these
overtake one who was born to the woods, the great grandson of Henry
Ware, the most gifted of the borderers, who in the woods had not only a
sixth sense, but a seventh as well?  And his great grandson had
inherited many of his qualities.

Harry, in the forest, felt only contempt for these youths of Central
Europe who could not tell one point of the compass from another.  He
guided his own course by the sun, and continued at a good pace until he
could hear shouts and shots no longer.  Then in the dense woods, where
the shadows made a twilight, he came to a tiny stream flowing from
under a rock.  He knelt and drank of the cool water, and then he opened
Michael's knapsack.  It was truly well filled, and he ate with deep
content.  Then he drank again and rested by the side of the pool.

As he reflected over his journey Harry concluded that Providence had
watched over him so far, but there was much yet to do before he reached
Lee.  Providence had a strange way of watching over a man for a while,
and then letting him go.  He would neglect no precaution.  The forest
would not continue forever and then he must take his chances in the
open.

Still burning with the desire to be the first to reach Lee, he put the
rifle and the shotgun on either shoulder, and set off at as rapid a
pace as the thickets would permit.  But he soon stopped because a sound
almost like that of a wind, but not a wind, came to his ears.  There
was a breeze blowing directly toward him, but he paid no attention to
it, because to him most breezes were pleasant and friendly.  But the
other sound had in it a quality that was distinctly sinister like the
hissing of a snake.

Harry paused in wonder and alarm.  All his instincts warned him that a
new danger was at hand.  The breath of the wind suddenly grew hot, and
sparks carried by it blew past him.  He knew, in an instant, that the
forest was on fire behind him and that tinder dry, it would burn fast
and furious.  Changing from a walk to a run, he sped forward as swiftly
as he could, while the flames suddenly sprang high, waved and leaped
forward in chase.




CHAPTER VI

TESTS OF COURAGE


Harry did not know how the woods had been set on fire, and he never
knew. He did not credit it to the intent of Michael and his comrades,
but he thought it likely that some of these men, ignorant of the
forest, had built a campfire.  His first thought was of himself, and
his second was regret that so fine a stretch of timber should be burned
over for nothing.

But he knew that he must hurry.  Nor could he choose his way.  He must
get out of that forest even if he ran directly into the middle of a
Union brigade.  The wind was bringing the fire fast.  It leaped from
one tree to another, despite the recent rains, gathering volume and
power as it came.  Sparks flew in showers, and fragments of burned
twigs rained down. Twice Harry's face was scorched lightly and he had a
fear that one of the blazing twigs would set his hair on fire.  He made
another effort, and ran a little faster, knowing full well that his
life was at stake.

The fire was like a huge beast, and it reached out threatening red
claws to catch him.  He was like primeval man, fleeing from one of the
vast monsters, now happily gone from the earth.  He was conscious soon
that another not far from him was running in the same way, a man in a
