directions.



** A Hanger for Trousers [143]

Secure two clothes pins of the metal spring kind for the clamps of
the hanger. The pins are fastened one to each end of a looped
galvanized wire. This wire should be about 6 in. long after a coil
is bent in the center as shown in the sketch. The diameter of the
wire should be about 1/8 in.

[Illustration: Hanger]



** How to Make an Adjustable Negative Washer [143]

The sketch herewith shows a washing box for negatives made from an
ordinary wooden box. As can be seen, the grooved partition, A, is
removable, and as several places are provided for

[Illustration: Washing Box]

its insertion, the tank can be made to accommodate anyone of
several sizes of plates, says Camera Craft. The other stationary
partition, B, which does not reach quite to the bottom of the
tank, is placed immediately next to the end of the tank, leaving a
channel between the two for the inflow of the wash water. A
narrow, thin strip, C, is fastened to the bottom of the tank to
keep the plates slightly raised, at the same time allowing a
clearer flow of the water from the bottom upwards to the
discharge.

The water enters the narrow partition at the end, flows under the
partitions B and A, then upward between and parallel to the
surface of the plates, escaping at the opposite end over the top
of the tank end, in which the upper part has been cut away for
that purpose. The depth of this cut, in the upper part of the tank
end, should allow the overflow to be a trifle higher than the
width of the largest size plate for which the tank is fitted.
Partition B being stationary, can be nailed in position
permanently, allowing the bottom edge to clear the bottom of the
tank the desired distance. Partition A being movable should have
attached to its bottom edge a couple of nails, D, or better still,
wooden pegs, which will keep it also above the bottom of the tank
at the desired height.

A coat of paraffin paint should be applied, and, just before it
sets perfectly hard, any rough spots trimmed down with a knife or
chisel and a second lighter coat applied. If the wood is very dry
and porous a preliminary coat of the paint should be applied and
allowed to soak into the pores. It is also well to apply a coat of
the paint to the joints at the corners and around the edge of the
bottom before nailing together.



** Turn-Down Shelf for a Small Space [144]

The average amateur photographer does not have very much space in
which to do his work. The kitchen is the room used ordinarily for
finishing the photographs. In many instances there will not be
space enough for any extra tables, and so a temporary place is
prepared from boxes or a chair on which to place the trays and
chemicals. Should there be space enough on one of the walls a
shelf can be made to hang down out of the way when not in use. A
shelf constructed on this order may be of any length to suit the
space or of such a length for the purpose intended. A heavy piece
of wood, about

[Illustration: Turn Down Shelf]

1-1/2 in. thick, and 4 to 6 in. wide, is first fastened to the
wall at the proper height with nails, or, much better, large
screws.

The shelf is cut and planed smooth from a board 12-in. wide and
about 1-in. thick. This board is fastened to the piece on the wall
with two hinges as shown in Fig. 1. A small cleat is nailed to the
outer and under edge of the board and in the middle as shown. This
is used to place a support under the outer edge of the shelf. The
support, A, Fig. 2, should be long enough to extend diagonally to
the floor or top of the baseboard from the inner edge of the cleat
when the shelf is up in its proper place. --L. L.



** Home-Made Electric Battery Massage [144]

A simple and cheap electric massage device can be made by using
three or

[Illustration: Electric Massage]

four cells of dry battery connected to two ordinary silver
tablespoons, as shown in the sketch. The handles of the spoons
should be insulated or the operator can wear either kid or rubber
gloves.



** How to Make Tint Lantern Slides [144]

Purchase some lantern slide plates and fix them in hypo without
exposing, in the usual manner, same as you would an exposed plate,
says the Moving Picture World. This leaves a thin, perfectly
transparent emulsion film on the glass, which will readily take
color. Mix a rather weak solution of clear aniline dye of the
desired color and dip the plate in it, wiping the plate side
clean. If not dark enough, dip again and again until desired tint
is attained, letting it dry between each dipping. A very light
blue tint slide will brighten a yellow film considerably, but the
tint must be very light, just a bare tint.



** A Bicycle Catamaran [145]

The accompanying photographs show a bicycle boat made to carry two
persons.

[Illustration: This Catamaran Carries Two People]

This boat is constructed by using two galvanized iron tubes 18 ft.
long and 12 in. in diameter, tapered at the front end down to
cast-iron points, and the rear end shaped to attach rudders. These
tubes are placed 26 in. apart, giving the boat an extreme width of
50 in.

The cylinders support a platform and on the rear end of this
platform is constructed a paddle wheel 52 in. in diameter with 16
spokes. On the end of each spoke is fastened a galvanized sheet
metal blade 6 in. wide and 8 in. long. A large guard placed over
the paddle wheel forms a seat for one person and a chair in front
on the platform provides a place for a second person.

The person in front helps to propel the boat with hand levers
which are connected with rods to sprocket wheels on each side of
the platform. The occupant of the rear seat contributes his part
of the power with his feet on pedals of the shaft that carries the
sprocket wheels. This shaft and sprocket wheels drive the paddle
wheel by side chains of the bicycle kind. The boat is steered from
the rear seat by ropes attached to double rudders. This boat will
run at considerable speed and is very steady in rough water as it
goes directly through large waves instead of going over them.
--Contributed by Ernest Schoedsack, Council Bluffs, Iowa.



** How to Make a Lead Pencil Rheostat [145]

Take an ordinary lead pencil and cut seven notches at equal
intervals on the pencil down to and around the lead, leaving it
bare. A seven-point switch is constructed on a board of suitable
size making the points by using screws that will go through the
board. A small piece of tin or brass will do for a switch and is
fastened as shown. The connections are made on the back side of
the board as shown by the dotted lines. This will reduce 40 to 50
volts down to 5 or 10 volts for short lengths

[Illustration: Simple Rheostat]

of time.
--Contributed by Roy Newby, San Jose, Cal.



** Homemade Shoe Rack [146]

The accompanying sketch explains how a boy can make his own shoe
rack that can be placed on the wall in

[Illustration: Shoe Rack]

the clothes closet. Figure 1 shows the construction of the bottom
to permit the dirt to fall through. Two boards, 9 in. wide and
about 3 ft. long, with six partitions between, as shown, will make
pockets about 6 in. long. The width of the pockets at the bottom
is 2 in. and at the top 5 in.
--Contributed by Guy H. Harvey, Mill Valley, Cal.



** How to Waterproof Canvas [146]

The method used by the British navy yards for waterproofing and
painting canvas so it will not become stiff and cracked is as
follows: One ounce of yellow soap and 1/2 pt. of hot water are
mixed with every 7 lb. of paint to be used. The mixture is applied
to the canvas with a brush. This is allowed to dry for two days
and then a coat of the same paint, without the soap, is laid on.
When this last coat is dry the canvas may be painted any color
desired. After three days of drying the canvas may be folded up
without sticking together, and is, of course, waterproof. Canvas
waterproofed in this manner makes an excellent covering for
portable canoes and canvas boats. The color mixture for the soap
and second application is made from 1 lb. of lampblack and 6 lb.
of yellow ocher, both in oil; the finish coat may be any color
desired. When no paint is to be used on the canvas it may be
waterproofed with a mixture made from soft soap dissolved in hot
water, and a solution of iron sulphate added. Iron sulphate, or
ferrous sulphate, is the green vitriol. The vitriol combines with
the potash of the soap, and the iron oxide is precipitated with
the fatty acid as insoluble iron soap. This precipitate is then
washed, dried and mixed with linseed oil.



** Building a House in a Tree Top [146]

The accompanying photograph shows a small house built in a tree
top 20 ft. from the ground. The house is

[Illustration: Lofty Sentry Box for Guarding Watermelon Patch]

5 ft. wide, 5 ft. 1 in. long, and 6 ft. 6 in. high. A small
platform, 2 ft. wide, is built on the front. Three windows are
provided, one for each side, and a door in front. The entrance is
made through a trap door in the floor of the house. This house was
constructed by a boy 14 years old and made for the purpose of
watching over a melon patch.
--Contributed by Mack Wilson, Columbus, O.



** How to Make a Lamp Stand and Shade [147]

A library light stand of pleasing design and easy construction is
made as follows: Square up a piece of white oak so that it shall
have a width and thickness of 1-3/4 in. with a length of 13 in.
Square up two pieces of the same kind of material to the same
width and thickness, but with a length of 12 in. each. Square up
two pieces to a width and length of 3 in. each with a thickness of
1-1/8 in.

If a planing mill is near, time and patience will be saved by
ordering one piece 1-3/4 in. square and 40 in. long, two pieces
1-1/8 in. thick and 3 in. square, all planed and sandpapered on
all surfaces. The long piece can then be cut at home to the
lengths specified above.

The 13-in. piece is for the upright and should have a 1/2-in. hole
bored the full length through the center. If the bit is not long
enough to reach entirely through, bore from each end, then use a
red-hot iron to finish. This hole is for the electric wire or gas
pipe if gas is used.

The two pieces for the base are alike except the groove of one is
cut from the top and of the other from the under side, as shown.
Shape the under sides first. This can best be done by placing the
two pieces in a vise, under sides together, and boring two holes
with a 1-in. bit. The center of each hole will be 2-1/2 in. from
either end and in the crack between the pieces. The pieces can
then be taken out, lines gauged on each side of each, and the wood
between the holes removed with turning saw and scraper steel.

The width of the grooves must be determined by laying one piece
upon the other; a trysquare should be used to square the lines
across the pieces, however, gauge for depth, gauging both pieces
from their top surfaces. Chisel out the grooves and round off the
corners as shown in the sketch, using a 3/4-in. radius.

These parts may be put together and fastened to the upright by
means of two long screws from the under side, placed to either
side of the 1/2-in. hole. This hole must be continued through the
pieces forming the base.

The braces are easiest made by taking the two pieces which were
planed to 1-1/8 in. thick and 3 in. square and drawing a diagonal
on each. Find the middle of this diagonal by drawing the central
portion of the other diagonal; at this point place the spur of the
bit and bore a 1-in. hole in each block.

Saw the two blocks apart, sawing

[Illustration: Details of Construction of Library Lamp Stand]

along a diagonal of each. Plane the surfaces on the saw cut smooth
and sandpaper the curve made by the bit. Fasten the braces in
place by means of roundhead blued screws.

To make a shade such as is shown in the illustration is rather
difficult. The shade is made of wood glued up and has art glass
fitted in rabbets cut on the inner edges. Such shades can be
purchased ready to attach. The sketch shows one method of
attaching. Four small pieces of strap iron are bent to the shape
shown and fastened to the four sides of the upright. Electric
globes--two, three or four may be attached as shown.

The kind of wood finish for the stand will depend upon the finish
on the wooden shade, if shade is purchased. Brown Flemish is
obtained by first staining the wood with Flemish water stain
diluted by the addition of two parts water to one part stain. When
this is dry, sandpaper the "whiskers" which were raised by the
water and fill with a medium dark filler. Directions will be found
on the filler cans. When the filler has hardened, apply two coats
of wax.

The metal shade as shown in the sketch is a "layout" for a copper
or brass shade of a size suitable for this particular lamp. Such
shades are frequently made from one piece of sheet metal and
designs are pierced in them as suggested in the "layout." This
piercing is done by driving the point of a nail through the metal
from the under side before the parts are soldered or riveted
together. If the parts are to be riveted, enough additional metal
must be left on the last panel to allow for a lap. No lap is
needed when joints are soldered.

A better way, and one which will permit the use of heavier metal,
is to cut each side of the shade separately and fasten them
together by riveting a piece of metal over each joint. The shape
of this piece can be made so as to accentuate the rivet heads and
thus give a pleasing effect.

For art-glass the metal panels are

[Illustration: The Completed Lamp]

cut out, the glass is inserted from the under side and held in
place by small clips soldered to the frame of the shade. Pleasing
effects are obtained by using one kind of metal, as brass, and
reinforcing and riveting with another metal, such as copper.

[Illustration: METAL SHADE--Construction of Shade]



** Illuminating a Watch Dial at Night [149]

This picture shows a watch holder, with a device to receive an
ordinary electric pocket lamp and battery. The battery is set in a
bracket under which a reflector extends downward to throw the
light on the dial of the watch and to protect the eyes from the
direct light. The entire stand and bracket are made from sheet
metal. The base is formed to make a tray to hold pins and collar
buttons. It is not necessary to seek in the darkness for a push
button or switch, as in ordinary devices, but a light pressure
with the palm of the hand will make the lamp glow.

[Illustration: Lamp]



** Home-Made Photographic Copying Stand [149]

The difficulties of bad lighting on small articles can be entirely
avoided by the use of a suitable support for the camera, the
object and the background.

[Illustration: Secures Good Light on Small Objects]

For illustrations it is often an advantage to show an object with
a perfectly plain background and no deep shadows. When using the
stand as illustrated this is a very simple matter. Figure 1 shows
the side, and Fig. 2 the front view of this stand. The stand is
very easily constructed from pipe and pipe fittings. The main pipe
of the stand will need to be of proper length to suit the focus of
your camera. This can be determined by finding the length from the
lens to the object after the bellows are extended to their full
length. The arms holding the glass, as shown in the sketch, should
be set at a point about the middle of the main tube. The cross
that holds the middle arms should be 3/4 in. one way and 1/2 in.
the other. This will allow for adjustment of the glass table. A
small set screw provided in the back of this cross will hold the
table in any position desired. The pipes and other connections are
all 1/2-in. and the lengths of the pipes are made suitable for the
size of the camera. When a small object is to be photographed it
is placed upon the glass table and the background fastened to the
board. In this manner small objects can be photographed without
any deep shadow on one side. The bottom cross and ells should be
corked so as to prevent any slipping and damage to the floor.



** Home-Made Pocket Lamp [149]

A simple and safe pocket lamp that will last for about 6 months
without extra expense can be made at home for a few cents.

Have your druggist take a strong vial of clear glass, or a pill
bottle with screw or cork top and put into it a piece of
phosphorus about the size of a pea and fill the bottle one-third
full of pure olive oil that has been heated for 15 minutes--but
not boiled. Cork tightly and the result will be a luminous light
in the upper portion of the bottle. If the light becomes dim,
uncork and recork again. The lamp will retain its brilliancy for
about 6 months. This makes a perfectly safe lamp to carry. These
lamps are used by watchmen of powder magazines. Care should be
exercised in handling the phosphorus, as it is very poisonous.



** How to Make a Tangent Galvanometer [150]

Secure a piece of wood 1/2 in. thick and cut out a ring with an
outside diameter of 10-1/2 in. and an inside diameter of 9 in. and
glue to each side two other rings 1/4 in. thick with the same
inside diameter as the first ring and 11 in. outside diameter,
thus forming a 1/4-in. channel in the circumference of the ring.
If a lathe is at hand this ring can be made from a solid piece and
the channel turned out. Cut another circular piece 11 in. in
diameter for a base. Make a hole in the center of this piece 1 in.
wide and 6-5/16 in. long, into which the ring first made should
fit so that its inner surface is just even with the upper surface
of the baseboard. The ring is held upright in the hole by a small
strip screwed to the base as shown. All screws and brads that are
used must be of brass. The cutting of these circular pieces is not
so difficult if a band saw driven by power is used. They can be
cut by means of a key-hole saw if a band saw is not accessible.

Before mounting the ring on the base, the groove should be wound
with 8 turns of No. 16 double cotton-covered magnet wire. The two
ends may be tied together with a string to hold them temporarily.

Fasten two strips of wood 1/4-in. thick 5/8-in. wide and 11 in.
long across the sides of the ring with their upper edges passing
exactly through the center of the ring. An ordinary pocket
compass, about 1-1/4 in. in diameter, is fitted in these strips so
that the center of the needle or pointer will be exactly in the
center of the ring and its zero point mark at the half-way point
between the two strips. Put the ring in place on the base, as
shown in the sketch, and connect the two ends of the wire to two
binding-posts that are previously attached to the base. Coat the
entire surface with brown shellac. Any deviation from the
dimensions will cause errors in the results obtained by its use.

Remove all pieces of iron or steel and especially magnets in the
near vicinity of the instrument when in use. Place the
galvanometer on a level table and turn it until the needle,
pointing north and south, and swinging freely, lies exactly in the
plane of the coil, as shown in the cut. The needle then will point
to zero if the directions have been followed closely. Connect one

[Illustration: Tangent Galvanometer]

cell of battery to the instrument and allow the current to flow
through the coils. The needle of the compass will be deflected to
one side or the other, and will finally come to rest at a certain
angle-let us say 45 deg. The dimensions of the instrument are such
that when the deflection is 45 deg. the current flowing through
the coils upon the ring is 1/2 ampere. The ampere is the unit
chosen to designate the strength of the electric current. For
other angles the value of the current may be found from the
following table:

Angles Degrees  Current Amperes
    10              .088
    20              .182
    30              .289
    40              .420
    45              .500
    50              .600
    55              .715
    60              .865
    70             1.375

As the magnetic force that acts upon a magnet needle varies in
different places the values given for the current will not be true
in all parts of the country. The table gives correct values for
the immediate vicinity of Chicago and that part of the United
States lying east of Chicago, and north of the Ohio river. The
results given should be multiplied by 1.3 for places south of the
Ohio river and east of the Mississippi.



** Home-Made X-Ray Instrument [151]

Two cylinders, AA, are mounted on a base, B, and mirrors, CC, are
fitted at an angle of 45 deg. into these cylinders. Corresponding
mirrors, EE, are put in the base parallel with those in those
cylinders. An opening extends downward from D of each cylinder so
that light entering at one end of the

[Illustration: Details of X-Ray Machine]

cylinder is reflected down at right angles by the first mirror to
the second, from the second to the third, from the third to the
fourth which reflects the light to the eye. Thus the light never
passes through the cylinders and the observer does not see
through, but around any object inserted at X between the
cylinders.



** How to Make a a Non-Polarizing Battery [151]

Bichromate batteries are very expensive to maintain and dry cells
do not furnish enough amperage for some kinds of experimental
work. A cell of a battery that will run 10 hours with an output of
over 1 ampere can be made as follows: Secure a jar about 4 in. in
diameter and 8 in. high and place in the bottom of this jar the
lower half of a tin baking powder can, to which a wire has been
soldered for connections. Place in the can a mixture of 2 oz.
black oxide of copper, 1 oz. black oxide of manganese and some
iron filings.

Purchase a small crowfoot zinc and hang it about 1 in. above the
half can. Prepare a 10 per cent solution of caustic soda and fill
the jar within 1 in. of the top. Place on top the solution a thin
layer of kerosene or paraffin. The cell will only cost about 50
cents to make and 25 cents for each renewal. When renewing, always
remove the oil with a siphon.
--Contributed by Robert Canfield, University Park, Colo.



** A Home-Made Barometer [151]

Take 1/4 oz. of pulverized campor, 62 gr. of pulverized nitrate of
potassium, 31 gr. nitrate of ammonia and dissolve in 2 oz.
alcohol. Put the solution in a long, slender bottle, closed at the
top with a piece of bladder' containing a pinhole to admit air,
says Metal Worker. When rain is coming the solid particles will
tend gradually to mount, little crystals forming in the liquid,
which otherwise remains clear; if high winds are approaching the
liquid will become as if fermenting, while a film of solid
particles forms on the surface; during fair weather the liquid
will remain clear and the solid particles will rest at the bottom.



** Lock Lubricant [151]

A door lock may be lubricated by using some lead scraped from the
lead in a pencil and put in the lock. This may be done by putting
the scrapings on a piece of paper and blowing them into the lock
through the keyhole.



** Rust Proofing Bolts [151]

Where bolts are subject to rust, the threads should be painted
with pure white lead; then they will not rust fast.



** Painting Yellow Pine [151]

When painting yellow pine exposed to the weather add a little pine
tar with the priming coat.



** Revolving a Wheel with Boat Sails [152]

A novel windmill or revolving wheel can be made by placing a light
wheel so it will turn freely on the end

[Illustration: An Unusual Type of Windmill]

of a post, and placing four small sailing boats at equal points on
the rim of the wheel. It makes no difference which way the wind
blows, the wheel will revolve in one direction. In Fig. 1 the
direction of the wind is shown by the arrows, and how the sails
catch the wind and cause the wheel to revolve. Figure 2 shows how
the wheel will appear when complete. This device makes an
attractive advertising sign.



** A Floating Electromagnet [152]

A piece of iron placed in a coil of wire carrying a current of
electricity becomes an electromagnet. If such a coil and iron core
be made small enough they can be attached to a cork and the cork,
floating on a solution, will allow the magnet to point north and
south. The sketch shows how to make such an instrument. A coil of
insulated wire is wrapped around a small iron core, leaving a few
inches of each end free for connections. The insulation is removed

[Illustration: Floating Electromagnet]

from these ends and they are run through a piece of cork. Attach
to the wires, on the under side of the cork, a piece of zinc to
one end and a piece of copper to the other. The cork is then
floated on a solution of acid, with the zinc and copper hanging in
the solution. If zinc and copper are used, the solution is made
from water and blue vitriol. If zinc and carbon are used, the
solution is made from sal ammoniac and water.

The float will move about on the solution until the magnet iron
will point north and south. If two of them are floating on the
same solution, they will move about and finally arrange themselves
end to end with the coils and magnet cores pointing north and
south.
--Contributed by C. Lloyd Enos.



** A Fish Bait [152]

A very effective fish bait is made by inclosing a live minnow in a
short section of glass tube, which is filled with water and both
ends closed with corks. This is used in place of the spoon.



** Homemade Air Thermometer [152]

The illustration shows the complete thermometer. The water in the
glass tube is caused to rise and fall by the expansion and
contraction of the air in the tin box. A paper-fastener box, about
1-1/4 in.

[Illustration: Air Thermometer]

deep and 2 in. in diameter will serve very well for the box A.
Solder in the side of the box 1-in. piece of 1/4-in. brass tubing,
B, and then solder on the cover, C, so that the only escape for
the air is through the brass tube. Secure a piece of 1/4-in. glass
tubing - not shorter than 18 in.--and bend it as shown at D in the
sketch. Hold the part of the tube to be bent in the broad side of
a gas jet, and in a minute or two the tube will bend with its own
weight. Any angle can be given glass tubing in this way. Connect
the glass tube to B with a short piece of rubber hose, E. If the
hose is not a tight fit, bind with a short piece of fine copper
wire. The standard, F, is made from a piece of No. 10 wire about
10 in. long. To this standard solder the supporting wire, G--No.
14 wire will do. On one side bend the wire around the tube B, and
on the other around the glass tube, D.

The base, H, can be made of oak, stained and varnished. The bottom
of the box, A, is covered with lampblack so as to readily absorb
all heat that strikes the surface. The black should not be put on
until just before you paint the supports, cover and rim of the box
with gold or silver paint. Hold the bottom of the box to be
blackened over a little burning cotton saturated with turpentine.

The scale on the glass can be etched with hydrofluoric acid, or
made with a little black paint. The water can be put in with a
medicine dropper. This instrument will measure the amount of heat
given by a candle some 20 or 30 ft. away.
--Contributed by J. Thos. Rhamstine.



** Home-Made Battery Voltmeter [153]

Secure a piece of brass tube 3 in. long that has about 1/4-in.
hole. Put ends, A, 1-1/4 in. square and cut from heavy cardboard
on this tube. Make a hole in the center of each cardboard just
large enough to allow the brass tube to fit tight. Put on two or
three layers of stout paper around the brass tube and between the
cardboard ends. Wind evenly about 2 oz. of No. 26 cotton covered
magnet wire on the paper between the ends and leave about 2 in. of
wire on each end extending from the coil. Use a board 1/2- in.
thick, 3 in. wide and 6 in. long for the base and fasten the coil
to it, as shown in Fig. 1. Bore holes for binding-posts, B, one on
each side of the board, and connect the two wires from the coil to
them. At the other end of the board and in the center drive a wire
nail and attach a small spring, C, to it. The spring should be
about 1 in. long. Take a small piece of soft iron, D, 1/2- in.
long and just large enough to slip freely through the brass

[Illustration: Battery Voltmeter Construction]

tube and solder a piece of copper wire to it; the other end of the
copper wire being hooked to the spring, C. The copper wire must be
just long enough to allow the piece of iron, D, to hang part way
in the end of the coil and still hold the spring in place. A
circular piece of cardboard, E, is slipped over the spring to
where the spring joins the wire. This cardboard is to serve as the
pointer. A piece of paper 1-1/2 in. wide and 2-1/2 in. long is
glued to the board so that it will be directly under the cardboard
pointer and fit snugly up against the top of the coil.

The paper can be calibrated by connecting one cell of battery to
the binding-posts. The iron plunger, D, is drawn into the tube and
consequently the pointer, E, is drawn nearer to the coil. Make a
mark directly under the place where the pointer comes to rest. At
the place mark the number of volts the cell reads when connected
with a voltmeter. Do the same with two or three cells and mark
down the result on the scale. By dividing off the space between
these marks you may be able to obtain a surprisingly correct
reading when connected with the battery cells to be tested.
--Contributed by Edward M. Teasdale, Cuba, N. Y.



** How to Make a Folding Canvas Cot [154]

All the material required to make the cot as shown in Fig. 1
consists of wood 1-1/2 in. square of which two pieces are 6 ft.
long; two pieces 2 ft. 3 in. long; two pieces 2-1/2 ft. long; four
pieces 1-1/2 ft. long; four hinges; some sheet metal and 2-1/4 yd.
of 8-oz. canvas.

Make a rectangle of the two long pieces and the two 2-ft. 3-in.
pieces of wood as shown in Fig. 2, nailing well the corners
together and reinforcing with a strip of sheet metal as shown in
Fig. 3. The four pieces 1-1/2 ft. long are used for the legs, and
two of them are nailed to one of the pieces 2-1/2 ft. long, making
a support as shown in Fig. 5.

Make two of these--one for each end.

[Illustration: Details of Canvas Cot Construction]

The hinges are attached as shown in Fig. 5 and the whole support
is fastened just under the end pieces of the frame by hinges. Four
pieces of sheet metal are cut as shown in Fig. 4 and fastened to
the body of the frame with their lower ends hooking over pins
driven in each leg at the proper place. The canvas is stretched as
tight as possible over the two long side pieces and fastened on
the outside edge of each piece with large headed tacks. The legs
will fold up as shown by the dotted line and the cot can be stored
in a small space.
--Contributed by R. J. Smith, Milwaukee, Wis.



** How to Make a Small Geissler Tube [154]

At first this would seem to be a difficult piece of work, yet a
good and beautiful Geissler tube can be made at home in the
following manner:

Procure a glass tube about 3-1/2 ft. long having a hole through
its center about 1/8 or 1/4 in. in diameter, about 1 in. of No. 30
platinum wire and enough mercury to fill the tube and a small
bowl. About 1-1/2 lb. of mercury will be sufficient. The first
thing to do is to seal 1/2 in. of platinum wire in one end of the
tube. This is done by holding the end of the tube with the right
hand and taking hold of the tube with the left hand about 4 in.
from the right hand. Hold the tube in a flame of a bunsen burner
in such manner that the flame will strike the tube midway between
the hands, as shown in Fig. 1, and keep turning the tube so as to
get an even heat. When the glass becomes soft,

[Illustration: Construction of Geissler Tube]

remove the tube from the flame and quickly draw it out into a fine
thread. Break this thread off about 1/8 in. from the long part of
the tube and the end will appear as shown in Fig. 2. Take 1/2 in.
of the platinum wire and slip it through the fine hole made by
breaking the glass thread so that one-half of the wire will be
inside of the long tube. If the end of the tube is now placed in
the flame of the burner, the glass will adhere to the platinum
wire and the wire will thus be sealed in the tube. The finished
end will appear as shown in Fig. 3. This tube as described will be
8 in. long, although nearly any size could be made in the same
way.

Measure 8 in. from the sealed end and place the tube at that point
in the flame, holding in the left hand. At the same time take the
piece of glass that was broken off at the end in the first
operation and hold it in the flame with the right hand. When both
the tube and piece of glass are soft, touch the soft part of the
tube with the end of the glass and draw the tube out into a point
like that shown in Fig. 4. Break off the piece of glass, thus
leaving a. small aperture in the long tube. Seal the remaining 1/2
in. of platinum in this aperture in the same manner as before
being careful not to heat the tube too suddenly. The tube is now
ready for filling and the upper part will appear as shown in Fig.
5.

The air is expelled from the tube by filling with mercury. This
may be done by making a paper funnel and pouring the mercury
slowly into the tube through the funnel. When the tube is filled
to within 1/2 in. of the funnel remove the funnel and tap the side
of the tube gently in order to remove any small air bubbles that
may be clinging to the sides of the tube. The air bubbles will
rise and come to the top. The tube now must be filled completely,
expelling all the air. Place a finger over the end of the tube to
keep the mercury in and invert the tube and set the end in the
bowl of mercury. The mercury in the tube will sink until the level
will be at about 30 in., leaving 8 in. of vacuum at the top. The
next operation is to seal the tube at the half-way point between
the lower platinum wire and the mercury level.

As the lower end of the tube must be kept at all times in the bowl
of mercury until the tube is sealed, an assistant will be
necessary for this last operation. Have the assistant hold the
tube in the mercury at a slight angle, using care to always keep
the lower end in the mercury, while you hold the burner in the
left hand and allow the flame to strike the tube at the stated
point. The part of the tube above this point will gradually bend
over of its own weight as the glass softens. When it reaches the
angle of about 60 deg., Fig. 6, take hold of the tube with the
right hand still keeping the flame on the tube, and gradually draw
the softened portion out until it separates from the main tube.

The tube is now finished and when the platinum wires are attached
to the terminals of a spark coil a beautiful blue light will
appear in the tube with a dark space at the negative end or
cathode.
--Contributed by David A. Keys, Toronto, Can.



** Loosening Rusted Nuts [155]

Nuts that are rusted fast can often be loosened by giving a hard
turn in the tightening direction.



** Cleaning Greasy Stoves [155]

Greasy stoves may be cleaned with a strong solution of lye or
soda.



** How to Make a Take-Down Background Frame [156]

Many amateur photographers who desire to do portrait work at home
have left the subject alone for the want of a suitable background.
A frame such as is used by the professional is entirely out of the
question in most homes, says a correspondent of Camera Craft. The
frame as shown in the sketch was devised and its chief advantage
lies in the fact that when not in use it can be compactly tied
together and stored away in a closet.

Almost any wood may be used in constructing this frame, but yellow
pine is the best, as it is easily obtained and at the same time
very well suited for such work. All pieces are to be dressed on
all sides.

Two upright pieces are cut from 3/4 in. material 2 in. wide and 5
ft. 9 in. long and two blocks are fastened on the ends of each
that are to be used for the bottom, as shown in Fig. 1. These
blocks are each 2 by 6-in. and 1/4 in. thick. The base is made
from a piece 3/4 in. thick, 3 in. wide and 5 ft. 4 in. long. A
crosspiece 3/4-in. thick, 3 in. wide and 12 in. long, cut in the
shape shown in Fig. 2, is screwed on each end of the base with
3-in. wood screws, as shown in Fig. 3. Four blocks 1/4 in. thick,
1 in. wide and 3 in. long are nailed to the sides of the base
piece parallel with and at a distance of 2 in. from the end of
same. This forms a slot, Fig. 4, to receive the pieces nailed to
the ends of the uprights. To secure a rigid frame it is essential
that this, joint be accurately put together.

Procure a piece of thick tin or brass and make two pieces like the
pattern shown in Fig. 5, with each projection 3-in. long. The
width of the crosspiece is 1 in. and the single projection 3/4 in.
These are bent and nailed, one on each end of a piece of wood that
is 1/4 in. thick, 1 in. wide and 5 ft. long, as in Fig. 6. These
will form two pockets that will fit over the tops of the uprights.
The frame is put together as shown in Fig. 7. Any background that
will hang straight without need of being stretched can be hung on
this frame.

[Illustration: FIG.6 -- Details of Background Frame]



**  Home-Made Kite Reel [156]

This kite reel is constructed from two old pulleys and a few pipe
fittings. The large pulley is about 14 in. in diameter, on the
face of which are riveted flat strips of iron with extending arms.
These arms are reinforced by riveting smaller pieces from one to
the

[Illustration: Old Pulleys and Pipe Fittings]

other, which connects all arms together on both sides of the
wheel. Mounted on the shaft with the pulleys is a guide for the
kite wire or string. The photograph shows that this guide permits
of being moved entirely over the top of the reel. The smaller
pulley is attached to the shaft and used as a brake. The brake is
used only when running out the wire or string, first removing the
crank.



** Attaching Runners to a Bicycle for Winter Use [157]

Instead of storing away your bicycle for the winter, attach
runners and use it on the ice. The runners can be made from
1/4-in. by 1-in. iron and fastened to the bicycle frame as shown
in the sketch. The tire is removed from the rim of the rear wheel
and large screws turned into the rim, leaving the greater part of
the screw extending. Cut off the heads of the screws and file them
to a point. The rear runners should be set so the rim of the wheel
will be about 1/2 in. above the runner level.
--Contributed by C. R. Welsh, Manhattan, Kan.

[Illustration: Bicycle Fitted with Runners for Snow]



** A Paper That Makes Green Prints [157]

A coating for ordinary paper that is said to give green prints is
made with a two per cent solution of gelatine, says Photography,
and sensitized with the following solution:

    Potassium Bichromate  15 gr.
    Magnesium Sulphate    25 gr.
    Water                  1 oz.

This mixture is spread over the paper in the usual way and the
paper dried in the dark. Printing is carried rather far. The print
is washed, then surface dried or blotted off on a pad and laid
film upwards on a sheet of glass, and the following developer is
applied with a wad of cotton wool wrung out:

    Pyrocatechin  5 gr.
    Water         1 oz.

The picture assumes a rich green color when developed, and is then
washed for five or ten minutes and dried quickly by heat.



** Copies Made from Wax Molds by Electro-Deposition [157]

Fine copies of wax impressions can be made in the following
manner: Procure an ordinary tumbler and fill it with a strong
solution of sulphate of copper, which is made by dissolving two
cents' worth of blue vitriol in 1/2 pt. of water. After this is
done make a porous cell by rolling a piece of brown paper around a
stick and fastening the edge with sealing wax; also, fix a bottom
to the cell in the same way. Make a solution of one part of oil of
vitriol and 5 parts of water and pour this mixture into the porous
cell. Wind the end of a copper wire around the end of a piece of
zinc and place the zinc in the porous cell. Attach the other end
of the wire to the wax impression.

The wax impression is made by pouring melted beeswax on the
article you wish to reproduce and removing after the wax gets
cold. The wax mold then should be coated with black lead and
polished. This is done with a camel's hair brush. A fine copy can
be made on the wax impression after the battery has been running
about 12 hr.
--Contributed by Edward M. Treasdale.

[Illustration: Electro-Deposition]



** How to Make Skating Shoes [158]

Remove the clamp part, as shown in Fig. 1, from an ordinary clamp
skate. Drill holes in the top part of the skate

[Illustration: Skating Shoes]

for screws. Purchase a pair of high shoes with heavy soles and
fasten the skates to the soles with screws, as shown in Fig. 2.
When completed the skating shoes will have the appearance shown on
Fig. 3. These will make as good skating shoes as can be purchased,
and very much cheaper.
--Contributed by Wallace C. Newton, Leominster, Mass.



** How to Make a Self-Setting Rabbit Trap [158]

Secure a good-sized box, say, 1 ft. high, 1-1/2 ft. wide, and 3
ft. long; and to the bottom, about 10 in. from one end, fasten a
2-in. square piece, A, Fig. 1, extending the width of the box.
Place a 10-in. board sloping from the end of the box to the cleat
A. The swing door B, Fig. 1, is made as shown

[Illustration: Self-Setting Trap]

in Fig. 2, which represents the back side of the door. Sheet metal
or tin is cut to the proper size and tacked around the edge of the
hole. This prevents the animal from gnawing its way out, also
provides a way to make the hole of different sizes for squirrels
or other animals. The hole in the door should be about 2 in. wide
and 4 in. high for rabbits. The door is made to swing freely on
two large nails driven through the sides of the box. The hole in
the door being only large enough to admit a small portion of the
rabbit's head, the rabbit will push its way through to the bait,
causing the door to swing back and up, and it will close by its
own weight when the animal is inside. A small door is provided in
the other end to remove the animals caught.

The advantage of this trap is that where one animal is caught
others are liable to follow, and several rabbits will be trapped
at a time. Then, too, the rabbits are not harmed in any way as
they would be if caught in an ordinary trap.
--Contributed by H. F. Church, Alexandria, Va.



** How to Make an Atomizer [158]

Secure a good-sized test tube and fit it with a cork. Take two
glass tubes, with about 1/8-in. hole, and bend them as shown in
the sketch. This is done by heating them at the proper point over
a gas flame until they are soft. Two holes are bored through the
cork and the bent tubes inserted in them, as shown in the sketch,
so that one of the tubes will extend nearly to the bottom

[Illustration: Atomizer]

of the test tube and the other just projecting through the cork.
The spray tube may be made with a fine hole by first securing a
tube longer than necessary and heating it at the proper point and
drawing the tube out into a fine thread. The thread is broken off
at the proper place to make a small hole.



** Home-Made Kits for the Camera [159]

If you have a 5- by 7-in. camera and wish to use some 4- by 5-in.
plates, make a few simple kits to hold the smaller plates and fit
the larger holders, says Camera Craft. Take two pieces of
pasteboard, A and B, black surfaced if possible, and exactly 5 by
