provided such fruits as she conceived the monkeys were fond of, and
went into the wood; where strewing them about, they presently quitted
the Bell, and attached themselves to the fruit.  The Poor Woman, in the
meantime, took away the Bell, and repaired to the city, where she
became an object of adoration to its inhabitants.  Wherefore, I say:
"It is not proper to be alarmed by a mere sound, when the cause of the
sound is unknown."



The Lion and the Rabbit

He who bath sense hath strength.  Where hath he strength who wanteth
judgment?  See how a Lion, when intoxicated with anger, was overcome by
a Rabbit.

Upon a certain mountain there lived a Lion, whose name was Durganta,[1]
who was perpetually sacrificing animals to his gods; so that, at
length, all the different species assembled, and, in a body,
represented that, as by his present mode of proceeding the forest would
be cleared all at once; if it pleased his Highness, they would, each of
them in his turn, provide him an animal for his daily food; and the
Lion gave, his consent accordingly.  So every beast delivered his
stipulated provision, till at length, in coming to the Rabbit's turn he
began to meditate in this manner: "Policy should be practised by him
who would save his life; and I myself shall lose mine, if I do not take
care.  Suppose I lead him after another Lion?  Who knows how that may
turn out for me?  Then I will approach him slowly, as if fatigued."

The Lion by this time began to be very hungry; so, seeing the Rabbit
coming toward him, he called out in a great passion: "What is the
reason thou comest so late?"  "Please your Highness," said the Rabbit
"as I was coming along, I was forcibly detained by another of your
species; but having given him my word that I would return immediately I
came here to represent it to your Highness."  "Go quickly," said the
Lion in a rage, "and show me where this vile wretch may be found?"

Accordingly the Rabbit conducted the Lion to the brink of a deep well,
where being arrived, "There," said the Rabbit, "look down and behold
him"; at the same time he pointed to the reflected image of the Lion in
the water; who swelling with pride and resentment, leaped into the
well, as he thought, upon his adversary, and thus put an end to his own
life.  I repeat, therefore: "He who hath sense, hath strength."

[1]Hard to go near.



The Birds and the Monkeys

A wise man is worthy to be advised; but an ignorant one never.
Certain birds, having given advice to a troop of monkeys, have their
nests torn to pieces, and are obliged to fly away.

On the banks of the river Navmoda, upon a neighbouring mountain, there
was a large Salmalee tree wherein certain Birds were wont to build
their nests and reside, even during the season of the rains.  One day
the sky being overcast with a troop of thick dark clouds, there fell a
shower of rain in very large streams.  The Birds seeing a troop of
Monkeys at the foot of the tree, all wet, and shivering with cold,
called out to them; "Ho, Monkeys! why don't you invent something to
protect you from the rain?  We build ourselves nests with straws
collected with nothing else but our bills.  How is this, that you, who
are blessed with hands and feet, yield to such sufferings?"

The Monkeys hearing this, and understanding it as a kind of reproach,
were exceedingly irritated and said amongst themselves: "Those Birds
there, sitting comfortably out of the wind within their warm nests, are
laughing at us!  So let them, as long as the shower may last."  In
short, as soon as the rain subsided, the whole troop of them mounted
into the tree, where tearing all the nests to pieces, the eggs fell
upon the ground and were broken.  I say, therefore: "A wise man is
worthy to be advised, but an ignorant one never."



The Rabbits and the Elephants

Great things may be effected by wise counsel, when a sovereign enemy
may be too powerful.  Certain Rabbits were enabled to live in comfort,
through the policy of one of their brethren.

Once upon a time, for want of rain in due season, a troop of Elephants
being greatly distressed for water, addressed their chief in these
words: "What resource have we, except in that hollow sinking ground
inhabited by those little animals! but deprived of that too, whither,
sir, shall we go?  What shall we do?"

Upon hearing their complaints, their chief, after travelling with them
a great way, discovered a fountain of clear water.  But, as many
Rabbits who happened, to be in their burrows were crushed to death
under the feet of so many Elephants trampling over their warren, at
length, one of them, reflected in this manner: "This troop of
Elephants, oppressed with thirst, will be coming here every day to
drink, and, at length, our whole race will be destroyed!"  But an old
buck said to him, "Brother, don't be uneasy; for I am going to prevent
what thou dreadest."  Saying which, he set off to try how he could
oppose them; but as he went along, he began to consider how he should
approach so formidable a troop; "for," observed he, "they say:

"'An elephant killeth even by touching, a serpent even by smelling, a
king even by ruling, and a wicked man by laughing at one.'

"Wherefore, I will mount the summit of a rock to address the head of
the troop."

This being put in execution accordingly, the chief Elephant asked him
who he was, and whence he came.  "I am," he replied, "an ambassador
sent here by the god Chandra."  "Declare the purport of thy
commission," said the Elephant.  "Sir," replied the Rabbit, "as
ambassadors, even when the weapons of war are lifted up, speak not
otherwise than for the benefit of their State; and although they speak
boldly according as it is their advantage, they are not to be put to
death; then I will declare what are the commands of the god Chandra.
He bade me say, that in driving away and destroying the Rabbits who are
appointed to guard the fountain which is consecrated to that duty, you
have done ill; 'for,' said he, 'they are my guards and it is notorious
that the figure of a Rabbit is my emblem.'"

The head Elephant, upon hearing this became greatly alarmed, declared
that they had offended through ignorance, and would never go to the
fountain again.

"If this be your resolution," said the ambassador, "go this once, and
make your submission before the diety himself, whom you will see in the
fountain, quite agitated with anger; and when you have pacified him,
you may depart."

Accordingly, as soon as it was night, the ambassador Vijaya having
conducted the chief of the Elephants to the fountain, there showed him
the image of the moon, trembling, as it were, upon the smooth surface
of the water and when he had made him bow down to it, in token of
submission, he said: "Please your divinity!  What hath been done having
been done through ignorance, I pray thee pardon them!" and upon saying
this, he caused the Elephant to depart.  I repeat, therefore, "Great
things may be effected by wise counsel, when a sovereign enemy may be
too powerful."



The Blue Jackal

The fool who forsaketh his own party, and delighteth to dwell with the
opposite side may be killed by them; as was the case with the Blue
Jackal.

A certain Jackal, as he was roaming about the borders of a town, just
as his inclinations led him, fell into a dyer's vat;[1] but being
unable to get out in the morning he feigned himself dead.  At length,
the master of the vat, which was filled with indigo, came, and seeing a
Jackal lying with his legs uppermost, his eyes closed, and his teeth
bare, concluded that he was dead, and so, taking him out, he carried
him a good way from the town, and there left him.  The sly animal
instantly got up, and ran into the woods; when, observing that his coat
was turned blue, he meditated in this manner: "I am now of the finest
colour! what great exaltation may I not bring about for myself?"
Saying this, he called a number of Jackals together, and addressed them
in the following words: "Know that I have lately been sprinkled king of
the forests, by the hands of the goddess herself who presides over
these woods, with a water drawn from a variety of choice herbs.
Observe my colour, and henceforward let every business be transacted
according to my orders."

The rest of the Jackals, seeing him of such a fine complexion,
prostrated themselves before him, and said: "According as your Highness
commands!"  By this step he made himself honoured by his own relations,
and so gained the supreme power over those of his own species, as well
as all the other inhabitants of the forests.  But after a while,
finding himself surrounded by a levee of the first quality, such as the
tiger and the like, he began to look down upon his relations; and, at
length, he kept them at a distance.  A certain old Jackal perceiving
that his brethren were very much cast down at this behaviour, cried:
"Do not despair!  If it continues thus, this imprudent friend of ours
will force us to be revenged.  Let me alone to contrive his downfall.
The lion, and the rest who pay him court, are taken by his outward
appearance; and they obey him as their king, because they are not aware
that he is nothing but a Jackal: do something then by which he may be
found out.  Let this plan be pursued: Assemble all of you in a body
about the close of the evening, and set up one general howl in his
hearing; and I'll warrant you, the natural disposition of his species
will incline him to join in the cry for:

"'Whatever may be the natural propensity of any one is very hard to be
overcome.  If a dog were made king, would he not gnaw his shoe straps?'

"And thus, the tiger discovering that he is nothing but a Jackal, will
presently put him to death."

In short, the plan was executed, and the event was just as it had been
foretold.  I repeat, therefore: "The fool who forsaketh his own party
and delighteth to dwell with the opposite side, may be killed by them."

[1]A dyer's vat, in Hindostan, is a large pan sunk in the ground, often
in the little court before the dyer's house.



The Mouse Who Became a Tiger

One of low degree, having obtained a worthy station, seeketh to
destroy his master; like the mouse, who having been raised to the state
of a Tiger, went to kill the Hermit.

In a certain forest, there once dwelt a Hermit whose name was
Maha-tapa.  One day seeing a young Mouse fall from the mouth of a crow
near his hermitage, out of compassion be took it up and reared it with
broken particles of rice.  He now observed that the cat was seeking to
destroy it; so, by the sacred powers of a saint, he metamorphosed his
Mouse into a cat; but his cat being afraid of his dog, he changed her
into a dog; and the dog being terrified at the tiger, at length he was
transformed into a Tiger.  The holy man now regarded the Tiger as no
way superior to his Mouse.  But the people who came to visit the
Hermit, used to tell one another that the Tiger which they saw there
had been made so by the power of the saint, from a Mouse; and this
being overheard by the Tiger, he was very uneasy, and said to himself:
"As long as this Hermit is alive, the disgraceful story of my former
state will be brought to my ears"; saying which he went to kill his
protector; but as the holy man penetrated his design with his
supernatural eye, he reduced him to his former state of a Mouse.  I
repeat, therefore: "One of low degree, having obtained a worthy
station, may seek to destroy his master."



The Brahmin and the Goat

He who, judging by what passeth in his own breast, believeth a knave
to be a person of veracity, is deceived; as the Brahmin was concerning
his Goat.

In a certain forest, a Brahmin, having determined to make an offering,
went to a neighbouring village and purchased a Goat, which having
thrown across his shoulder, he turned toward home.  As he was
travelling along, he was perceived by three thieves.  "If," said they,
"we could by some artifice get the Goat from that man, it would be a
great proof of our address."

Saying this, they agreed upon their stratagem, and executed it in this
manner: They stationed themselves before the Brahmin, and sat down
under the trees in the road which led to his habitation, till he should
come up to them.  Soon after, he was accosted by one of them in this
manner: "Is not that a dog?  Brahmin, what is the reason thou carriest
it upon thy shoulder?"  The Brahmin replied: "No, it is not a dog; it
is a Goat, which I have purchased to make an offering of."  About a
mile farther on he met another of them, who repeating the same
question, he took the Goat from his shoulder, and putting it upon the
ground, examined it again and again; and at length, replacing it upon
his shoulder, he went on, quite staggered as it were, for:

The minds even of good men are staggered by the arguments of the
wicked; but those who place confidence in them may suffer by it.

At length the Brahmin, having heard the third thief, like the former
two, insist upon it that he had a dog upon his shoulder, was convinced
that it was indeed a dog; and so, leaving his Goat behind him, which
the thieves presently took away and made a feast of, the good man
washed himself and went home.  Whence, I say, "He who, judging by what
passeth in his own breast, believeth a knave to be a person of
veracity, is deceived."




FABLES FROM INDIA

"These simple children's stories have lived on, and maintained their
place of honour and their undisputed sway in every schoolroom of the
East and every nursery of the West."

F. MAX MULLER


FABLES FROM INDIA

The Lion, the Fox, and the Story-teller

A Lion who was the king of a great forest once said to his subjects: "I
want some one among you to tell me stories one after another without
ceasing.  If you fail to find somebody who can so amuse me, you will
all be put to death."

In the East there is a proverb which says; "The king kills when he
will," so the animals were in great alarm.

The Fox said: "Fear not; I shall save you all.  Tell the king the
Story-teller is ready to come to court when ordered."  So the animals
had orders to send the Story-teller at once to the presence.  The Fox
bowed respectfully, and stood before the king, who said: "So you are to
tell us stories without ceasing?"

"Yes, your Majesty," said the Fox.

"Then begin," said the Lion.

"But before I do so," said the Fox, "I would like to know what your
Majesty means by a story."

"Why," said the Lion, "a narrative containing some interesting event or
fact."

"Just so," said the Fox, and began: "There was once a fisherman who
went to sea with a huge net, and spread it far and wide.  A great many
fish got into it.  Just as the fisherman was about to draw the net the
coils snapped.  A great opening was made.  First one fish escaped."
Then the Fox stopped.

"What then?" said the Lion.

"Then two escaped," said the Fox.

"What then?" asked the impatient Lion.

"Then three escaped," said the Fox.  Thus, as often as the Lion
repeated his query, the Fox increased the number by one, and said as
many escaped.  The Lion was vexed, and said: "Why you are telling me
nothing new!"

"I wish that your majesty may not forget your royal word," said the
Fox.  "Each event occurred by itself, and each lot that escaped was
different from the rest."

"But wherein is the wonder?" said the Lion.

"Why, your majesty, what can be more wonderful than for Fish to escape
in lots, each exceeding the other by one?"

"I am bound by my word," said the Lion, "else I would see your carcass
stretched on the ground."

The Fox replied in a whisper: "_If tyrants that desire things
impossible are not at least bound by their own word, their subjects can
find nothing to bind them_."



The Fox in the Well

A Fox fell into a well, and was holding hard to some roots at the side
of it, just above the water.  A Wolf who was passing by saw him, and
said, "Hollo, Reynard; after all you have fallen into a well!"

"But not without a purpose, and not without the means of getting out of
it," said the Fox.

"What do you mean?" said the Wolf.

"Why," said the Fox, "there is a drought all over the country now, and
