Map Reading

Before starting on a hike, study carefully the road maps. The best maps
are those of the United States Geological Survey, made on a scale of two
inches to the mile, and costing five cents each. The map is published in
atlas sheets, each sheet representing a small quadrangular district. Send
to the Superintendent of Documents, at Washington, D. C., for a list.

[Illustration: Universal Map Measure]

A mountaineer in Tennessee said: "We measure miles with a coonskin, and
throw in the tail for good measure." A better way is to purchase the
Universal Map Measure, costing $1.50 (imported  and sold by Dame, Stoddard
Co., 374 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.), which accurately measures the
distance upon the Government Survey Maps.

Shoe Wisdom

For tramping the boy needs the right kind of a shoe, or the trip will be a
miserable failure. A light-soled or light-built shoe is not suited for
mountain work, or even for an ordinary hike. The feet will blister and
become "road-weary." They must be neither too big nor too small nor too
heavy, and be amply broad to give the toes plenty of room. The shoe should
be water-tight. A medium weight, high-topped lace shoe is about right.
Bathing the feet at the springs and streams along the road will be
refreshing, if not indulged in too frequently. (See chapter on "Health and
Hygiene" for care of the feet and proper way of walking.)

It is well to carry a spare shirt hanging down the back with the sleeves
tied round the neck. Change when the shirt you are wearing becomes too wet
with perspiration.

The Pack

The most practical and inexpensive pack is the one manufactured for the
Boy Scouts of America. Price, sixty cents. It is about 14 by 20 inches
square, and 6 inches thick, made of water-proof canvas, with shoulder
straps, and will easily hold everything needed for a tramping trip.

A few simple remedies for bruises, cuts, etc., should be taken along by
the leader (see chapter on "Simple Remedies"). You may not need them, and
some may poke fun at them, but as the old lady said: "You can't always
sometimes tell." Amount and kind of provisions must be determined by the
locality and habitation.

[Illustration: Hiking Pack]

The "Lean-to"

Reach the place where you are going to spend the night in plenty of time
to build your "lean-to," and make your bed for the night. Select your
camping spot, with reference to water, wood, drainage, and material for
your "lean-to." Choose a dry, level place, the ground just sloping enough
to insure the water running away from your "lean-to" in case of rain. In
building your "lean-to," look for a couple of good trees standing from
eight to ten feet apart with branches from six to eight feet above the
ground. By studying the illustration below, you will be able to build a
very serviceable shack, affording protection from the dews and rain. While
two or more boys are building the shack, another should be gathering
firewood, and preparing the meal, while another should be cutting and
bringing in as many soft, thick tips of hemlock or balsam boughs as
possible, for the roof of the shack and the beds. How to thatch the
"lean-to" is shown in this illustration.

If the camp site is to be used for several days, two "lean-tos" may be
built facing each other, about six feet apart. This will make a very
comfortable camp, as a small fire can be built between the two, thus
giving warmth and light.

[Illustration: Frame of Lean To]

[Illustration: Method of Thatching.]

The Bed

On the floor of your "lean-to" lay a thick layer of the "fans" or branches
of balsam fir or hemlock, with the convex side up, and the butts of the
stems toward the foot of the bed. Now thatch this over with more "fans" by
thrusting the butt ends through the first layer at a slight angle toward
the head of the bed, so that the soft tips will curve toward the foot of
the bed, and be sure to make the head of your bed away from the opening of
the "lean-to" and the foot toward the opening. Over this bed spread your
rubber blanket with rubber side down, your sleeping blanket on top, and
you will be surprised how soft, springy, and fragrant a bed you have, upon
which to rest your "weary frame," and sing with the poet:

Then the pine boughs croon me a lullaby,
  And trickle the white moonbeams
To my face on the balsam where I lie
  While the owl hoots at my dreams.
-J. George Frederick.

What God puts in the blood is eliminated slowly and we are all impregnated
with a love for the natural life which is irresistible. That was a great
saying of the boy who was taken from the city for the first time on an
all-night outing. Snugly tucked up in his blankets he heard the wind
singing in the pines overhead. As the boy looked up, he asked, "Wasn't God
blowing His breath down at us?"--Dr. Lilburn.

Hot Stones

If the night bids fair to be cold, place a number of stones about six or
eight inches in diameter next the fire, so they will get hot. These can
then be placed at the feet, back, etc., as needed, and will be found good
"bed warmers." When a stone loses its heat it is replaced near the fire
and a hot one is taken. If too hot, wrap the stone in a shirt or sweater
or wait for it to cool off.

Night Watchers

Boys desire adventure. This desire may be gratified by the establishment
of night watchers, in relays of two boys every two hours. Their
imaginations will be stirred by the resistless attraction of the camp-fire
and the sound of the creatures that creep at night.

Observation

Many boys have excellent eyes but see not, and good ears but hear not, all
because they have not been trained to observe or to be quick to hear. A
good method of teaching observation while on a hike or tramp is to have
each boy jot down in a small notebook or diary of the trip the different
kinds of trees, birds, animals, tracks; nature of roads, fences; peculiar
rock formation, smells of plants, etc., and thus be able to tell what he
saw or heard to the boys upon his return to the permanent camp or to his
home.

Cameras

One of the party should take a Brownie No. 2 or small folding kodak.
Photos of the trip are always a great pleasure and a memory reviver. A
practical and convenient method of carrying small folding cameras is
described in "Forest and Stream."  A strap with a buckle having been
attached to an ordinary leather belt is run through the loops at the back
of the camera-case. The camera may be pushed around the belt to the point
where it will be least in the way.

Lamps

A very convenient lamp to use on a hike is the Baldwin Camp Lamp, made by
John Simmons Co., 13 Franklin Street, New York City. (Price, $1.00.) It
weighs only five ounces when fully charged with carbide, and is but 4-3/4
inches high. It projects a strong light 150 feet through the woods. A
stiff wind will not blow it out. It can be worn comfortably in your hat or
belt.

The "Rocky Mountain Searchlight," made of a discarded tomato can, a
candle, and a bit of wire for a handle, is a camp product that will be
found to be very useful in an emergency.

[Illustration: Rocky Mountain Lantern]

The can is carried lengthwise, with the wire handle run through a hole in
the closed end on through the entire length of the can and out the open
end. Do not wrap the handle wire around the can. It will slip off. Two
cuts, crossing each other, make the candle opening, with the cut edges
bent inward. The candle is pushed upward as it burns down, the flame being
kept in the middle of the can. The cut edges prevent it from falling out
until the last hold is melted away. The "Searchlight" gives good service
when hung in the tent or on a nearby tree, but is especially valuable in
lighting up a rough path on a rainy, windy night.

Camp Hanger

The camp hanger shown in the illustration can be hung from the ridgepole
of the tent, and is particularly useful when from two to four persons
occupy the tent. It can be raised and lowered at will by attaching the
hanger to a pulley arrangement. The hanger may be made of wood in any
length. Ordinary coat hooks are fastened to the side with screws. A common
screw-eye is used for the line at the top. A snap hook attached to the
rope facilitates its removal at will.

A boy of ingenuity can make a number of convenient things. A good drinking
cup may be made from a piece of birch bark cut in parallelogram shape, and
twisted into pyramid form, and fastened with a split stick. (See
illustrations on opposite page.) A flat piece of bark may serve as a
plate. A pot lifter may be made from a green stick about 18 inches long,
allowing a few inches of a stout branch to remain. By reversing the same
kind of stick and driving a small nail near the other end or cutting a
notch, it may be used to suspend kettles over a fire. A novel candlestick
is made by opening the blade of a knife and jabbing it into a tree, and
upon the other upturned blade putting a candle. A green stick having a
split end which will hold a piece of bread or meat makes an excellent
broiler. Don't pierce the bread or meat. Driving a good-sized green stake
into the ground at an angle of 45 degrees and cutting a notch in which may
be suspended a kettle over the fire, will provide a way of boiling water
quickly.

For suggestions in building a camp-fire and cooking on hikes, see chapter
on "Cooking on Hikes." The bibliography for the whole subject of Hikes,
including cooking, is on page 153.

[Illustration: Birch bark cup, Camp fire tongs, Camp Broiler, Bark Plate,
A Novel Candlestick, Pot Lifter, Pot Hook, To Boil Water Quickly.]

[Illustration: Extemporaneous Dining]



CHAPTER XII--COOKING ON HIKES

BUILDING A COOKING FIRE
FIRE BY SUN GLASS
GRIDDLE CAKES
BROILED BACON
CREAMED SALMON
SALMON ON TOAST
BAKED POTATOES
BAKED FISH
FROGS' LEGS
EGGS
COFFEE
COCOA
SAMPLE MENU
RATION LIST
DISH WASHING

The Fireplace

Take two or three stones to build a fireplace; a stick first shaved and
then whittled into shavings; a lighted match, a little blaze, some bark,
dry twigs and a few small sticks added; then with the griddle placed over
the fire, you are ready to cook the most appetizing griddle cakes. After
the cakes are cooked, fry strips of bacon upon the griddle; in the surplus
fat fry slices of bread, then some thinly sliced raw potatoes done to a
delicious brown and you have a breakfast capable of making the mouth of a
camper water.

Another way of building a fire: Place two green logs side by side, closer
together at one end than the other. Build fire between. On the logs over
the fire you can rest frying pan, kettle, etc. To start fire have some
light, dry wood split up fine. When sticks begin to blaze add a few more
of larger size and continue until you have a good fire.

Sun Glass

When the sun shines a fire may be started by means of a small pocket sun
or magnifying glass. Fine scrapings from dry wood or "punk tinder" will
easily ignite by the focusing of the sun dial upon it, and by fanning the
fire and by adding additional fuel, the fire-builder will soon have a
great blaze.

COOKING RECEIPTS

Griddle Cakes

Beat together one egg, tablespoonful of sugar, cup of new milk, or
condensed milk diluted one-half. Mix in enough self-raising flour to make
a thick cream batter. Grease the griddle with rind or slices of bacon for
each batch of cakes.

Broiled Bacon

Slice bacon thin. Remove the rind which makes the slices curl up. Or, gash
the rind with a sharp knife if the boys like "cracklings." Fry on griddle
or put on the sharp end of a stick and hold over the hot coals, or, better
yet, remove the griddle and put a clean flat rock in its place. When the
rock is hot lay the slices of bacon on it and broil. Keep turning the
bacon so as to brown it on both sides. Cut into dice.

Creamed Salmon

Heat about a pint of salmon in one-half pint milk, season with salt and
pepper and a half teaspoonful of butter.

Salmon on Toast

Drop slices of stale bread into smoking-hot lard. They will brown at once.
Drain them. Heat a pint of salmon, picked into flakes, season with salt
and pepper and put into it a tablespoonful of butter. Stir in one egg,
beaten light, with three tablespoonfuls evaporated milk not thinned. Pour
mixture on the fried bread.

Potatoes

Wash potatoes and dry well; bury them deep in a good bed of live coals,
cover them with hot coals until well done. They will take about forty
minutes to bake. When you can pass a sharpened hardwood sliver through
them, they are done, and should be raked out at once. Run the sliver
through them from end to end, and let the steam escape and use
immediately, as a roast potato quickly becomes soggy and bitter.

Baked Fish

Dig a hole one foot and a half deep. Build a fire in it, heaping up dry
sticks until there is an abundance of fuel. After an hour, take out the
coals, clear the hole of ashes, lay green corn husks on the hot bottom of
the hole. Soak brown paper in water and wrap around the fish. Lay it in
the hole, cover with green corn husks, covered in turn with half an inch
of earth. Build a fire over it and keep burning for an hour. Then remove
and you have something delicious and worth the time taken to prepare.

Fried Fish

Clean fish well. Small fish should be fried whole, with the backbone
severed to prevent curling up; large fish should be cut into pieces, and
ribs cut loose from backbone so as to lie flat in pan. Rub the pieces in
corn meal or powdered bread crumbs, thinly and evenly (that browns them).
Fry in plenty of very hot fat to a golden brown, sprinkling lightly with
pepper and salt just as the color turns. If fish has not been wiped dry,
it will absorb too much grease. If the frying fat is not very hot when
fish are put in they will be soggy with it.

Frogs' Legs

After skinning frogs, soak them an hour in cold water, to which vinegar
has been added, or put them for two minutes into scalding water that has
vinegar in it. Drain, wipe dry, and cook. To fry: Roll in flour seasoned
with salt and pepper, and fry, not too rapidly, preferably in butter or
oil. Water cress is a good relish with them. To grill: Prepare three
tablespoonfuls melted butter, one-half teaspoonful salt, and a pinch or
two of pepper, into which dip the frog legs, then roll in fresh bread
crumbs and broil for three minutes on each side.

EGGS

Boiled

Raise water to boiling point. Place eggs in carefully. Boil steadily for
three minutes if you prefer them soft. If you want them hard-boiled, put
them in cold water, bring to a boil, and keep it up for twenty minutes.
The yolk will then be mealy and wholesome.

Fried

Melt some butter or fat in frying pan, when it hisses drop in eggs
carefully. Fry them three minutes.

Scrambled

First stir the eggs up with a little condensed cream and a pinch of salt
and after putting some butter in the frying pan, stir the eggs in it,
being careful not to cook them too long.

Poached

First put in the frying pan sufficient diluted condensed milk which has
been thinned with enough water to float the eggs when the milk is hot;
drop in the carefully opened eggs and let them simmer three or four
minutes. Serve the eggs on slices of buttered toast, pouring on enough of
the milk to moisten the toast.

Coffee

For every cup of water allow a tablespoonful of ground coffee, and one
extra for the pot. Heat water to boiling point first, add coffee, boil
five minutes, settle with one-fourth cup cold water and serve. Some prefer
to put the coffee in a small muslin bag, tied loose, and boil for five
minutes longer.

Cocoa

Allow a teaspoonful of cocoa for every cup of boiling water. Mix the
powdered cocoa with hot water or hot milk to a creamy paste. Add equal
parts of boiling water and boiled milk, and sugar to taste. Boil two or
three minutes.

SAMPLE MENU FOR AN OVER-NIGHT AND A DAY HIKE OR TRAMP

Breakfast

Griddle cakes with Karo Syrup or brown sugar and butter;
Fried bacon and potatoes;
Bread, coffee, preserves.

Dinner

Creamed salmon on toast; Baked potatoes; Bread; Pickles; Fruit.

Supper

Fried eggs; Creamed or chipped beef; Cheese; Bread; Cocoa

These recipes have been tried out. Biscuit and bread-making have been
purposely omitted. Take bread and crackers with you from the camp.
"Amateur" biscuits are not conducive to good digestion or happiness. Pack
butter in small jar. Cocoa, sugar and coffee in small cans or heavy paper,
also salt and pepper. Wrap bread in a moist cloth to prevent drying up.
Bacon and dried or chipped beef in wax paper. Pickles can be purchased put
up in small bottles. Use the empty bottle as a candlestick.

Ration List for six boys, three meals

2 lbs. bacon (sliced thin),
1 lb. butter,
1 doz. eggs,
1/2 lb. cocoa,
1/2 lb. coffee,
1 lb. sugar,
3 cans salmon,
24 potatoes,
2 cans condensed milk,
1 small package self-raising flour,
Salt and pepper.

Utensils

Small griddle or tin "pie plate" (5 cents each),
Small stew pan,
Small coffee pot,
Small cake turner,
Large spoon,
Teaspoons,
Knives and forks,
Plates and cups,
Matches and candles.

Dish Washing

First fill the frying pan with water, place over fire and let it boil.
Pour out water and you will find that it has practically cleaned itself.
Clean the griddle with sand and water. Greasy knives and forks may be
cleaned by jabbing a couple of times into the ground. After all grease is
gotten rid of, wash in hot water and dry with cloth. Don't use the cloth
first and get it greasy.

Be sure to purchase Horace Kephart's excellent book on "Camp Cookery,"
$1.00, Outing Publishing Co., or Association Press. It is filled with
practical suggestions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Camp and Trail"--Stewart Edward White. Doubleday, Page & Company, $1.25
net. Full of common sense and of special value to those contemplating long
tramps and wilderness travel. Several chapters on "Horseback Travel"

"Out-of-Doors"--M. Ellsworth Olsen, Ph.D. Pacific Press Publishing Co., 60
cents. A book permeated with a wholesome outdoor spirit.

The Field and Forest Book--Dan Beard. Charles Scribner's Sons, $2.00.
Written in "Beardesque" style, filled with his inimitable illustrations
and crammed with ideas.

The Way of the Woods-Edward Breck. G. P. Putnam's Sons, $1.75 net. Simple,
terse, free from technical terms, and calculated to give the novice a mass
of information. Written for Northeastern United States and Canada, but of
interest for every camper.

[Illustration: The Morning Dip]


