coffee at Hooper's, and not many fellows would regard long letters to and
from home as being the _summum bonum_ of the week. Yet Todd had come
to regard his mamma's letters--four-paged gossip about his sisters, his
brothers, the horses, and the dogs--in the light of luxuries.

Consequently, with nothing to distract him, Gus really did work. His
standing in the Fifth sensibly increased. Merishall did not make
elaborate jokes on his Latin, and Corker not once let fall the warning
eye-glass preparatory to savaging him for his Greek, formerly called so
by a courtesy title. There was a world of difference between his old
haphazard slip-slop and his present honest attempts in the ways of
scholarship.

The half-holidays, though, dragged dreadfully, for Gus was one of those
fellows who have no natural aptitude for games, and he had a theory that
he did not care a straw about them either. Being in the Fifth he could,
of course, suit himself what he did with his halfers. Sometimes, in very
desperation, he would lounge down to the Acres, and wander forlornly from
goal post to goal post, and sometimes he spent the afternoon amusing
himself--with Lancaster's express approval--in the laboratory, and so
effaced previous bad impressions from the science master's mind. Gus,
however, was honest enough with himself to own that he would rather have
had an aimless stroll with Cotton than any amount of footer-gazing or
"bottle-washing." But Cotton had definitely thrown him over; they did not
nod when they met, and Jim was very careful not to see Gus walking in
solitary state in the roadway.

Todd was moodily looking out of his window one halfer, and discontentedly
wondering how he could exist till he should switch on the electric for
the evening grind, when a not unfamiliar knock sounded on the door. Gus
faced round wonderingly, and opened the door. The house-master dropped
into the chair which Todd hastily drew out for him.

"I thought I should catch you in, Todd. Nothing on, have you?"

"No, sir," said Todd.

"No particular engagement for this afternoon."

"No, sir," said Gus, with a half sigh merging into a half smile, "though
I did think of going down to the Acres, and looking at the footer."

"I'm glad of that," said Taylor, as though he really were. "I promised to
referee this afternoon--Hargon's _v_. Sharpe's--but I want to cry
off now. Neuralgia, Todd, is simply torturing me this moment, and
refereeing wouldn't improve it. Do you mind taking my place? Do please
say 'No' if you'd rather not."

"Very sorry, sir," said Gus, referring to the neuralgia. "Referee!"

"Yes," said Taylor, with a ghost of a smile at Todd's astonishment.

"Certainly, I will, sir--I mean I'll take your place. But the fellows
will gasp when I step into the arena."

"Thank you, Todd. Why will they gasp?"

"Footer isn't my line, sir."

"Hasn't been, Todd. Anyhow, they'll be delighted when you whistle them
up."

"I hope they'll be delighted when I've finished, sir," said Gus,
doubtfully.

"One side won't, of course," said Taylor, cheerfully. "That is natural,
and the usual thing. Do you know, I never played football, but I like
refereeing immensely. Positive it's the best thing after playing, and I
know that a really first-class referee is a very rare fowl. Of course
it's the off-side rule and, etc."

Taylor delivered himself of a little homily on the subject of refereeing.
He was enthusiastic almost to the point of forgetting his neuralgia, and
Todd got quite interested in the theme so earnestly handled. He had not
thought there was much fun in it until the house-master unfolded its
possibilities, but he took over the whistle fairly sanguine.

"I'll do my best, sir," said Gus, in conclusion; "and if they stone me
off the Acres----"

"I'll bury my reputation as a prophet under the missiles."

In one thing Todd was certainly right. When he found Hargon's _v_.
Sharpe's pitch and told the assembled twenty-two--rather diffidently, I
must own--that he was the deputy referee, they did gasp.

"Show us your whistle, Gus," said Higgins, Hargon's captain, doubtfully.

Gus held it up, with a genial and childlike smile.

"Got the rules in your pocket, too, I suppose."

"I have," said Todd--"for reference. But I know _now_, Higgins, that
goal-keepers cannot take more than two steps with the ball, and----"

Sharpe's lot guffawed at Todd's neat little thrust at Higgins's little
failing as a goal-keeper.

"But don't you worry, Hig; I'll see you through all right. Three-quarter
each way, I suppose?"

Todd gave his whole mind to the refereeing, and soon warmed to business.
He found that there was heaps more fun in it than he had bargained for,
and as he was a sharp, quick, and clever youth he came out of the ordeal
with flying colours. He made mistakes, naturally, but momentous issues
depended on none of them, and he felt he had not done so badly when
Higgins, at half-time, spoke to him as one in authority to another. But
Palmer, the captain of Sharpe's lot--the beaten side--put the coping
stone to a pleasant afternoon by asking Gus to referee for them against
Merishall's. Gus walked off the field a happy man.

From that afternoon Todd had no excuse for loafing away any halfer. His
services as referee were in demand, not merely as a matter of utility,
but of preference. Taylor, who had watched rather anxiously Todd's
progress, smiled easily at the success of his understudy.

"I say," said Bourne to me, "what's come over Todd? Blessed if that usual
ass didn't handle the Fifth _v_. Sixth to-day simply beautifully.
When you're lynched, Gus will fill your shoes completely. Talks so-so,
too. Who's improving him?"

I acted on Phil's advice, and Todd and I parcelled out the outstanding
fixtures between us. Then Todd became one of the best-known fellows in
the school, and strolled up the hill with Worcester, Acton, Vercoe, and
other heroes as to the manner born. The old, lazy, shallow, shifty,
shiftless Gus was drifting into the background every day.

Then Todd gave us a final shock. I was hurrying down the High when a
constable asked me if I could tell him "where a young gentleman named
Todd lived."

"I'm passing by his house," said I, more than a trifle puzzled as to what
the police might want with Gus. "Hope it isn't house-breaking,
constable?"

"No, sir," said he, laughing. "It is a matter of ice-breakin'."

I expect I looked mystified.

"Mr. Todd, sir, fished out of the water just below the Low Locks a common
ordinary drunk, Robins--a bargee. That was yesterday afternoon, and this
morning the superintendent sends me to see how he is."

I looked more blankly ignorant than before.

"He's kept it dark, I see, sir. There isn't a bigger fool alive than
Robins when he's drunk--which he mostly--what is--and he acted yesterday
up to the usual form of drunks. He _would_ go on the ice just below
the locks, when it would hardly bear a sparrer, let alone a drunk Robin,
and he naturally goes under before he'd gone a dozen yards. Mr. Todd went
for him without, I fancy, considering the risks. He broke the ice up to
that forsaken Robins, and waded in after him. When _we_ got there he
was up to his neck in water, and he'd got the fool by the collar; then we
pulled 'em both out. Mind, up to his chin in that frozen water! We
thought Robins was a goner from cold when we landed 'im, and asked Mr.
Todd's name as bein' likely to be required at the inquest. But, bless
you, sir, Robins pulled through all right; that sort generally does."

"Was there any one to help Todd, when he went for the fellow?"

"No, sir; he just waded in and took his chance. I wouldn't--at least not
for an ord'nary drunk. Mr. Todd just ran home as he was: said the sprint
would warm him to rights. How is he?"

"Got a vile cold; he was barking pretty well all chapel."

"And Robins," said the policeman, in disgust, "doesn't own up to a
snuffle. This Mr. Todd's house, sir?"

"Yes. I'd just ask to see Mr. Taylor, the house-master, first. I fancy
he'll be pleased to see you."

The constable's plain, unvarnished tale gave the Rev. E. Taylor as
pleasant a ten minutes as he had enjoyed for some time, and he passed on
the worthy man to the butler with instructions as to "something hot."
Then he rapped on Todd's door.

Decidedly the ship _Agustus Vernon Robert Todd_ "had found herself."




CHAPTER XVII

RAFFLES' BILL


It was with hearty thankfulness at the idea of being finally rid of
Raffles that Jack walked over to the "Lodestone" by himself on the
Thursday, jingling his last few shillings in his pockets. Raffles was
waiting for him in the stables, and he was very friendly and familiar,
which always annoyed Jack immensely.

"Glad you're in time, sir, and to 'ear the dibs a-rattlin' in your
pockets."

"Because they'll rattle in yours, soon, I suppose. I make out I owe you
about ten shillings, Raffles."

"'Ow do you make that out, Mr. Bourne?"

"Rabbits, cartridges, and dummy pigeons. I'm about right, I fancy?"

"Right as far as they go."

"As far as they go, of course--not farther. Then here you are."

"And the gun," said Raffles, calmly, looking into vacancy, and not
seeing Jack's coins--"leastwise, wot was a gun."

"Am I to pay for that filthy article?" said Jack, angrily. "Why, it
nearly blew my brains out!"

"'As'e to pay for that breech-loader gun?" said Raffles, laughing
softly as at some good joke. "Why, of course you have."

"My opinion is, Raffles, that that gun was rotten. It wasn't worth a
sovereign. I don't believe it was ever fit to shoot with, now."

"Of course, _now_," said Raffles, with a sneer. "_Now_, when you've got
to pay for it."

"I don't know so much about 'have got to pay for it' at all. That grin
of yours doesn't improve your looks, Raffles," said Jack, who was rather
nettled by Raffles' sneer.

"Well, my bantam cock," said Raffles, savagely, "I only 'opes as this
'ere bill won't spoil yours. And let me tell you, young shaver, I want
the money."

Jack calmly took the piece of note-paper which Raffles hurriedly fished
out of his pocket, and flourished dramatically before Bourne. There was
a touching simplicity about Raffles' bill-making that would in ordinary
times have made Jack split with laughter, but, naturally, at the present
time he did not feel in a very jovial frame of mind. Hence he read
through the farrago with only one very strong desire--to kick Raffles
neck and crop out of the stable. This was the bill:--

  Mr. burn owes me daniel raffles this money.

  To bunneys at sixpence each... 2 0
  To 50 cartrigges......         6 6
  To pidgins.........            1 6
  1 gunn breech loder......  L7  0 0
                             _______
  totel                      L7 10 0

"Now, Raffles," said Jack, in a white heat, "what do you mean by this
rotten foolery?"

"There's no foolery about it," said Raffles, sulkily. "That's my bill."

"Why, you unspeakable rascal, did you fancy I'd pay it?"

"I did, and I do."

Something in the fellow's tone made Jack a trifle uneasy, and he
considered within himself for a moment what he had better do. That the
rascal had made up his mind to be nasty was evident, and when Jack
thought that the gun, poor as it was, was destroyed, though through no
fault of his own, he thought perhaps he might give his old jackal
something as a solatium.

"All right, Raffles! I'll pay you for what I owe you now, and I'll give
you a sovereign for the gun. I'll send you that in a day or two. I've no
more money with me now."

"That ain't the bill. I want this 'ere bill paid."

"'This 'ere bill' is sheer rot!" retorted Jack.

"Rot or not, it's what I want from you. You pay up that seven odd, or it
will be the worse for you. What is seven odd to a young gent like you?
Aren't you all millionaires at St. Amory's?"

"Not by a long chalk."

"Well, I don't want to be unpleasant, my buck, but if you won't pay over
I'll show you up."

"Show me up, you beast--what do you mean?"

"I'll write to Corker and blow the gaff."

"If you did that," said Bourne, grimly, "I'd kill you first day I could
do it."

[Illustration: "I'M GOING TO HAVE THE SEVEN TEN, OR SHOW YOU UP."]

"Or I'd write to your brother."

"And he'd do it now, you skunk!"

"No names, young gent. That won't pay my bill. You don't seem to imagine
I mean what I say."

"No, I don't, for you wouldn't be any _nearer_ getting the money."

"But then you say you aren't going to pay anyhow, so I may as well touch
you up a bit. You've most every time told me not to be so beastly
friendly, and I ain't going to be. I'm going to have the seven ten or
show you up. That's straight."

"Show me up," repeated Jack, blankly. "You miserable blackmailer!"
Bourne felt then the beautiful feelings of being in the grasp of a
low-bred cad who could play with him as a cat with a mouse. He sat
staring in front of him livid with rage, and Raffles, who was watching
him covertly, and with no small anxiety, could see he was digesting the
whole situation. Jack would indeed then and there have let Raffles do
his worst, and would have stood the racket from Corker--and his
brother--rather than be blackmailed by the villain by his side, but he
said hopelessly to himself, "How can I do it without bringing Acton into
it? When this comes out all his training with the Coon must come out
too; perhaps he'll lose his monitorship for not keeping his hand on me,
and Phil's done him a bad enough turn already. I can't round on him.
Heavens! I can't do that."

This reads rather pitiful, doesn't it, under the circumstances?

Jack at the end of his resources tried a desperate bluff.

"I'll put Acton on your track, my beauty, and perhaps he'll make you
see--or feel--reason."

"That game's no good, young shaver. I don't want to see Mr. Acting no
more than you want to tell him of your little blow-outs. Look here, are
you going to pay? Yes or no?"

"I haven't got the money," said Jack, at his wits' end.

"Ho! that's very likely," said Raffles, with a sneer; "anyhow, you could
mighty soon get it if you wanted to."

"How?"

"Why, borrow it, of course. Ask your chum, Mr. Acting. _He_ 'as money.
No end of brass, the Coon says."

"I can't do that," said Jack, in utter despair.

"Orl right," said Raffles, seeing his shot had told. "I see you ain't
got the money on you now, and I don't want to be too 'ard on you. I'll
give you a chance. I'll give you till Saturday to turn it over. My
advice is to borrow from Mr. Acting. He'll lend it you, I should think;
anyhow, I can't stand shilly-shallying here all night, no more than I
can stand the loss of that grand gun, so I'm off. Have the money by
Saturday at three, or I blow the gaff and you can be hung up or cut up
for all I care. I'm not going to be more beastly friendly nor more
chummy than that."

Raffles lurched off with a savage leer, and Jack staggered back to St.
Amory's.

Jack's life was a burden to him for the next few hours, his head nearly
split with the hatching of impossible plans with loopholes to escape the
weasel on his track, but the end was as Acton had foreseen. Acton got a
note through Grim.

"DEAR ACTON,
  "Could you give me ten minutes in your study to-night?--Yours,
"J. BOURNE."

"DEAR BOURNE,
  "Twenty, if you like.--Yours,
"J. ACTON."

Jack went, and when Acton put him into the easy-chair and noticed his
white, fagged face, he felt genuinely sorry for him.

"You look seedy, young 'un."

"I hope I don't look as seedy as I feel, that's all."

"What's the matter?"

Jack boggled over what he'd come to say, but finally blurted out:
"Acton, would you lend me seven pounds? I'm in a hole, the deuce of a
hole; in fact, I'm pretty well hopelessly stumped. I'll tell you why if
you ask me, but I hope you won't. I've been an ass, but I've collared
some awful luck, and I'm not quite the black sheep I seem. I don't want
to ask Phil--in fact, I couldn't, simply couldn't ask him for this. I'll
pay you back beginning of next term if I can raise as much, and if not,
as much as I can then, and the rest later."

"Oh, you're straight enough, young 'un, and I'll lend you the money,"
said Acton.

Jack blubbed in his thanks, for he was really run down.

"Keep up your pecker, Bourne. Borrowing isn't a crime, quite. When do
you want the cash?"

"By to-morrow, please," said Jack.

"Call in for it, then, before afternoon school, and you can pay me back
as you say. I suppose the sharks have got hold of you."

"Yes," said Jack, with perfect truth, though he only knew of one, and he
went to bed that night blessing Acton. His gorge rose when he thought of
his fleecing, and at this he almost blubbed with rage as he blubbed with
gratitude to Acton.

