in the school, as we have. I wouldn't change Warner, and Hedge, and
Crab, and the young un, for any six on their side." (Violent cheers.)
"But half a dozen fellows can't keep it up for two hours against two
hundred. Why is it, then? I'll tell you what I think. It's because we've
more reliance on one another, more of a house feeling, more fellowship
than the School can have. Each of us knows and can depend on his
next-hand man better. That's why we beat 'em to-day. We've union,
they've division--there's the secret." (Cheers.) "But how's this to be
kept up? How's it to be improved? That's the question. For I take it
we're all in earnest about beating the School, whatever else we care
about. I know I'd sooner win two School-house matches running than get
the Balliol scholarship any day." (Frantic cheers.)

"Now, I'm as proud of the house as any one. I believe it's the best
house in the school, out and out." (Cheers.) "But it's a long way from
what I want to see it. First, there's a deal of bullying going on. I
know it well. I don't pry about and interfere; that only makes it
more underhand, and encourages the small boys to come to us with their
fingers in their eyes telling tales, and so we should be worse off than
ever. It's very little kindness for the sixth to meddle generally--you
youngsters mind that. You'll be all the better football players for
learning to stand it, and to take your own parts, and fight it through.
But depend on it, there's nothing breaks up a house like bullying.
Bullies are cowards, and one coward makes many; so good-bye to the
School-house match if bullying gets ahead here." (Loud applause from
the small boys, who look meaningly at Flashman and other boys at the
tables.) "Then there's fuddling about in the public-house, and drinking
bad spirits, and punch, and such rot-gut stuff. That won't make good
drop-kicks or chargers of you, take my word for it. You get plenty of
good beer here, and that's enough for you; and drinking isn't fine or
manly, whatever some of you may think of it.

"One other thing I must have a word about. A lot of you think and say,
for I've heard you, 'There's this new Doctor hasn't been here so long
as some of us, and he's changing all the old customs. Rugby, and the
Schoolhouse especially, are going to the dogs. Stand up for the good old
ways, and down with the Doctor!' Now I'm as fond of old Rugby customs
and ways as any of you, and I've been here longer than any of you, and
I'll give you a word of advice in time, for I shouldn't like to see any
of you getting sacked. 'Down with the Doctor's' easier said than done.
You'll find him pretty tight on his perch, I take it, and an awkwardish
customer to handle in that line. Besides now, what customs has he put
down? There was the good old custom of taking the linchpins out of the
farmers' and bagmen's gigs at the fairs, and a cowardly, blackguard
custom it was. We all know what came of it, and no wonder the Doctor
objected to it. But come now, any of you, name a custom that he has put
down."

"The hounds," calls out a fifth-form boy, clad in a green cutaway with
brass buttons and cord trousers, the leader of the sporting interest,
and reputed a great rider and keen hand generally.

"Well, we had six or seven mangy harriers and beagles belonging to the
house, I'll allow, and had had them for years, and that the Doctor
put them down. But what good ever came of them? Only rows with all the
keepers for ten miles round; and big-side hare-and-hounds is better fun
ten times over. What else?"

No answer.

"Well, I won't go on. Think it over for yourselves. You'll find, I
believe, that he don't meddle with any one that's worth keeping. And
mind now, I say again, look out for squalls if you will go your own way,
and that way ain't the Doctor's, for it'll lead to grief. You all know
that I'm not the fellow to back a master through thick and thin. If I
saw him stopping football, or cricket, or bathing, or sparring, I'd be
as ready as any fellow to stand up about it. But he don't; he encourages
them. Didn't you see him out to-day for half an hour watching us?" (loud
cheers for the Doctor); "and he's a strong, true man, and a wise one
too, and a public-school man too" (cheers), "and so let's stick to him,
and talk no more rot, and drink his health as the head of the house."
(Loud cheers.) "And now I've done blowing up, and very glad I am to have
done. But it's a solemn thing to be thinking of leaving a place which
one has lived in and loved for eight years; and if one can say a word
for the good of the old house at such a time, why, it should be said,
whether bitter or sweet. If I hadn't been proud of the house and
you--ay, no one knows how proud--I shouldn't be blowing you up. And now
let's get to singing. But before I sit down I must give you a toast to
be drunk with three-times-three and all the honours. It's a toast which
I hope every one of us, wherever he may go hereafter, will never fail
to drink when he thinks of the brave, bright days of his boyhood. It's a
toast which should bind us all together, and to those who've gone before
and who'll come after us here. It is the dear old School-house--the best
house of the best school in England!"

My dear boys, old and young, you who have belonged, or do belong, to
other schools and other houses, don't begin throwing my poor little book
about the room, and abusing me and it, and vowing you'll read no more
when you get to this point. I allow you've provocation for it. But come
now--would you, any of you, give a fig for a fellow who didn't believe
in and stand up for his own house and his own school? You know you
wouldn't. Then don't object to me cracking up the old School house,
Rugby. Haven't I a right to do it, when I'm taking all the trouble
of writing this true history for all of your benefits? If you ain't
satisfied, go and write the history of your own houses in your own
times, and say all you know for your own schools and houses, provided
it's true, and I'll read it without abusing you.

The last few words hit the audience in their weakest place. They had
been not altogether enthusiastic at several parts of old Brooke's
speech; but "the best house of the best school in England" was too much
for them all, and carried even the sporting and drinking interests off
their legs into rapturous applause, and (it is to be hoped) resolutions
to lead a new life and remember old Brooke's words--which, however, they
didn't altogether do, as will appear hereafter.

But it required all old Brooke's popularity to carry down parts of his
speech--especially that relating to the Doctor. For there are no such
bigoted holders by established forms and customs, be they never so
foolish or meaningless, as English school-boys--at least, as the
school-boys of our generation. We magnified into heroes every boy who
had left, and looked upon him with awe and reverence when he revisited
the place a year or so afterwards, on his way to or from Oxford or
Cambridge; and happy was the boy who remembered him, and sure of an
audience as he expounded what he used to do and say, though it were sad
enough stuff to make angels, not to say head-masters, weep.

We looked upon every trumpery little custom and habit which had obtained
in the School as though it had been a law of the Medes and Persians, and
regarded the infringement or variation of it as a sort of sacrilege. And
the Doctor, than whom no man or boy had a stronger liking for old school
customs which were good and sensible, had, as has already been hinted,
come into most decided collision with several which were neither the one
nor the other. And as old Brooke had said, when he came into collision
with boys or customs, there was nothing for them but to give in or take
themselves off; because what he said had to be done, and no mistake
about it. And this was beginning to be pretty clearly understood. The
boys felt that there was a strong man over them, who would have things
his own way, and hadn't yet learnt that he was a wise and loving man
also. His personal character and influence had not had time to make
itself felt, except by a very few of the bigger boys with whom he came
more directly into contact; and he was looked upon with great fear and
dislike by the great majority even of his own house. For he had found
School and School-house in a state of monstrous license and misrule,
and was still employed in the necessary but unpopular work of setting up
order with a strong hand.

However, as has been said, old Brooke triumphed, and the boys cheered
him and then the Doctor. And then more songs came, and the healths of
the other boys about to leave, who each made a speech, one flowery,
another maudlin, a third prosy, and so on, which are not necessary to be
here recorded.

Half-past nine struck in the middle of the performance of "Auld Lang
Syne," a most obstreperous proceeding, during which there was an immense
amount of standing with one foot on the table, knocking mugs together
and shaking hands, without which accompaniments it seems impossible
for the youths of Britain to take part in that famous old song. The
under-porter of the School-house entered during the performance, bearing
five or six long wooden candlesticks with lighted dips in them, which he
proceeded to stick into their holes in such part of the great tables
as he could get at; and then stood outside the ring till the end of the
song, when he was hailed with shouts.

"Bill you old muff, the half-hour hasn't struck." "Here, Bill, drink
some cocktail." "Sing us a song, old boy." "Don't you wish you may
get the table?" Bill drank the proffered cocktail not unwillingly, and
putting down the empty glass, remonstrated. "Now gentlemen, there's only
ten minutes to prayers, and we must get the hall straight."

Shouts of "No, no!" and a violent effort to strike up "Billy Taylor" for
the third time. Bill looked appealingly to old Brooke, who got up and
stopped the noise. "Now then, lend a hand, you youngsters, and get the
tables back; clear away the jugs and glasses. Bill's right. Open
the windows, Warner." The boy addressed, who sat by the long ropes,
proceeded to pull up the great windows, and let in a clear, fresh rush
of night air, which made the candles flicker and gutter, and the fires
roar. The circle broke up, each collaring his own jug, glass, and
song-book; Bill pounced on the big table, and began to rattle it away to
its place outside the buttery door. The lower-passage boys carried off
their small tables, aided by their friends; while above all, standing
on the great hall-table, a knot of untiring sons of harmony made night
doleful by a prolonged performance of "God Save the King." His Majesty
King William the Fourth then reigned over us, a monarch deservedly
popular amongst the boys addicted to melody, to whom he was chiefly
known from the beginning of that excellent if slightly vulgar song in
which they much delighted,--

     "Come, neighbours all, both great and small,
     Perform your duties here,
     And loudly sing, 'Live Billy, our king,'
     For bating the tax upon veer."

Others of the more learned in songs also celebrated his praises in
a sort of ballad, which I take to have been written by some Irish
loyalist. I have forgotten all but the chorus, which ran,--

     "God save our good King William,
     Be his name for ever blest;
     He's the father of all his people,
     And the guardian of all the rest."

In troth we were loyal subjects in those days, in a rough way. I trust
that our successors make as much of her present Majesty, and, having
regard to the greater refinement of the times, have adopted or written
other songs equally hearty, but more civilized, in her honour.

Then the quarter to ten struck, and the prayer-bell rang. The sixth and
fifth form boys ranged themselves in their school order along the wall,
on either side of the great fires, the middle-fifth and upper-school
boys round the long table in the middle of the hall, and the
lower-school boys round the upper part of the second long table, which
ran down the side of the hall farthest from the fires. Here Tom found
himself at the bottom of all, in a state of mind and body not at all fit
for prayers, as he thought; and so tried hard to make himself serious,
but couldn't, for the life of him, do anything but repeat in his head
the choruses of some of the songs, and stare at all the boys opposite,
wondering at the brilliancy of their waistcoats, and speculating what
sort of fellows they were. The steps of the head-porter are heard on the
stairs, and a light gleams at the door. "Hush!" from the fifth-form boys
who stand there, and then in strides the Doctor, cap on head, book
in one hand, and gathering up his gown in the other. He walks up the
middle, and takes his post by Warner, who begins calling over the names.
The Doctor takes no notice of anything, but quietly turns over his book
and finds the place, and then stands, cap in hand and finger in book,
looking straight before his nose. He knows better than any one when to
look, and when to see nothing. To-night is singing night, and there's
been lots of noise and no harm done--nothing but beer drunk, and nobody
the worse for it, though some of them do look hot and excited. So the
Doctor sees nothing, but fascinates Tom in a horrible manner as he
stands there, and reads out the psalm, in that deep, ringing, searching
voice of his. Prayers are over, and Tom still stares open-mouthed after
the Doctor's retiring figure, when he feels a pull at his sleeve, and
turning round, sees East.

"I say, were you ever tossed in a blanket?"

"No," said Tom; "why?"

"'Cause there'll be tossing to-night, most likely, before the sixth come
up to bed. So if you funk, you just come along and hide, or else they'll
catch you and toss you."

"Were you ever tossed? Does it hurt?" inquired Tom.

"Oh yes, bless you, a dozen times," said East, as he hobbled along by
Tom's side upstairs. "It don't hurt unless you fall on the floor. But
most fellows don't like it."

They stopped at the fireplace in the top passage, where were a crowd of
small boys whispering together, and evidently unwilling to go up
into the bedrooms. In a minute, however, a study door opened, and a
sixth-form boy came out, and off they all scuttled up the stairs, and
then noiselessly dispersed to their different rooms. Tom's heart beat
rather quick as he and East reached their room, but he had made up his
mind. "I shan't hide, East," said he.

"Very well, old fellow," replied East, evidently pleased; "no more shall
I. They'll be here for us directly."

The room was a great big one, with a dozen beds in it, but not a boy
that Tom could see except East and himself. East pulled off his coat and
waistcoat, and then sat on the bottom of his bed whistling and pulling
off his boots. Tom followed his example.

A noise and steps are heard in the passage, the door opens, and in rush
four or five great fifth-form boys, headed by Flashman in his glory.

Tom and East slept in the farther corner of the room, and were not seen
at first.

"Gone to ground, eh?" roared Flashman. "Push 'em out then, boys; look
under the beds." And he pulled up the little white curtain of the one
nearest him. "Who-o-op!" he roared, pulling away at the leg of a small
boy, who held on tight to the leg of the bed, and sang out lustily for
mercy.

"Here, lend a hand, one of you, and help me pull out this young howling
brute.--Hold your tongue, sir, or I'll kill you."

"Oh, please, Flashman, please, Walker, don't toss me! I'll fag for
you--I'll do anything--only don't toss me."

"You be hanged," said Flashman, lugging the wretched boy along; "'twon't
hurt you,--you!--Come along, boys; here he is."

"I say, Flashey," sang out another of the big boys; "drop that; you
heard what old Pater Brooke said to-night. I'll be hanged if we'll toss
any one against their will. No more bullying. Let him go, I say."

Flashman, with an oath and a kick, released his prey, who rushed
headlong under his bed again, for fear they should change their minds,
and crept along underneath the other beds, till he got under that of the
sixth-form boy, which he knew they daren't disturb.

"There's plenty of youngsters don't care about it," said Walker. "Here,
here's Scud East--you'll be tossed, won't you, young un?" Scud was
East's nickname, or Black, as we called it, gained by his fleetness of
foot.

"Yes," said East, "if you like, only mind my foot."

"And here's another who didn't hide.--Hullo! new boy; what's your name,
sir?"

"Brown."

"Well, Whitey Brown, you don't mind being tossed?"

"No," said Tom, setting his teeth.

"Come along then, boys," sang out Walker; and away they all went,
carrying along Tom and East, to the intense relief of four or five other
small boys, who crept out from under the beds and behind them.

"What a trump Scud is!" said one. "They won't come back here now."

"And that new boy, too; he must be a good-plucked one."

"Ah! wait till he has been tossed on to the floor; see how he'll like it
then!"

Meantime the procession went down the passage to Number 7, the largest
room, and the scene of the tossing, in the middle of which was a great
open space. Here they joined other parties of the bigger boys, each
with a captive or two, some willing to be tossed, some sullen, and some
frightened to death. At Walker's suggestion all who were afraid were let
off, in honour of Pater Brooke's speech.

Then a dozen big boys seized hold of a blanket, dragged from one of the
beds. "In with Scud; quick! there's no time to lose." East was chucked
into the blanket. "Once, twice, thrice, and away!" Up he went like a
shuttlecock, but not quite up to the ceiling.

"Now, boys, with a will," cried Walker; "once, twice, thrice, and away!"
This time he went clean up, and kept himself from touching the ceiling
with his hand, and so again a third time, when he was turned out, and
up went another boy. And then came Tom's turn. He lay quite still, by
East's advice, and didn't dislike the "once, twice, thrice;" but the
"away" wasn't so pleasant. They were in good wind now, and sent him
slap up to the ceiling first time, against which his knees came rather
sharply. But the moment's pause before descending was the rub--the
feeling of utter helplessness and of leaving his whole inside behind him
sticking to the ceiling. Tom was very near shouting to be set down when
he found himself back in the blanket, but thought of East, and didn't;
and so took his three tosses without a kick or a cry, and was called a
young trump for his pains.

He and East, having earned it, stood now looking on. No catastrophe
happened, as all the captives were cool hands, and didn't struggle. This
didn't suit Flashman. What your real bully likes in tossing is when the
boys kick and struggle, or hold on to one side of the blanket, and so
get pitched bodily on to the floor; it's no fun to him when no one is
hurt or frightened.

"Let's toss two of them together, Walker," suggested he.

"What a cursed bully you are, Flashey!" rejoined the other. "Up with
another one."

And so now two boys were tossed together, the peculiar hardship of which
is, that it's too much for human nature to lie still then and share
troubles; and so the wretched pair of small boys struggle in the air
which shall fall a-top in the descent, to the no small risk of both
falling out of the blanket, and the huge delight of brutes like
Flashman.

