"It will seem very dull going to work on the farm after my pleasant days
with you."

"You won't need to go to work on the farm, unless you choose to do so."

"But I must earn something; I cannot be idle."

"Oh, I forgot to tell you what arrangements I propose to make for you."

Andy looked up eagerly.




CHAPTER XII.

SOMETHING UNEXPECTED.


"Our separation will only be temporary," continued Mr. Gale, "but I do
not wish to leave you unprovided for during my absence, I shall allow
you five dollars a week while I am away."

Andy brightened up.

"How kind you are, Mr. Gale!" he said. "I don't think you ought to do
this."

Walter Gale smiled.

"I can very well afford it," he said; "so we will regard the matter as
settled."

"How soon must you go?"

"I shall start to-morrow--my preparations will be easily made. How would
you like to go to New York to see me off?"

"I should be delighted," answered Andy. "I have only been to New York
twice in my life."

"Then you will enjoy the day. You can take the afternoon train home."

At the farm, Mr. and Mrs. Grant heard with regret of Mr. Gale's
departure, but they were pleased to hear that Andy would be in receipt
of an income.

"How will you fill up your time, Andy?" asked his father.

"I have my books, and will keep up my Latin and Greek. I will pay you
four dollars a week, and you can hire a boy for that to help you. I
think I can spend my time more profitably in studying."

"Do you think Mr. Gale will return?"

"He has promised to do so. I am to see him off to-morrow."

"Are you going to trust that boy alone in New York?" asked his Aunt
Jane, with asperity.

"Why, what could happen to me?" asked Andy, indignantly.

"You might get run over."

"I am not a little boy, Aunt Jane. I can take care of myself."

"You may meet with an accident for all your smartness."

"I think Andy is old enough to take care of himself," said his father,
mildly.

"Oh, well! have it your own way. You can't say but I've warned you," and
she sniffed severely.

"I wonder what makes Aunt Jane so disagreeable," thought Andy.

"Perhaps you'd like to go and take care of him," suggested Mr. Grant,
with a smile. "You are old enough to take care of yourself."

"You needn't twit me with my age, Sterling," said Jane, with an injured
sniff.

"I don't. Old age is honorable."

This made matters worse.

"You talk as if I was seventy-five. I don't consider myself an old
person."

In spite of the melancholy presentiment of Aunt Jane, Andy set out for
New York with Mr. Gale. An hour and a half brought them to the
metropolis.

"I should like to show you something of the city, Andy," said his
companion, "but I shall have to spend the time in shopping."

"I shall see something of the city if I go about with you."

"That is true."

At one o'clock they went to the Sinclair House, on Broadway, to dine.
They selected a table where there was but one other guest, who seemed
known to Walter Gale.

"Good-morning, Mr. Flint," said the young man.

"Ah, it's you, Walter, is it?" returned the other, a stout man, whose
hair was beginning to grow gray.

"Yes."

"I haven't seen you for a long time. Where have you been?"

"Rusticating in a Connecticut town."

"Is the young man with you a brother? But, no; I remember that you have
no brother."

"He isn't related to me, but I think as much of him as if he were. His
name is Andrew Grant."

"A good name. Is he attending school?"

"He has recently left school."

"If he were seeking a position I could find a place for him."

"In your own employ?"

"Yes. I have a boy, but I don't find him reliable or faithful. He will
leave me on Saturday night."

"Andy," said his friend, "how would you like to enter Mr. Flint's
employ?"

"Very much," answered Andy, eagerly.

At the same time he wondered what was the nature of Mr. Flint's
business.

"Then after dinner we will walk together to Mr. Flint's store in Union
Square."

"There is my card," said Mr. Flint.

Andy received it and read the name:

    F. FLINT,

    UNION SQUARE.

    JEWELRY.

The two men conversed together, and when dinner was over they walked up
Broadway to Fourteenth Street. Turning the left-hand corner, they soon
reached a jewelry store of modest appearance, but evidently containing a
valuable stock.

A youth with light-brown hair, who seemed to have been born tired, was
leaning against the counter. This, doubtless, was the boy who was not
satisfactory.

"John," said Mr. Flint, "have you carried the parcel to Forty-eighth
Street?"

"No, sir," answered the boy.

"Why not?"

"I thought it would do just as well after lunch."

"There you are mistaken. Put on your hat at once and go," said his
employer, sharply.

"You see," went on Mr. Flint, after the boy had started, "the trouble I
have with John. He needs to be looked after continually."

"You won't have that trouble with Andy."

"No, I think not."

Walter Gale accompanied Mr. Flint to the back part of the store, where
they held a conversation in a low tone. Presently Walter Gale came back,
and signified to Andy that they must be going.

"Mr. Flint will expect you to present yourself for duty on Tuesday
morning," he said. "You will reach the store at eight o'clock."

"All right, sir."

On returning to the street, Walter Gale said:

"I propose to take the next train for Philadelphia. You may accompany me
to the Cortlandt Street station. Can you find your way from there to the
Grand Central Depot?"

"Yes, sir."

"You will get there in time to take the afternoon train back to Arden.
You haven't asked me what salary you are to receive."

"I should like to know, sir."

"Five dollars a week, which is better than is generally paid to a new
boy."

"Will it pay my expenses, Mr. Gale?" asked Andy, doubtfully.

"No; but you remember that I promised you five dollars a week. Instead
of paying it to you I will give you a note to Mrs. Norris, who keeps a
comfortable boarding house on Clinton Place. She knows me well, and will
assign you a room, looking to me for payment. That will leave you five
dollars a week for your personal expenses, clothing, etc."

"I shall be rich, Mr. Gale, thanks to your kindness."

"Mind, Andy, I am to have you back whenever I want you. Probably I may
spend some weeks with my uncle, and during this time you may as well
work for Mr. Flint."

"Do you think I shall suit him?" asked Andy, with some anxiety.

"I feel sure of it. You will find him strict in business, but kind and
reasonable. I shall expect to hear from you soon after you enter upon
your duties. I shall find life pretty dull at my uncle's house, and your
letters will bring something of the excitement of the outside world to
me."

"I will write you every week, Mr. Gale."

"If it won't be asking too much of you, I shall be glad to have you do
so."

Andy crossed the ferry with Mr. Gale, and then returning at once, took
the four o'clock train for Arden.

His news created considerable stir at home. All were pleased except Aunt
Jane.

"Brother," she said, "are you going to trust Andy alone in New York?"

"Yes, Jane; he must begin to rely upon himself some time, and he may as
well begin now."

"It's temptin' Providence, in my opinion."

"It might be so with some boys, but I have faith in Andy's prudence and
good sense."

"He ain't any different from other boys, as you will find."

But in spite of these ominous words Andy made arrangements to leave
Arden on Monday morning. He looked forward eagerly to his new life in
New York.




CHAPTER XIII.

ANDY LEAVES HOME.


Conrad was not slow in learning of Mr. Gale's departure from the hotel.
The intelligence pleased him, for, as he supposed, it threw Andy out of
employment. He sought an early opportunity of speaking to him on the
subject.

At five o'clock in the afternoon the mail came in at the post office.
Among those who congregated there at the time were Conrad and Andy.

"So you've lost your place?" began Conrad, abruptly.

"What do you mean?" asked Andy.

"Mr. Gale has left town, hasn't he?"

"Yes."

"Where has he gone?"

"To Pennsylvania, to stay with an uncle who is very sick."

"Do you think he will come back to Arden?"

"I don't know, but I think it is doubtful."

"I suppose, then, you will go back to work on the farm?"

Andy smiled.

"Things might be worse," he said.

"Yes. I think it is the best thing you can do."

"Why do you think so?"

"Oh, well, you are a poor boy, and there is nothing else for you to do."

"Did you ever think of becoming a farmer?"

"I should say not," replied Conrad, haughtily. "I shall probably be a
lawyer or a merchant."

"I might become a merchant myself--some day."

Conrad laughed.

