the floor. As the tall and handsome teacher saw this act, he arose from
his seat, and, without a word, walked toward the lad.

"'Get up, sir,' he said.

"The lad looked at him to see if he was in earnest; then he cast his
eyes toward the large boys to see if they were not going to take up his
defense.

"'Get up, sir,' said the teacher a second time, and he took him by the
collar of his jacket as if to raise him. The lad saw he had no common
man to deal with, and he rose from his seat.

"'Follow me, sir,' calmly spoke the teacher, and he led the way toward
the hall, while the boy began to tremble, wondering if the new teacher
was going to take him out and kill him. The primary department was
presided over by a sister of the new teacher, and into this room he led
the young transgressor.

"Turning to his sister he said: 'I have a pupil for you; select a seat
for him, and let him remain here. If he makes any disturbance whatever,
inform me.' Turning to the boy he said: 'Young man, mind your teacher,
and do not leave your seat until I give permission,' and he was gone.

"The lad sat there, feeling very sheepish, and as misery loves company,
it was not long before he was gratified to see the door open and observe
his seat-mate enter with the new teacher, who repeated the previous
orders, when he quietly and with dignity withdrew.

"The number was subsequently increased to three, the teacher returning
each time without a word to the other scholars concerning the
disposition made of the refractory lads. The effect upon the rest of the
school was remarkable. As no intimation of the disposition of the boys
was given, not a shade of anger displayed on the countenance of the new
teacher, nor any appearances of blood were noticeable upon his hands,
speculation was rife as to what he had done with the three chaps. He
spoke kindly to all, smiled upon the scholars who did well in their
classes, and seemed to inspire all present with the truth of his remarks
uttered at the opening of the session.

"At recess the mystery that had enveloped the school was cleared away,
for the three lads in the primary department were seen as the rest of
the scholars filed by the door. While all the rest enjoyed the recess,
the three lads were obliged to remain in their seats, and when school
was dismissed for the forenoon, the new teacher entered the
primary-room, and was alone with the young offenders. He sat down by
them, and like a father talked kindly and gave good advice. No parent
ever used more fitting words nor more impressed his offspring with the
fitness thereof than did the new teacher. Dismissing them, he told them
to go home, and when they returned to school to be good boys.

"That afternoon the boys were in their seats, and in two weeks' time
there was not a scholar in the room who would not do anything the
teacher asked. He was beloved by all, and his quiet manner and cool,
dignified ways made him a great favorite. He only taught two terms, and
every reasonable inducement was offered to prevail upon him to remain,
but without avail. His reply was: "I have accomplished all I intended,
namely, conquered what you thought was a wild lot of boys, and received
the discipline that I required. I regret leaving my charge, for I have
learned to love them, but I am to enter a law office at once."

"That teacher was Chester A. Arthur, now President of the United States;
the teacher of the primary department was his sister, now Mrs.
Haynesworth, and the first of the three refractory boys was the writer.
When it was announced that our beloved teacher was to leave us, many
tears were shed by his scholars, and as a slight token of our love, we
presented him with an elegant volume of poems."




CHAPTER XVII.

LIFE IN COLLEGE.


Probably young Garfield never passed two happier or more profitable
years than at Williams College. The Seminaries he had hitherto attended
were respectable, but in the nature of things they could not afford the
facilities which he now enjoyed. Despite his years of study and struggle
there were many things in which he was wholly deficient. He had studied
Latin, Greek, and mathematics, but of English literature he knew but
little. He had never had time to read for recreation, or for that higher
culture which is not to be learned in the class-room.

In the library of Williams College he made his first acquaintance with
Shakespeare, and we can understand what a revelation his works must have
been to the aspiring youth. He had abstained from reading fiction,
doubting whether it was profitable, since the early days when with a
thrill of boyish excitement he read "Sinbad the Sailor" and Marryatt's
novels. After a while his views as to the utility of fiction changed. He
found that his mind was suffering from the solid food to which it was
restricted, and he began to make incursions into the realm of poetry and
fiction with excellent results. He usually limited this kind of reading,
and did not neglect for the fascination of romance those more solid
works which should form the staple of a young man's reading.

It is well known that among poets Tennyson was his favorite, so that in
after years, when at fifteen minutes' notice, on the first anniversary
of Lincoln's assassination, he was called upon to move an adjournment of
the House, as a mark of respect to the martyred President, he was able
from memory to quote in his brief speech, as applicable to Lincoln, the
poet's description of some

  "Divinely gifted man,
  Whose life in low estate began,
  And on a simple village green,
    Who breaks his birth's invidious bars,
  And grasped the skirts of happy chance,
  And breasts the blows of circumstance,
    And grapples with his evil stars;
  Who makes by force his merit known,
    And lives to clutch the golden keys
    To mould a mighty state's decrees,
  And shape the whisper of the throne;
  And moving up from high to higher,
    Becomes on Fortune's crowning slope
    The pillar of a people's hope,
  The center of a world's desire."

I am only repeating the remark made by many when I call attention to the
fitness of this description to Garfield himself.

Our young student was fortunate in possessing a most retentive memory.
What he liked, especially in the works of his favorite poet, was so
impressed upon his memory that he could recite extracts by the hour.
This will enable the reader to understand how thoroughly he studied, and
how readily he mastered, those branches of knowledge to which his
attention was drawn. When in after years in Congress some great public
question came up, which required hard study, it was the custom of his
party friends to leave Garfield to study it, with the knowledge that in
due time he would be ready with a luminous exposition which would supply
to them the place of individual study.

Young Garfield was anxious to learn the language of Goethe and
Schiller, and embraced the opportunity afforded at college to enter upon
the study of German. He was not content with a mere smattering, but
learned it well enough to converse in it as well as to read it.

So most profitably the Junior year was spent, but unhappily James had
spent all the money which he had brought with him. Should he leave
college to earn more? Fortunately, this was not necessary. Thomas
Garfield, always unselfishly devoted to the family, hoped to supply his
younger brother with the necessary sum, in installments; but proving
unable, his old friend, Dr. Robinson, came to his assistance.

"You can pay me when you are able, James," he said.

"If I live I will pay you, doctor. If I do not--"

He paused, for an idea struck him.

"I will insure my life for eight hundred dollars," he continued, "and
place the policy in your hands. Then, whether I live or die, you will be
secure."

"I do not require this, James," said the doctor kindly.

"Then I feel all the more under obligations to secure you in return for
your generous confidence."

It was a sensible and business-like proposal, and the doctor assented.
The strong, vigorous young man had no difficulty in securing a policy
from a reputable company, and went back to college at the commencement
of the Senior year. I wish to add that the young man scrupulously repaid
the good doctor's timely loan, for had he failed to do so, I could not
have held him up to my young readers as in all respects a model.

There was published at Williams College, in Garfield's time, a magazine
called the _Williams Quarterly_. To this the young man became a frequent
contributor. In Gen. James S. Brisbin's campaign Life of Garfield, I
find three of his poetic contributions quoted, two of which I will also
transfer to my pages, as likely to possess some interest for my young
reader. The first is called

"THE CHARGE OF THE TIGHT BRIGADE,"

and commences thus:

  "Bottles to right of them,
  Bottles to left of them,
  Bottles in front of them,
    Fizzled and sundered;
  Ent'ring with shout and yell,
  Boldly they drank and well,
  They caught the Tartar then;
  _Oh, what a perfect sell!_
    Sold--the half hundred!
  Grinned all the dentals bare,
  Swung all their caps in air,
  Uncorking bottles there,
  Watching the Freshmen, while
    Every one wondered;
  Plunged in tobacco smoke,
  With many a desperate stroke,
  Dozens of bottles broke;
  Then they came back, but not,
    Not the half hundred!"

Lest from this merry squib, which doubtless celebrated some college
prank, wrong conclusions should be drawn, I hasten to say that in
college James Garfield neither drank nor smoked.

The next poem is rather long, but it possesses interest as a serious
production of one whose name has become a household word. It is entitled

"MEMORY.

  "'Tis beauteous night; the stars look brightly down
  Upon the earth, decked in her robe of snow.
  No light gleams at the window save my own,
  Which gives its cheer to midnight and to me.
  And now with noiseless step sweet Memory comes,
  And leads me gently through her twilight realms.
  What poet's tuneful lyre has ever sung,
  Or delicatest pencil e'er portrayed
  The enchanted, shadowy land where Memory dwells?
  It has its valleys, cheerless, lone, and drear,
  Dark-shaded by the lonely cypress tree.
  And yet its sunlit mountain tops are bathed
  In heaven's own blue. Upon its craggy cliffs,
  Robed in the dreamy light of distant years,
  Are clustered joys serene of other days;
  Upon its gently sloping hillside's bank
  The weeping-willows o'er the sacred dust
  Of dear departed ones; and yet in that land,
  Where'er our footsteps fall upon the shore,
  They that were sleeping rise from out the dust
  Of death's long, silent years, and round us stand,
  As erst they did before the prison tomb
  Received their clay within its voiceless halls.

  "The heavens that bend above that land are hung
  With clouds of various hues; some dark and chill,
  Surcharged with sorrow, cast their sombre shade
  Upon the sunny, joyous land below;
  Others are floating through the dreamy air,
  White as the falling snow, their margins tinged
  With gold and crimson hues; their shadows fall
  Upon the flowery meads and sunny slopes,
  Soft as the shadows of an angel's wing.
  When the rough battle of the day is done,
  And evening's peace falls gently on the heart,
  I bound away across the noisy years,
  Unto the utmost verge of Memory's land,
  Where earth and sky in dreamy distance meet,
  And Memory dim with dark oblivion joins;
  Where woke the first remembered sounds that fell
  Upon the ear in childhood's early morn;
  And wandering thence along the rolling years,
  I see the shadow of my former self
  Gliding from childhood up to man's estate.
  The path of youth winds down through many a vale,
  And on the brink of many a dread abyss,
  From out whose darkness comes no ray of light,
  Save that a phantom dances o'er the gulf,
  And beckons toward the verge. Again, the path
  Leads o'er a summit where the sunbeams fall;
  And thus, in light and shade, sunshine and gloom,
  Sorrow and joy, this life-path leads along."

During the year 1856 young Garfield was one of the editors of the
college magazine, from which the above extracts are made. The hours
spent upon his contributions to its pages were doubtless well spent.
Here, to use his own words, he learned "to hurl the lance and wield the
sword and thus prepare for the conflict of life." More than one whose
names have since become conspicuous contributed to it while under his
charge. Among these were Professor Chadbourne, S.G.W. Benjamin, Horace
E. Scudder, W.R. Dimmock, and John Savary. The last-named, now resident
in Washington, has printed, since his old friend's death, a series of
sonnets, from which I quote one:

  "How many and how great concerns of state
    Lie at the mercy of the meanest things!
    This man, the peer of presidents and kings;
  Nay, first among them, passed through dangers gate
  In war unscathed, and perils out of date,
    To meet a fool whose pistol-shot yet rings
    Around the world, and at mere greatness flings
  The cruel sneer of destiny or fate!
  Yet hath he made the fool fanatic foil
    To valor, patience, nobleness, and wit!
    Nor had the world known, but because of it,
  What virtues grow in suffering's sacred soil.
    The shot which opened like a crack of hell,
    Made all hearts stream with sacred pity's well
    And showed that unity in which we dwell."




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE CANAL-BOY BECOMES A COLLEGE PRESIDENT.


During his second winter vacation a great temptation assailed James. It
was not a temptation to do wrong. That he could easily have resisted.

I must explain.

At Prestenkill, a country village six miles from Troy, N.Y., the young
student organized a writing school, to help defray his expenses. Having
occasion to visit Troy, his interest in education led him to form an
acquaintance with some of the teachers and directors of the public
schools.

One of these gentlemen, while walking with him over the sloping sides of
a hill overlooking the city, said: "Mr. Garfield, I have a proposition
to make to you."

The student listened with interest.

"There is a vacancy in one of our public schools. We want an experienced
teacher, and I am sure you will suit us. I offer you the place, with a
salary of twelve hundred dollars a year. What do you say?"

The young man's heart beat for a moment with repressible excitement. It
was a strong temptation. He was offered, deducting vacations, about one
hundred and twenty-five dollars a month, while heretofore his highest
wages had been but eighteen dollars per month and board. Moreover, he
could marry at once the young lady to whom he had been for years
engaged.

He considered the offer a moment, and this was his answer:

"You are not Satan and I am not Jesus, but we are upon the mountain, and
you have tempted me powerfully. I think I must say, 'Get thee behind
me!' I am poor, and the salary would soon pay my debts and place me in a
position of independence; but there are two objections. I could not
accomplish my resolution to complete a college course, and should be
crippled intellectually for life. Then, my roots are all fixed in Ohio,
where people know me and I know them, and this transplanting might not
succeed as well in the long run as to go back home and work for smaller
pay."

So the young man decided adversely, and it looks as if his decision was
a wise one. It is interesting to conjecture what would have been his
future position had he left college and accepted the school then offered
him. He might still have been a teacher, well known and of high repute,
but of fame merely local, and without a thought of the brilliant destiny
he had foregone.

So he went back to college, and in the summer of 1856 he graduated,
carrying off the highest honor--the metaphysical oration. His class was
a brilliant one. Three became general officers during the
rebellion--Garfield, Daviess, and Thompson. Rockwell's name is well
known in official circles; Gilfillan is Treasurer of the United States.
There are others who fill prominent positions. In the class above him
was the late Hon. Phineas W. Hitchcock, who for six years represented
Nebraska in the United States Senate--like Garfield, the architect of
his own fortunes.

"What are your plans, Garfield?" asked a classmate but a short time
before graduation.

"I am going back to Ohio, to teach in the school where I prepared for
college."

"What is the name of the school?"

"Hiram Institute."

"I never heard of it."

"It has only a local reputation."

"Will you get a high salary?"

"No; the institute is poor, and can pay me but little."

"I think you are making a mistake."

