overhearing what has been said, and while I don't care to enter into the
little private quarrels of my girls, I want to tell you that you made a
noble defense of your position. I am very proud of you, my child." Miss
Thompson put her arms around the weeping girl and kissed her. "I wish
every girl in my school would make such a stand for her principles. You
were right not to have resigned. Always do what your judgment tells you is
right, no matter what the result is, and don't give up the captaincy!"




CHAPTER XIII

A SKATING PARTY


The holidays had come and gone, and the pupils of Oakdale High School had
resigned themselves to a period of hard study. The dreaded mid-year
examinations stared them in the face, and for the time being basketball
ardor had cooled and a surprising devotion to study had ensued.

Since the day that Grace had refused to give up her captaincy there had
been considerable change in the girls' attitude toward her. She had not
regained her old-time popularity, but it was evident that her schoolmates
respected her for her brave decision and treated her with courtesy. They
still retained a feeling of suspicion toward Anne, however, although they
did not openly manifest it.

Miriam Nesbit had been inwardly furious over the outcome of her plan to
gain the captaincy, but she was wise enough to assume an air of
indifference over her defeat. Grace's speech had made considerable
impression on the minds of even Miriam's most devoted supporters and she
knew that the slightest slip on her part would turn the tide of opinion
against her.

Grace was in a more cheerful frame of mind than formerly. She felt that
all would come right some day. "Truth crushed to earth shall rise again,"
she told herself, and the familiar saying proved very comforting to her.

Winter had settled down on Oakdale as only a northern winter can do. There
had been snow on the ground since Thanksgiving, and sleigh rides and
skating parties were in order.

Grace awoke one Saturday morning in high good humor.

"To-day's the day," she said to herself. "Hurrah for skating!"

She hurried through her breakfast and was donning her fur cap and sweater,
when Anne, Jessica and Nora, accompanied by David, Hippy, Reddy and, to
her surprise and delight, Tom Gray, turned in at her gate.

    "'Oh, be joyful, oh, be gay,
      For there's skating on the bay,'"

sang Hippy.

"Meaning pond, I suppose," laughed Grace, as she opened her front door.

"Meaning pond?" answered Hippy, "only pond doesn't rhyme with gay."

"You might say,

    "'Oh, be joyful, oh, be fond,
      For there's skating on the pond,'"

suggested David.

"Fond of what?" demanded Hippy.

"Of the person you've asked to skate with you," replied David, looking
toward Anne, who stood with a small pair of new skates tucked under her
arm.

"I shall be initiated into all the mysteries of the world soon," she
observed, smiling happily. "Last year it was coasting and football and now
it's dancing and skating. When I once get these things on, David, I'll be
like a bird trying its wings, I'll flop about just as helplessly."

"I'm awfully glad to see you, Tom," said Grace, "I did not expect to see
you until Easter."

"Oh, I couldn't keep away," laughed Tom. "This is the jolliest place I
know."

"Good reason," said Reddy, "we are the real people."

"Stop praising yourself and listen to me," said Hippy. "Our pond has
frozen over in the most obliging manner. It's as smooth as glass. Let's go
there to skate. There's a crowd of boys and girls on it already."

The pond on the Wingate estate was really a small lake, a mile or more in
circumference. While it froze over every winter, the ice was apt to be
rough, and there were often dangerous places in it, air-holes and thin
spots where several serious accidents had occurred.

Therefore, Wingate's Pond was not used as much as the river for skating;
but this winter the ice was as smooth and solid as if it had been frozen
artificially, so the High School boys and girls could not resist the
temptation to skim over its surface.

"Isn't it a fine sight?" asked Grace, as they came in view of the skaters
who were circling and gliding over the pond, some by twos and threes,
others in long rows, laughing and shouting.

A big fire burned on the bank, rows of new-comers sat near it, fitting on
their skates.

"Away with dull care!" cried Hippy, as he circled gracefully over the ice;
for, with all his weight, Hippy was considered one of the best skaters in
Oakdale.

"Away with everything but fun," finished Grace who could think of nothing
save the joy of skating. "Come along, Anne. Don't be afraid. David and I
will keep you up until you learn to use those tiny little feet of yours."

Anne's small feet went almost higher than her head while Grace was
speaking, and she sat flat down on the ice.

"No harm done," she laughed, "only I didn't know it could possibly be so
slippery."

They pulled her up, David and Grace, and put her between them with Tom
Gray on the other side of Grace as additional support, and off they flew,
while Anne, keeping her feet together and holding on tightly, sailed along
like a small ice boat.

"This will give you confidence," explained David, "and later on you can
learn how to use your feet."

But Anne hardly heard him, so thrilled was she by the glorious sensation.
As they flew by, followed by Hippy and Nora, with Reddy and Jessica, she
caught glimpses of many people looking strangely unfamiliar on skates.
Miriam passed, gliding gracefully over the ice with a troop of sophomores
at her heels. There were many High School boys "cracking the whip" in long
rows of eight or more, while there were some older people comfortably
seated in sleigh chairs which were pushed from behind, generally by some
poor boys in Oakdale, who stood on the bank waiting to be hired.

"Now, we'll have a lesson," exclaimed David when they had reached the
starting point again, while the others lost themselves in the crowd. Anne
was a good pupil, but she was soon tired and sat down on a bench near the
bank.

"Do go and have a good skate yourself, David," she insisted. "I'll rest
for awhile and look on."

But it was far too cold to sit still.

"I'll give myself a lesson," she said. "This is a quiet spot. All the
others seem to have skated up to the other end."

As she was carefully taking the strokes David had taught her, with an
occasional struggle to keep her balance, she heard a great shouting behind
her. The next instant, some one had seized her by the hand.

"Keep your feet together!" was shouted in her ear, and she found herself
going like the wind at the end of a long line of girls. They were juniors,
she saw at once, and it was Julia Crosby at the whip end who had seized
her by the hand.

Anne closed her eyes. They were going at a tremendous rate of speed, it
seemed to her, like a comet shooting through the air. Then, suddenly, the
head of the comet stood still and the tail swung around it, and Anne, who
represented the very tip of the tail and who hardly reached to Julia
Crosby's shoulder, felt herself carried along with such velocity that the
breath left her body, her knees gave way and she fell down in a limp
little bundle. Julia Crosby instantly let go her hand and the impetus of
the rush shot her like a catapult far over the ice into the midst of a
crowd of skaters.

But the juniors never stopped to see what damage had been done. They
quickly joined hands again, and were off on another expedition almost
before Anne had been picked up by David and Hippy.

"It's that Julia Crosby again," cried David. "I wish she would move to
Europe. I'd gladly buy her a ticket. The town of Oakdale isn't big enough
to hold her and other people. She's always trying to knock somebody off
the side of the earth."

Anne went home, tired and bruised. She had had enough of skating for one
morning David returned to join the others; for this was not the last of
the day's adventures and Julia Crosby, before sunset, was to repent of her
cruelty to Anne.

In the meantime Grace and Tom had skated up to the far end of the pond.

"Well, Grace," said Tom, "how has the world been using you? I suppose you
have been adding to your laurels as a basketball captain."

"Far from it," said Grace a trifle sadly. "Miriam Nesbit is star player at
present."

They skated on for some time in silence. Tom felt there was something
wrong, so he tactfully changed the subject.

"Who is the girl doing the fancy strokes?" he asked, pointing to Julia
Crosby, who, some distance ahead of them, was giving an exhibition of her
powers as a maker of figure eights and cross-cuts.

"That's the junior captain," answered Grace. "I hope she won't fall,
because she's heavy enough to go right through the ice if she should have
a hard tumble."

"Suppose we stop watching her," suggested Tom. "I don't want to see her
take a header, and people who show off on skates always do so, sooner or
later."

They changed their course toward the middle of the pond, while Julia, who
was turning and circling nearer the shore, watched them from one corner of
her eye.

Suddenly Grace stopped.

"Julia! Julia!" she cried. "Miss Crosby!"

"What's the matter?" demanded Tom.

"Don't you see the danger flag over there? She will skate into a hole if
she keeps on. The ice houses are near here, and I suppose it is where they
have been cutting ice."

"Hello-o!" cried Tom, straining his lungs to reach the skater, who looked
back, gave her usual tantalizing laugh and skated on.

"You are getting onto thin ice," screamed Grace in despair, beckoning
wildly. "Stop! Stop!"

Julia Crosby was skating backwards now, facing the others.

"Catch me if you can," she called, and the wind carried her words to them
as they flew after her.

Then Grace, who had been anxiously watching the skater and not the ice,
stumbled on a piece of frozen wood and fell headlong. She lay still for an
instant, half stunned by the blow, but even in that distressful moment she
could hear the other girl's derisive laughter.

Tom called again:

"You'll be drowned, if you don't look where you are going."

"Why don't you learn to skate?" was Julia's answer.

"O Tom," exclaimed Grace. "Leave me. I'll soon get my breath. Do go and
stop that girl. The pond's awfully deep there."

"Miss Crosby," Tom Gray called, "won't you wait a minute? I have something
to tell you."

"Catch me first!" she cried.

She turned and began skating for dear life, bending from the waist and
going like the wind.

"I think I'll try and catch her from the front," he said to himself. "I
don't propose to tumble in, too, and leave poor Grace to fish, us both
out."

With arms swinging freely, he made for the center of the pond. As he
whizzed past the girl, he turned with a wide sweep and came toward her,
pointing at the same time to the white flag. But it was too late. In her
effort to outstrip him, Julia slid heavily into the danger zone.

There was a crash and a splash, then down she went into the icy water,
followed by Tom, who had seized her arm in a fruitless effort to save her.

For an instant Tom was paralyzed with the coldness of the water. Still,
keeping a firm grip on the arm of the girl who had been responsible for
his ice bath, he managed to clutch the ledge of ice made by their fall
with his free hand.

"Take hold of the ice and try to help yourself a little," commanded Tom.

Julia made a half-hearted attempt, and managed to grasp the ledge, but her
hold was so feeble that Tom dared not withdraw his support He was
powerless to act, and they would both drown unless help came quickly.




CHAPTER XIV

A BRAVE RESCUE


Grace was still where she had fallen, cooling a large, red lump on her
forehead by applying her handkerchief first to the ice and then to the
swollen place, when she suddenly felt herself to be entirely alone in the
world.

"Everybody has gone home to dinner!" she exclaimed, as she glanced over
her shoulder at the other end of the pond, now denuded of skaters.

Then she shifted her position, looking for Tom and Julia. She had never
dreamed, when she saw her friend go whizzing across the ice, that he had
not caught the reckless girl in time to warn her of her danger.

In a flash she saw the empty expanse of ice before her. She leaped to her
feet, balancing herself with difficulty, for her head was still dizzy from
the blow.

"Tom! Tom Gray!" she called. "Where are you?"

"Run for help!" came the answer. In another moment she saw them clinging
to a broken ledge of ice, Tom supporting Julia Crosby.

As for the junior captain, she was weeping bitterly, and making no attempt
to help herself.

Grace anxiously scanned the expanse of the ice. It was nearly a mile to
the other end of the pond, and the last group of skaters had disappeared
over the brow of the hill.

"You must think quickly," she said to herself.

Her eyes took in the other shore. Not a soul was there, not a dwelling of
any sort; nothing but the great ice house that stood like a lonely
sentinel on the bank. Yet something seemed to tell her that help lay in
that direction.

Once before, in a moment of danger, Grace had obeyed this same impulse and
had never regretted it. Once again she was following the instinct that
might have seemed to another person anything but wise.

Skating as she had never skated before, Grace Harlowe reached the shore in
a moment. Here, dropping to the bank, she quickly removed her skates, then
ran toward the ice house, feeling strangely unaccustomed to walking on the
ground after her long morning on skates.

"What if I am off on a wild-goose chase?" she said to herself. "Suppose
there is no one there?" She paused for an instant and then ran on faster
than before.

"I shall find help over there, I know I shall," she thought as she
hurried over the frozen ground and made straight for the ice house. There
was no time to be lost. Tom and Julia were liable to be sucked under and
drowned while she was looking for help.

Grace pushed resolutely on. In the meantime hardly four minutes had really
elapsed since the skaters had tumbled into the water.

On the other side of the ice house she came abruptly upon a man engaged in
loading a child's wagon with chips of wood.

"Help!" cried Grace. "Help! Some people have broken through the ice. Have
you a rope?"

The man made no answer whatever. He did not even look up until Grace shook
him by the shoulder.

