refrained from opening while Mrs. Tennant was present. It contained the
badges of the new society. Kathleen had decided that they were to call
themselves "The Wild Irish Girls," and this title was neatly engraved on
the little badges, which were of the shape of hearts. Below the name was
the device--a harp with a bit of shamrock trailing round it. The badges
were small and exceedingly neat, and there were about sixty of them in
all.

"Now then, I can go ahead," thought Kathleen. "What with the finery for
my dear, darling chosen ones, and the badges for all the members, I
shall do."

She was utterly reckless with regard to expense. Her father was rich,
and he did not mind what he spent on his only child. The box seemed to
fill up every crevice of her heart, as she expressed it, and it was a
very happy girl who dressed to go to the Weldons' that evening.
Kathleen was intensely affectionate, and would have done anything in the
world to please Mrs. Tennant; but when it came to wearing a very quiet
gray dress with a little lace round the collar and cuffs, she begun to
demur.

"It can't be done," she thought. "Half of them will be in gray and half
of them in brown, and a few old dowdies will perhaps be in black. But I
must be gay; it isn't fair to Aunt Katie to be anything else."

She made a wild and scarcely judicious selection. She put on crimson
silk stockings, and tucked into her bag a pair of crimson satin shoes.
Her dress consisted of a black velvet skirt over a crimson petticoat,
and her bodice was of crimson silk very much embroidered and with
elbow-sleeves. Round her neck she wore innumerable beads of every
possible color, and twisted through her lovely hair were some more
beads, which shone as the light fell on them. Altogether it was a very
bizarre and fascinating little figure that appeared that evening at the
Weldons' hall door. Over her showy dress she wore a long opera-cloak, so
that at first her splendors were not fully visible. This gaily dressed
little person entered a room full of sober people. The effect was
somewhat the same as though a gorgeous butterfly had flown into the
room. She lit up the dullness and made a centre of attraction--all eyes
were fastened upon her; for Kathleen in her well-made dress,
notwithstanding the gayety of its color, looked simply radiant. The
mischief in her dark eyes, too, but added to her charm. She glanced with
almost maliciousness at Alice, who, in the dowdiest of pale-gray
dresses, with her hair rather untidy and her face destitute of color,
was standing near one of the windows. And as Alice glanced at Kathleen
she felt that she almost hated the Irish girl.




CHAPTER IX.

CONSCIENCE AND DIFFICULTIES.


All the people who knew her were beginning to make a fuss over Ruth
Craven. She who had hardly ever been noticed during the early part of
her life, who was just her grandfather's darling and her grandmother's
idol, was now petted and made much of and fussed over by every one. It
was quite an extraordinary thing for the paying girls of the Great
Shirley School to be so interested and excited about a foundationer.
Cassandra Weldon was not the only girl who had taken Ruth up; some of
the best and nicest girls of the school began to patronize her. The fact
was that she was very modest and a perfect lady, and it was impossible
to feel anything but good-will towards her. The rest of the foundation
girls at first determined that they would leave her with her fine
friends, but when Kathleen insisted on Ruth's joining the secret society
of the Wild Irish Girls, they were obliged to submit.

"We'd do anything in the world for our queen," said Susy Hopkins,
talking to another foundation girl one day as they strolled along the
road. "It is to-night we are to meet again, and she says she will bring
the rules all drawn up, and she will read them to us. There are about
thirty of us now, and more and more offer to join every day. The
difficulty is that we have got to keep the thing from the knowledge of
the teachers and the paying girls of the school. Kathleen is certain
that it would be suppressed if it were known; and it must not be known,
for it is the biggest lark and the greatest fun we ever had in all our
lives."

"Yes," said Rosy Myers; "I feel now quite honored at being a foundation
girl."

"She does promise us wonderful things," said Kate Rourke. "She says when
the summer comes we shall have all sorts of nice excursions. Of course,
we can't do anything special in the daytime, unless sometimes on
Saturday, when we have a whole holiday; but at least; she says, the
nights are our own and we can do as we like. It really is grand. I
suppose it is wicked, but then that makes it rather more fascinating."

"We are in the queen's Cabinet, bless her, the duck!" said Susy Hopkins.
"There are a dozen of us now, and there is talk of a sort of livery or
badge for the members of the Cabinet; but we'll know all about it when
we meet sharp at nine to-night. We are the twelve members of the
Cabinet, and there are about twenty girls who are our sort of standing
army. It is really most exciting."

The girls talked a little longer and then parted. As Susy Hopkins was
running home helter-skelter--for she wanted to get her lessons done in
order to be fully in time for the meeting that evening--she met Ruth
Craven. Ruth was walking slowly by with her usual demure and sweet
expression.

"Hullo!" called out Susy. "We'll meet to-night, sha'n't we?"

"I don't know," said Ruth.

"Aren't you coming? Why, you are sort of Prime Minister to the queen."

"You don't think it right really, do you," said Ruth--"not from the
bottom of your heart, I mean?"

"Right or wrong, I mean to enjoy myself," said Susy Hopkins. "I suppose,
if you come to analyse it, it is wrong, and not right. But, dear me,
Ruth! what fun should we poor girls have if we were too particular on
these points?"

"It always seems to me that it is worth while to do right," said Ruth.

"So you say, but I don't quite agree with you. You will come to-night,
in any case, won't you?"

"Yes, I will come to-night; but I am not happy about it, and I wish
Kathleen--Oh, I know it is very fascinating, and Kathleen is just
delightful, but I should not like our teachers to know."

"Of course not," said Susy, staring at her. "They'd soon put a stop to
it."

"Are you certain? I know so little about the school."

"Certain? I'm convinced. Why, they'd be furious. I expect we'd be
expelled."

"Then that proves it. I didn't know there was any strict rule about it."

"Why, what are you made of, Ruth Craven?"

"I thought," said Ruth, "that when we were not in school we were our own
mistresses."

"To a certain extent, of course; but we have what is called the school
character to keep up. We have, as it were, to uphold the spirit of the
school. Now the spirit of the school is quite against secrecy in any
form. Oh dear, why will you drag all this out of me? I'd made up my mind
not to think of it, and now you have forced me to say it. Of course you
will come to-night. You have to think of Kathleen as well as the school,
and she's gone to a fearful lot of expense. You could not by any
possibility forsake her, could you?"

"No, of course not," said Ruth very slowly.

She bade Susy good-bye and walked on; her attitude was that of one who
was thinking hard.

"Ruth is very pretty," said Susy to herself, "but I don't know that I
quite admire her. She is the sort of girl that everybody loves, and I am
not one to admire a universal favorite. She is frightfully, tiresomely
good, and she's just _too_ pretty; and she's not a bit vain, and she's
not a bit puffed up. Oh, she is just right in every way, and yet I feel
that I hate her. She has got the sort of conscience that will worry our
queen to distraction. Still, once she joins she'll have to obey our
rules, and I expect our queen will make them somewhat stringent."

A clock from a neighboring church struck the half-hour. Susy looked up,
uttered an exclamation, put wings to her feet, and ran the rest of the
way home. Susy's home was in the High Street of the little town of
Merrifield. Her mother kept a fairly flourishing stationer's shop, in
one part of which was a post-office. Some ladies were buying stamps as
Susy dashed through the shop on her way to the family rooms at the back.
Mrs. Hopkins was selling stationery to a couple of boys; she looked up
as her daughter entered. Susy went into the parlor, where tea was laid
on the table. It consisted of a stale loaf, some indifferent butter, and
a little jam. The tea, in a pewter teapot, was weak; the milk was
sky-blue, and the jug that held it was cracked.

Susy poured out a cup of tea, drank it off at a gulp, snatched a piece
of bread-and-butter from the plate, and sat down to prepare her lessons
at another table. She had two hours' hard work before her, and it was
already nearly six o'clock. The quarry was a little distance away, and
she must tidy herself and do all sorts of things. Just then her mother
came in.

"Oh, Susy," she said, "I am so glad you have come! I want you to attend
to the shop for the next hour. I am sent for in a hurry to my sister's;
she has a bad cold, and wants me to call in. I think little Peter is not
well; your aunt is afraid he is catching measles. Run into the shop the
moment you have finished your tea, like a good child. You can take one
of your lesson-books with you if you like. There won't be many customers
at this hour."

"Oh, mother, I did really want to work hard at my lessons. They are very
difficult, you know, and you promised that when I went to the Great
Shirley School you'd never interfere with my lesson hours."

"I did say so, and of course I don't mean to interfere; but this is a
special case."

"Can't Tommy go and stand in the shop? If any special customers come in
I will attend to them."

"No, Tommy can't. He has a headache and is lying down upstairs. You must
oblige me this time, Susy. You can sit up a little longer to-night to
finish your lessons if you are much interrupted while I am away."

"You are sure you will not be more than an hour, mother?"

"Oh, certain."

"And I suppose in any case I may shut up the shop at seven o'clock,
mayn't I?"

"Shut the shop at seven o'clock!" said Mrs. Hopkins. "You forget that
this is Wednesday. We always keep the shop, except the post-office part,
open until past nine on Wednesdays; such a lot of people come in for
odds and ends on this special night. But I will be back long before
nine. Don't on any account shut the shop until I appear."

Susy, feeling cross and miserable, all her bright hopes dashed to the
ground, took a couple of books and went into the shop and sat behind the
counter. The days were getting short and cold, and as the shop door was
opened there was a thorough draught where she was sitting. Her feet
grew icy cold; she could scarcely follow the meaning of her somewhat
difficult lessons. No customers appeared.

"How stupid I am!" thought the little girl. "This will never do."

She roused herself, and bending forward, propped her book open before
her. Presently she heard the clock outside strike seven.

"Mother will be back now, thank goodness!" she thought. "If I work
desperately hard, and stop my ears so that I needn't hear a sound, I may
have done by nine o'clock."

Just at that moment two ladies came in to ask for a special sort of
stationery. Susy, who was never in the least interested in the shop, did
not know where to find it. She rummaged about, making a great mess
amongst her mother's neat stores; and finally she was obliged to say
that she did not know where it was.

"Never mind," said one of the ladies, kindly; "I will come in again next
time I am passing. It doesn't matter this evening."

Susy felt vexed; she knew her mother would blame her for sending the
ladies away without completing a purchase. And they had scarcely left
before she found the box which contained the stationery. She pushed it
out of sight on the shelf, and sat down again to her book. Her mother
ought to be coming in now. Susy would have to do a lot of exercises;
these she could not by any possibility do in the shop. She had also some
mathematical work to get through or she would never be able to keep her
place in class. Why didn't Mrs. Hopkins return? Half-an-hour went by;
three-quarters. It was now a quarter to eight. Susy felt quite
distracted. With the exception of the two ladies, there had been no
customer in the shop up to the present. The fact was, they did not
begin to appear until soon after eight on Wednesday evenings. Then the
schoolgirls and schoolboys and many other people of the poorer class
used to drop in for penn'orths and ha'p'orths of stationery, for pens,
for ink, for sealing-wax, &c.

"Mother must be in soon. I know what I will do," said Susy. "I will open
the door of the parlor and sit there. If any one appears I can dash out
at once."

No sooner had the thought come to her than she resolved to act on it.
She turned on the gas in the parlor--it was already brightly lighted in
the shop--and sat down to her work.

"An hour and a quarter before the meeting of the Wild Irish Girls," she
said to herself. "Strange, is it not, that I should call myself a Wild
Irish Girl when I am a Cockney through and through? Well, whatever
happens, I shall be at the meeting."




CHAPTER X.

THE WILD IRISH GIRLS' SOCIETY IS STARTED.


While Susy sat in the parlor a tramp happened to pass the brightly
lighted shop. He was weather-beaten and slipshod, and altogether made a
most disreputable appearance. A hand was thrust into each of his
pockets, and these pockets were destitute of coin. The tramp was hungry
and penniless. The little shop with its gay light and tempting articles
of stationery, and books and sealing-wax displayed in the window, were
quite to the man's taste. He could not see the parlor beyond, nor the
peep-hole where Susy was supposed to be able to watch the shop; he only
noticed that no one was within. The tramp was in the humor to do
something desperate; he entered the shop under the pretense of begging;
made straight for the till, pulled it open, and took out a handful of
money. He had no time to count his spoils, but leaving the till-drawer
still open, he dashed out of the shop.

Now it so happened that Susy, just when the tramp stole in, had gone
upstairs to fetch a fresh exercise-book. She noticed nothing amiss on
her return, and went tranquilly on with her work. Eight o'clock struck.
Susy was in despair.

"I can't possibly fail Kathleen," she said to herself. "She started this
splendid idea in order to help me and give me pleasure. I must be at the
quarry whatever happens to-night. Something very unusual is detaining
mother. I know what I'll do: I'll shut up the shop at half-past eight,
leave a little note for mother, and then go to the quarry as fast as I
can. I will tell mother that I am due at an important meeting, and she
is sure not to question me; mother is always very kind, and gives me as
much liberty as she can."

Susy made a great struggle to keep her mind centered on her books, but
with all her efforts her thoughts would wander. They wandered to
Kathleen and the Wild Irish Girls' Society; they wandered to her other
schoolfellows; they wandered to the hardship of having to take care of
the shop when she wished to be otherwise employed; and finally they
settled themselves on Ruth Craven. She could not help wondering what
Ruth would do--whether she would continue to be a valuable aid to the
queen of the new society, or whether she would give them up altogether.

"I'd almost like her not to stay with us," thought Susy; "for then
perhaps Kathleen would make me her Prime Minister. I'd like that.
Kathleen is the dearest, truest, greatest lady I ever came across. She
doesn't think anything of birth, nor of those sort of tiresome
distinctions; she thinks of you for what you are worth yourself. And she
is so splendid to look at, and has such a gallant sort of way. I do
admire her just!"

The shop-bell rang. Susy was out in a moment. A woman had called for a
penn'orth of paper and an envelope. She put down her penny on the
counter, and Susy supplied her from a special box.

"I was in such a taking," said the woman. "I just remembered at the last
moment that all the shops were shut. I don't know what I should have
done if I hadn't recalled that Mrs. Hopkins kept hers open until nine
o'clock. I am obliged to you, little girl. I have to send this letter to
my son in India, and I'd miss the mail if it wasn't posted to-night. You
couldn't now, I suppose, oblige me with a stamp."

"Of course I can," said Susy, cheerfully. "Mother always keeps a supply
of stamps in the till."

She turned to the till as she spoke, and for the first time noticed that
the drawer was open.

"How careless of me not to have shut it!" she thought.

It did not occur to her to examine its contents, or to suppose for a
single moment that any one had taken money out of it. She provided the
woman with a stamp, and then, shut the drawer of the till. It was now
half-past eight, and Susy determined to take the bull by the horns and
to close the shop without further ado. She sent for the little maid in
the kitchen to put up the shutters, and in a minute or two the shop was
in darkness and Susy was racing through the remainder of her lessons. It
would take her a quarter of an hour, running most of the way, to reach
the old quarry, and she must have three or four minutes to dress. She
stood up, therefore, at her work, in order, as she expressed it, to save
time. She was so occupied when her mother came in.

"Why have you shut the shop?" said Mrs. Hopkins in an annoyed voice. "It
is only a very little past half-past eight, and I saw two poor women
outside. They wanted a penn'orth of paper each. They said, 'We thought
you always kept open until nine o'clock,' Now it will spread all over
the place that I shut at half-past eight. Why did you do it, Susy? It's
hard enough to make ends meet without adding any more difficulties."

Mrs. Hopkins stood, looking very pale and perplexed, in the parlor. Susy
glanced at her mother, and could not help reflecting that the poor woman
was fit to drop.

"Do sit down, mother," she said. "I was so distracted; I have to be a
good way from here at nine o'clock, I couldn't think whatever kept you.
I was obliged to shut the shop. I am sorry."

"Well, never mind. You didn't tell me that you were going out. I wish
you wouldn't go out so much in the evening, Susy; it does make it so
hard for me. There's no one now to help me with a bit of mending, and
all your things are getting so racketed through."

"What kept you, mother?" said Susy, ignoring her mother's speech.

"Oh, it was your aunt. She's in such a taking about little Peter; she's
quite certain he's in for measles or something worse. I'm persuaded that
it's nothing but a cold. I never saw such a muddle-headed woman as your
aunt Bessie. She hadn't a thing handy in the place. I had to stay and
see the doctor, and then to fetch the medicine myself, and then put the
child to bed. I assure you I haven't sat down since I left."

"And I suppose she never thought of giving you as much as a cup of tea?"
said Susy.

"No," answered her mother; then catching sight of the teapot, she added,
"You might have had the tea-things removed, Susy. I will make myself a
fresh cup."

Susy stood still for a moment. Temptation tugged at her heart. Her
mother certainly required if ever a mother did require a daughter. But
the Wild Irish Girls--surely they were pining for her in the distance!

"I wish I could help you, mother. I would if I hadn't promised to go
out. If you will give me the latchkey I can let myself in. You needn't
wait up; I promise to lock up carefully."

"Very well, dear," said Mrs. Hopkins.

She did not reproach Susy; that was not her way. She put a little kettle
on the gas-stove, fetched a clean cup and saucer, and presently sat down
to her belated meal.

