boys to sit upon. They leaped in and he took up the lines once more.

"G'lang!" he shouted to his team and cracked his whip, and off they went
along the road at a good gait.

"Great Julius Caesar!" cried Andy, after a quarter of a mile had been
passed. "Talk about bumping the bumps! This road has 'em beaten to a
frazzle!"

"Getting your money's worth, Andy?" asked The Imp, with a grin.

"Ain't no springs on this wagon!" said Ezra Cole, with a grin. "But
don't you mind; it will give you a fine appetite fer that dinner when
you git there!"

"It will, if it doesn't knock out our teeth so we can't chew!" murmured
Jack.

On and on they rattled at a good pace until the lights of Point View
Lodge shone in the distance.

"Just drop us off at the gate!" cried Jack. "We don't want to ride up
to the piazza in such a rig as this."

"Why, hello, have you arrived at last?" cried a voice from out of the
darkness, and then Laura and Flossie appeared, standing by the gate. The
three cadets looked glumly at each other, and then Pepper commenced to
snicker and all burst into a hearty spell of laughter.




CHAPTER XIV

AT THE FORD MANSION


"Don't you admire our very fashionable turnout?" questioned Pepper, as
he came forward and shook hands with the girls.

"It's the latest in carriages," came from Andy.

"Oh!" murmured Laura. "Did you really come all the way from Putnam Hall
in that?"

"It must have been hard riding," was Flossie's comment.

"No, we didn't come all the way," answered Pepper. "We'll tell you about
it later," he added. Then Ezra Cole was paid. The old farmer lost no
time in driving away.

As the girls and boys walked slowly toward the mansion the cadets told
the particulars of the breakdown on the road.

"And you really think some of your rivals did it?" questioned Laura.
"How mean!"

"I'd never speak to them again," added Flossie, with a flash of her
eyes.

"Well, we'll talk a whole lot to 'em," answered Pepper, grimly.

"But you have got to prove them guilty first," said Laura.

Once at the mansion the situation was explained to Mr. and Mrs. Ford,
and the boys were conducted by a servant to a bathroom, where they might
wash and brush up and make themselves otherwise presentable. They did
not linger long, and when they came below, the folding-doors to the
dining-room were opened and the butler announced dinner.

It was a jolly meal, and the cadets were made to feel perfectly at home.
Mr. Ford asked them how they were getting along in school, and was
surprised when told that they hoped to graduate from the Hall the
following June.

"We shall miss your visits to the Lodge," said Mrs. Ford.

"You'll have to visit us anyway--if you get a chance," said Laura, and
all of the cadets said they would remember her kind words. Then they
talked about old times, and especially about the time when the boys had
visited the Lodge and killed the tiger that had escaped from the circus,
as related in "The Putnam Hall Cadets," and of how the girls had visited
the cadets in the woods, when the boys had run away from the Hall, as
told of in "The Putnam Hall Rebellion."

"I'd like to go to a boarding-school," said Flossie. "It must be lots of
fun!"

"Fun and work, mixed," answered Andy.

After the dinner, over which they took their time, the young folks
gathered around the piano and sang and played, and they also had several
dances, with the old folks looking on. All too soon it came time for the
boys to go back to the Hall.

"I have ordered the auto around," said Rossmore Ford. "John can take you
back, and he can also stop for your bicycles, if you wish."

"Thank you very much," answered Jack. "We'll ride home in the auto with
pleasure. But I guess we had better let the bicycles rest to-night where
they are; eh, fellows?"

"Yes," answered Pepper and Andy.

A little later the cadets said good-night. The big touring car was
brought around and they got in the tonneau. Then the chauffeur turned on
the power, and away they shot into the darkness, the girls crying a
good-by after them.

"Well, we had a dandy time, in spite of the breakdown," remarked the
young major.

"But we have got to find out who played this trick on us," came from
Pepper.

"That may be easier said than done," said Andy. "Whoever was mean
enough to play such a trick will do his best to lay low."

When the boys got back to the Hall they found that the majority of their
friends had gone to bed. Only Stuffer Singleton was up, reading a novel
by the light of a wax-candle he had smuggled up to the room.

"Hello! have a good time?" queried the boy who loved to eat, as he cast
aside the volume.

"Bang up," answered Jack, and then he went on quickly. "Stuffer, were
you near the gym this afternoon?"

"No. Why?"

"Somebody was mean enough to tamper with our bicycles," answered the
young major, and gave a few particulars.

"Oh, you can bet it was the Ritter crowd, or Ritter alone," said
Stuffer, quickly. "It would be just like them to do their best to spoil
your fun."

It was not until two days later that Jack and his chums had a chance to
go for their broken-down wheels. They found them exactly as they had
been left, and explained to the owner of the barn how they happened to
be there.

"It's all right," said the farmer. "You can leave them here a month if
you want to." He knew Captain Putnam well, having sold him some straw
for the school stables.

The cadets had to trundle the bicycles back to Putnam Hall and then had
many hours' work in fixing the wheels so they could be used again.

During those two days the youths made many inquiries, but were unable to
get a clue as to who had played the trick. Ritter and Coulter "laid low"
and kept out of their way.

Following the game with the Dauntless Club came several other football
contests, and Putnam Hall won two games and lost one. Then the weather
turned off cold, with a promise of snow in the air.

During those days it must not be supposed that the search for Jack's
gold watch and chain was abandoned. It was continued with spirit, but no
clue was brought to light.

"It's as much of a mystery as the disappearance of my things when the
horse ran away with me," said Andy. "I don't suppose I'll ever hear of
those things either."

"Yes, but that was different, Andy," said the young major. "You were on
a public highway, where anybody might pick up the things, supposing you
merely dropped them. But I was right here, where everybody is supposed
to be honest."

"It gives the school a black eye, doesn't it?"

"That's it. I know Captain Putnam feels terrible about it, too."

"Do you suspect any of the hired help?"

"I don't know what to think."

The weather grew colder rapidly, and one morning the cadets arose to
find the ground covered with snow to a depth of several inches.

"Hurrah!" shouted Fred. "See the snow! Doesn't it look inviting?"

"Want a roll in it, Fred?" questioned Bart Field.

"Not exactly. I was thinking of a snowball fight."

"That's the talk! Let us get up a fight after school hours!" cried Bart
Conners.

Pepper was at the window. Slyly he raised the sash and scooped up a big
handful of snow from the broad ledge outside. Andy was nearby, bending
over, lacing up his shoe.

"Welcome to the snow!" cried The Imp, gaily, and let a portion of the
frozen mass slip down the acrobatic youth's collar.

"Wow!" snorted Andy, straightening up with a jerk. "Hi, you, what do you
take me for, an ice-box?" And he commenced to squirm as the cold snow
ran down his backbone. Then he made a dive for Pepper and chased The Imp
around the dormitory. Over two of the beds they flew, and then brought
up in a corner with a crash.

"Have mercy on the furniture!" cried Joe Nelson.

"Don't knock over the table!" added Stuffer.

"Give me that snow!" cried Andy, and managed to get a small portion from
Pepper. "How do you like that?" And he plastered the snow in The Imp's
left ear.

"Hurrah! Snow from Snow!" cried Jack.

"'Twill warm Pepper's blood, so it will!" was Emerald Hogan's comment.

More snow had been scooped from the window-sill by Fred and Joe, and
soon a battle-royal was in progress in the dormitory. But it came to an
abrupt end when Dave Kearney appeared.

"Stop it!" cried the young sergeant. "Crabtree is coming!"

"All over!" whispered Jack. "All as orderly as lambs!" And at once every
cadet settled down and started in an orderly fashion to finish his
morning toilet.

"What was the noise in here?" demanded Josiah Crabtree, as he threw open
the door and strode into the dormitory.

He glared around savagely, but nobody answered him.

"I demand to know what was going on here!" he continued.

"Mr. Crabtree, did you speak to me?" asked Pepper, meekly.

"I spoke to you all!" thundered the teacher. "What were you doing in
here?"

"I am dressing, Mr. Crabtree," answered Andy.

"I am dressing, Mr. Crabtree," came from Jack.

"I am dressing, too," put in Fred.

"And so was I dressing," said Stuffer, with a smile.

"And I was dressing," supplemented Pepper. "Come to think of it, I
rather fancy we were all dressing. You see, we always do dress when we
get up in the morning, Mr. Crabtree," he added with a simple smile.

"I want none of your impudence, Ditmore."

"Oh, dear, was I impudent?" murmured The Imp. "I didn't know it. I beg
ten thousand pardons--yes, a million, if you'd rather, sir."

"Be quiet, you--you forward boy! Something was going on in here! If I
find out what it was, I shall punish all of you!" And having thus
delivered himself, Josiah Crabtree strode out of the dormitory, banging
the door after him.

"Isn't he an angel!" murmured Andy.

"The sweetest teacher that ever grew!" returned Pepper.

"I'd like to know how long Captain Putnam will put up with him," was
Jack's comment.

"I don't believe it will be very long," answered Fred.

The cadets finished their dressing and hurried below. On account of the
storm the morning drill was held in the gymnasium, and then the young
soldiers marched to the mess-room. On the way several could not resist
the temptation to pick up some snow and throw it at each other.

"Hi, you stop that!" roared Reff Ritter, as a snowball took him in the
neck. "Who threw that?" he demanded; but nobody answered him. "I believe
it was you, Ditmore!" he went on, turning an ugly look on Pepper.

"That's one for tampering with our bicycles, Ritter," retorted Pepper.

It was a chance shot, taken on the spur of the moment, but it told. Reff
Ritter started and turned pale.

"Who--er--told you I--er--tampered with your bicycles?" he stammered.

"Never mind who told me, Ritter. We are going to get square with you,
and don't you forget it."

"Who said I touched 'em?" grumbled the bully.

"Never mind about that."

"You are trying to corner me, that what's you are up to!" grumbled
Ritter. "But you shan't do it! I never touched your wheels, and you
can't prove that I did. Now don't you throw any more snowballs at me,
or I'll report you." And then Ritter hurried into the mess-room as fast
as he could.

Pepper, Jack and Andy looked at each other.

"He is guilty, I know it!" said Pepper firmly.

"I believe you," answered the young major; and Andy nodded his head to
show that he agreed with his chums.




CHAPTER XV

THE SNOWBALL BATTLE


"Now then, fellows, for the greatest snowball battle of the age!"

"Here is where Company A smothers Company B!"

"Rats! You mean that Company B will bury Company A out of sight!"

"Hi, Major Ruddy! What side are you going on?" queried Bart Conners, who
still commanded Company B.

"He is coming on our side!" answered Henry Lee, the captain of the other
company.

"Well, I can't fight on both sides," answered the young major with a
laugh.

"Go with the company that wins!" suggested Pepper, with a grin.

"Toss up a cent for it," suggested Andy.

"All right, I'll toss up," answered Jack, and did so, and it was decided
that he should fight with Company B.

"Good enough!" cried Pepper, who was in that command. "Now Company A is
licked, sure!"

"Not much!" was the answer from Stuffer Singleton. "We'll win, sure!"

"We will, unless you stop to eat a doughnut!" put in Joe Nelson, and at
this remark a general laugh went up, for Stuffer had once lost a
long-distance running race because he stopped on the way to devour some
cookies he had in his pocket.

It was after school hours, and the cadets had gathered on the field
where, during the summer, corn had been raised. It was to be a battle
between the two companies of the school battalion, with the company
captain as leader on each side.

The preliminary rules were speedily arranged. Lines were drawn at either
end of the field, about five hundred feet apart. In the center, about a
hundred feet apart, two other lines were drawn. Along the latter lines
the cadets arranged themselves.

"Now then, fighting will begin when the school-bell rings out four!"
cried the cadet who had been made referee. "The company that chases the
other company over its back line wins the contest. No fighting with
anything but snow allowed. Anybody using his fists, or a stone, or a
lump of ice, will be ruled out of the contest."

With all possible speed the young soldiers started to supply themselves
with snowballs, and soon each had ten to twenty in his hands and pockets
and under his arms or at his feet.

"Get ready!" shouted Bart, as he glanced hastily at his watch.

"Give it to 'em hot when the bell rings!" came from Henry Lee.

Half a minute more and the Hall bell commenced to toll out the hour. The
bell had not yet ceased to ring when there came a grand shower of
snowballs from each company. The shower was so thick that a few of the
snowballs hit each other.

"Forward!" shouted Captain Bart.

"Forward!" echoed Captain Henry.

And then the two long lines of cadets rushed forward over the
snow-covered field until they were within thirty or forty feet of each
other. Then came another shower of snowballs.

"Wow!" yelled one cadet. "Oh, my nose!"

"Caesar's helmet! That hit me in the eye!" came from another.

"Say, don't try to knock out all my teeth!" added a third.

"Charge!" yelled the captain of Company A. "Charge! Get 'em on the run
right now!"

"Stand firm!" came from the commander of Company B. "Now then, fire!"

The rush of Company A was met with an extra heavy volley of snowballs.
The cadets staggered under the onslaught and then came to a halt.

"Now then, up and at 'em!" yelled Captain Bart. And yelling like wild
Indians, his command charged on Company A. The snowballs flew thick and
fast, and slowly but surely Company A was forced to give ground until it
stood on the line from which it had started. But by that time Company B
was out of ammunition and had to pause to manufacture more snowballs.

In the ranks of Company A were Ritter, Coulter and Paxton. Paxton had of
late somewhat dropped the others, but Reff and Gus were as thick as
ever. They were now standing side by side.

"Say, I'd like to give it to Ruddy and those others," muttered Coulter.

"So would I," whispered Ritter in return. "Confound 'em, I'd like to
know if they really know the truth about the bicycles."

"I don't see how they found out; nobody was around when you fixed 'em
up."

"Maybe somebody was spying; that sneak of a Mumps, for instance."

"If he was, and told on us, I'll fix him for it."

Both cadets were making snowballs near a hollow. As Ritter scraped the
snow up he uncovered several jagged stones.

"Say, look here!" he whispered, and pointed at the stones. "Let's fix
up some special snowballs for Ruddy & Company!" he added with a knowing
look at his crony.

"All right; but be careful you are not caught," answered Gus Coulter.

Both cadets got down close to the jagged stones and adroitly slipped
several of them into the snowballs they were making.

"Wait till we are pretty close," directed Ritter. "Then let drive for
all you are worth."
