survey in the mirror before going to the game. High School matters
formed the principal theme of conversation, and Grace was not surprised
to learn that Eleanor had been carrying things with a high hand in
third-year French class, in which Ellen Holt, one of the Portville
girls, recited.

"She speaks French as well as Professor La Roche," said Miss Holt, "but
she nearly drives him crazy sometimes. She will pretend she doesn't
understand him and will make him explain the construction of a sentence
over and over again, or she will argue with him about a point until he
loses his temper completely. She makes perfectly ridiculous caricatures
of him, and leaves them on his desk when class is over, and she asks him
to translate impertinent slang phrases, which he does, sometimes,
before he realizes how they are going to sound. Then the whole class
laughs at him. She certainly makes things lively in that class."

The sound of the bell cut short the chat and the four girls hurried
downstairs to greet Jessica, Mabel and the girls who were the Bright's
guests. Nora and Anne, with their charges, came next, and last of all
David, Tom and Hippy paraded up the walk, in single file, blowing
lustily on tin horns and waving blue and white banners. A brief season
of introduction followed, then Grace distributed blue and white rosettes
with long streamers that she had made for the occasion, to each member
of the party. Well supplied with Oakdale colors, they set out for the
football grounds, where an immense crowd of people had gathered to see
the big game of the season.

"I shall never forget the first football game I saw in Oakdale," said
Anne to David as they made their way to the grandstand. "It ended very
sensationally for me."

"I should say it did," replied David, smiling. "Confidentially, Anne, do
you ever hear from your father?"

"Not very often," replied Anne. "He is not liable to trouble me again,
however, because he knows that I will not go back to the stage, no
matter what he says. He was with the western company of 'True Hearts'
last year, but I don't know where he is now, and I don't care. Don't
think I'm unfeeling; but it is impossible for me to care for him, even
though he is my father."

"I understand," said David sympathetically. "Now let's forget him and
have a good time."

"Hurrah! Here comes the band!" shouted Hippy.

The "Oakdale Military Band" took their places in the improvised
bandstand and began a short concert before the game with the "Stars and
Stripes," while the spectators unconsciously kept time with their feet
to the inspiring strains.

When the two teams appeared on the field there were shouts of enthusiasm
from the friends of the players, and the band burst forth with the High
School song, in which the students joined.

After the usual preliminaries, the game began, and for the next hour
everything else was forgotten save the battle that waged between the two
teams.

Miriam Nesbit, Eva Allen and Marian Barber, with their guests, joined
Grace's party, and soon the place they occupied became the very center
of enthusiasm. Reddy, who was playing left end on the home team,
received an ovation every time he made a move, and when towards the end
of the game he made a touchdown, his friends nearly split their loyal
throats in expressing their approval.

It was over at last, and Oakdale had won a complete victory over the
Georgetown foe, who took their defeat with becoming grace. As soon as
Reddy could free himself from the grasp of his school fellows, who would
have borne him from the field in triumph if he had not stoutly resisted,
he hurried to his friends, who showered him with congratulations.

"O you Titian-haired star!" cried Hippy, clasping his hands in mock
admiration. "You are the rarest jewel in the casket. Words fail to
express my feelings.

          "'O joy, O bliss, O rapture! Let happiness now hap!
            I am a sea of gurgling glee, with ecstacy on tap.'"

Hippy recited this effusion in a killing falsetto voice, and endeavored
to embrace Reddy fervently, but was dragged back by Tom and David, to
Reddy's visible relief.

"He's the idol of the hour. Don't put your irreverent hands on him," was
David's injunction.

"But I adore idols," persisted Hippy. "Let me at him."

"Quit it, fat one!" growled Reddy, with a grin. "I'll settle with you
later."

With gay laughter and jest, the young folks made their way from the
grounds and started down the road toward home.

The whole party, walking four abreast, had just turned the curve where
the road ended and Main Street began, when there was a hoarse honk!
honk! and a runabout decorated in blue and white, containing Eleanor and
Edna Wright, bore down upon them at lightning speed. The girls, uttering
little cries of alarm, scattered to both sides of the road, with the
exception of Mabel Allison, who, in her hurry to get out of the way,
stumbled and fell directly in the path of the oncoming machine.




CHAPTER XIII

A THANKSGIVING FROLIC


But sudden as had been Mabel's fall, Grace Harlowe was equal to the
emergency. With a bound she reached the middle of the road, seized Mabel
and dragged her back just as the runabout passed over the place where
she had fallen. It almost grazed her outstretched hand, then shot on
down the road without slackening its speed for an instant.

There was a cry of horror from the young folks that ended in a sigh of
relief. David and Tom Gray quickly raised Mabel to her feet and turned
to Grace, whose face was ghastly, while she trembled like a leaf. The
reaction had set in the moment she realized that Mabel was safe. Jessica
and Nora had both begun to cry, while the faces of the others fully
expressed their feelings.

"Grace," said Tom in a husky voice, "that was the quickest move I ever
saw any one make."

Grace drew a long breath, the color returned to her pale face and in a
measure she recovered herself.

"Some one had to do something," she said weakly. "I was the nearest to
her, that's all. Are you hurt, Mabel, dear?" she asked, turning to the
young girl, who stood by Jessica, looking white and dazed.

"It came so suddenly," she faltered, "I couldn't get up. It was awful!"
She shuddered, then burst into tears, burying her face in Jessica's
shoulder.

"There, there," soothed Jessica, wiping her own eyes. "It's all right
now. Stand up straight and let me brush your coat. You are all mud."

"Here come the would-be murderesses now," cried Hippy. "They actually
managed to stop and turn around, and now they are coming this way. One
of them is my pet abomination--Miss Wright. She used to call me 'fatty'
when I was little, and I've never forgiven her. But who is the reckless
young person playing chauffeur? She ought to be put in jail for
exceeding the speed limit."

"Hush!" said Grace. "Here she is."

The runabout had stopped and Eleanor alighted. Ignoring the four chums,
she walked up to Miriam Nesbit.

"Will you please tell me if any one is hurt?" she asked pettishly.
"I saw some one fall, but couldn't stop the machine. I supposed the
highway was for vehicles, not pedestrians four abreast."

"Miss Savell, you have just missed running over Miss Allison," said
Miriam coldly. "Had it not been for Miss Harlowe, there would have been
a serious accident. I should advise you to drive more carefully in
future, or you may not escape so easily another time."

Eleanor flushed at these words and said haughtily, "I did not ask for
advice, I asked for information."

"Very true," replied Miriam calmly, "but you see I have given you both."

"You are the most ill-bred lot of girls I have ever seen," returned
Eleanor crossly, "and I think you are making a great deal of unnecessary
fuss over a small matter. Why didn't your prize orphan get out of the
way with the rest of you? Besides, you have no right to block a public
highway, as you did. I am very sorry I came back at all."

Turning on her heel, she walked back to the runabout, climbed in and
drove down the road like the wind, apparently indifferent as to what
comment her heartless behavior might create.

"Who on earth is that girl?" inquired Reddy Brooks. "She has about as
much sympathy as a stone."

"That is Eleanor Savell," replied Anne Pierson, "and she can be nice if
she wishes, but she doesn't like us very well. That's why she was so
hateful."

"So that's the famous Eleanor?" said Tom Gray in a low tone to
Grace. "Aunt Rose was telling me about her this morning at breakfast.
I supposed she was a great friend of yours."

"She was, but she isn't," returned Grace. "That's rather indefinite.
However, I'll tell you about it as we go back."

"She certainly can't complain as far as looks are concerned," said
Hippy. "She must have yards of blue ribbon that she won at baby shows
when but a mere infant."

"Attention, boys and girls," cried Grace. "Let us forget what has
happened and have just as good a time to-night as we can. We mustn't
spoil the party."

"I move that we give Grace Harlowe a special round of applause for being
a heroine," cried Hippy. "Hurrah!"

His example was quickly followed and the noise of the cheering brought
people to their doors to see what the excitement was about.

"Do stop," protested Grace. "People will begin asking all sorts of
questions."

"Don't interfere with our simple pleasures," expostulated Hippy. "Let us
howl in peace. High School yell next, please."

By the time the party had reached the center of the town where their
ways parted, the shadow cast by the near accident had almost
disappeared.

By eight o'clock that evening the last guest had arrived, and the
Harlowe's hospitable home was the scene of radiant good cheer. Mrs.
Gray, enthroned in a big chair in one corner of the drawing room, was in
her element, and the young folks vied with each other in doing her
homage. The sprightly old lady was never so happy as when surrounded by
young folks. She had a word or smile for each one, and the new girls who
had at first felt rather timid about meeting her, were soon entirely at
ease in her presence.

The greater part of the furniture had been removed from the big living
room and the floor had been crashed; while a string orchestra that made
a specialty of playing for parties had been hired for the pleasure of
those who cared to dance.

As dancing was the chief amusement at nearly all of the young people's
parties in Oakdale, the floor was filled from the beginning of the first
waltz until supper was announced. This was served at two long tables in
the dining room, Mrs. Gray occupying the seat of honor at the head of
one, and Miss Thompson, who was a favorite at High School parties, the
other. There were miniature ears of corn, turkeys, pumpkins and various
other favors appropriate to Thanksgiving at each one's place. In the
center of one table stood two dolls dressed in the style of costume worn
by the Pilgrim fathers and mothers. They held a scroll between them on
which was printed the Thanksgiving Proclamation. In the center of the
other table were two dolls, one dressed in football uniform, a miniature
football under its arm, while the other, dressed as a High School girl,
held up a blue banner with O. H. S. on it in big, white letters.

This had been Grace's idea. She had dressed the dolls with the idea of
contrasting the first Thanksgiving with that of to-day. There was a
great craning of necks from those at the one table to see the central
figures on the other, but soon every one settled down to the discussion
of the dainties provided for them.

The supper ended with a toast to their young hostess, which was drunk
standing, and then the guests repaired to the drawing room, where
impromptu stunts were in order. Every one was obliged to do something,
if only to make a remark appropriate to the occasion. Nora sang, Anne
recited, Grace and Miriam did a Spanish dance that they had practised
during vacation with remarkable spirit and effect. Jessica was then
detailed to play, and under cover of her music, Tom, Reddy, David and
Hippy left the room, Tom returning presently to announce solemnly that
an original one-act drama, entitled "The Suffragette," written by Mr.
Wingate and presented by a notable cast, would be the next offering.

After a moment's wait, Hippy, Reddy and David appeared, and were greeted
with shouts of laughter. Reddy minced along in a bonnet and skirt
belonging to Mrs. Harlowe, while Hippy wore a long-sleeved gingham
pinafore of Grace's, which lacked considerable of meeting in the back,
and was kept on by means of a sash. After deliberately setting their
stage in full view of the audience at one end of the room, the play
began, with David as the meek, hen-pecked husband, Hippy as the
neglected child, who wept and howled continuously, while Reddy played
the unnatural wife and mother, who neglected her family and held woman's
suffrage meetings in the street.

The dialogue was clever, and the action of the sketch so ridiculous that
the audience laughed from the first line until the climax, especially
when the suffragette was hustled off to jail by Tom Gray, in the role of
a policeman, for disturbing the peace, while her husband and child
executed a wild dance of joy as she was hauled off the scene, protesting
vigorously.

The applause was tremendous and the cast were obliged to bow their
thanks several times before it subsided. Songs, speeches and recitations
followed rapidly until everyone had contributed something in the way of
a stunt. Then the guests formed two long lines from the living room
straight through the big archway into the drawing room, and soon a
Virginia reel was in full swing, led off by Mr. Harlowe and Mrs. Gray,
who took her steps as daintily as when she had danced at her first party
so many years before.

After the reel, the young folks romped through "Paul Jones," and then
the party broke up, all declaring that never before had they had quite
such a good time.

As Grace sleepily prepared for bed, she felt a little thrill of pride at
the success of her party, and her only regret was the fact that of all
those invited, Eleanor was the only one who had refused to be present.




CHAPTER XIV

ELEANOR FINDS A WAY


Now that Thanksgiving was past, basketball became the topic of the hour.
The juniors had accepted the challenge of the senior class, and had
agreed to play them on Saturday, December 12, at two o'clock, in the
gymnasium. Only two weeks remained in which to practise. Their sorority
enthusiasm had so completely run away with them that they had even
neglected basketball until now. Therefore Grace Harlowe lost no time
in getting Miss Thompson's permission to use the gymnasium, and promptly
notified her team and the subs. to meet there, in gymnasium suits,
prepared to play, that afternoon.

The instant the last bell sounded on lessons, ten girls made for their
lockers, and fifteen minutes later the first team and the subs. were
moving toward the gymnasium deep in the discussion of the coming game
and their chances for success over their opponents.

A brief meeting was held, and the girls were assigned to their
positions. Grace had fully intended that Miriam should play center, but
when she proposed it, Miriam flatly refused to do so, and asked for her
old position of right forward.

"You are our captain," she declared to Grace, "and the best center
I ever saw on a girls' team. It would be folly to change now. Don't
you agree with me, girls?"

Nora was detailed as left forward, while Marian Barber and Eva Allen
played right and left guards. The substitutes were also assigned their
positions and practice began.

Before they had been on the floor twenty minutes the girls were
thoroughly alive to the joy of the game and worked with the old-time
dash and spirit that had won them the championship the previous year.
Now that they were in harmony with each other, they played with
remarkable unity, and after an hour's practice Grace decided that they
were in a fair way to "whip the seniors off the face of the earth."

"I never saw you girls work better!" she exclaimed. "It will be a sorry
day for the seniors when we line up on the twelfth."

"There'll be a great gnashing of senior teeth after the game," remarked
Nora confidently.

"Do you know, girls," said Grace, as they left the gymnasium that
afternoon, "I am sorry that Eleanor won't be peaceable. I wanted her to
like every bit of our school life and thought she'd surely be interested
in basketball. I suppose she will stay away from the game merely
because we are on the team. It is really a shame for her to be so
unreasonable."

"Grace Harlowe, are you ever going to stop mourning over Eleanor?" cried
Miriam impatiently. "She doesn't deserve your regret and is too selfish
to appreciate it. I know what I am talking about because I used to be
just as ridiculous as she is, and knowing what you suffered through me,
I can't bear to see you unhappy again over some one who is too trivial
to be taken seriously."

"You're a dear, Miriam!" exclaimed Nora impulsively.

