rather queer."

"She looks queer, too," said Bessie Kirk to Winona, as they stood
watching Joyce's retreating figure. "I thought she was going to faint a
while ago. It'll be a hideous nuisance if she has to be out of it."

"Our best bowler! It's unthinkable!" groaned Winona.

"It's hard luck, but I'm certain Joyce won't play on Saturday," said
Mary Payne.

The team was feeling rather down at the prospect.

"We may throw up the sponge if Joyce is off!" mourned Olave Parry.

"Shut up, you bluebottle!" snapped Winona, decidedly out of temper.
"Joyce may be absolutely well again by Saturday, and if she isn't
Marjorie Kemp must take her place. Do be sporting! You'll never win if
you make up your mind beforehand that you're going to lose!"

When Winona walked into _V.a._ on the following morning she looked
anxiously in the direction of Joyce's desk, but the familiar check dress
and amber pigtail were not to be seen. Little groups of girls were
standing in clusters, talking in apparent consternation.

"Well! Have you heard the news?" asked Garnet, stepping forward to meet
her friend.

"No. What's the damage? You're looking very down in the dumps!"

"Joyce Newton has developed small-pox!"

"Nonsense!" exploded Winona.

"It's perfectly true," said Garnet, with severe dignity in her voice.
"One only wishes for Joyce's sake that it wasn't! The news has only just
come. Helena Maitland knows about it. She lives next door, and saw the
doctor's car at the Newtons' gate this morning."

"I told you Joyce looked queer yesterday!" said Bessie Kirk.

"Suppose we all catch it!" shuddered Freda Long.

"Don't! It's too horrible!"

There was a feeling of utter consternation among the girls as the bad
news was discussed. They wondered what was going to happen.

"Miss Bishop is telephoning to the Medical Officer of Health,"
volunteered Olave Parry, who had been downstairs to seek fresh
information.

Just then Miss Huntley came into the room, though it was not yet nine
o'clock. She went at once to her desk and took the call over.

"What's going to happen about Joyce?" one or two of the girls ventured
to ask her.

"I don't know yet. I expect we shall all be put into quarantine. Miss
Bishop is making arrangements. In the meantime we will go on with our
work."

It was wise of Miss Huntley to begin the English Language lesson, for
though every one was of course very abstracted, it gave some ostensible
occupation. Before the hour was over Miss Bishop sailed into the room.
She looked pale and anxious, but spoke with her usual calm dignity.

"Girls," she announced, "you have heard of the very difficult situation
in which the school is placed. I have rung up Dr. Barnes, the Medical
Officer of Health, and he tells me that the whole of _V.a._ must be
regarded as 'contact cases.' That means that as Joyce has been amongst
you, it is possible for any of you to develop the disease. In order to
avoid the spread of infection throughout the city, you will have to be
most carefully kept apart. I have sent all the other girls home, and you
will stay at the school during to-day. Dr. Barnes is coming this morning
to re-vaccinate you, and this afternoon you are to be taken to the Camp
at Dunheath, where you will stay until the period of quarantine is over.
Go home? Most certainly not! No girl is to leave the school on any
pretext whatever. I am communicating with your home people and
requesting that they send you a few necessary things to take to the
camp, but no personal interviews can be allowed. Dr. Barnes' orders are
most emphatic. You need not be alarmed, for if you are all re-vaccinated
it is highly improbable that you will be infected, and I think you will
all enjoy yourselves at Dunheath."

When the Principal had gone the girls clustered round Miss Huntley to
discuss the situation.

"Yes, of course I'm going with you," said the mistress. "I'm a contact
case as much as anybody else! Miss Bishop tells me that Dr. Barnes will
send a hospital nurse with us. It's a nuisance to be in quarantine, but
it will be beautiful out in the country just now, and we'll manage to
enjoy ourselves."

The girls took the matter in various fashions according to their
respective temperaments. Some were nervous, while others regarded it as
a joke. The latter rallied their more timorous companions with scant
mercy.

"Oh, buck up, you sillies!" said Marjorie Kemp, to the tearful plaints
of Agatha James and Irene Mills. "Vaccination doesn't hurt! It's nothing
but a scratch. You might be going to have your arms cut off. For
goodness' sake show some pluck! Suppose you were in the trenches? The
Camp will be just topping. We'll have the time of our lives!"

"If we don't break out in spots!" wailed Irene.

"Well, wait till you do before you make a fuss. You're far more likely
to catch a thing if you're afraid of it."

"Oh, I say!" said Winona, suddenly remembering Saturday's event. "The
match to-morrow will be all off!"

"Hold me up! So it will! What a grizzly nuisance! Oh, the hard luck of
it!"

"Well, it can't be helped! We must play the Sixth later on."

"Kirsty'll be as savage as we are!"

"Poor old Joyce, she's responsible for a good deal of damage!"

The rest of the day passed in an extraordinary fashion. V.a.
had the whole of the school premises absolutely and entirely to itself.
The Fourth Form room was turned into a temporary surgery, and Dr. Barnes
installed himself there with tubes of vaccine and packets of new darning
needles. Each girl in turn went first to Miss Bishop and had her arm
thoroughly sterilized with boiled water and boracic lotion, and was then
passed on to the medical officer for vaccination. The scratch with the
needle really did not hurt, and the little operations were soon over.
Sixteen maidens walking about waiting for their arms to dry before
re-donning their blouses made a rather comical sight. The giggles that
ensued raised the spirits of even Agatha and Irene.

"Glad it was done on our left arms! I expect we sha'n't be in much form
for cricket after this, unless we play one-handed!" laughed Winona. "By
the by, will there be any field we can practice on out at the camp?"

"I expect so," returned Miss Huntley. "You had better make a collection
of bats, balls and stumps and a few tennis rackets, and also your school
books. Put them all together, and Miss Bishop will have them sent to
us."

The girls hastened to sort out the necessary impedimenta for cricket and
tennis, but arranged piles of books with less enthusiasm, the general
opinion being that it was rather stiff to be expected to do work at the
Camp. They were each allowed to take a book from the school library, and
Miss Huntley added a pile of foolscap paper, pens and a big bottle of
ink, which the girls devoutly hoped might get broken on the way and thus
save them the labor of writing exercises. They had dinner and a four
o'clock tea at school, after which meal Miss Bishop, who seemed to have
spent most of the day at the telephone, announced that arrangements were
now completed, and that they must get ready to start. Great was the
excitement when at five o'clock a motor char-a-banc made its appearance.
The sixteen "contacts" and Miss Huntley took their places, their
hand-bags, which had been sent from their respective homes during the
course of the day, were stowed away with the rest of their luggage
inside a motor 'bus, and the company, feeling much more like a picnic
party than possibly infected cases, drove merrily away for their period
of quarantine.




CHAPTER XI

The Open-air Camp


If this particular Friday had been an exciting day to the girls of
V.a., it had certainly proved a most agitating one to the
Medical Officer of Health for Seaton. Upon his energy and organization
depended the prevention of a serious epidemic in the city, and he had
shown himself admirably able to cope with the sudden emergency. The
Corporation had lately set up a camp for children threatened with
tuberculosis, and this was commandeered by Dr. Barnes as a suitable
place for quarantine. It lay five miles away from Seaton, on the top of
a hill in a very open situation in the midst of fields, so was
excellently fitted for the purpose. The children under treatment there
had been hurriedly taken back to their homes in Seaton, extra beds and
supplies had been sent out, and a hospital nurse installed in charge, so
that all was in readiness when the char-a-banc arrived.

The Camp consisted of a long wooden shelter or shed, the south side of
which was entirely open to the air. The boarded floor was raised about
three feet above the level of the field, and projected well beyond the
roof line, thus forming a kind of terrace. Inside the shelter was a row
of small beds, and a space was curtained off at either end, on one side
for a kitchen and on the other to make a cubicle for Miss Huntley.
Outside, under a large oak tree, stood a table and benches. Nothing
could have been more absolutely plain and bare as regards furniture. The
girls took possession, however, with the utmost enthusiasm. The idea of
"living the simple life" appealed to them. Who wanted chairs and chests
of drawers and wash-stands? It would be fun to sleep in the shelter, and
spend the whole day out of doors.

"It's too topping for anything!" declared Marjorie Kemp, after a careful
inspection of the premises. "We shall have to keep all our things inside
our bags, and wash in an enameled tin basin, and drink our tea out of
mugs!"

"It will be precious having meals under that tree!" agreed Bessie Kirk.

"What shall we do if it rains?" inquired Irene Mills.

"Go to bed with hot bottles, like the children did," replied Nurse
Robinson. "They always thought that prime fun, so I expect you will too.
You'll soon get into the life here."

The view from the shelter was most beautiful. In the far away distance
they could see the towers of Seaton Minster and the spires of the
churches, while all around lay lush meadows, fields of growing corn, and
woods in the glory of June foliage. The Camp stood in the corner of a
very large pasture, with hedges all covered with lovely wild roses and
tangles of honeysuckle, while a wood close by showed a tempting vista of
pine trees. The fresh country air and the smell of flowers and pines
were delicious.

Life at the Camp was arranged according to a strict time-table. Every
one rose at seven, and a certain number of volunteers helped to prepare
breakfast. Then came bed-making, crockery washing and potato peeling, at
which duties the girls took turns. From 9.30 to 12.30 they had classes
with Miss Huntley, while Nurse Robinson superintended the cooking of the
dinner on the large oil stove. With the exception of an hour's
preparation the rest of the day was free from lessons. Tea was at four
and supper at seven, and by half-past nine every one was in bed, well
covered with blankets, and with a hot bottle if she liked, for the
nights were apt to be chilly to those unaccustomed to sleeping in the
open-air. The rules of quarantine were of course sternly kept. No girl
might go outside the pasture without special permission. Sometimes Miss
Huntley took her flock for a walk along quiet country roads and rambling
by-lanes, but the vicinity of their fellow-creatures was carefully
avoided.

"We're like the lepers in the Middle Ages!" laughed Garnet. "I feel as
if I ought to wear a coarse white cassock, and ring a bell as I go
about, to warn people to give me a wide berth!"

"It's amusing that the farmer has even driven his cows out of the
pasture since we arrived," said Evelyn. "He let them feed here while the
tuberculous children had their innings, and I should have thought
consumption germs were as bad as small-pox ones."

"They weren't real consumptives though, only threatened!"

"Well, we're not small-pox patients, either, only contacts!"

"I'm sorry for those poor kids, sent suddenly back to their slum homes
after being here for weeks," said Jess Gardner.

"Oh, the kids have had luck! There were only ten of them, and a lady at
Hawberry has rigged up a tent in her garden, and has them all there, so
Nurse told me this morning. They're living on the fat of the land, and
gaining pounds and pounds in weight, by the look of them."

"Good! I don't feel so bad at having turned them out, then. It's great
here!"

"Rather! On the whole, I feel thoroughly grateful to Joyce."

From the girls' point of view there really was matter for
congratulation. None of them was ill, and all were having a most
delightful and quite unexpected three weeks' holiday in idyllic
surroundings. Their arms, to be sure, had "taken," and were more or less
sore, but that was a trifling inconvenience compared with the pleasures
of living in Camp. There was no anxiety to be felt about Joyce, she had
the disease very slightly, and was being treated with such extreme care
that her face would not be marked afterwards. It was ascertained that
she had caught the infection from some Belgians who had come over lately
from Holland, and who were now isolated by Dr. Barnes in a Cottage
Hospital. The Seaton High School was undergoing elaborate disinfection,
and as June was well advanced, the Governors had decided not to re-open
until September, when all possibility of contagion would have passed
away. This was the only part of the proceedings that did not please the
girls.

"It's rather sickening to have no end to the term," groaned Marjorie.
"Our matches are all off, and no swimming display or sports. It's rough
on Margaret and Kirsty particularly. Do you realize that when we go back
in September they'll both have left? All the prefects are leaving."

"Oh, hard luck! Who'll take their places?"

"Some of our noble selves, I suppose, if we're promoted to the Sixth."

"Who'll be General and Games Captain?"

"Ah! Ask me a harder, my intelligent child."

"I think I could put my finger on one of them, at any rate."

"So could I, perhaps, but I don't care to prophesy too soon," sighed
Bessie.

Whoever might be destined to wear future laurels at school, Winona, as
Captain of the V.a. team, assumed direction of the games at the
Camp. Part of the pasture was sufficiently level to make quite a fair
cricket pitch, while a piece in the opposite corner served as a tennis
court. An old man from the farm was bribed to come and cut the grass
with a scythe, but as no lawn-mower or roller was available, the result
was decidedly rough. The tennis enthusiasts rigged up a tape in lieu of
a net, and marked some courts with lime begged from the farmer. Their
games, owing to the general bumpiness of the ground, had at least the
charm of variety and excitement, and four umpires had to keep careful
and continual watch in order to decide whether the balls went over or
under the tape, which indeed collapsed occasionally, as the poles were
only sticks cut from the hedge.

If the tennis was funny, the cricket was even funnier. Many of the girls
could not use their left arms at all, consequently the batting was
extraordinary, and sometimes the easiest catches were missed. It was
very amusing, however, and perhaps for that reason provided more
entertainment than the most strict and orthodox play under the critical
eye of Kirsty might have done.

Really the quarantine party had a most idyllic time. In the warm June
weather it was delightful to live out of doors. There were rosy-violet
dawns and golden-red sunsets, and clear starry nights when the planet
Venus shone like a lamp in the dark blue of the sky, and owls would fly
hooting from the woods, and bats come flitting round the shelter in
search of moths. One day, indeed, was wet, but the girls sat or lay on
their beds, and read or talked, and played games, with intervals of
exciting dashes in mackintoshes to fetch cans of water, or dishes from
the larder.

On Sundays there was of course no church-going, but Miss Huntley read
morning prayers, and in the evening they sang hymns, each girl in turn
choosing the one she liked best. "All things bright and beautiful,"
"Nearer, my God, to Thee," and "Now the day is over" were prime
favorites, but perhaps the most popular of all was the ancient Hymn of
St. Patrick, which Miss Huntley had copied from a book of Erse
literature, and had adapted to an old Irish tune. The girls learnt it
easily, and its fifth century Celtic mysticism fascinated them. They
liked such bits as:

    "In light of sun, in gleam of snow
    Myself I bind;
    In speed of lightning, in depth of sea
    In swiftness of wind.
    God's Might to uphold me,
    God's Wisdom to guide,
    God's shield to protect me
    In desert and wild."

    *   *   *

    "Christ with me, before me,
    Behind me and in me,
    O Threeness in Oneness
    I praise and adore Thee."

"In Ireland it is sometimes called the Shamrock Hymn," said Miss
Huntley, "because St. Patrick used the little green shamrock leaf to
explain to the chiefs the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. The original is
in a very ancient dialect of the Irish Celtic, and was preserved in an
old manuscript book written on parchment. It always reminds me of the
'Benedicite omnia opera' of our prayer-book; the thought is the same in
both: 'O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord' is
about the sum of it all."

Except for the trifling trouble of vaccination, the effects of which in
most cases were soon over, the quarantine party enjoyed radiant health.
Dr. Barnes came twice a week to inspect, and Nurse Robinson kept a
vigilant watch for headaches, back-aches, and sickness. None of these
symptoms appeared, however, and all began to congratulate themselves
that the infection had been avoided. There was a burst of warm weather
at the beginning of July, which made the hill breezes of Dunheath highly
acceptable. It was too hot during the daytime to play active games; the
girls lounged about under the shade of the trees, and read the
illustrated papers with which they were kept plentifully supplied.

"I've never really had time before to study the toilet hints," said
Beatrice Howell one afternoon, poring over a certain page headed "My
Lady's Boudoir." "It seems to me that we ought to take our complexions
more seriously. We actually wash our faces with soap and water, and
'Lady Veronica' says here that that's an absolutely suicidal practice
for delicate skins. She gives all kinds of recipes for what one should
do. I wish I could have a few lessons in face massage. I wonder how hard
one ought to rub? And why a downward movement all the time?" (Beatrice
was stroking her cheeks contemplatively as she spoke.) "Why mayn't you
rub upwards?"

"The Princess recommends gentle pinching," said Mollie Hill, who was
studying the columns of a rival paper, "and then an application of Mrs.
Courtenay's lavender cream. We ought to be careful not to get freckled
or sunburnt. 'Lady Marjorie' gives some splendid prescriptions against
both. I wonder how the papers always get the aristocracy to write their
Beauty Hints? I shouldn't have thought they'd have condescended to
reveal their secrets!"

"My good girl! Don't flatter yourself that either 'Lady Veronica' or
'Lady Marjorie' is a member of the aristocracy," chuckled Bessie Kirk.
"They're probably most plebeian and dowdy-looking individuals living in
Bloomsbury boarding-houses, with pasty complexions and freckled noses,
and they get a percentage on the preparations they recommend. If you
notice, they always tell you to use Mrs. Somebody's pomade or face
cream, and it's generally very expensive."

"Oh, but this one's home-made!" declared Beatrice. "Look here! It says:
'Take an ounce of spermaceti, and melt it in a pan with a teacupful of
rose water. When thoroughly mixed, add an ounce of Vodax, which may be
obtained from any chemist, stir until quite cold, then put into pots.'
I'm sure that sounds simple enough, in all conscience."

"What about the Vodax, though? If you went to the chemist's you'd find
it is a patent preparation, and very expensive, and it would just knock
the bottom out of the 'home-made' theory of the recipe."

"There must be something in all these hints, though," said Mollie
plaintively, "or the paper wouldn't publish them every week."

"Well, perhaps there is, to a certain extent, but just think of the time
it would take to carry them out, to say nothing of the expense of
cosmetics. Here, give me the book a sec, and a piece of pencil. I want
to make a calculation. Now, if you really follow 'Lady Marjorie's'
advice, your day will run something like this. It's a kind of beauty
time-table:

Face Massage, Morning                                       10 minutes
 "     "      Evening                                       10   "
Hair Drill, Morning                                         15   "
 "     "    Evening                                         15   "
Application of cloths wrung out in hot water to face daily  30   "
Breathing Exercises                                         15   "
Physical    "                                               15   "
Manicure                                                     5   "
Oatmeal applications                                         5   "
                                                            ---
