myself, my wife and son, and, I may say, of my father, too, although at
present he may not realize the kindness of your offer. I do not think it
likely that, if James Stuart prevails, and Ireland is rent from England,
we shall avail ourselves of your offer, for we have more than sufficient
of this world's goods to remove to England, and there settle ourselves
and our son, for assuredly Ireland would be no place where a Protestant
could dwell in peace and quietness. Nevertheless, I thank you heartily,
and shall ever gratefully bear in mind the promise you have made, and the
fact that, although you have the power to turn us from our home, you have
stayed from doing so. There has been much wrong done on both sides; and,
from a boy, when I have seen you ride into or from your home, I have felt
that I and mine wronged you, by being the possessors of your father's
lands."

"They were the spoil of battle," Zephaniah broke in fiercely.

"Yes, they were the spoil of battle," his son repeated; "but there are
limits, even to the rights of conquerors. I have read history, and I know
that nowhere but in Ireland did conquerors ever dispossess whole peoples,
and take possession of their lands."

"The Israelites took the land of Canaan," Zephaniah interrupted.

"I am speaking of modern wars, father. For centuries, no such act of
wholesale spoliation was ever perpetrated; and considering, as I do, that
the act was an iniquitous one, although we have benefited by it, I
consider the offer which Captain Davenant has made to us to be a noble
one.

"I have to thank you, sir, also, for your kindness to my son--a kindness
which doubtless saved his life, as well as that of many others in
Londonderry; and believe me that, whatever comes of this horrible war, I
and mine will never forget the kindnesses we have received at your
hands."

"The affair was my son's, rather than mine," Captain Davenant said; "but
I was glad to be able to assist him in aiding your brave boy. He is a
noble fellow, and you have every reason to be proud of him."

"I must add my thanks to those of my husband," Hannah said, coming out
from the house, having listened to the conversation through an open
window. "We had suffered so, until your son brought us news of John, two
days since. It is strange, indeed, that your son should have been the
means of saving one of a household whom he cannot but have learnt to
regard as the usurpers of his father's rights. It was but last night I
was reading of Jonathan and David, and it seemed to me that, assuredly,
the same spirit that they felt for each other was in our sons."

"The boys are very fond of each other, Mrs. Whitefoot, and I am glad of
it. They are both manly fellows, and there is no reason why the feuds of
the fathers should descend to the children."

With a cordial goodbye, Captain Davenant rode off.

"Jabez," Zephaniah said, as they turned into the house, "I had not
thought to hear a son of mine rise in rebellion against his father."

"Father," Jabez said, "for forty-five years I have been a good son to
you; but it is time that I took my stand. It seems to me that the
principles upon which the soldiers of Cromwell fought, were the
principles which animated the Israelites of old. Exodus, Judges, and
Kings were the groundwork of their religion, not the Gospels. It has
gradually been borne upon me that such is not the religion of the New
Testament, and, while I seek in no way to dispute your right to think as
you choose, I say the time has come when I and my wife will act upon our
principles."

"It is written, Honour thy father and thy mother," Zephaniah said
sternly.

"Ay, father, I have honoured you, and I shall honour you to the end; but
a man has no right to give up his conscience to his father; for it is
written, also, that a man shall leave father and mother, and wife and
home to follow the Lord. I have heard you, father, and the elders of our
church, quote abundant texts from Scripture, but never one, that I can
recall, from the New Testament. Hitherto, I have been as an Israelite of
Joshua's time. Henceforward, I hope to be a Christian. I grieve to anger
you, father, and for years I have held my peace rather than do so; but
the time has come when the spirit within me will no longer permit me to
hold my peace. In all worldly matters, I am still your obedient son,
ready to labour to my utmost to gather up wealth which I do not enjoy, to
live a life as hard as that of the poorest tenant on our lands; but, as
touching higher matters, I and my wife go our own way."

Without a word, Zephaniah took his hat and strode away from the house,
and, after much angry communing with himself, went to the minister and
deacons of his chapel, and laid the facts of the rebellion before them,
and asked their advice.

They were in favour of peace, for two of them were his tenants, and they
knew that the time could not be very far off when Jabez would take the
old man's place, and it would be a serious matter, indeed, to the chapel,
were he to be driven from its fold.

"We cannot expect that all shall see with our eyes, Zephaniah," the
minister said, "and, indeed, the offer, which thou sayest the man
Davenant made, was a generous one. It would be well, indeed, for our
brethren throughout Ireland, did all the original owners of their lands
so treat them. Thousands who, but a few months since, were prosperous
men, are now without a shelter wherein to lay their heads. The storm is
sweeping over us, the elect are everywhere smitten, and, should James
Stuart conquer, not a Protestant in Ireland but must leave its shores.
Therefore, although I would counsel no giving up of principle, no
abandonment of faith, yet I would say that this is no time for the
enforcement of our views upon weak vessels. I mourn that your son should,
for the time, have fallen away from your high standard, but I say it were
best to be patient with him."

At home, there were few words spoken after Zephaniah had gone out. Hannah
had thrown her arms round her husband's neck, and had said:

"I thank God for your words, Jabez. Now I am proud of you, as I have
never been proud before, that you have boldly spoken out for liberty of
conscience. I feel like one who has for many years been a slave, but who
is, at last, free."

Jabez kissed her, but was silent. To him, it had been a great trial to
rebel. He knew that he was right, and would have done it again, if
necessary; but it was a terrible thing to him to have openly withstood
the father to whom he had, from childhood, rendered almost implicit
obedience.

On his return, Zephaniah did not renew the subject; but from that time,
there was a great change in the moral atmosphere of the house. Zephaniah
was still master in all matters of daily work; but in other respects,
Jabez had completely emancipated himself.



Chapter 6: Dundalk.


After the failure before Derry, the utmost confusion prevailed in the
military councils, arising chiefly from the jealousies and conflicting
authorities of the French and Irish commanders. James was entirely under
the control of the French ambassador, who, together with all his
countrymen in Ireland, affected to despise the Irish as a rude and
uncivilized people; while the Irish, in turn, hated the French for their
arrogance and insolence. Many of the Irish gentlemen, who had raised
regiments at their private expense, were superseded to make room for
Frenchmen, appointed by the influence of the French ambassador. These
gentlemen returned home in disgust, and were soon followed by their men,
who were equally discontented at being handed over to the command of
foreigners, instead of their native leaders.

Every day, the breach widened between the French and Irish, and the
discontent caused by the king's exactions was wide and general; and if
William, at this time, had offered favourable terms to the Catholics, it
is probable that an arrangement could have been arrived at.

But William was busily at work, preparing an army for the conquest of the
country. Had Ireland stood alone, it is probable that England would, at
any rate for a time, have suffered it to go its own way; but its close
alliance with France, and the fact that French influence was all powerful
with James, rendered it impossible for England to submit to the
establishment of what would be a foreign and hostile power, so close to
her shores. Besides, if Ireland remained under the dominion of James, the
power of William on the throne of England could never have been
consolidated.

Although he had met with no resistance on his assumption of the throne,
he had the hearty support of but a mere fraction of the English people,
and his accession was the work of a few great Whig families, only. His
rule was by no means popular, and his Dutch favourites were as much
disliked, in England, as were James' French adherents in Ireland.

In Scotland, the Jacobite party were numerous and powerful, and were in
open rebellion to his authority. Thus, then, if William's position on the
throne of England was to be consolidated, it was necessary that a blow
should be struck in Ireland.

Torn by dissension, without plan or leading, the Irish army remained, for
months, inactive; most of the regiments having, after the northern
campaign, returned to the districts in which they were raised; and thus,
no preparation was made to meet the army which was preparing to invade
the country.

This, ten thousand strong, under the command of General Schomberg, who,
although eighty years of age, was still an able, active, and spirited
commander, embarked on the 8th of August at Chester, and on the 13th
landed near Bangor, in Carrickfergus Bay. There was no force there of
sufficient strength to oppose him.

Schomberg found Antrim and Belfast deserted; but the garrison at
Carrickfergus, consisting of two regiments, prepared vigorously for a
siege. Schomberg at once prepared to invest it, and in a short time
attacked it by land and sea. The siege was pressed with vigour, but the
garrison, under M'Carty Moore, defended themselves with the greatest
skill and bravery. As fast as breaches were battered in their walls, they
repaired them, and repulsed every attempt of the besiegers to gain a
footing in the town. The garrison were badly supplied with ammunition,
but they stripped the lead from the roofs of the castle and church to
make bullets.

But all this time, no attempt whatever was made to relieve them. The
French and Irish generals were disputing as to what was the best plan of
campaign. The king was busy making money with his trade with France; and,
after holding out until they had burned their last grain of powder, the
gallant garrison were forced to capitulate. Schomberg was too glad to get
the place to insist on hard terms, and the garrison marched out with all
the honours of war--drums beating, and matches alight--and were conveyed,
with all their stores, arms, and public and private property, to the
nearest Irish post.

The effect of this determined resistance, on the part of the little
garrison at Carrickfergus, was to impress Schomberg with the fact that
the difficulty of the task he had undertaken was vastly greater than he
had supposed. The success with which Londonderry had defended itself
against the Irish army had impressed him with the idea that the levies of
King James were simply contemptible; but the fighting qualities of the
garrison of Carrickfergus had shown him that they were a foe by no means
to be despised, and convinced him that the force at his command was
altogether inadequate to his necessities.

He therefore moved south with extreme caution. He found the country
altogether wasted and deserted. The Protestants had long since fled, and
were gathered round Derry and Enniskillen. The Catholics had now deserted
their homes, at his approach; and the troops, in their retreat, had
burned and wasted everything, so that he had no means of subsistence for
his army, and was obliged to rely upon the fleet, which he ordered to
follow him down the coast.

Schomberg was soon joined by three regiments of Enniskillen horse. The
appearance of these troops astonished the English. They resembled rather
a horde of Italian banditti than a body of European cavalry. They
observed little order in their military movements, and no uniformity of
dress or accoutrement. Each man was armed and clad according to his own
fancy, and accompanied by a mounted servant, carrying his baggage. But,
like the Cossacks, whom they closely resembled, they were distinguished
by an extreme rapidity of movement, and a fierceness and contempt of all
difficulty and danger. They calculated neither chances nor numbers, but
rushed to the attack of any foe with a ferocity and fanaticism which
almost ensured success, and they regarded the slaughter of a Papist as an
acceptable service to the Lord. They plundered wherever they went, and
were a scourge to the Irish Protestants as well as Catholics.

The troops furnished by Derry were similar in character to those from
Enniskillen. They could not endure the restraints of discipline, and were
little use in acting with the regular army, and, like the Cossacks, were
formidable only when acting by themselves. Schomberg and his successor,
and, indeed, the whole of the English officers, soon came to abhor these
savage and undisciplined allies.

Still, the Irish army made no move. Report had magnified Schomberg's
strength to more than twice its real numbers, and the military leaders
could not believe that, after so many months of preparation, William had
despatched so small an army for the conquest of Ireland.

Confusion and dismay reigned in Dublin. The French Marshal, De Rosen,
advised that Dublin and Drogheda should be abandoned, and that the Irish
army should be concentrated at Athlone and Limerick; but Tyrconnell went
to Drogheda, where the council of war was sitting, and strenuously
opposed this, promising that by the next night twenty thousand men should
be assembled there. Expresses were sent out in all directions; and by
forced marches, the Irish troops stationed in Munster directed their
course to Drogheda, in high spirits and anxious to meet the enemy.

Schomberg, although he had been reinforced by six thousand men from
England, fell back at the news of the gathering, and formed an intrenched
camp in a strong position between Dundalk and the sea. His approaches
were covered by mountains, rivers, and morasses; his communication was
open to the sea, and here he resolved to wait for reinforcements.

Captain Davenant became more and more despondent as to the cause in which
he had embarked.

"Without the king, and without his French allies," he said bitterly to
his wife, "we might hope for success; but these are enough to ruin any
cause. Were the king's object to excite discontent and disgust among his
subjects, he could not act otherwise than he is now doing. His whole
thoughts are devoted to wringing money out of the people, and any time he
has to spare is spent upon superintending the building of the nunneries,
in which he is so interested. As to the French, they paralyse all
military operations. They regard us as an inferior race, and act as if,
with their own five or six thousand troops, they could defeat all the
power of England. It is heartbreaking seeing our chances so wasted.

"Had advantage been taken of the enthusiasm excited when King James
landed; had he himself been wise and prudent, disinterested for himself,
and desirous of obtaining the affections of all classes; and had he
brought with him none of these French adventurers, he would, long ere
this, have been undisputed King of Ireland from end to end, and we should
have stood as one people in arms, ready to oppose ourselves to any force
that England could send against us. Never were chances so frittered away,
never such a succession of blunders and folly. It is enough to break
one's heart."

"I do hope, father, that when the troop marches again you will take me as
cornet. I am six months older than I was, and have learned a lot in the
last campaign. You have not filled up the place of Cornet O'Driscoll. I
did think, when he was killed in that last fight you had before Derry,
you would have appointed me."

"In some respects I am less inclined than ever, Walter," Captain Davenant
said; "for I begin to regard success as hopeless."

"It will make no difference, father, in that way, for if we are beaten
they are sure to hand all our land over to the Protestants. Besides,
things may turn out better than you think; and whether or no, I should
certainly like to do my best for Ireland."

"Well, we will think about it," Captain Davenant said; and Walter was
satisfied, for he felt sure that his father would finally accede to his
wishes.

It was late at night, when the mounted messenger dashed up to the door of
the castle and handed in an order. Captain Davenant opened it.

"We are to march, in half an hour's time, to Drogheda. The whole army is
to assemble there."

"Hurray!" Walter shouted. "Something is going to be done, at last."

A man was sent down to the village at once, to order the twenty men
quartered there to saddle and mount instantly, and ride up to the castle;
while another, on horseback, started for Bray to get the main body under
arms. Mrs. Davenant busied herself in packing the wallets of her husband
and son. She was very pale, but she said little.

"God bless you both," she said, when all was finished, "and bring you
back again safely. I won't ask you to take care of yourselves, because,
of course, you must do your duty, and with all my love I should not wish
you to draw back from that. When home and religion and country are at
stake, even we women could not wish to keep those we love beside us."

There was a last embrace, and then Captain Davenant and his son sprang on
their horses, which were waiting at the door, took their place at the
head of the party which had come up from the village, and rode away into
the darkness, while the two Mrs. Davenants gave free vent to the tears
which they had hitherto so bravely restrained.

At Bray, Captain Davenant found the rest of his troop drawn up in
readiness, and after a brief inspection, to see that all were present
with their proper arms and accoutrements, he started with them for
Dublin, and after a few hours' rest there continued his way towards
Drogheda.
