Don't waste it again on a live bird, I pray.
I'm an owl; you're another. Sir Critic, good-day!"
      And the barber kept on shaving.

    _James T. Fields._




At School-Close


The end has come, as come it must
  To all things; in these sweet June days
The teacher and the scholar trust
  Their parting feet to separate ways.

They part: but in the years to be
  Shall pleasant memories cling to each,
As shells bear inland from the sea
  The murmur of the rhythmic beach.

One knew the joys the sculptor knows
  When, plastic to his lightest touch,
His clay-wrought model slowly grows
  To that fine grace desired so much.

So daily grew before her eyes
  The living shapes whereon she wrought,
Strong, tender, innocently wise,
  The child's heart with the woman's thought.

And one shall never quite forget
  The voice that called from dream and play,
The firm but kindly hand that set
  Her feet in learning's pleasant way,--

The joy of Undine soul-possessed,
  The wakening sense, the strange delight
That swelled the fabled statue's breast
  And filled its clouded eyes with sight!

O Youth and Beauty, loved of all!
  Ye pass from girlhood's gate of dreams;
In broader ways your footsteps fall,
  Ye test the truth of all that seems.

Her little realm the teacher leaves,
  She breaks her wand of power apart,
While, for your love and trust, she gives
  The warm thanks of a grateful heart.

Hers is the sober summer noon
  Contrasted with your morn of spring;
The waning with the waxing moon,
  The folded with the outspread wing.

Across the distance of the years
  She sends her God-speed back to you;
She has no thought of doubts or fears;
  Be but yourselves, be pure, be true,

And prompt in duty; heed the deep,
  Low voice of conscience; through the ill
And discord round about you, keep
  Your faith in human nature still.

Be gentle: unto griefs and needs
  Be pitiful as woman should,
And, spite of all the lies of creeds,
  Hold fast the truth that God is good.

Give and receive; go forth and bless
  The world that needs the hand and heart
Of Martha's helpful carefulness
  No less than Mary's better part.

So shall the stream of time flow by
  And leave each year a richer good,
And matron loveliness outvie
  The nameless charm of maidenhood.

And, when the world shall link your names
  With gracious lives and manners fine,
The teacher shall assert her claims,
  And proudly whisper, "These were mine!"

    _John G. Whittier._




The Wild White Rose

Oh, that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing
that I long for.--_Job 6:8._


It was peeping through the brambles, that little wild white rose,
Where the hawthorn hedge was planted, my garden to enclose.
All beyond was fern and heather, on the breezy, open moor;
All within was sun and shelter, and the wealth of beauty's store.
But I did not heed the fragrance of flow'ret or of tree,
For my eyes were on that rosebud, and it grew too high for me.
In vain I strove to reach it through the tangled mass of green,
It only smiled and nodded behind its thorny screen.
Yet through that summer morning I lingered near the spot:
Oh, why do things seem sweeter if we possess them not?
My garden buds were blooming, but all that I could see
Was that little mocking wild rose, hanging just too high for me.

So in life's wider garden there are buds of promise, too,
Beyond our reach to gather, but not beyond our view;
And like the little charmer that tempted me astray,
They steal out half the brightness of many a summer's day.
Oh, hearts that fail with longing for some forbidden tree,
Look up and learn a lesson from my white rose and me.
'Tis wiser far to number the blessings at my feet,
Than ever to be sighing for just one bud more sweet.
My sunbeams and my shadows fall from a pierced Hand,
I can surely trust His wisdom since His heart I understand;
And maybe in the morning, when His blessed face I see,
He will tell me why my white rose grew just too high for me.

    _Ellen H. Willis._




L'Envoi


When Earth's last picture is painted, and the tubes are twisted and dried,
When the oldest colors have faded, and the youngest critic has died,
We shall rest, and, faith, we shall need it--lie down for an aeon or two,
Till the Master of All Good Workmen shall set us to work anew!

And those who were good shall be happy: they shall sit in a golden chair;
They shall splash at a ten-league canvas with brushes of comet's hair;
They shall find real saints to draw from--Magdalene, Peter and Paul;
They shall work for an age at a sitting and never be tired at all.

And only the Master shall praise us, and only the Master shall blame;
And no one shall work for money, and no one shall work for fame;
But each for the joy of the working, and each, in his separate star,
Shall draw the Thing as he sees It for the God of Things as They Are!

    _Rudyard Kipling._




Whistling in Heaven


You're surprised that I ever should say so?
  Just wait till the reason I've given
Why I say I sha'n't care for the music,
  Unless there is whistling in heaven.
Then you'll think it no very great wonder,
  Nor so strange, nor so bold a conceit,
That unless there's a boy there a-whistling,
  Its music will not be complete.

It was late in the autumn of '40;
  We had come from our far Eastern home
Just in season to build us a cabin,
  Ere the cold of the winter should come;
And we lived all the while in our wagon
  That husband was clearing the place
Where the house was to stand; and the clearing
  And building it took many days.

So that our heads were scarce sheltered
  In under its roof when our store
Of provisions was almost exhausted,
  And husband must journey for more;
And the nearest place where he could get them
  Was yet such a distance away,
That it forced him from home to be absent
  At least a whole night and a day.

You see, we'd but two or three neighbors,
  And the nearest was more than a mile;
And we hadn't found time yet to know them,
  For we had been busy the while.
And the man who had helped at the raising
  Just staid till the job was well done;
And as soon as his money was paid him
  Had shouldered his axe and had gone.

Well, husband just kissed me and started--
  I could scarcely suppress a deep groan
At the thought of remaining with baby
  So long in the house alone;
For, my dear, I was childish and timid,
  And braver ones might well have feared,
For the wild wolf was often heard howling.
  And savages sometimes appeared.

But I smothered my grief and my terror
  Till husband was off on his ride,
And then in my arms I took Josey,
  And all the day long sat and cried,
As I thought of the long, dreary hours
  When the darkness of night should fall,
And I was so utterly helpless,
  With no one in reach of my call.

And when the night came with its terrors,
  To hide ev'ry ray of light,
I hung up a quilt by the window,
  And, almost dead with affright,
I kneeled by the side of the cradle,
  Scarce daring to draw a full breath,
Lest the baby should wake, and its crying
  Should bring us a horrible death.

There I knelt until late in the evening
  And scarcely an inch had I stirred,
When suddenly, far in the distance,
  A sound as of whistling I heard.
I started up dreadfully frightened,
  For fear 'twas an Indian's call;
And then very soon I remembered
  The red man ne'er whistles at all.

And when I was sure 'twas a white man,
  I thought, were he coming for ill,
He'd surely approach with more caution--
  Would come without warning, and still.
Then the sound, coming nearer and nearer,
  Took the form of a tune light and gay,
And I knew I needn't fear evil
  From one who could whistle that way.

Very soon I heard footsteps approaching,
  Then came a peculiar dull thump,
As if some one was heavily striking
  An ax in the top of a stump;
And then, in another brief moment,
  There came a light tap on the door,
When quickly I undid the fast'ning,
  And in stepped a boy, and before

There was either a question or answer
  Or either had time to speak,
I just threw my glad arms around him,
  And gave him a kiss on the cheek.
Then I started back, scared at my boldness.
  But he only smiled at my fright,
As he said, "I'm your neighbor's boy, Ellick,
  Come to tarry with you through the night.

"We saw your husband go eastward,
  And made up our minds where he'd gone,
And I said to the rest of our people,
  'That woman is there all alone,
And I venture she's awfully lonesome,
  And though she may have no great fear,
I think she would feel a bit safer
  If only a boy were but near.'

"So, taking my axe on my shoulder,
  For fear that a savage might stray
Across my path and need scalping,
  I started right down this way;
And coming in sight of the cabin,
  And thinking to save you alarm,
I whistled a tune, just to show you
  I didn't intend any harm.

"And so here I am, at your service;
  But if you don't want me to stay,
Why, all you need do is to say so,
  And should'ring my axe, I'll away."
I dropped in a chair and near fainted,
  Just at thought of his leaving me then,
And his eye gave a knowing bright twinkle
  As he said, "I guess I'll remain."

And then I just sat there and told him
  How terribly frightened I'd been,
How his face was to me the most welcome
  Of any I ever had seen;
And then I lay down with the baby,
  And slept all the blessed night through,
For I felt I was safe from all danger
  Near so brave a young fellow, and true.

So now, my dear friend, do you wonder,
  Since such a good reason I've given,
Why I say I sha'n't care for the music,
  Unless there is whistling in heaven?
Yes, often I've said so in earnest,
  And now what I've said I repeat,
That unless there's a boy there a-whistling,
  Its music will not be complete.




Sleep, Baby, Sleep


      Sleep, baby, sleep!
Thy father's watching the sheep,
Thy mother's shaking the dreamland tree,
And down drops a little dream for thee.
      Sleep, baby, sleep!

      Sleep, baby, sleep!
The large stars are the sheep,
The little stars are the lambs, I guess,
The bright moon is the shepherdess.
      Sleep, baby, sleep!

      Sleep, baby, sleep!
Thy Savior loves His sheep;
He is the Lamb of God on high
Who for our sakes came down to die.
      Sleep, baby, sleep!

    _Elizabeth Prentiss._




The Lost Chord


Seated one day at the organ,
  I was weary and ill at ease,
And my fingers wandered idly
  Over the noisy keys.

I do not know what I was playing,
  Or what I was dreaming then;
But I struck one chord of music,
  Like the sound of a great Amen.

It flooded the crimson twilight,
  Like the close of an angel's psalm;
And it lay on my fevered spirit
  With a touch of infinite calm.

It quieted pain and sorrow,
  Like love overcoming strife;
It seemed the harmonious echo
  From our discordant life.

It linked all perplexing meanings
  Into one perfect peace,
And trembled away into silence
  As if it were loth to cease.

I have sought, but I seek it vainly,
  That one lost chord divine,
That came from the soul of the organ,
  And entered into mine.

It may be that Death's bright angel
  Will speak in that chord again;
It may be that only in Heaven
  I shall hear that grand Amen.

    _Adelaide A. Procter._




The Children's Hour


Between the dark and the daylight,
  When the night is beginning to lower,
Comes a pause in the day's occupations,
  That is known as the Children's Hour.

I hear in the chamber above me
  The patter of little feet,
The sound of a door that is opened,
  And voices soft and sweet.

From my study I see in the lamplight,
  Descending the broad hall stair,
Grave Alice, and laughing Allegra,
  And Edith with golden hair.

A whisper, and then a silence:
  Yet I know by their merry eyes
They are plotting and planning together
  To take me by surprise.

A sudden rush from the stairway,
  A sudden raid from the hall!
By three doors left unguarded
  They enter my castle wall!

They climb up into my turret
  O'er the arms and back of my chair;
If I try to escape, they surround me;
  They seem to be everywhere.

They almost devour me with kisses,
  Their arms about me entwine,
Till I think of the Bishop of Bingen
  In his Mouse-tower on the Rhine!

Do you think, O blue-eyed banditti,
  Because you have scaled the wall,
Such an old mustache as I am
  Is not a match for you all!

I have you fast in my fortress,
  And will not let you depart,
But put you down into the dungeon
  In the round-tower of my heart.

And there will I keep you forever,
  Yes, forever and a day,
Till the walls shall crumble to ruin,
  And moulder in dust away!

    _Henry W. Longfellow._




Woodman, Spare That Tree!


Woodman, spare that tree!
  Touch not a single bough!
In youth it sheltered me,
  And I'll protect it now.
'T was my forefather's hand
  That placed it near his cot;
There, woodman, let it stand.
  Thy ax shall harm it not!

That old familiar tree,
  Whose glory and renown
Are spread o'er land and sea--
  And wouldst thou hew it down?
Woodman, forbear thy stroke!
  Cut not its earth-bound ties;
Oh, spare that aged oak,
  Now towering to the skies!

When but an idle boy,
  I sought its grateful shade;
In all their gushing joy
  Here, too, my sisters played.
My mother kissed me here;
  My father pressed my hand--
Forgive this foolish tear,
  But let that old oak stand!

My heart-strings round thee cling,
  Close as thy bark, old friend!
Here shall the wild-bird sing,
  And still thy branches bend.
Old tree! the storm still brave!
  And, woodman, leave the spot;
While I've a hand to save,
  Thy ax shall harm it not!

    _George Pope Morris_.




Little Brown Hands


They drive home the cows from the pasture,
  Up through the long shady lane,
Where the quail whistles loud in the wheat-fields,
  That are yellow with ripening grain.
They find, in the thick waving grasses,
  Where the scarlet-lipped strawberry grows.
They gather the earliest snowdrops,
  And the first crimson buds of the rose.

They toss the new hay in the meadow,
  They gather the elder-bloom white,
They find where the dusky grapes purple
  In the soft-tinted October light.
They know where the apples hang ripest,
  And are sweeter than Italy's wines;
They know where the fruit hangs the thickest
  On the long, thorny blackberry vines.

They gather the delicate sea-weeds,
  And build tiny castles of sand;
They pick up the beautiful sea shells--
  Fairy barks that have drifted to land.
They wave from the tall, rocking tree-tops,
  Where the oriole's hammock-nest swings,
And at night time are folded in slumber
  By a song that a fond mother sings.

Those who toil bravely are strongest;
  The humble and poor become great;
And so from these brown-handed children
  Shall grow mighty rulers of state.
The pen of the author and statesman,--
  The noble and wise of the land,--
The sword, and the chisel, and palette,
  Shall be held in the little brown hand.

    _Mary H. Krout._




Barbara Frietchie


Up from the meadows rich with corn
Clear in the cool September morn,

The clustered spires of Frederick stand
Green-walled by the hills of Maryland.

Round about them orchards sweep,
Apple and peach tree fruited deep,

Fair as the garden of the Lord
To the eyes of the famished rebel horde,

On that pleasant morn of the early fall
