and the happy marriage-tide, and was, in the main, too good to prove a
kill-joy.

Master Rowland and Mistress Betty were married by Master Rowland's own
brother in the Vicar's own church, with Fiddy and Prissy and the Sedleys
for bridesmaids, and Dick Ashbridge for a groom's-man. Cousin Ward,
brought all the way from town to represent the bride's relations, was
crying as if she were about to lose an only daughter. For Granny, she
would not shed one bright, crystal tear on any account; besides, she was
ever in state at Larks' Hall to welcome home, the happy couple. Ah,
well, they were all happy couples in those days!

At Larks' Hall Mistress Betty bloomed during many a year; for a fine
woman knows no decay; she only passes from one stage of beauty and
excellence to another, wearing, as her rightful possession, all
hearts--her sons', as their father's before them. And Master Rowland no
longer sat lonely in his hall, in the frosty winter dusk or under the
usher-oak in the balmy summer twilight, but walked through life briskly
and bravely, with a perfect mate; whom he had not failed to recognize as
a real diamond among the bits of glass before the footlights--a diamond
which his old mother had consented to set for him.

Our squire and Lady Betty are relics of a former generation. We have
squires as many by thousands, as accomplished by tens of thousands; but
the inimitable union of simplicity and refinement, downrightness and
dignity, disappeared with the last faint reflection of Sir Roger de
Coverley. And charming Lady Betty departed also with early hours,
pillions, and cosmetics--that blending of nature and art, knowledge of
the corrupt world and abiding true-heartedness, which then existed--a
sort of marvel.




A CAST IN THE WAGGON.


I.--DULCIE'S START IN THE WAGGON FOR HER COMPANY.

Old and young were clamouring hoarsely and shrilly by daybreak one
September morning round a little girl, one of a cloth-worker's numerous
family. She had been rather a tender lass, and change of air was thought
good for her full growth. Though she was still small, she was close on
her one-and-twentieth year, and her friends held it was high time for
her to see the world. It was seeing the world to go with a late mayor's
daughter, an orphan and an heiress, who had been visiting the
cloth-worker's family, and would have Dulcie to live with her for awhile
in a neighbouring town as a friend and companion.

Mind those worthy warm-hearted relatives of Dulcie's had no idea of her
returning to her parents' nest in a hurry, though the two towns, Fairfax
and Redwater, were within a day's journey by waggon of each other.
Dulcie would see the world, and stay in her new abode in the next
country town, or lose her character for dignity and spirit; and girls
were fain to be thought discreet and decided a hundred years ago or so.
She might as lief marry as not, when she was away on her travels. Girls
married then with far less trouble than they accomplished such a
journey. They ran down to Richmond and married on a Sunday, to save a
talk and a show; they walked out of the opera where Handel might be
performing, and observant gentlemen took the cue, followed on their
heels, and had the knot tied by a priest, waiting in the house opposite
the first chair-stand. Indeed, they contracted alliances so
unceremoniously, that they went to Queen Caroline's or the Princesses'
drawing-room, without either themselves or the world appearing quite
sure whether they were maids or wives. Dear! dear! what did come of
these foolish impulsive matches? Did they fulfil the time out of mind
adage, "Happy's the wooing that's not long a-doing"? or that other old
proverb, "Marry in haste, and repent at leisure"? Which was the truth?

It is a pity that you should see Dulcie, for the first time, in tears.
Dulcie, who only cried on great occasions, in great sorrow or great
joy--not above half-a-dozen times in her life. Dulcie, whom the
smallpox could not spoil, with her pretty forehead, cat's eyes, and
fine chin. Does that description give you an idea of Dulcie--Dulcie
Cowper, not yet Madam, but any day she liked Mistress Dulcie? It seems
expressive. An under-sized, slight-made girl, with a little face
clearly, very clearly cut, but round in all its lines as yet; an
intelligent face, an enthusiastic face, a face that could be very
shrewd and practical, and, at the same time, a face that could be
lavishly generous. The chief merit of her figure lay in this
particular, that she "bridled" well. Yes, it is true, we have almost
forgotten the old accomplishment of "bridling"--the head up and the
chin in, with the pliant knees bent in a low curtsey. Dulcie
"bridled," as she prattled, to perfection. She had light brown hair,
of the tint of a squirrel's fur, and the smoothness of a mouse's coat,
though it was twisted and twirled into a kind of soft willowy curls
when she was in high dress. Ah! no wonder that Kit Cowper, the
cloth-worker, groaned to see that bright face pass from his ninepin
alley; but it was the way of the world, or rather the will of
Providence to the cloth-worker, that the child should fulfil her
destiny. So Dulcie was launched on the sea of life, as far as
Redwater, to push her fortune.

No wonder Dulcie was liked by Clarissa Gage. Clarissa was two years
younger than Dulcie, but she was half-a-dozen years older in knowledge
of the world, and therefore fell in love with Dulcie for the sake of
variety. Clarissa had the bones of a noble woman under her pedantry and
affectation; she was a peg above Dulcie in station, and a vast deal
before her in the world's estimation. She was indeed "a fortune;" and
you err egregiously if you suppose a fortune was not properly valued a
hundred years ago. Men went mad for fair faces and glib tongues, but
solidly and sensibly married fortunes, according to all the old
news-prints. But Clarissa was also a beauty, far more of a regular
beauty than Dulcie, with one of those inconceivably dazzling complexions
that blush on like a June rose to old age, and a stately height and
presence for her years. She had dark brown curls of the deep brown of
mountain waters, with the ripple of the same, hanging down in a wreath
of tendrils on the bend of the neck behind. With all her gifts, Mistress
Clary had the crowning bounty which does not always accompany so many
inferior endowments: she had sense under her airs, and she was good
enough to like Dulcie instinctively, and to think how nice it would be
to have Dulcie with her and Mistress Cambridge in their formal brick
house, with the stone coping and balcony, at Redwater. Besides, (credit
to her womanhood,) Clarissa did reflect what a fine thing it would be
for Dulcie Cowper getting up in years, really getting up in years,
however young in spirit, to have the variety, and the additional chance
of establishing herself in life. Certainly, Redwater was a town of more
consideration than Fairfax, and had its occasional assemblies and
performances of strolling players; and Clarissa, in right of her
father's family, visited the vicar and the squire, and could carry
Dulcie along with her, since the child's manners were quite genteel, and
her clothes perfectly presentable.

It was a harmonious arrangement, in which not only Clarissa but Mistress
Cambridge agreed. Cambridge was one of those worthy, useful persons,
whom nobody in those strangely plain but decidedly aristocratic
days--not even Clarissa and Dulcie, though they sat with her, ate with
her, hugged her when they wanted to coax her--ever thought or spoke of
otherwise than "Cambridge, a good sort of woman in her own way." The
only temporary drawback to the contentment of the party was the shower
of tears which fell at Dulcie's forcible separation from her relatives.
It was forcible in the end; all the blessings had been given in the
house--don't sneer, they did her no harm, no harm, but a vast deal of
good--and only the kisses and tears were finished off in the street.

After all this introduction, it is painful to describe how the company
travelled. It was in a stage waggon! But they could not help it. We
never stated that they were out-and-out quality; and not even all the
quality could travel in four coaches and six, with twelve horsemen
riding attendance, and an unpaid escort of butchers, bakers, and
apothecaries, whipping and spurring part of the way for the custom. What
could the poor Commons do? There were not stage coaches in every quarter
of the great roads; and really if they pocketed their gentility, the
huge brown waggons were of the two extinct conveyances the roomier,
airier, and safer both from overturns and highwaymen. The seats were
soft, the space was ample, and the three unprotected females were
considered in a manner incognito, which was about as modest a style as
they could travel in. Of course, they were not in their flowered silks,
their lutestrings, their mantuas. We are assured every respectable woman
travelled then in a habit and hat, and no more thought of hoops than of
hair powder. The only peculiarity was that beneath their hats they wore
mob-caps, tied soberly under the chin, and red or blue handkerchiefs
knotted over the hat, which gave them the air of Welsh market-women, or
marvellously clean and tidy gipsies. Clarissa was spelling out the words
in _Pharamond_--a French classic; Dulcie was looking disconsolately
straight before her through their sole outlet, the bow at the end of the
waggon, which circumscribed as pretty and fresh a circle of common and
cornfield, with crimson patches of wood and the blue sky above, as one
might wish to see. Occasionally the crack of a sportsman's gun was heard
to the right or left, followed by a pheasant or a string of partridges
darting across the opening of the canvas car; but as yet no claimant had
solicited the privilege and honour of sharing the waggon and the view
with our fair travellers.


II.--TWO LADS SEEK A CAST IN THE WAGGON.

"Hullo, Joe! we want a lift," cries a brisk voice, and the couple of
great steeds--they might have been Flanders mares or Clydesdale horses,
so powerful were they over the shoulders, so mighty in the
flanks--almost swerved out of their direct line and their decorum. Two
fellows suddenly started up from a couch where they had lain at length
on a hay-stack, slid down the height, crashed over an intervening bit of
waste land, and arrested the waggoner in his smock-frock and clouted
shoes.

"Get in, Will, and take possession. Ha! hum! here are ladies: where will
we stow our feet? I declare Will is on their skirts already, with more
green slime than is carried on the breast of a pond. I believe he thinks
them baggage--lay figures, as they've turned aside their heads.
Gentlefolks for a wager! duchesses in disguise! I must make up to them,
anyhow. Ladies, at your service; I humbly beg your pardon for having so
much as thought of incommoding you, but indeed I was not aware of your
presence. Come, Will, tumble out again instantly, and do not let us be
so rude as to plague the ladies."

Poor Will! very stiff and tired, stared about him, disturbed and
discomforted, and prepared to perform the behest of his more energetic
companion.

Dulcie did a little of her "bridling," but said never a word; Clarissa
lifted her large, rather languishing eyes, let them fall again on her
mittens, and remained dumb. They speak before they were spoken to? not
they, they knew better. At the same time, when Will stumbled as he
alighted on his weary feet, they were guilty of an inclination to
titter, though the accident was excusable, and the point of the joke
small.

"You are very polite, sirs," protested Cambridge, making round eyes, and
reddening and blowing at being constituted the mouthpiece of the party
on any interest save that of victuals. "I vow it is very pretty
behaviour; but as it is a public carriage, I don't think we are at
liberty to deprive Joe of his money, and you, sirs, of your seats. What
say you, Mistress Clary?"

"I decline to give an opinion," answered Clarissa with great dignity; in
which she broke down a little by adding hastily, in half audible
accents. "Be quiet, Dulcie!" for Dulcie's risible faculties had been
excited in a lively degree. She had been crying so lately that there was
a hysterical turn in her mirth, and having once given way to it she
could not restrain herself, but was making all sorts of ridiculous faces
and spasms in her throat without effect. You see, these were two
ordinary, happy young girls; and the stiff starch of their manners and
pretensions only brought out in a stronger light, and with a broader
contrast, their youthful frolicsomeness.

"I think, sirs, you may come in--that is, if you keep your distance,"
Mistress Cambridge decided, with solemn reservation. With a multitude of
apologies and thanks, the two young men, more considerate and courteous
in their forward and backward fashion than many a fine gentleman of the
time, clambered up, and coiled themselves into corners, leaving a
respectful void between them and the original occupants of the waggon.

Tranquillity settled down on the travellers--a tranquillity only broken
by the drowsy rumble of the waggon-wheels, and the perennial whistle of
the stooping, grizzled waggoner. Dulcie was just thinking that they
might have been Turks, they were so silent, when Mistress Cambridge
stirred the still atmosphere by the inquiry--

"Pray, sirs, have you happened to fall in with any stubble chickens in
your walk; I think you said you had been walking hereabouts?" affording
Clarissa an opportunity of complaining afterwards, in the retirement of
the little inn's private room, that these young fellows would judge them
a set of gluttons or farmers' daughters abroad for a holiday, aping
gentlewomen, instead of being duchesses in disguise.

Although the girls never lifted their eyes, yet, by a magic only known
to such philosophers, they had taken as complete an inventory of the
young men, beginning at their wardrobes, as if they had looked at them
coolly from head to foot for a whole half-hour. They were aware that
the fellows were in plain suits, though one of them was not without the
air of being fine on occasions. Their coats were cloth, not brocade or
velvet; their ruffles were cambric, not lace; their shoe-buckles were
only silver; their hats were trimmed with braid, and neither with gold
nor silver edging. They were not my lords; they were not in regimentals;
they did not rap out oaths; they had not the university air; they showed
no parson's bands; they were not plain country bumpkins--what were they?

After all, it was scarcely worth inquiry whether the newcomers belonged
to law or physic; for the young women in their pride and petulance felt
bound not to consider the investigation worth the trouble. The lad who
was the leader, and who was unquestionably of gentle enough nurture, was
a plain little fellow, sallow and homely-featured, although a
good-natured person might suppose from his smiling sagacity that in
animated conversation it would be quite possible to forget his face in
his countenance. The other was ruddy, with a face as sharply cut as a
girl's, and delicate features not fitting his long limbs--clearly he was
no better than a nincompoop. Yes, the girls were perfectly justifiable
in whispering as the waggon stopped to bait at the "Nine Miles House,"
and they got out to bait also--

"What a pair!"

"Such a fright, the little fellow, Clary!"

"Such a goose, the tall fellow, Dulcie!"

It is a sad truth that foolish young women will judge by the exterior,
leap at conclusions, and be guilty of rude and cruel remarks.

What would come of it if the silly, sensitive hearts were in earnest, or
if they did not reserve to themselves the indefeasible right of changing
their opinions?

At the "Nine Miles House" the wayfarers rested, either in the sanded
parlour, or the common kitchen of the ale-house. Mistress Clarissa and
her party had the sanded parlour for themselves; the young men, with
their cramped legs, stumbled into the flitch-hung kitchen, the more
entertaining room of the two, and had plates of beans and bacon, a toast
and a tankard; for the day was in September, and the wind was already
bracing both to body and appetite. Mistress Clarissa carried her private
stores, and Cambridge laid out her slices of roasts and broils, plates
of buns and comforts, and cruets with white wines. But when did a
heroine remain in a sanded parlour in an inn, when she could stroll over
the country and lose her way, and get run at by wild cattle, and stared
at by naughty gentlemen? Clary was not so mean-spirited, though she was
physically lazier than Dulcie; she was eager to scamper across the
stubble fields (where Cambridge expected chickens to roam in flocks),
and to wander, book in hand, by yon brook with the bewitching pollards.

Dulcie could not accompany her. Dulcie being a practical woman, a needle
in innocent sharpness, had peeped about the waggon to inspect their
luggage, and had found to her horror that one of her boxes had burst its
fastenings--that very box with her respected mother's watered tabby, and
her one lace head on the place of honour on the top. So she and
Cambridge had an earnest consultation on the accident, which resulted in
their proceeding to tuck up their skirts, empty the receptacle with the
greatest care and tenderness, and repack it with such skill that a rope
would replace its rent hinges. Dulcie was not for walking.

Clarissa was thus forced to saunter alone, and after she had got to the
brook and the pollards, she sat down, and leant her arms on the bars of
an old farm gate. Soon tiring of looking about her, staring at the
minnows and the late orange coltsfoot and white wild ranunculus, and the
straw-coloured willow-leaves drooping into the water, she took out of
her pocket that little brown French classic, _Pharamond_, and started
again to accompany the French storyteller, advancing on the very tallest
of stilts that storyteller ever mounted. It was a wonder truly that
Clary on her mossy bank, and by a rustic stile, had not preferred the
voices of the winds and the waters, the last boom of the beetle, the
last screech of the martin, the last loud laugh of the field-workers
borne over a hedge or two on the breeze, to the click and patter of
these absurd Frenchmen's tongues.

At last Clarissa bethought her of the hour, sprang up, carefully put
away her volume--volumes and verses were precious then--and began to
pick her steps homewards. Ah! there had been a wretch of a man looking
at her--actually drawing her in his portfolio--the ugly fellow in the
waggon. Thank goodness, he could not have recognized her as his
fellow-traveller; he had copied the old farm-gate from the other side,
and he could only have got a glimpse of her figure through the bars with
not so much as the crown of her hat above them. He had only put her in
faithfully by a line or two, and three dots, and he did not observe her
now as she passed behind him and scanned his performance ere she
scampered off. But what a risk she had run of having her likeness taken
without her knowledge or consent, and carried about the country by a
walking gentleman!

It was quite an adventure; yet how could Clary think it so when an
earthquake and a whole town burnt to ashes were nothing in her French
novels! But, still true to the instinct of personality which causes us
to think a molehill in reference to our dear selves a world more
momentous and interesting than a mountain in reference to a princess of
the blood-royal, stately Clarissa flew off like a lapwing to tell Dulcie
that she had just had such an escape, and hit on such a discovery--she
had found out all about the two fellows; they were a couple of painters.
Marry! it was a marvel to see the one so hearty, and the other so rosy.
Doubtless they did not have an odd penny in their purse between them.

Clarissa came too late; she encountered Dulcie running out to meet her,
all alive with the same news, only gathered in a more orthodox manner.
The fair, soft lad, whom they had reckoned a nincompoop, had shaken
himself up in his companion's absence, and had offered his landlady a
drawing for his share of the dinner, "if you will score the value off
