
And thus the old man dreams,
And then awakes; awakes to hear
The sweet old song just dying
On the pulsing evening air:

    "When other helpers fail,
      And comforts flee,
    Lord of the helpless,
      Oh, abide with me!"

    _Eliza M. Sherman._




God's Message to Men


God said: I am tired of kings;
  I suffer them no more;
Up to my ear the morning brings
  The outrage of the poor.

Think ye I have made this ball
  A field of havoc and war,
Where tyrants great and tyrants small
  Might harry the weak and poor?

My angel--his name is Freedom--
  Choose him to be your king.
He shall cut pathways east and west
  And fend you with his wing.

I will never have a noble;
  No lineage counted great,
Fishers and choppers and plowmen
  Shall constitute a state,

And ye shall succor man,
  'Tis nobleness to serve;
Help them who cannot help again;
  Beware from right to swerve.

    _Ralph Waldo Emerson._




The Sandman


The rosy clouds float overhead,
  The sun is going down,
And now the Sandman's gentle tread
  Comes stealing through the town.
"White sand, white sand," he softly cries,
  And, as he shakes his hand,
Straightway there lies on babies' eyes
  His gift of shining sand.
Blue eyes, gray eyes, black eyes and brown,
As shuts the rose, they softly close,
  when he goes through the town.

From sunny beaches far away,
  Yes, in another land,
He gathers up, at break of day,
  His store of shining sand.
No tempests beat that shore remote,
  No ships may sail that way;
His little boat alone may float
  Within that lovely bay.
Blue eyes, gray eyes, black eyes and brown,
As shuts the rose, they softly close,
  when he goes through the town.

He smiles to see the eyelids close
  Above the happy eyes,
And every child right well he knows--
  Oh, he is very wise!
But if, as he goes through the land,
  A naughty baby cries,
His other hand takes dull gray sand
  To close the wakeful eyes.
Blue eyes, gray eyes, black eyes and brown,
As shuts the rose, they softly close,
  when he goes through the town.

So when you hear the Sandman's song
  Sound through the twilight sweet,
Be sure you do not keep him long
  A-waiting in the street.
Lie softly down, dear little head,
  Rest quiet, busy hands,
Till by your bed when good-night's said,
  He strews the shining sands.
Blue eyes, gray eyes, black eyes and brown,
As shuts the rose, they softly close,
  when he goes through the town.

    _Margaret Vandegrift._




Ring Out, Wild Bells


Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky,
  The flying cloud, the frosty light:
  The year is dying in the night;
Ring out, wild bells, and let him die.

Ring out the old, ring in the new,
  Ring, happy bells, across the snow:
  The year is going, let him go;
Ring out the false, ring in the true.

Ring out the grief that saps the mind,
  For those that here we see no more;
  Ring out the feud of rich and poor,
Ring in redress to all mankind.

Ring out a slowly dying cause,
  And ancient forms of party strife;
  Ring in the nobler modes of life,
With sweeter manners, purer laws.

Ring out false pride in place and blood,
  The civic slander and the spite;
  Ring in the love of truth and right,
Ring in the common love of good.

Ring out old shapes of foul disease;
  Ring out the narrowing lust of gold;
  Ring out the thousand wars of old,
Ring in the thousand years of peace.

Ring in the valiant man and free,
  The larger heart, the kindlier hand;
  Ring out the darkness of the land,
Ring in the Christ that is to be.

    _Alfred, Lord Tennyson._




The Wishing Bridge


Among the legends sung or said
  Along our rocky shore,
The Wishing Bridge of Marblehead
  May well be sung once more.

An hundred years ago (so ran
  The old-time story) all
Good wishes said above its span
  Would, soon or late, befall.

If pure and earnest, never failed
  The prayers of man or maid
For him who on the deep sea sailed,
  For her at home who stayed.

Once thither came two girls from school
  And wished in childish glee:
And one would be a queen and rule,
  And one the world would see.

Time passed; with change of hopes and fears
  And in the selfsame place,
Two women, gray with middle years,
  Stood wondering, face to face.

With wakened memories, as they met,
  They queried what had been:
"A poor man's wife am I, and yet,"
  Said one, "I am a queen.

"My realm a little homestead is,
  Where, lacking crown and throne,
I rule by loving services
  And patient toil alone."

The other said: "The great world lies
  Beyond me as it laid;
O'er love's and duty's boundaries
  My feet have never strayed.

"I see but common sights at home,
  Its common sounds I hear,
My widowed mother's sick-bed room
  Sufficeth for my sphere.

"I read to her some pleasant page
  Of travel far and wide,
And in a dreamy pilgrimage
  We wander side by side.

"And when, at last, she falls asleep,
  My book becomes to me
A magic glass: my watch I keep,
  But all the world I see.

"A farm-wife queen your place you fill,
  While fancy's privilege
Is mine to walk the earth at will,
  Thanks to the Wishing Bridge."

"Nay, leave the legend for the truth,"
  The other cried, "and say
God gives the wishes of our youth
  But in His own best way!"

    _John Greenleaf Whittier._




The Things Divine


These are the things I hold divine:
A trusting chi id's hand laid in mine,
Rich brown earth and wind-tossed trees,
The taste of grapes and the drone of bees,
A rhythmic gallop, long June days,
A rose-hedged lane and lovers' lays,
The welcome smile on neighbors' faces,
Cool, wide hills and open places,
Breeze-blown fields of silver rye,
The wild, sweet note of the plover's cry,
Fresh spring showers and scent of box,
The soft, pale tint of the garden phlox,
Lilacs blooming, a drowsy noon,
A flight of geese and an autumn moon,
Rolling meadows and storm-washed heights,
A fountain murmur on summer nights,
A dappled fawn in the forest hush,
Simple words and the song of a thrush,
Rose-red dawns and a mate to share
With comrade soul my gypsy fare,
A waiting fire when the twilight ends,
A gallant heart and the voice of friends.

    _Jean Brooks Burt._




Mothers of Men


The bravest battle that ever was fought!
  Shall I tell you where and when?
On the map of the world you will find it not,
  'Twas fought by the mothers of men.

Nay, not with cannon or battle shot,
  With sword or nobler pen,
Nay, not with eloquent words or thought
  From mouths of wonderful men;

But deep in the walled-up woman's heart--
  Of woman that would not yield,
But bravely, silently, bore her part--
  Lo, there is that battle field!

No marshaling troup, no bivouac song,
  No banner to gleam or wave,
But oh! these battles, they last so long--
  From babyhood to the grave.

Yet, faithful as a bridge of stars,
  She fights in her walled-up town--
Fights on and on in the endless wars,
  Then, silent, unseen, goes down.

Oh, ye with banner and battle shot,
  And soldiers to shout and praise,
I tell you the kingliest victories fought
  Were fought in those silent ways.

Oh, spotless in a world of shame,
  With splendid and silent scorn,
Go back to God as white as you came--
  The kingliest warrior born!

    _Joaquin Miller._




Echo


"I asked of Echo, t'other day
  (Whose words are often few and funny),
What to a novice she could say
  Of courtship, love and matrimony.
  Quoth Echo plainly,--'Matter-o'-money!'

"Whom should I marry? Should it be
  A dashing damsel, gay and pert,
A pattern of inconstancy;
  Or selfish, mercenary flirt?
  Quoth Echo, sharply,--'Nary flirt!'

"What if, aweary of the strife
  That long has lured the dear deceiver,
She promise to amend her life.
  And sin no more; can I believe her?
  Quoth Echo, very promptly;--'Leave her!'

"But if some maiden with a heart
  On me should venture to bestow it,
Pray should I act the wiser part
  To take the treasure or forgo it?
  Quoth Echo, with decision,--'Go it!'

"But what if, seemingly afraid
  To bind her fate in Hymen's fetter,
She vow she means to die a maid,
  In answer to my loving letter?
  Quoth Echo, rather coolly,--'Let her!'

"What if, in spite of her disdain,
  I find my heart entwined about
With Cupid's dear, delicious chain
  So closely that I can't get out?
  Quoth Echo, laughingly,--'Get out!'

"But if some maid with beauty blest,
  As pure and fair as Heaven can make her,
Will share my labor and my rest
  Till envious Death shall overtake her?
Quoth Echo (sotto voce),-'Take her!'"

    _John G. Saxe._




Life, I Know Not What Thou Art


Life! I know not what thou art,
But know that thou and I must part;
And when, or how, or where we met
I own to me's a secret yet.

Life! we've been long together
Through pleasant and through cloudy weather;
'Tis hard to part when friends are dear--
Perhaps 'twill cost a sigh, a tear;

Then steal away; give little warning,
Choose thine own time;
Say not Good Night, but in some brighter clime
Bid me Good Morning.

    _Anna L. Barbauld._




Autumn Leaves


In the hush and the lonely silence
  Of the chill October night,
Some wizard has worked his magic
  With fairy fingers light.

The leaves of the sturdy oak trees
  Are splendid with crimson and red.
And the golden flags of the maple
  Are fluttering overhead.

Through the tangle of faded grasses
  There are trailing vines ablaze,
And the glory of warmth and color
  Gleams through the autumn haze.

Like banners of marching armies
  That farther and farther go;
Down the winding roads and valleys
  The boughs of the sumacs glow.

So open your eyes, little children,
  And open your hearts as well,
Till the charm of the bright October
  Shall fold you in its spell.

    _Angelina Wray._




A Message for the Year


Not who you are, but what you are,
  That's what the world demands to know;
Just what you are, what you can do
  To help mankind to live and grow.
Your lineage matters not at all,
  Nor counts one whit your gold or gear,
What can you do to show the world
  The reason for your being here?

For just what space you occupy
  The world requires you pay the rent;
It does not shower its gifts galore,
  Its benefits are only lent;
And it has need of workers true,
  Willing of hand, alert of brain;
Go forth and prove what you can do,
  Nor wait to count o'er loss or gain.

Give of your best to help and cheer,
 The more you give the more you grow;
This message evermore rings true,
  In time you reap whate'er you sow.
No failure you have need to fear,
  Except to fail to do your best--
What have you done, what can you do?
  That is the question, that the test.

    _Elizabeth Clarke Hardy._




Song of the Chattahoochee[*]


  Out of the hills of Habersham,
  Down the valleys of Hall,
I hurry amain to reach the plain,
Run the rapid and leap the fall,
Split at the rock and together again,
Accept my bed, or narrow or wide,
And flee from folly on every side
With a lover's pain to attain the plain
  Far from the hills of Habersham,
  Far from the valleys of Hall.

  All down the hills of Habersham,
  All through the valleys of Hall,
The rushes cried "Abide, abide,"
The wilful waterweeds held me thrall,
The laving laurel turned my tide,
The ferns and the fondling grass said "Stay,"
The dewberry dipped for to work delay,
And the little reeds sighed "Abide, abide
  Here in the hills of Habersham,
  Here in the valleys of Hall."

  High o'er the hills of Habersham,
  Veiling the valleys of Hall,
The hickory told me manifold
Fair tales of shade, the poplar tall
Wrought me her shadowy self to hold,
The chestnut, the oak, the walnut, the pine,
O'erleaning, with flickering meaning and sign,
Said, "Pass not, so cold, these manifold
  Deep shades of the hills of Habersham,
  These glades in the valleys of Hall."

  And oft in the hills of Habersham,
  And oft in the valleys of Hall,
The white quartz shone, and the smooth brookstone
Did bar me of passage with friendly brawl,
And many a luminous jewel lone
--Crystals clear or a-cloud with mist,
Ruby, garnet, and amethyst--
Made lures with the lights of streaming stone,
  In the clefts of the hills of Habersham,
  In the beds of the valleys of Hall.

  But oh, not the hills of Habersham,
  And oh, not the valleys of Hall
Avail: I am fain for to water the plain.
Downward the voices of Duty call--
Downward, to toil and be mixed with the main.
The dry fields burn, and the mills are to turn,
And a myriad flowers mortally yearn,
And the lordly main from beyond the plain
  Calls o'er the hills of Habersham,
  Calls through the valleys of Hall.

    _Sidney Lanier._

[Footnote *: Used by special permission of the publishers, Charles
Scribner's Sons.]




Courting in Kentucky


When Mary Ann Dollinger got the skule daown thar on Injun Bay
I was glad, fer I like ter see a gal makin' her honest way,
I heerd some talk in the village abaout her flyin' high,
Tew high for busy farmer folks with chores ter dew ter fly;
But I paid no sorter attention ter all the talk ontell
She come in her reg-lar boardin' raound ter visit with us a spell.
My Jake an' her has been cronies ever since they could walk,
An' it tuk me aback ter hear her kerrectin' him in his talk.

Jake ain't no hand at grammar, though he hain't his beat for work;
But I sez ter myself, "Look out, my gal, yer a-foolin' with a Turk!"
Jake bore it wonderful patient, an' said in a mournful way,
He p'sumed he was behindhand with the doin's at Injun Bay.
I remember once he was askin' for some o' my Injun buns,
An' she said he should allus say, "them air," stid o' "them is" the ones.
Wal, Mary Ann kep' at him stiddy mornin' an' evenin' long,
Tell he dassent open his mouth for fear o' talkin' wrong.

One day I was pickin' currants down by the old quince tree,
When I heerd Jake's voice a-sayin', "Be ye willin' ter marry me?"
An' Mary Ann kerrectin', "Air ye willin', yeou sh'd say."
Our Jake he put his foot daown in a plum decided way.
"No wimmen-folks is a-goin' ter be rearrangin' me,
Hereafter I says 'craps,' 'them is,' 'I calk'late,' an' 'I be.'
Ef folks don't like my talk they needn't hark ter what I say;
But I ain't a-goin' to take no sass from folks from Injun Bay;
I ask you free an' final, 'Be ye goin' to marry me?'"
An' Mary Ann sez, tremblin', yet anxious-like, "I be."




God's Will is Best


Whichever way the wind doth blow,
Some heart is glad to have it so;
Then blow it east, or blow it west,
