makes ambition virtue?--the sense of honor. But is the sense of
honor consistent with a spirit of plunder, or the practice of
murder? Can it flow from mercenary motives, or can it prompt to
cruel deeds?

The independent views of America have been stated and asserted as the
foundation of this address. My Lords, no man wishes for the due
dependence of America on this country more than I do. To preserve it,
and not confirm that state of independence into which your measures
hitherto have driven them, is the object which we ought to unite in
attaining. The Americans, contending for their rights against arbitrary
exactions, I love and admire. It is the struggle of free and virtuous
patriots. But, contending for independency and total disconnection from
England, as an Englishman, I cannot wish them success; for in a due
constitutional dependency, including the ancient supremacy of this
country in regulating their commerce and navigation, consists the mutual
happiness and prosperity both of England and America. She derived
assistance and protection from us; and we reaped from her the most
important advantages. She was, indeed, the fountain of our wealth, the
nerve of our strength, the nursery and basis of our naval power. It is
our duty, therefore, my Lords, if we wish to save our country, most
seriously to endeavor the recovery of these most beneficial subjects;
and in this perilous crisis, perhaps the present moment may be the only
one in which we can hope for success. For in their negotiations with
France, they have, or think they have, reason to complain; though it be
notorious that they have received from that power important supplies and
assistance of various kinds, yet it is certain they expected it in a
more decisive and immediate degree. America is in ill humor with France;
on some points they have not entirely answered her expectations. Let us
wisely take advantage of every possible moment of reconciliation.
Besides, the natural disposition of America herself still leans toward
England; to the old habits of connection and mutual interest that united
both countries. This _was_ the established sentiment of all the
continent; and still, my Lords, in the great and principal part, the
sound part of America, this wise and affectionate disposition prevails.
And there is a very considerable part of America yet sound--the middle
and the southern provinces. Some parts may be factious and blind to
their true interests; but if we express a wise and benevolent
disposition to communicate with them those immutable rights of nature
and those constitutional liberties to which they are equally entitled
with ourselves, by a conduct so just and humane we shall confirm the
favorable and conciliate the adverse. I say, my Lords, the rights and
liberties to which they are equally entitled with ourselves, _but no
more_. I would participate to them every enjoyment and freedom which the
colonizing subjects of a free state can possess, or wish to possess; and
I do not see why they should not enjoy every fundamental right in their
property, and every original substantial liberty, which Devonshire, or
Surrey, or the county I live in, or any other county in England, can
claim; reserving always, as the sacred right of the mother country, the
due constitutional dependency of the colonies. The inherent supremacy of
the state in regulating and protecting the navigation and commerce of
all her subjects, is necessary for the mutual benefit and preservation
of every part, to constitute and preserve the prosperous arrangement of
the whole empire.

The sound parts of America, of which I have spoken, must be sensible of
these great truths and of their real interests. America is not in that
state of desperate and contemptible rebellion which this country has
been deluded to believe. It is not a wild and lawless banditti, who,
having nothing to lose, might hope to snatch something from public
convulsions. Many of their leaders and great men have a great stake in
this great contest. The gentleman who conducts their armies, I am told,
has an estate of four or five thousand pounds a year; and when I
consider these things, I cannot but lament the inconsiderate violence of
our penal acts, our declaration of treason and rebellion, with all the
fatal effects of attainder and confiscation.

As to the disposition of foreign powers which is asserted [in the King's
speech] to be pacific and friendly, let us judge, my Lords, rather by
their actions and the nature of things than by interested assertions.
The uniform assistance supplied to America by France suggests a
different conclusion. The most important interests of France in
aggrandizing and enriching herself with what she most wants, supplies of
every naval store from America, must inspire her with different
sentiments. The extraordinary preparations of the House of Bourbon, by
land and by sea, from Dunkirk to the Straits, equally ready and willing
to overwhelm these defenceless islands, should rouse us to a sense of
their real disposition and our own danger. Not five thousand troops in
England! hardly three thousand in Ireland! What can we oppose to the
combined force of our enemies? Scarcely twenty ships of the line so
fully or sufficiently manned, that any admiral's reputation would permit
him to take the command of. The river of Lisbon in the possession of our
enemies! The seas swept by American privateers! Our Channel trade torn
to pieces by them! In this complicated crisis of danger, weakness at
home, and calamity abroad, terrified and insulted by the neighboring
powers, unable to act in America, or acting only to be destroyed, where
is the man with the forehead to promise or hope for success in such a
situation, or from perseverance in the measures that have driven us to
it? Who has the forehead to do so? Where is that man? I should be glad
to see his face.

You cannot _conciliate_ America by your present measures. You cannot
_subdue_ her by your present or by any measures. What, then, can you do?
You cannot conquer; you cannot gain; but you can _address_; you can lull
the fears and anxieties of the moment into an ignorance of the danger
that should produce them. But, my Lords, the time demands the language
of truth. We must not now apply the flattering unction of servile
compliance or blind complaisance. In a just and necessary war, to
maintain the rights or honor of my country, I would strip the shirt from
my back to support it. But in such a war as this, unjust in its
principle, impracticable in its means, and ruinous in its consequences,
I would not contribute a single effort nor a single shilling. I do not
call for vengeance on the heads of those who have been guilty; I only
recommend to them to make their retreat. Let them walk off; and let them
make haste, or they may be assured that speedy and condign punishment
will overtake them.

My Lords, I have submitted to you, with the freedom and truth which I
think my duty, my sentiments on your present awful situation. I have
laid before you the ruin of your power, the disgrace of your reputation,
the pollution of your discipline, the contamination of your morals, the
complication of calamities, foreign and domestic, that overwhelm your
sinking country. Your dearest interests, your own liberties, the
Constitution itself totters to the foundation. All this disgraceful
danger, this multitude of misery, is the monstrous offspring of this
unnatural war. We have been deceived and deluded too long. Let us now
stop short. This is the crisis--the only crisis of time and situation,
to give us a possibility of escape from the fatal effects of our
delusions. But if, in an obstinate and infatuated perseverance in folly,
we slavishly echo the peremptory words this day presented to us, nothing
can save this devoted country from complete and final ruin. We madly
rush into multiplied miseries, and "confusion worse confounded."

Is it possible, can it be believed, that ministers are yet blind to this
impending destruction? I did hope, that instead of this false and empty
vanity, this overweening pride, engendering high conceits and
presumptuous imaginations, ministers would have humbled themselves in
their errors, would have confessed and retracted them, and by an active,
though a late, repentance, have endeavored to redeem them. But, my
Lords, since they had neither sagacity to foresee, nor justice nor
humanity to shun these oppressive calamities--since not even severe
experience can make them feel, nor the imminent ruin of their country
awaken them from their stupefaction, the guardian care of Parliament
must interpose. I shall, therefore, my Lords, propose to you an
amendment of the address to his Majesty, to be inserted immediately
after the two first paragraphs of congratulation on the birth of a
princess, to recommend an immediate cessation of hostilities, and the
commencement of a treaty to restore peace and liberty to America,
strength and happiness to England, security and permanent prosperity to
both countries. This, my Lords, is yet in our power; and let not the
wisdom and justice of your Lordships neglect the happy, and, perhaps,
the only opportunity. By the establishment of irrevocable law, founded
on mutual rights, and ascertained by treaty, these glorious enjoyments
may be firmly perpetuated. And let me repeat to your Lordships, that the
strong bias of America, at least of the wise and sounder parts of it,
naturally inclines to this happy and constitutional reconnection with
you. Notwithstanding the temporary intrigues with France, we may still
be assured of their ancient and confirmed partiality to us. America and
France _cannot_ be congenial.

My Lords, to encourage and confirm that innate inclination to this
country, founded on every principle of affection, as well as
consideration of interest; to restore that favorable disposition into a
permanent and powerful reunion with this country; to revive the mutual
strength of the empire; again to awe the House of Bourbon, instead of
meanly truckling, as our present calamities compel us, to every insult
of French caprice and Spanish punctilio; to re-establish our commerce;
to reassert our rights and our honor; to confirm our interests, and
renew our glories forever--a consummation most devoutly to be
endeavored! and which, I trust, may yet arise from reconciliation with
America--I have the honor of submitting to you the following amendment,
which I move to be inserted after the two first paragraphs of the
address:

    "And that this House does most humbly advise and supplicate his
    Majesty to be pleased to cause the most speedy and effectual
    measures to be taken for restoring peace in America; and that no
    time may be lost in proposing an immediate opening of a treaty
    for the final settlement of the tranquillity of these invaluable
    provinces, by a removal of the unhappy causes of this ruinous
    civil war, and by a just and adequate security against the
    return of the like calamities in times to come. And this House
    desire to offer the most dutiful assurances to his Majesty, that
    they will, in due time, cheerfully co-operate with the
    magnanimity and tender goodness of his Majesty for the
    preservation of his people, by such explicit and most solemn
    declarations, and provisions of fundamental and irrevocable
    laws, as may be judged necessary for the ascertaining and fixing
    forever the respective rights of Great Britain and her
    colonies."




XXII. FROM "THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD."

THE FAMILY USE ART, WHICH IS OPPOSED WITH STILL GREATER.

OLIVER GOLDSMITH.--1728-1774.


Whatever might have been Sophia's sensations, the rest of the family was
easily consoled for Mr. Burchell's absence by the company of our
landlord, whose visits now became more frequent and longer. Though he
had been disappointed in procuring my daughters the amusements of the
town, as he designed, he took every opportunity of supplying them with
those little recreations which our retirement would admit of. He usually
came in the morning, and while my son and I followed our occupations
abroad, he sat with the family at home, and amused them by describing
the town, with every part of which he was particularly acquainted. He
could repeat all the observations that were retailed in the atmosphere
of the play-houses, and had all the good things of the high wits by rote
long before they made their way into the jest-books. The intervals
between conversation were employed in teaching my daughters piquet, or
sometimes in setting my two little ones to box to make them _sharp_, as
he called it; but the hopes of having him for a son-in-law, in some
measure blinded us to all his imperfections. It must be owned that my
wife laid a thousand schemes to entrap him; or, to speak it more
tenderly, used every art to magnify the merit of her daughter. If the
cakes at tea ate short and crisp, they were made by Olivia: if the
gooseberry wine was well knit, the gooseberries were of her gathering:
it was her fingers that gave the pickles their peculiar green; and in
the composition of a pudding, it was her judgment that mixed the
ingredients. Then the poor woman would sometimes tell the 'squire, that
she thought him and Olivia extremely of a size, and would bid both stand
up to see which was tallest. These instances of cunning, which she
thought impenetrable, yet which everybody saw through, were very
pleasing to our benefactor, who gave every day some new proofs of his
passion, which, though they had not risen to proposals of marriage, yet
we thought fell but little short of it; and his slowness was attributed
sometimes to native bashfulness, and sometimes to his fear of offending
his uncle. An occurrence, however, which happened soon after, put it
beyond a doubt that he designed to become one of our family; my wife
even regarded it as an absolute promise.

My wife and daughters happening to return a visit to neighbor
Flamborough's, found that family had lately got their pictures drawn by
a limner, who travelled the country, and took likenesses for fifteen
shillings a head. As this family and ours had long a sort of rivalry in
point of taste, our spirit took the alarm at this stolen march upon us,
and notwithstanding all I could say, and I said much, it was resolved
that we should have our pictures done too. Having, therefore, engaged
the limner, for what could I do? our next deliberation was to shew the
superiority of our taste in the attitudes. As for our neighbor's family,
there were seven of them, and they were drawn with seven oranges, a
thing quite out of taste, no variety in life, no composition in the
world. We desired to have something in a brighter style, and after many
debates, at length came to an unanimous resolution of being drawn
together in one large historical family piece. This would be cheaper,
since one frame would serve for all, and it would be infinitely more
genteel; for all families of any taste were now drawn in the same
manner. As we did not immediately recollect an historical subject to hit
us, we were contented each with being drawn as independent historical
figures. My wife desired to be represented as Venus, and the painter was
desired not to be too frugal of his diamonds in her stomacher and hair.
Her two little ones were to be as Cupids by her side, while I, with my
gown and band, was to present her with my books on the Whistonian
controversy. Olivia would be drawn as an Amazon, sitting upon a bank of
flowers, dressed in a green Joseph richly laced with gold, and a whip in
her hand. Sophia was to be a shepherdess, with as many sheep as the
painter could put in for nothing; and Moses was to be dressed out with
an hat and white feather. Our taste so much pleased the 'squire, that he
insisted on being put in as one of the family, in the character of
Alexander the Great, at Olivia's feet. This was considered by us all as
an indication of his desire to be introduced into the family, nor could
we refuse his request. The painter was therefore set to work, and as he
wrought with assiduity and expedition, in less than four days the whole
was completed. The piece was large, and it must be owned he did not
spare his colors; for which my wife gave him great encomiums. We were
all perfectly satisfied with his performance; but an unfortunate
circumstance had not occurred till the picture was finished, which now
struck us with dismay. It was so very large that we had no place in the
house to fix it. How we all came to disregard so material a point is
inconceivable; but certain it is, we had been all greatly remiss. The
picture, therefore, instead of gratifying our vanity, as we hoped,
leaned, in a most mortifying manner, against the kitchen wall, where the
canvas was stretched and painted, much too large to be got through any
of the doors, and the jest of all our neighbors. One compared it to
Robinson Crusoe's long-boat, too large to be removed; another thought it
more resembled a reel in a bottle; some wondered how it could be got
out, but still more were amazed how it ever got in.

But though it excited the ridicule of some, it effectually raised more
malicious suggestions in many. The 'squire's portrait being found united
with ours, was an honor too great to escape envy. Scandalous whispers
began to circulate at our expense, and our tranquillity was continually
disturbed by persons who came as friends to tell us what was said of us
by enemies. These reports we always resented with becoming spirit; but
scandal ever improves by opposition.

We once again therefore entered into a consultation upon obviating the
malice of our enemies, and at last came to a resolution which had too
much cunning to give me entire satisfaction. It was this: as our
principal object was to discover the honor of Mr. Thornhill's addresses,
my wife undertook to sound him by pretending to ask his advice in the
choice of an husband for her eldest daughter. If this was not found
sufficient to induce him to a declaration, it was then resolved to
terrify him with a rival. To this last step, however, I would by no
means give my consent, till Olivia gave me the most solemn assurances
that she would marry the person provided to rival him upon this
occasion, if he did not prevent it, by taking her himself. Such was the
scheme laid, which, though I did not strenuously oppose, I did not
entirely approve.

The next time, therefore, that Mr. Thornhill came to see us, my girls
took care to be out of the way, in order to give their mamma an
opportunity of putting her scheme in execution; but they only retired to
the next room, whence they could overhear the whole conversation: my
wife artfully introduced it, by observing, that one of the Miss
Flamboroughs was like to have a very good match of it in Mr. Spanker. To
this the 'squire assenting, she proceeded to remark, that they who had
warm fortunes were always sure of getting good husbands: "But heaven
help," continued she, "the girls that have none. What signifies beauty,
Mr. Thornhill? or what signifies all the virtue, and all the
qualifications in the world, in this age of self-interest? It is not,
what is she? but, what has she? is all the cry."

"Madam," returned he, "I highly approve the justice, as well as the
novelty, of your remarks, and if I were a king, it should be otherwise.
It should then, indeed, be fine times for the girls without fortunes:
our two young ladies should be the first for whom I would provide."

"Ah, sir," returned my wife, "you are pleased to be facetious: but I
wish I were a queen, and then I know where my eldest daughter should
look for an husband. But now that you have put it into my head,
seriously, Mr. Thornhill, can't you recommend me a proper husband for
her? She is now nineteen years old, well grown and well educated, and,
in my humble opinion, does not want for parts."

"Madam," replied he, "if I were to choose, I would find out a person
possessed of every accomplishment that can make an angel happy. One with
prudence, fortune, taste, and sincerity; such, madam, would be, in my
opinion, the proper husband." "Ay, sir," said she, "but do you know of
any such person?"--"No, Madam," returned he, "it is impossible to know
any person that deserves to be her husband: she's too great a treasure
for one man's possession: she's a goddess. Upon my soul, I speak what I
think, she's an angel"--"Ah, Mr. Thornhill, you only flatter my poor
girl: but we have been thinking of marrying her to one of your tenants,
whose mother is lately dead, and who wants a manager; you know whom I
mean, farmer Williams; a warm man, Mr. Thornhill, able to give her good
bread; and who has several times made her proposals:" (which was
actually the case) "but, sir," concluded she, "I should be glad to have
your approbation of our choice."--"How, Madam," replied he, "my
approbation! My approbation of such a choice! Never. What! Sacrifice so
much beauty and sense, and goodness, to a creature insensible of the
blessing! Excuse me, I can never approve of such a piece of injustice!
And I have my reasons!"--"Indeed, sir," cried Deborah, "If you have your
reasons, that's another affair; but I should be glad to know those
reasons."--"Excuse me, madam," returned he, "they lie too deep for
discovery;" (laying his hand upon his bosom) "they remain buried,
rivetted here."

After he was gone, upon general consultation, we could not tell what to
make of these fine sentiments. Olivia considered them as instances of
the most exalted passion; but I was not quite so sanguine: yet, whatever
they might portend, it was resolved to prosecute the scheme of farmer
Williams, who, from my daughter's first appearance in the country, had
paid her his addresses.




XXIII. MEETING OF JOHNSON WITH WILKES.

(1776).

JAMES BOSWELL.--1740-1795.

_From_ LIFE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON, LL. D.


I am now to record a very curious incident in Dr. Johnson's life, which
fell under my own observation; of which _pars magna fui_, and which I am
persuaded will, with the liberal-minded, be much to his credit.

My desire of being acquainted with celebrated men of every description
had made me, much about the same time, obtain an introduction to Dr.
Samuel Johnson and to John Wilkes, Esq. Two men more different could not
perhaps be selected out of all mankind. They had even attacked one
another with some asperity in their writings; yet I lived in habits of
friendship with both. I could fully relish the excellence of each; for I
have ever delighted in that intellectual chemistry, which can separate
good qualities from evil in the same person.

Sir John Pringle, "mine own friend and my father's friend," between whom
and Dr. Johnson I in vain wished to establish an acquaintance, as I
respected and lived in intimacy with both of them, observed to me once,
very ingeniously, "It is not in friendship as in mathematics, where two
things, each equal to a third, are equal between themselves. You agree
with Johnson as a middle quality, and you agree with me as a middle
quality; but Johnson and I should not agree." Sir John was not
sufficiently flexible; so I desisted; knowing, indeed, that the
repulsion was equally strong on the part of Johnson; who, I know not
from what cause, unless his being a Scotchman, had formed a very
erroneous opinion of Sir John. But I conceived an irresistible wish, if
possible, to bring Dr. Johnson and Mr. Wilkes together. How to manage
it, was a nice and difficult matter.[E]

My worthy booksellers and friends, Messieurs Dilly in the Poultry, at
whose hospitable and well-covered table I have seen a greater number of
literary men than at any other, except that of Sir Joshua Reynolds, had
invited me to meet Mr. Wilkes and some more gentlemen on Wednesday, May
15th. "Pray," said I, "let us have Dr. Johnson." "What, with Mr. Wilkes?
not for the world," said Mr. Edward Dilly: "Dr. Johnson would never
forgive me." "Come," said I, "if you'll let me negotiate for you, I will
be answerable that all shall go well." _Dilly._ "Nay, if you will take
it upon you, I am sure I shall be very happy to see them both here."

Notwithstanding the high veneration which I entertained for Dr. Johnson,
I was sensible that he was sometimes a little actuated by the spirit of
contradiction, and by means of that I hoped I should gain my point. I
was persuaded that if I had come upon him with a direct proposal, "Sir,
will you dine in company with Jack Wilkes?" he would have flown into a
passion, and would probably have answered, "Dine with Jack Wilkes, Sir!
I'd as soon dine with Jack Ketch." I, therefore, while we were sitting
quietly by ourselves at his house in an evening, took occasion to open
my plan thus: "Mr. Dilly, Sir, sends his respectful compliments to you,
and would be happy if you would do him the honor to dine with him on
Wednesday next along with me, as I must soon go to Scotland." _Johnson._
"Sir, I am obliged to Mr. Dilly. I will wait upon him." _Boswell._
"Provided, Sir, I suppose, that the company which he is to have is
agreeable to you?" _Johnson._ "What do you mean, Sir? What do you take
me for? Do you think I am so ignorant of the world as to imagine that I
am to prescribe to a gentleman what company he is to have at his table?"
_Boswell._ "I beg your pardon, Sir, for wishing to prevent you from
meeting people whom you might not like. Perhaps he may have some of what
he calls his patriotic friends with him." _Johnson._ "Well, Sir, and
what then? What care I for his _patriotic friends_? Poh!" _Boswell._ "I
should not be surprised to find Jack Wilkes there." _Johnson._ "And if
Jack Wilkes _should_ be there, what is that to _me_, Sir? My dear
friend, let us have no more of this. I am sorry to be angry with you;
but really it is treating me strangely to talk to me as if I could not
meet any company whatever, occasionally." _Boswell._ "Pray forgive me,
Sir, I meant well. But you shall meet whoever comes, for me." Thus I
secured him, and told Dilly that he would find him very well pleased to
be one of his guests on the day appointed.

Upon the much expected Wednesday, I called on him about half an hour
before dinner, as I often did when we were to dine out together, to see
that he was ready in time, and to accompany him. I found him buffeting
his books, as upon a former occasion, covered with dust, and making no
preparation for going abroad. "How is this, Sir?" said I. "Don't you
recollect that you are to dine at Mr. Dilly's?" _Johnson._ "Sir, I did
not think of going to Dilly's; it went out of my head. I have ordered
dinner at home with Mrs. Williams." _Boswell._ "But, my dear Sir, you
know you were engaged to Mr. Dilly, and I told him so. He will expect
you, and will be much disappointed if you don't come." _Johnson._ "You
must talk to Mrs Williams about this."

Here was a sad dilemma. I feared that what I was so confident I had
secured would yet be frustrated. He had accustomed himself to show Mrs.
Williams such a degree of humane attention, as frequently imposed some
restraint upon him; and I knew that if she should be obstinate, he would
not stir. I hastened down stairs to the blind lady's room, and told her
I was in great uneasiness, for Dr. Johnson had engaged to me to dine
this day at Mr. Dilly's, but that he had told me he had forgotten his
engagement, and had ordered dinner at home. "Yes, Sir," said she,
pretty peevishly, "Dr. Johnson is to dine at home." "Madam," said I,
"his respect for you is such, that I know he will not leave you, unless
you absolutely desire it. But as you have so much of his company, I hope
you will be good enough to forego it for a day, as Mr. Dilly is a very
worthy man, has frequently had agreeable parties at his house for Dr.
Johnson, and will be vexed if the Doctor neglects him to-day. And then,
Madam, be pleased to consider my situation; I carried the message, and I
assured Mr. Dilly that Dr. Johnson was to come; and no doubt he has made
a dinner, and invited a company, and boasted of the honor he expected to
have. I shall be quite disgraced if the Doctor is not there." She
gradually softened to my solicitations, which were certainly as earnest
as most entreaties to ladies upon any occasion, and was graciously
pleased to empower me to tell Dr. Johnson, "That all things considered,
she thought he should certainly go." I flew back to him, still in dust,
and careless of what should be the event, "indifferent in his choice to
go or stay"; but as soon as I had announced to him Mrs. Williams's
consent, he roared, "Frank, a clean shirt," and was very soon dressed.
When I had him fairly seated in a hackney-coach with me, I exulted as
much as a fortune-hunter who has got an heiress into a post-chaise with
him to set out for Gretna Green.

When we entered Mr. Dilly's drawing room, he found himself in the midst
of a company he did not know. I kept myself snug and silent, watching
how he would conduct himself. I observed him whispering to Mr. Dilly,
"Who is that gentleman, Sir?"--"Mr. Arthur Lee." _Johnson._ "Too, too,
too" (under his breath), which was one of his habitual mutterings. Mr.
Arthur Lee could not but be very obnoxious to Johnson, for he was not
only a _patriot_, but an _American_. He was afterwards minister from the
United States at the court of Madrid. "And who is the gentleman in
lace?"--"Mr. Wilkes, Sir." This information confounded him still more;
he had some difficulty to restrain himself, and, taking up a book, sat
down upon a window-seat and read, or at least kept his eye upon it
intently for some time, till he composed himself. His feelings, I dare
say, were awkward enough. But he had no doubt recollected his having
rated me for supposing that he could be at all disconcerted by any
company, and he, therefore, resolutely set himself to behave quite as an
easy man of the world, who could adapt himself at once to the
disposition and manners of those whom he might chance to meet.

The cheering sound of "Dinner is upon the table," dissolved his reverie,
and we _all_ sat down without any symptoms of ill humor.... Mr. Wilkes
placed himself next to Dr. Johnson, and behaved to him with so much
attention and politeness, that he gained upon him insensibly. No man ate
more heartily than Johnson, or loved better what was nice and delicate.
Mr. Wilkes was very assiduous in helping him to some fine veal. "Pray
give me leave, Sir--It is better here--A little of the brown--Some fat,
Sir--A little of the stuffing--Some gravy--Let me have the pleasure of
giving you some butter--Allow me to recommend a squeeze of this orange;
or the lemon, perhaps may have more zest"--"Sir; sir, I am obliged to
you, Sir," cried Johnson, bowing, and turning his head to him with a
look for some time of "surly virtue," but, in a short while of
complacency.

Foote being mentioned, Johnson said, "He is not a good mimic." One of
the company added, "A merry-andrew, a buffoon." _Johnson._ "But he has
wit too, and is not deficient in ideas, or in fertility and variety of
imagery, and not empty of reading; he has knowledge enough to fill up
his part. One species of wit he has in an eminent degree, that of
escape. You drive him into a corner with both hands; but he is gone,
Sir, when you think you have got him--like an animal that jumps over
your head. Then he has a great range for wit; he never lets truth stand
between him and the jest, and he is sometimes mighty coarse. Garrick is
under many restraints from which Foote is free." _Wilkes._ "Garrick's
wit is more like Lord Chesterfield's." _Johnson._ "The first time I was
in company with Foote was at Fitzherbert's. Having no good opinion of
the fellow, I was resolved not to be pleased; and it is very difficult
to please a man against his will. I went on eating my dinner pretty
sullenly, affecting not to mind him. But the dog was so very comical,
that I was obliged to lay down my knife and fork, throw myself back in
my chair, and fairly laugh it out. No, Sir, he was irresistible. He upon
one occasion experienced, in an extraordinary degree, the efficacy of
his powers of entertaining. Amongst the many and various modes which he
tried of getting money, he became a partner with a small-beer brewer,
and he was to have a share of the profits for procuring customers
amongst his numerous acquaintance. Fitzherbert was one who took his
small-beer, but it was so bad that the servants resolved not to drink
it. They were at some loss how to notify their resolution, being afraid
of offending their master, who, they knew, liked Foote much as a
companion. At last they fixed upon a little black boy, who was rather a
favorite, to be their deputy, and deliver their remonstrance; and,
having invested him with the sole authority of the kitchen, he was to
inform Mr. Fitzherbert, in all their names, upon a certain day, that
they would drink Foote's small-beer no longer. On that day Foote
happened to dine at Fitzherbert's, and this boy served at table; he was
so delighted with Foote's stories, and merriment, and grimace, that when
he went down stairs, he told them, 'This is the finest man I have ever
seen. I will not deliver your message. I will drink his small-beer.'"

... Mr. Wilkes remarked, that "among all the bold flights of
Shakespeare's imagination, the boldest was making Birnam-wood march to
Dunsinane; creating a wood where there never was a shrub; a wood in
Scotland! ha! ha! ha!" And he also observed, that "the clannish slavery
of the Highlands of Scotland was the single exception to Milton's remark
of 'the mountain nymph, sweet Liberty,' being worshipped in all hilly
countries." "When I was at Inverary," said he, "on a visit to my old
friend Archibald, Duke of Argyle, his dependents congratulated me on
being such a favorite of his Grace. I said, 'It is, then, gentlemen,
truly lucky for me; for if I had displeased the Duke, and he had wished
it, there is not a Campbell among you but would have been ready to bring
John Wilkes's head to him in a charger. It would have been only

    "'Off with his head! so much for _Aylesbury_.'

"I was then member for Aylesbury."

... Mr. Arthur Lee mentioned some Scotch who had taken possession of a
barren part of America, and wondered why they should choose it.
