
"My shoes are ever so wet," boasted Winnie. "I plumped down deep in the
lane, and the water went right through the laces at the top. It
squelches as I walk. I feel like a soldier in the trenches."

"I've torn my coat in three places," said Hattie, not to be outdone. "It
will be a nice little piece of work for Mrs. Johnson to mend it."

"Glad they don't make us mend our own coats here," grunted Winnie.

"Miss Bowes would be ashamed to see me in it if I did," Hattie chuckled,
"but I've knitted a whole sock since Christmas, and turned the heel too.
Cuckoo, aren't you tired?"

"Not a scrap," replied Rona, who was stumping along sturdily in spite of
her encumbrances.

"Well, I am. I wish it wasn't three miles back."

"It's not more than two as the crow flies."

"But we're not crows, and we can't fly, and there are no aeroplanes to
give us a lift. We've got to tramp, tramp, tramp along the hard high
road. I begin to sympathize with Tommies on the march."

"Why need we stick to the high road?" said Rona, pausing suddenly. "If
we struck across country we'd save a mile or more. Look, The Woodlands
is over there, and if we made a beeline for it we'd cut off all that
enormous round by Cefn Mawr. Who's game to try?"

"Oh, I am, if we can dodge Teddie!"

"Likewise this child," added Winnie.

"Oh, we'll dodge Teddie right enough! It will be good scouting
practice," chuckled Rona. "Sit down on that stone and tie your shoelace,
and we'll wait for you while the others go on; then we'll bolt through
that gate and over the wall into the next field."

The idea that it was scouting practice lent a vestige of sanction to the
proceeding. Winnie took the hint, and adjusted her shoelaces with
elaborate care and deliberation.

"Don't be all day over that," said Miss Teddington, who passed by but
did not wait.

The moment she was round the corner of the road, and the high hedge
screened her from view, the three deserters were through the gate and
running across the field. They scaled a wall without much difficulty,
and found themselves on a wide gorse-grown pasture. Though they could
not now see the chimneys of The Woodlands in the distance, there were
other landmarks quite sufficient to guide them. They plodded on
cheerfully.

"It would be prime to have our snowdrops all packed up before the
others got back," ventured Hattie. "They'd be so surprised. They'd
wonder how we'd stolen a march on them."

"If Teddie asks where we were, we can truly say 'at the front'," Winnie
giggled.

"You'd better not pick up any nature specimens, though, or she'll want
to know 'the exact locality' where you found them."

"Um--yes! That might be awkward. This toadstool shall stay on its native
heath, in case it tells tales."

It was rather a fascinating walk, all amongst the gorse-bushes. None of
the three had been there before, and instinctively the younger ones left
Rona to lead the way. Her bump of locality had been well developed in
New Zealand, so she strode on with confidence. But the ground shelved
down suddenly, revealing a natural feature upon which they had not
counted, a fairly wide brook, running between sandy banks. Here indeed
was an obstacle. Winnie and Hattie stared at it with blank faces and
groaned.

"We'd forgotten the wretched Llanelwyn stream. What atrocious luck!
Don't believe there's the ghost of a bridge anywhere. Shall we have to
go back?"

"I'm not going back," declared Rona sturdily. "There must be some way of
getting over it some where. Come along and we'll prospect."

"Oh, for the wings of a dove!" sighed Hattie. "Even those of the
raggedest sparrow would be welcome."

"Better wish yourself a fish, for you may have to try swimming," grunted
Winnie.

"I can't swim--not a stroke! You'll suggest I shall jump it next, I
suppose. Look here, we shall have to go back. There's nothing else for
it. Rona! Corona Mitchell! Corona Margarita! Cuckoo! Where've you gone
to?"

"Coo--ee!" came in reply from the distance, and presently Rona appeared
beckoning vigorously.

"We're--going--back," shouted Hattie.

"No, no! Come along here."

Anxious to see if she had found any solution of the problem, the others
pelted down a slope and joined her.

"Here's our bridge," said Rona proudly, as soon as they rounded the
corner.

"That thing!" exclaimed Winnie, looking aghast at the decidedly slim
pole, that was fixed across the stream as a cattle bar.

"I'm not a tight-rope dancer, thank you!" sneered Hattie rather
indignantly.

"It'll be quite easy," Rona urged.

"Oh, I dare say! You won't find me trying to walk across it, I can tell
you."

"I didn't ask you to walk. I'm going to sit on it cross-legged, like a
tailor, and shuffle myself over. It's broad enough for that. I'll go
first."

"Oh, I daren't! I'd drop in!" wailed the younger ones in chorus.

"Now don't funk. What two sillies you are! It won't be as hard as you
think. Just watch me do it."

Fortunately the pole had two great advantages: it was firmly fixed in
the bank on either side, so that it did not sway about, and, being the
trunk of a fir-tree with the bark still left on, its surface offered
some grip. Rona's progress was slow but steady. She worked herself over
by a few inches at a time. When she reached the water's edge on the far
side she dropped on to a patch of silver sand and hurrahed.

"Buck up, and come along," she yelled lustily.

This was scouting with a vengeance, and more than the others had
bargained for; but the stronger will prevailed, and though they shook in
their shoes they were persuaded to make the experiment.

"I'm all dithering," panted Hattie, as Winnie pushed her forward to try
first.

It was not as bad as she had expected. She was able to cling tightly
with hands and knees, and though she had one awful moment in the middle,
when she thought she was overbalancing, she reached Rona's outstretched
hand in due course.

"You squealed like a pig," said the Cuckoo.

"I thought I was done for. Wouldn't you like to feel how my heart's
beating?"

"No, I shouldn't. Don't be affected. Come along, Win. We can't wait all
day. I'll fish you out if you tumble in, I promise you. It isn't deep
enough to drown you."

With many protestations, Winnie, really very much scared, followed the
others' lead, and got along quite successfully till within a foot of the
brink; then the sudden mooing of a cow on the bank startled her, and so
upset her equilibrium that she splashed into the water, wetting one leg
thoroughly.

"Ugh! My shoes were squelchy enough before," she lamented. "You can't
think how horrid it is."

"Never mind, you've got across."

"But you might sympathize."

"Haven't time. We shall have to hurry up if we mean to be back before
the others."

"Did you think the cow was Teddie calling you?" laughed Hattie, who,
having got her own trial over, could afford to jest at other people's
misfortunes.

"You'd have jumped yourself. Oh dear, I spilt most of my snowdrops,
though I did tie the basket round my neck!"

"Never mind; you can't fish them out of the stream now. I'll give you
some of mine. Here, take these," said Rona. "I've nobody to send them
to," she added, half to herself, as she climbed the bank.

"Oh, thanks awfully! I always send Mother a big bunch. She looks forward
to them. I've brought a cardboard box from home on purpose to pack them
in, because the cook runs quite out of starch-boxes. Some of the girls
last year had to wrap theirs just in brown paper. If you don't want
yours, can you spare me a few more?"

"I'll keep just these to put in my bedroom, and you may have the rest if
you like," replied Rona, stalking ahead.

Every now and then the sense of her loneliness smote her. She would
probably be the only girl in the school who was not sending flowers
away to-night. How different it would be if she had anybody in England
who took an interest in her and cared to receive her snowdrops!

"It's no use crying for the moon," she decided, blinking hard lest she
should betray symptoms of weakness before her juniors. "When a thing
can't be helped it can't, and there's an end of it."

"Cuckoo! Corona Margarita! Do wait for us! You walk like the wind."

"Or as if a bull were chasing you," panted Hattie, overtaking her and
claiming a supporting arm. "Do you see where we've got ourselves to? The
only way out of this is to go straight through the Glynmaen Wood."

"Well, and why shouldn't we go through the Glynmaen Wood? Is it any
different to any other wood?"

"No, only they're horribly particular about trespassing. They stick up
all kinds of notices warning people off."

"What rubbish! Why, in New Zealand we go where we like."

"Oh, I dare say, in New Zealand!"

"Look, there's a notice up there," said Winnie, pointing over the hedge
to a tree whereon was nailed a weather-stained board bearing the
inhospitable legend: "Trespassers Beware".

Rona stared at it quite belligerently.

"I should like to pull it down," she observed. "What right has anybody
to try to keep places all to themselves?"

"I suppose it belongs to Lord Glyncraig."

"All the more shame to him then. I shall take a particular pleasure in
going, just because he sticks up 'Don't'."

"Suppose we're caught?"

"My blessed babes, you don't suppose I've come all this short cut and
scrambled over a pole to be turned back by a trespass notice! Do you
want to cross the stream again and trail home by the road?"

"Rather not!"

"Then I'll give you a boost to get over the fence there."

The property was well protected. It took Rona's best efforts to help her
companions to scale the high oak boards. When they had all dropped
safely to the other side they set off through the trees in the direction
they judged would bring them out nearest to The Woodlands.

Three girls in thick shoes do not pass absolutely silently through a
wood, especially if they indulge in giggles. Winnie and Hattie,
moreover, could never be together without chattering incessantly. For
the moment they had forgotten every principle of scouting. In that
quiet, secluded spot their shrill voices rang out with extreme
clearness. A rabbit or two scuttled away, and a pheasant flew off with a
whirr. Presently another and heavier pair of boots might be heard
tramping towards them, the bushes parted, and a dour-looking face, with
lantern jaws and a stubbly chin, regarded them grimly. The gamekeeper
glowered a moment, then growled out:

"What are you three a-doing here?"

"That's our own business," retorted Rona briskly.

"Indeed? Well, it happens to be my business too. You're trespassing, and
you know it."

"We're doing no harm."

"Aren't you? I suppose it's nothing to scare every pheasant in the wood.
Oh dear no!"

"What nonsense! It was only one," exclaimed Rona, standing up against
the bullying tone. "You're making the most unnecessary fuss. What right
have you to stop us?"

"More right than you've got to be here. I won't have anybody in these
woods, schoolgirls or no schoolgirls, so just you get back the way you
came, or----"

"That will do, Jordan," said a voice behind him.

The keeper started, turned, and touched his cap obsequiously.

"Beg pardon, my lord, but the trespassing that goes on here gets past
bearing, and wants putting a stop to."

"Very well, I'll settle it myself," and Lord Glyncraig--for it was
he--readjusted his glasses and stared reprovingly at the three
delinquents.

"Ah! girls from The Woodlands--evidently out of bounds. I shall have to
report you to your headmistress, I'm afraid. Your names, please."

"Winnie Fowler," "Hattie Goodwin," murmured two subdued voices.

Rona did not answer at all. She kept her head down and her eyes fixed on
the ground.

"It's--it's surely not the same girl who did me such a service this
morning on the marsh? Then I must repeat my thanks. Now, look here,
you've been up to some mischief, all three of you. Get back to school as
quick as you can, and I'll say nothing about it! There! Off you go!"

Without another word the sinners pelted along through the wood, never
pausing till they reached the railing and climbed over on to the high
road. Here, on free ground, they felt at liberty to express their
indignation.

"He's a nasty, horrid old thing to turn us out!" panted Hattie.

"How he looked at you, Rona!" said Winnie. "He stared and stared and
stared!"

"Wondering where he'd seen me before, I suppose. I expect the green
stains on my coat reminded him. I got them hauling up his precious dog."

"It wasn't with him in the wood."

"Oh, it's sitting by the fire drinking linseed tea! It looked a pampered
brute."

"We shall have to scoot to keep clear of Teddie."

"All right. Scooterons-nous. Thank goodness, there's the hedge of The
Woodlands! We'll slip in through the little side gate."

The three certainly merited discovery for their misdeeds, but on this
occasion they evaded justice; for, as luck would have it, they reached
the house just a moment or two before the rest of the school, and Miss
Teddington, who was in a hurry to pack her boxes of snowdrops, concluded
that they must have been in front with Ulyth and Lizzie, and did not
stop to remember that she had left them tying Winnie's shoelace by the
roadside. It was seldom that such a palpable lapse escaped her keen eye
and even keener comprehension; so they might thank their fortunate stars
for their escape. Hattie and Winnie made great capital out of the
adventure, and recounted all the details, much exaggerated, to a
thrilled audience in IV B.

Rona did not mention the matter to Ulyth. Perhaps, knowing her
room-mate's standards, in her heart of hearts she was rather ashamed of
it.




CHAPTER XI

Rona receives News


Ulyth and Lizzie Lonsdale were sitting cosily in the latter's bedroom.
It was Shrove Tuesday, and, with perhaps some idea of imitating the
Continental habit of keeping carnival, Miss Bowes for that one day
relaxed her rule prohibiting sweets, and allowed the school a special
indulgence. Needless to say, they availed themselves of it to the
fullest extent. Some had boxes of chocolate sent them from home; others
visited the village shop and purchased delicacies from the big bottles
displayed in the windows; while a favoured few managed to borrow pans
from the kitchen and perform some cookery with the aid of friends.
Lizzie had been concocting peppermint creams, and she now leant back
luxuriously in a basket-chair and handed the box to Ulyth. The two girls
were friends, and often met for a chat. Ulyth sometimes wished they
could be room-mates. Though Rona was immensely improved, she was still
not an entirely congenial companion. Her lack of education and early
training made it difficult for her to understand half the things Ulyth
wanted to talk about, and it was troublesome always to have to explain.
In an equal friendship there must be give and take, and to poor Rona
Ulyth was constantly giving her very best, and receiving nothing in
return. Lizzie, on the contrary, was inspiring. She played and painted
well, was fond of reading, and was ready to help to organize any forward
movement in the school. She and Ulyth pottered together over
photography, mounted specimens for the museum, tried new stitches in
embroidery, and worked at the same patterns in chip carving. The two
girls were at about the same level of attainment in most things, for if
Ulyth had greater originality, Lizzie was the more steady and plodding.
It was Ulyth's failing to take things up very hotly at first, and then
grow tired of them. She was apt to have half a dozen unfinished pieces
of fancywork on hand, and her locker in the carpentry-room held several
ambitious attempts that had never reached fruition.

Lizzie, as she munched her peppermint creams, turned over the pages of a
volume of Dryden's poems, and made an occasional note. Each form kept a
"Calendar of Quotations" hung up in its classroom, the daily extracts
for which were supplied by the girls in rotation. It was Lizzie's turn
to provide the gems for the following week, and she was hunting for
something suitable.

"I wish Miss Bowes had given me Shakespeare," she said. "I could have
