execution of Hernando would remove his worst enemy.  But Almagro does
not appear to have been an especially cruel man.  He was an easy-going,
careless, jovial, pleasure-loving soldier, and he spared the lives of
the two brothers.  Gonzalo escaped, and assembling a force, immediately
took the field.

[Illustration: Fernando Cortes.  From a Picture in the Florence Gallery]

There had been a meeting between Francisco and Almagro.  The latter got
an inkling that there was treachery intended, and though the meeting
had begun with embraces and tears, it was broken off abruptly and both
the ancient partners prepared for an appeal to arms.  Almagro had
released Hernando on his promise to return immediately to Spain.  This
promise Hernando broke.  Francisco made his brother commander of the
army, and the forces of the two commanders met on the plains of Salinas
on the 6th of April, 1538.

There were about seven hundred on one side, Pizarro's, and five hundred
on the other, equally divided between horse and foot, with a few pieces
of artillery in both armies.  The men of Chili, as Almagro's forces
were called, hated their former comrades, and Pizarro's men returned
this feeling with such animosities as are engendered nowhere save in
civil war.  Victory finally attended Hernando Pizarro.  He had fought
in the ranks like a common soldier, save that he had been at great
pains so to distinguish himself by his apparel that every one could
know him, so that all who sought him could find him.  Orgonez was slain
as he lay on the ground, wounded.  Such was the close, fierce fighting
that the killed alone numbered nearly {104} two hundred, besides a
proportionately greater number wounded.

Almagro had watched the battle from an adjacent hill.  He was old and
ill, broken down from excesses and dissipations.  Unable to sit a
horse, he had been carried thither on a litter.  The sight of his
routed army admonished him to try to escape.  With great pain and
difficulty he got upon a horse, but being pursued, the animal stumbled
and Almagro fell to the ground.  Some of Pizarro's men were about to
dispatch him when Hernando interfered.  He was taken prisoner to Cuzco
and held in captivity for a while.  Hernando had announced his
intention of sending him to Spain for trial, but a conspiracy to effect
his release, in which was our old friend De Candia, caused a change in
his purposes.  Almagro was tried on charges which were easily trumped
up, was found guilty, of course, and in spite of his protestations and
piteous appeals for life, he was strangled to death at night in his
prison on the 8th of July, 1538, in the sixty-fifth year of his life.
His head was then struck from his shoulders and both were exhibited in
the great square at Cuzco.  Vainglorious, ignorant, incompetent, yet
cheerful, generous, frank, kindly and open-hearted, and badly treated
by Pizarro and his brothers, he possibly deserved a better fate.

The Pizarro brothers affected to be overcome by the stern necessity
which compelled poor Almagro's execution.  As Francisco had done when
he had killed Atahualpa, these two put on mourning and insisted upon
being pall-bearers, and exhibited every outward manifestation of deep
and abiding grief.

Almagro left a son, Diego, by an Indian woman, to whom he had not been
married.  This young man {105} was under the guardianship of Pizarro at
Lima.  The sword of Damocles hung over his head for a while, but he was
spared eventually and, the rebellion of Almagro having been cut down,
the revolt of the Inca crushed, peace appeared once more to dwell in
the land.


VIII. The Mean End of the Great Conquistador

But fate had not finished with the Pizarros as yet.  Hernando was sent
back to Spain to explain the situation, and Gonzalo despatched to
Quito, of which province he was made governor.  He had instructions to
explore the country eastward to see if he could find another Peru.  He
made a marvelous march to the head-waters of the Amazon River, where he
was deserted by one of his commanders, Orellana, who built a
brigantine, sailed down the whole length of the Amazon, finally
reaching Europe, while Gonzalo and those few of his wretched followers
who survived the terrible hardships of that march, struggled back to
Quito.

Francisco, the Marquis, was thus left alone in Peru.  The position of
the men of Chili was precarious.  Although outwardly things were
peaceful, yet they felt that at any time Pizarro might institute war
against them.  They got the young Almagro away from him, and a score of
men under Juan de Rada, a stout-hearted veteran, mercenary soldier,
determined to put the Marquis to death and proclaim the young Almagro
as Lord and Dictator of Peru.

On Sunday afternoon, the 26th of June, 1541, De Rada and nineteen
desperate men of Chili, met at De Rada's house in Lima.  Pizarro had
received a number of warnings which he had neglected, confident {106}
in the security of his position, but the existence of the conspiracy
had been brought home to him with peculiar force that Sunday, and he
had remained in his palace at Lima surrounded by a number of gentlemen
devoted to his cause.  At vespers--which seems to have been a favorite
hour for nefarious deeds among the Spaniards--the assassins sallied
forth from the home of De Rada and started for the palace.

Such was the indifference in which the people held the squabbles
between the Pizarrists and the Almagrists, that it was casually
remarked by many of them, as the assassins proceeded through the
streets, that they were probably on their way to kill the governor.
The governor was at supper on the second floor of his palace.  There
was a sudden tumult in the square below.  The door was forced open and
the Almagrists, shouting "Death to Pizarro!" rushed for the stairs.
Most of the noble company with the old Marquis fled.  The great
conquistador at least had no thought of flight.  There remained with
him, however, two pages, his brother Martin de Alcantara, Francisco de
Chaves, one of the immortal thirteen of Gallo, and another cavalier,
named De Luna.

As they heard the clash of arms on the stairs and the shouting of the
assailants, the Marquis ordered De Chaves to close the door; then he
sprang to the wall, tore from it his corselet and endeavored to buckle
it on his person.  De Chaves unwisely attempted to parley, instead of
closing the door and barring it.  The assailants forced the entrance,
cut down De Chaves, and burst into the room.  Pizarro gave over the
attempt to fasten his breastplate, and seizing a sword and spear,
defended himself stoutly while pealing his war-cry: "Santiago!" through
the palace.  The two pages, {107} fighting valiantly, were soon cut
down.  De Alcantara and De Luna were also killed, and finally, Pizarro,
an old man over seventy years of age, stood alone before the murderers.

Such was the wonderful address of the sword play with which he defended
himself that the conspirators were at a loss how to take him, until De
Rada, ruthlessly seizing one of his comrades, pitilessly thrust him
upon Pizarro's sword-point, and, before the old man could withdraw the
weapon, cut him in the throat with his sword.  Instantly Pizarro was
struck by a dozen blades.  He fell back upon the floor, but he was not
yet dead, and with his own blood he marked a cross on the stones.  It
is alleged by some that he asked for a confessor, but that is hardly
likely, for as he bent his head to press his lips upon the cross, one
of the murderers, seizing a huge stone bowl, or earthen vessel, threw
it upon his head and killed him.  _Sic transit Pizarro_!

If he has been the subject of much severe censure, he has not lacked,
especially of late, zealous defenders.  I have endeavored to treat him
fairly in these sketches.  Considering him in comparison with his
contemporaries, Cortes surpassed him in ability, Hernando in executive
capacity, Almagro in generosity, Balboa in gallantry, and De Soto in
courtesy.  On the other hand, he was inferior to none of them in
bravery and resolution, and he made up for his lack of other qualities
by a terrible and unexampled persistency.  Nothing could swerve him
from his determination.  He had a faculty of rising to each successive
crisis which confronted him, wresting victory from the most adverse
circumstances in a way worthy of the highest admiration.  He was not so
cruel as Pedrarias, but he was {108} ruthless enough and his fame is
forever stained by atrocities and treacheries from which no personal or
public success can redeem it.  In passing judgment upon him, account
must be taken of the humble circumstances of his early life, his lack
of decent, healthy environment, his neglected youth, his total
ignorance of polite learning.  Take him all in all, in some things he
was better and in other things no worse than his day and generation.


IX. The Last of the Brethren

Hernando Pizarro was delayed on his voyage to Spain and some of
Almagro's partisans got the ear of the King before he arrived.  He was
charged with having permitted by his carelessness the Peruvian uprising
and having unlawfully taken the life of Almagro.  The story of his
desperate defense of Cusco was unavailing to mitigate the anger of the
King at the anarchy and confusion--and incidentally the diminution of
the royal revenue--which prevailed in Peru.  Hernando was thrown into
prison at Medina, and kept there for twenty-three long and weary years.

He had married his own niece, Francisca Pizarro, illegitimate daughter
of the Marquis Francisco, by a daughter of the great Inca, Huayna
Capac.  The woman was a half-sister of Atahualpa and Huascar.  By this
questionable means, the family of the Pizarros, with certain dignities,
restored for their Peruvian service, was perpetuated in Spain.
Hernando died at the age of one hundred and four.

De Rada, after the assassination of Francisco, assembled the ancient
partisans of Almagro.  They swore fealty to the young Almagro, and
immediately {109} took the field against a new governor sent out by
Charles V. to take charge of affairs in Peru.  This Vaca de Castro,
through his able lieutenants, Alvarado and Carvajal, defeated the
forces of Almagro on the bloody and desperately fought field of Chapus,
took the young man prisoner to Cuzco, and beheaded him forthwith.  He
met his death bravely, without beseeching or repining.  Before the fate
of the battle was decided, Almagro, suspecting that the gunner, De
Candia, another of the thirteen who had adhered to his cause, was not
serving his artillery with so good effect as he might, ran him through
the body.

There remains but one of the brothers who gave Peru to Spain, the
magnificent cavalier, Gonzalo.  His fate may be briefly summarized.
Another Viceroy, named Blasco Nunez Vela, succeeded De Castro.  He had
orders to release the Peruvians from servitude, which meant that the
conquerors and the thousands who had come after, would have been
compelled to work.  Led by Gonzalo, who had been rewarded for his
services in the rebellion against Almagro by a domain in Peru which
included the newly discovered mines of Potosi, which provided him with
the sinews of war, the people rebelled against the Viceroy.  Pizarro
and his lieutenant, Carvajal, deposed and defeated the Viceroy in a
battle near Quito on the 18th of January, 1546, the latter losing his
life.

Gonzalo Pizarro was now the supreme lord of Peru, which included
practically the whole of the South American coast from the Isthmus of
Darien to the Straits of Magellan, for Valdivia, one of Francisco
Pizarro's lieutenants, had partially conquered Chili at last.

The Spanish monarch, three thousand miles away, {110} could do nothing
by force.  He sent an able and devoted ecclesiastic, Gasca by name,
clothing him with dictatorial powers, to see what he could do.  Gasca
arrived at Panama, cunningly and tactfully won the captains of
Gonzalo's navy to his side, went to Peru, assembled a force, and
although Centeno, one of his lieutenants, was badly defeated by Gonzalo
and Carvajal on the 26th of October, 1547, at Huarina, the bloodiest
battle ever fought in Peru, finally gained strength enough to march to
Cuzco, where Gonzalo had command of a large and splendidly equipped
army.  Gasca, by promising that the obnoxious laws concerning the
Indians should be repealed, and adroitly pointing out that those who
adhered to Gonzalo were, in effect, in rebellion against their
sovereign, had so undermined the allegiance of his men that Gonzalo,
who had marched to the Valley of Xaquixaguana, found himself deserted
on the eve of the battle by all but a handful of faithful retainers.

"What shall we do?" asked one of the devoted followers.

"Fall on them and die like Romans."

"I believe I should prefer to die like a Christian," said Gonzalo
calmly.

Recognizing that it was all up with him, riding forward with Carvajal
and the rest, he coolly surrendered himself to Gasca.

Carvajal was hung, drawn and quartered.

Gonzalo, the last of the brothers, was beheaded in the great square at
Cuzco.  He was magnificently arrayed as he rode to his death.  His vast
estates, including the mines of Potosi, had been confiscated and all
his possessions were on his back.  He met his fate with the courage of
the family.  Before he {111} died he made a little address from the
scaffold.  Contrasting his present poverty with his former state, he
asked those who had been his friends and who owed him anything, and
also those who had been his enemies, to lay out some of the treasure
they had gained through his family and himself in masses for the repose
of his soul.  Then he knelt down before a table bearing a crucifix, and
prayed silently.  At last he turned to the executioner and said:

"Do your duty with a steady hand!"

So he made a rather dramatic and picturesque exit there in the square
at Cuzco, on that sunny morning in April, 1548.  His head was exhibited
at Lima with that of Carvajal.  To it was attached this inscription:

"This is the head of the traitor, Gonzalo Pizarro, who rebelled in Peru
against his sovereign and battled against the royal standard at the
Valley of Xaquixaguana."

There remains but one other person whose fate excites a passing
interest, unless it be Bishop Valverde, who was killed, while on a
journey, by the Peruvians, some years before; this is the last Inca,
Manco Capac.  When De Rada and his band started out to assassinate
Pizarro, one of the soldiers, named Gomez Perez, made a detour as they
crossed the square, to keep from getting his feet wet in a puddle of
muddy water which had overflowed from one of the conduits.

"You shrink," cried De Rada, in contempt, "from wetting your feet, who
are about to wade in the blood of the governor!  Go back, we will have
none of you."

He had not permitted Perez to take part in the assassination.  This
Perez, after the final defeat of the Almagrists, fled to the mountains
where Manco still exercised a fugitive sway over such of his people
{112} as could escape the Spaniards.  He was afterward pardoned and
used as a medium of communication between Gasca and the Inca.  The
priest viceroy was anxious to be at peace with the Inca, but Manco
refused to trust himself to the Spaniards.

Perez and he were playing bowls one day in the mountains.  Perez either
cheated, or in some way incensed the unfortunate Inca, who peremptorily
reproved him, whereupon the Spaniard, in a fit of passion, hurled his
heavy stone bowl at the last of the Incas, and killed him.  That was
the end of Perez, also, for the attendants of the young Inca stabbed
him to death.

Thus all those who had borne a prominent part in the great adventures
had gone to receive such certain reward as they merited; which reward
was not counted out to them in the form of gold and silver, or stones
of price.  The sway in the new land of the king over the sea was
absolute at last, and there was peace, such as it was, in Peru.



[1] "What is this, Francisco Pizarro?" Balboa asked, in great
astonishment, of his former lieutenant and comrade, meeting him and his
soldiers on the way with the order of arrest.  "You were not wont to
come out in this fashion to receive me!"

[2] Magellan had crossed it from the south five years before.

[3] Prescott, to whose remarkable accuracy, considering the time in
which he wrote, the authorities at his command, and the disabilities
under which he labored, I am glad to testify, in view of the prevalent
opinion that his books are literature and not history, says thirteen;
Helps says fifteen, while Markham and Fiske say sixteen.  Kirk verifies
Prescott's conclusion with a good argument.  One thing there is to
which no one but Prescott seems to have called attention or explained.
Everybody says Ruiz, the old pilot, was the first to follow Pizarro
across the line.  If so, he must have stepped back again, probably at
Pizarro's request, for six months later we find him leaving Panama in
charge of the ship which took Pizarro and his devoted subordinates off
the Island of Gorgona.  Ruiz could only have reached Panama in Tafur's
ship.  Certain it is that only thirteen men were ennobled for their
heroic constancy on the Island of Gallo, as we shall see later.  The
three names added to Prescott's list are put there on the authority of
Garcilasso de la Vega, the son of a Spanish cavalier and an Inca
princess.  Two of the three men he mentions he claims told him
personally that they had been of the heroic band which had refused to
abandon Pizarro.  Such claims made by men who may really believe them
to be true after the event, are not rare in history.

Whatever the exact number, there were but a handful.  The rest,
choosing Panama, remained on the north side of the line, and I have no
doubt regretted their decision for the rest of their lives.

[4] Generally speaking, the Peruvians were monogamous, except in case
of the Inca, who had as many wives as he wished, and who sometimes
rewarded exceptional services by allowing some favored adherent an
extra wife.

[5] The exact number varies with different authorities, none of whom,
however, makes the total greater than two hundred.

[6] Napoleon at Toulon succeeded in getting volunteers to man a
particularly dangerous artillery outpost swept by the guns of the
enemy, by the simple expedient of denominating the position as the
"Battery of the Fearless," or the "Battery of those who are not
afraid."  Even better than Pizarro, this great Corsican soldier of
fortune knew how to handle his men.

[7] Authorities differ as to which it was.  The matter is not material,
anyway.

[8] The ransom of King John II. of France, taken prisoner by the Black
Prince, was three million golden crowns.  The value of the ancient ecu
de la couronne varied between $1.50 and $1.30, so that the ransom of
John was between four and one-half and seven million dollars.
