
"What is the man's name?" said Sigurd.

"I know not."

"Did you see his face or hear his voice?"

"No; why should we?  We could believe those who brought him here."

"And were they the king's officers?"

"The king's that is now," said the guard.

"Why?" exclaimed Sigurd; "what do you mean?  Is not Ulf the king?"

"No," said the man.  "When you went out two hours ago he was, but now
Sigurd is king."

"False villain!" cried Sigurd, catching the fellow by the throat; "thou
art a traitor like all the rest."

The soldier, astonished to be thus assailed by a monk, stood for a
moment speechless; and before he could find words Sigurd had cast back
the hood from his own head.

The man, who knew him at once, turned pale as ashes, and, trembling from
head to foot, fell on his knees.

But Sigurd scornfully bade him rise and summon the guard, which he did.
Great was the amazement of the soldiers as they assembled, to see a monk
bareheaded stand with his hand on the throat of their comrade.  And
greater still did it become when they recognised in those stern, noble
features their own Prince Sigurd.

Before they could recover their presence of mind, Sigurd held up his
hand to enjoin silence, and said--

"Let two men go at once to the dungeon and bring the prisoner out."

While they were gone the group stood silent, as men half dazed, and
wondered what would happen next.

In a few moments the two guards returned, bringing with them the
prisoner, whom Sigurd greeted with every token of gratitude and joy.

"Brave friend," he exclaimed, "but for thy generous devotion this night
might have ended in murder and ruin, and these knaves and their friends
might have done their king and me a grievous wrong.  Accept Sigurd's
thanks."

"What!" exclaimed the prisoner, falling on his knees, "art thou Sigurd?
Do I owe my poor life to the bravest of all heroes?"

"I owe my life to thee, rather," said Sigurd; "and not mine only, but my
brother's."  Then turning to the bewildered and shame-struck soldiers,
he said--

"Men!--for I scorn to call you friends!--it remains for you to choose
between your duty or the punishment reserved for traitors.  You may
thank Heaven your wicked plans for this night have been foiled, and
that, traitors though you be, you do not stand here as murderers also.
Let those who refuse to return to their allegiance stand forward."

Not a man moved.

"Then," said Sigurd, "I demand a pledge of your loyalty."

"We will prove it with our lives!" cried the men, conscience-struck, and
meaning what they said.

"All I ask," said Sigurd, "is, that not a man here breathes a word of
this night's doing.  Besides yourselves, one man only knows of my being
at Niflheim, and he has vowed secrecy.  Do you do the same?"

The soldiers eagerly gave the required pledge.

"I leave you now," said Sigurd, "at the post of duty.  Let him who would
serve me, serve my king."

"We will! we will!" cried the men.

Sigurd held up his hand.

"It is enough," said he; "I am content.  And you, friend," said he to
the late prisoner, "will you accompany me home?"

The man joyfully consented, and that same night those two departed to
the sea, and before morning were darting over the waves towards the
Castle of the North-West Wind.

Sigurd's secret was safely kept.  Ulf, to the day of his death, knew
nothing of his brother's journey to Niflheim; nor could he tell the
reason why the loyalty of his soldiers revived from that time forward.
He died in battle not long after, yet he lived long enough to repent of
his harshness towards his brother, and to desire to see him again.
Messengers from him were on their way to the Tower of the North-West
Wind at the time when he fell on the field of Brulform.  Sigurd's first
act after becoming king was to erect a monument on the spot where Ulf
fell, with this simple inscription, which may be read to this day, "To
my Brother."



CHAPTER SIX.

Sub-Chapter I.

MY FIRST TRAGEDY.

FOREWORD.

I have admired tragedy from my earliest days.  I believe I must have
acted in it in the nursery--at least the scenes I have in my mind
appeared to me to be tragic at the time, although it was not of my own
will that I participated in them.  The occasions, for instance, when I
was stood in the corner for misconduct at table, or thrashed by my big
brother for my "cheek," or dosed with castor oil by the doctor for
"mulligrubs," all stand out in my memory as tragic, and no doubt
prepared me to appreciate tragedy later on as a fine art.

As soon as I went to school I found still more extended opportunities
for studying that art.  Tragedy dogged my footsteps and marked me for
her own from the first.  I was bullied; that was bad enough.  I was
caned; that was worse.  I had to learn Latin verbs; that was worst of
all.  I was a practised tragedian at seven.  Acts one, two, and three
were performed as a rule once a day, and now and then encored.

The worst of it was that the person who got most of the applause was not
the wretched actor, but the author.  I was quite overlooked.  This
convinced me early that it is more profitable to make tragedies for
other people to act than to act in them oneself; and at a tender age,
therefore, I set before myself the profession of a tragic author.

For long enough, however, I had to wait my inspiration.  I was kept so
busy in the capacity of actor (from which my special talents would not
permit me to retire as early as I should myself have wished) that it was
comparatively late in life--I mean I had turned twelve--before the grand
idea of writing a tragedy dawned in my ardent breast.  Even then it was
destined to simmer for three or four years, owing to pressure of other
work and the still more pressing lack of a subject.

Meanwhile, however, I read tragedies ardently.  I read Shakespeare, more
or less, and admired him rather, although I could see his weak points,
and thought him considerably overrated.  I had also read the nursery
rhymes carefully, and most of the harrowing stories of history and
fiction, particularly the latter.  I had, moreover, recently made a
tragic acquaintance with the Greek Drama in the person of a scoundrel
called Aeschylus, whose sickening lucubrations I was forced to learn by
heart, and now and then to copy out, a hundred lines at a time, till I
grew to detest him.

All these circumstances combined decided me to write a tragedy on my own
account; which, while following Shakespeare in his good points, should
avoid his weaknesses, which should embody the best features of the
nursery rhymes, and which should avoid like poison the shockingly
debased style of Aeschylus.

After mature reflection I hit upon a theme which I flattered myself was
original and suggestive.  Shakespeare had kept off it, and it was after
Aeschylus' time; and as far as I knew I was the first to clothe it in a
tragic garb.  I refer to the story of Romulus and Remus.  It was
classical, sanguinary, and sounded well on a title-page.  Besides, as
very little was known about it, there was plenty of scope for original
treatment, and no one could say whether I was wrong in my facts, because
no one was in a position to contradict me.  In addition to that, as the
story related to boys and athletic sports (both of which subjects I knew
something about), it seemed the very theme of a good tragedy, which
might make my name immortal, and rank to all generations as an English
classic.

It might have, but somehow it didn't.  However, I have kept the copy
still, and this book shall be the fortunate medium of introducing the
tragedy to the world.

In case any of my readers, as is possible, should be unacquainted with
the story of Romulus and Remus, let me say that I believe (but am not
quite sure) that they were two twin brothers, both boys, left orphans at
an early age, and nursed by a stepmother in the shape of a wolf.  They
were subsequently discovered, and having grown to manhood, it occurred
to Romulus to build Rome.  For this modest undertaking Remus chaffed his
brother, and practised the high jump over his walls, naturally damaging
them considerably.  Whereupon Romulus knocked him on the head, and lived
happily ever afterwards.

This, briefly, is the story.  Now for the tragedy:--

Romulus and Remus; Or, Catching Him On The Hop.

(The sub-title was a concession to the democratic tastes of the present
generation, who like to have their curiosity excited without being told
too much.)

_Dramatis Persona_.

Men.  Romulus (a boy).  Remus (his brother).  John (a shepherd).
Faustulus (a policeman).

Women.  A Wolf.  Mary Ann (a maiden of forty).

_Chorus, Soldiers, Sailors, Volunteers, Bricklayers, Boys, Maidens, and
Lictors_.

_Act I_.

Scene I.--A Wood near Rome.

_Enter She-wolf with two boys in her mouth, John following_.

_John_.  She-monster, tell me, what have you got there?

_Wolf_.  Two kids, my John; and dinner-time is near.

_Rom. and Rem._ Oh my! alas! help! hi!  Will no one hear?

_John (smacking his lips_).  Say, gentle Lupus, where didst find them
both?

_Wolf_.  Listen!  I'll tell you while you lay the cloth.

(_Sings_).

  I'm a wolf, I'm a wolf, in this big lonely wood,
  And I live in a hole in a tree,
  And I daily prowl forth in my free, hungry mood
  To look for my dinner and tea.
  I never object to the wing of a man,
  Or a tender young lamb gives me joy;
  But what I like best is a slice off the breast,
  Or the leg, or the arm, of a boy.
  To-day I'm in luck, as you plainly may see
  By the morsels that kick in my maw;
  Fetch a knife, fork, and spoon, John, for you and for me.
  Dinner's ready!  Young boys taste best raw.

  _Rom._
  Oh, impious monster, hold thy howling jaw!
  And you, John, to your flocks return once more.
  Forbear to talk of eating me and Remus,
  You ugly, wicked, ill-conditioned schemers.

1.  Here I should remark that to be strictly accurate my tragedy should
be called a tragic opera.  It abounds in songs calculated to stir
familiar chords in the breasts of a popular and juvenile audience.

2.  It may here be objected that my heroes are at this time only a few
weeks old.  But instances of precocious children (especially in tragic
drama) are not unheard of; and after careful inquiry the author is not
satisfied that in the present case the young persons in question did not
speak fluently.  Allowance must, of course, be made for youthful
inexperience in the matter of rhymes.

  _Remus_.
  D'you hear, you cads?  Shut up, and let us be.
  You shall not dine off Romulus and me!

  _John (in alarm_).
  Upon my word!  What if the boys are right?
  Friend Lupus, thanks--I'd rather not to-night.

  _Wolf (scornfully_).
  What?  Do you funk it?  Well, I call that rough.

  _John_.
  Fact is, I can't help thinking they'd taste tough.

  _Rom. and Rem.  (excitedly_).
  We would! we would! we're awful tough to eat;
  We're only skin and bone and gristle; and no meat.
  (_They sing_).
  Two little kids from nurse are we,
  Skinny as two kids can be;
  Never a bite since yesterday,
  Two little kids from nurse.

  Dropped we were by our cruel ma
  (With full consent of our awful pa)
  Into the stream of the river Tiber -
  Two little kids from nurse.

  We were nearly drowned, when the stream stood still
  And left us dry (and hungry) till
  This old she-wolf came to take her fill
  Of two little kids from nurse.
  You let us be, or we'll tell our ma,
  And she'll inform our awful pa;
  If he comes round, you'll catch a Tartar--
  Two little kids from nurse.

  _Wolf (turning pale_).
  Your words alarm me!  Gentle lads, behold,
  I'll be your nurse until you're two years old.
  Then if you have not found your pa or ma,
  I will adopt you.  What say you?

  _Rom. and Rem._.
  Hurrah!

  _John_.
  So now that's settled, let's chant one more strain,
  And after that I'll to my home again.

  Song.

  _Rom._.
  Who ran to gulp me where I lay,
  And took me in her mouth away,
  And talked of eating me to-day?
  The she-wolf.

  _Rem._.
  Who scrunched my arm and clawed my side,
  And would not heed me when I cried,
  But whispered, "Won't he taste prime fried?"
  The she-wolf.

  _John_.
  Who wouldn't spare two pretty boys,
  Until they kicked and made a noise?
  Who ever thus her time employs?
  The she-wolf.

  _Wolf_.
  Who's not as bad as people say?
  Who's going to nurse you night and day,
  And wash your face and help you play?
