animal being fastened together so as to form a sling, through which he
has thrust his head, leaving the long slender shanks, like the ends of
the letter X, projecting at each side and high above his shoulders.

Despite the load thus borne by him, the step of the ex-Ranger is no
longer that of a man either despairing or fatigued.  On the contrary, it
is light and elastic; while his countenance shows bright and joyous as
the beams of the ascending sun.  His very shadow seems to flit over the
frosted foliage of the artemisias as lightly as the figure of a
gossamer-robed belle gliding across the waxed floor of a ball-room.

Walt Wilder no longer hungers or thirsts.  Though the carcase on his
back is still unskinned, a huge collop cut out of one of its
hind-quarters tells how he has satisfied the first craving; while the
gurgle of water, heard inside the canteen slung under his arm, proclaims
that the second has also been appeased.

He is now hastening on to the relief of his comrade, happy in the
thought of being able soon to relieve him also from his sufferings.

Striding lightly among the sage-bushes, and looking ahead for the
landmark that should guide him, he at length catches sight of it.  The
palmilla, standing like a huge porcupine upon the plain, cannot be
mistaken; and he descries it at more than a mile's distance, the shadow
of his own head already flickering among its bayonet-like blades.

Just then something else comes under his eyes, which at once changes the
expression upon his countenance.  From gay it grows grave, serious,
apprehensive.  A flock of buzzards, seemingly scared by his shadow, have
suddenly flapped up from among the sage-plants, and are now soaring
around, close to the spikes of the palmilla.  They have evidently been
down _upon the earth_.  And what have they been doing there?

It is this question, mentally put by Walt Wilder, that has caused the
quick change in his countenance--the result of a painful conjecture.

"Marciful heavens!" he exclaims, suddenly making halt, the gun almost
dropping from his grasp.  "Kin it be possyble?  Frank Hamersley gone
under!  Them buzzards!  They've been upon the groun' to a sartinty.
Darnashin! what ked they a been doin' down thar?  Right by the bunch o'
palmetto, jest whar I left him.  An' no sign o' himself to be seen?
Marciful heavens! kin it be possyble they've been--?"

Interrupting himself, he remains motionless, apparently paralysed by
apprehension, mechanically scanning the palmilla, as though from it he
expected an answer to his interrogatory.

"It air possyble," he continues after a time, "too possyble--too
likesome.  He war well-nigh done up, poor young fellur; an' no wonder.
Whar is he now?  He must be down by the side o' the bush--down an' dead.
Ef he war alive, he'd be lookin' out for me.  He's gone under; an' this
deer-meat, this water, purcured to no purpiss.  I mout as well fling
both away; they'll reach him too late."

Once more resuming his forward stride, he advanced towards the dark mass
above which the vultures are soaring.  His shadow, still by a long
distance preceding him, has frightened the birds higher up into the air,
but they show no signs of going altogether away.  On the contrary, they
keep circling around, as if they had already commenced a repast, and,
driven off, intend returning to it.

On what have they been banqueting?  On the body of his comrade?  What
else can be there?

Thus questioning himself, the ex-Ranger advances, his heart still aching
with apprehension.  Suddenly his eye alights on the piece of paper
impaled upon the topmost spike of the palmilla.  The sight gives him
relief, but only for an instant; his conjectures again leading him
astray.

"Poor young fellur!" is his half-spoken reflection; "he's wrote
somethin' to tell how he died--mayhap somethin' for me to carry back to
the dear 'uns he's left behind in ole Kaintuck.  Wall, that thing shall
sartinly be done ef ever this chile gets to the States agin.  Darnashin!
only to think how near I war to savin' him; a whole doe deer, an' water
enough to a drownded him!  It'll be useless venison now, I shan't care
no more to put tooth into it myself.  Frank Hamersley gone dead--the man
o' all others I'd 'a died to keep alive.  I'd jest as soon lie down an'
stop breathin' by the side o' him."

While speaking he moves on towards the palmilla.  A few strides bring
him so near the tree that he can see the ground surface about its base.
There is something black among the stems of the sage-bushes.  It is not
the dead body of a man, but a buzzard, which he knows to be that he had
shot before starting off.  The sight of it causes him again to make
stop.  It looks draggled and torn, as if partially dismembered.

"Kin he hev been eatin' it?  Or war it themselves, the cussed kannybals?
Poor Frank, I reck'n I'll find him on t'other side, his body mangled in
the same way.  Darn it, 't air kewrous, too.  'Twar on this side he laid
down to git shade from the sun.  I seed him squat whiles I war walkin'
away.  The sun ain't hot enuf yit to a druv him to westward o' the bush,
though thar for sartin he must be.  What's the use o' my stannin'
shilly-shally hyar?  I may as well face the sight at oncest, ugly as I
know it'll prove.  Hyar goes."

Steeling himself for the terrible spectacle, which he believes to be
certainly awaiting him, he once more advances towards the tree.

A dozen strides bring him up, and less than half a dozen more carry him
around it.

No body, living or dead--no remains of man, mutilated or otherwise!

For some time Wilder stands in speechless surprise, his glances going
all around.  But no human figure is seen, either by the palmilla or
among the sage-bushes beside it.  Can the wounded man have crawled away?
But no; why should he?  Still, to make sure, the ex-Ranger shouts out,
calling Hamersley by name.

He gets no response.  Alone he hears the echo of his own voice, mingling
with the hoarse croaking of the vultures, scared by his shouts.

His hunter habits now counsel him to a different course of action.  His
comrade cannot be dead, else the corpse would be there.  The vultures
could not have eaten up both body and bones.  There is no skeleton, no
remains.  His fellow fugitive has gone off or been taken.  Whither?
While asking the question Wilder sets about the right way to answer it.
As a skilled tracker he begins by examining the signs that should put
him on the trace of his missing companion.  At a glance he perceives the
prints of a horse's hoof, and sees they are those of one unshod.  This
bodes ill, for the naked-hoofed horse betokens a savage rider--an
Indian.  Still, it may not be; and he proceeds to a more careful
scrutiny of the tracks.  In a short time he is able to tell that but one
horse has been there, and presumably but one rider, which promises
better.  And while shaping conjectures as to who it could have been his
eye ascends to the piece of paper impaled upon the spike, which he has
for a time forgotten.  This promises still better.  It may clear up
everything.

Hoping it will, he strides towards and takes hold of it.  Lifting it
carefully from the leaf, he spreads it out.  He sees some writing in
pencil, which he prepares to read.

At first sight he supposed it might be a dying record.  Now he believes
it may be something else.

His hands tremble, and his huge frame is convulsed as he holds the paper
to his eyes.

With a thrill of joy he recognises the handwriting of Hamersley, which
he knows.  He is not much of a scholar; still, he can read, and at a
glance makes out the first four words, full of pleasant meaning:

"_Saved by an Angel_!"

He reads no farther, till after giving utterance to a "hurrah!" that
might have been heard many miles over the Staked Plain.  Then, more
tranquillised, he continues deciphering the chirography of his companion
to the end; when a second shout terminates the effort.

"Saved by a angel!" he says, muttering to himself.  "A angel on the
Staked Plain!  Whar can the critter hev come from?  No matter whar.
Thar's been one hyar, for sartin.  Darn me ef I don't smell the sweet o'
her pettikotes now!  This piece o' paper--'t ain't Frank's.  I knows he
hedn't a scrap about him.  No.  Thar's the scent o' a woman on it, sure;
an' whar thar's a woman Frank Hamersley ain't likely to be let die o'
sturvashun.  He air too good-lookin' for that.  Wall I reck'n it's all
right an' thar ain't no more need for me to hurry.  T'war rayther a
scant breakfast I've hed, an' hain't gin this chile's in'ards
saterfacshun.  I'll jest chaw another griskin o' the deer-meat to
strengthen me for this six-mile tramp southard."

In less than five minutes after, the smoke from a sage-stalk fire was
seen ascending from beside the palmilla, and in its blaze, quickly
kindled, a huge piece of venison, cut from the fat flanks of the doe,
weighing at least four pounds, spitted upon one of the stiff blades of
the plant, was rapidly turning from blood red to burnt brown.

As circumstances had ofttimes compelled the ex-Ranger to eat his
deer-meat underdone, the habit had become his _gout_; and it was,
therefore, not long before the griskin was removed from the spit.  Nor
much longer till it ceased to be a griskin--having altogether
disappeared from his fingers, followed by a gurgling sound, as half the
contents of the canteen went washing it down his throat.

"Now!" he said, springing to his feet, after he had completed his
Homeric repast, "this chile feels strong enuf to face the devil hisself,
an' tharfor he needn't be backward 'bout the encounterin' o' a angel.
So hyar goes to find out Frank Hamersley, an' how _he's_ farin'.
Anyhow, I'll take the deer along in case thar mout be a scarcity o'
eetables, though I reck'n thar's no fear o' that.  Whar a angel makes
dwelling-place thar oughter be a full crib, though it may be ambrosyer
or mannar, or some o' them fixin's as a purairy man's stummick ain't
used to.  Anyways, a bit o' doe-deer meat won't do no harum.  So, Walt
Wilder, ole coon, let's you an' me set our faces southart, an' see
what's to turn up at the tarminashun o' six miles' trampin'."

Once more shouldering the carcase, he strides off towards the south,
guiding himself by the sun, but more by the hoof-marks of the mustang.
These, though scarce distinguishable, under the over-shadowing
sage-plants, are descried with little difficulty by the experienced eye
of the Ranger.

On goes he, now and then muttering to himself conjectures as to what
sort of a personage has appropriated and carried off his comrade.  But,
with all his jocular soliloquising, he feels certain the _angel_ will
turn out to be a _woman_.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

FALLEN AMONG FRIENDS.

If, before losing consciousness, Hamersley had a thought that he had
fallen into the hands of enemies, never in all his life could he have
been more mistaken, for those now around him, by their words and
gestures, prove the very reverse.  Six personages compose the group--
four men and a girl; the sixth, she, the huntress, who has conducted him
to the house.  The girl is a brown-skinned Indian, evidently a domestic;
and so also two of the four men.  The other two are white, and of
pronouncedly Spanish features.  One is an oldish man, greyheaded,
thin-faced, and wearing spectacles.  In a great city he would be taken
for a _savant_, though difficult to tell what he may be, seen in the
Llano Estacado surrounded by a desert.  In the same place, the other and
younger man is equally an enigma, for his bearing proclaims him both
gentleman and soldier, while the coat on his back shows the undress
uniform of an officer of more than medium rank.

It is he who answers to the apostrophe, "Hermano!" springing forward at
the word, and obeying the command of his sister--for such is she whom
Hamersley has accompanied to the spot.

Throwing out his arms, and receiving the wounded man as he falls
insensible from the saddle, the obedient brother for a moment stands
aghast, for in the face of him unconscious he recognises an old friend--
one he might no more expect to see there than to behold him falling from
the sky.

He can have no explanation from the man held in his arms.  The latter
has fainted--is dying--perhaps already dead.  He does not seek it, only
turns to him who wears the spectacles, saying,--

"Doctor, is he, indeed, dead?  See if it be so.  Let everything be done
to save him."

He thus addressed takes hold of Hamersley's pulse, and, after a moment
or two, pronounces upon it.  It beats; it indicates extreme weakness,
but not absolute danger of death.

Then the wounded man is carried inside--tenderly borne, as if he, too,
were a brother--laid upon a couch, and looked after with all the skill
the grey-haired _medico_ can command, with all the assiduity of her who
has brought him to the house, and him she calls "Hermano."

As soon as the stranger has been disposed of, between these two there is
a dialogue--the brother seeking explanations from the sister, though
first imparting information to her.  He knows the man she has saved;
telling her how and where their acquaintance was made.  Few words
suffice, for already is the story known to her.  In return, she too
gives relation of what has happened--how, after her chase upon the
plain, coming back successful, she saw the zopilotes, and was by them
attracted out of her way; narrating all the rest already told.

And now nothing more can be known.  The man still lives--thank Heaven
for that!--but lies on the couch unconscious of all around him.  Not
quiet, for he is turning about, with quick-beating pulse, and brain in a
condition of delirium.

For a night and a part of a day they keep by his bedside--all three,
sister, brother, and doctor, grouped there, or going and coming.  They
know who the wounded man is, though ignorant of how he came by his
wounds, or what strange chance left him stranded on the Staked Plain.

They have no hope of knowing until he may regain consciousness and
recover.  And of this the doctor has some doubt; when asked, shaking his
head ominously, till the spectacles get loosened upon his nose.

But, though the prognosis remain uncertain, the diagnosis is learnt in a
manner unexpected.  Before noon of the next day the hounds are heard
baying outside; and the watchers by the sick-bed, summoned forth, see
one approaching--a personage whose appearance causes them surprise.  Any
one seen there would do the same, since for months no stranger had come
near them.  Strange, indeed, if one had, for they are more than a
hundred miles from any civilised settlement, in the very heart and
centre of a desert.

What they see now is a man of colossal form and gigantic stature, with
bearded face and formidable aspect, rendered somewhat grotesque by a
deer's carcase carried over his shoulders, the shanks of the animal
rising crossways over his crown.

They are not dismayed by the uncouth apparition.  She who has brought
Hamersley to the house guesses it to be the comrade of whom he spoke--
describing him as "true and faithful."

And, without reflecting further, she glides out, grasps the great hunter
by the hand, and conducts him to the bedside of his unconscious
companion.

Looking at her as she leads him, Walt Wilder mutters to himself,--

"Saved by a _angel_!  I knowed it would turn out a _woman_, and this is
one for sartin."



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

THE LONE RANCHE.

A singular habitation was that into which Frank Hamersley, and after him
Walt Wilder, had found their way.  Architecturally of the rudest
description--a kind among Mexicans especially styled _jacal_, or more
generally _rancho_, the latter designation Anglicised or Americanised
into ranche.  The _rancho_, when of limited dimensions, is termed
_ranchito_, and may be seen with walls of different materials, according
to the district or country.  In the hot low lands (_tierras calientes_)
it is usually built of bamboos, with a thatching of palm-leaf; higher
up, on the table lands (_tierras templadas_) it is a structure of mud
bricks unburnt (adobe's); while still higher, upon the slopes of the
forest-clad sierras, it assumes the orthodox shape of a log cabin,
though in many respects differing from that of the States.

The one which gave shelter to the fugitives differed from all these,
having walls of split slabs, set stockade fashion, and thatched with a
sedge of _tule_, taken from a little lake that lay near.  It had three
rooms and a kitchen, with some sheds at the back--one a stable
appropriated to the mustang mare, another to some mules, and a third
occupied by two men of the class of "peons"--the male domestics of the
establishment.

All, with the house itself, structures of the rudest kind, unlike as
possible to the dwelling-place of a lady, to say nought of an _angel_.

This thought occurs to Wilder as he enters under its roof.  But he has
no time to dwell upon it.  His wounded comrade is inside, to whom he is
conducted.  He finds the latter still alive--thank God for that!--but
unconscious of all that is passing around.  To the kindly words spoken
in apostrophe he makes no reply, or only in speeches incoherent.  His
skin is hot, his lips parched, his pulse throbbing at ninety to the
minute.  He is in the throes of a raging fever, which affects his brain
as his blood.

The stalwart hunter sits down by his side, and stays there, tenderly
nursing him.  It glads him to observe there are others solicitous as
himself--to find that he and Hamersley have fallen among friends.
Though also surprising him, as does the sort of people he sees around.
First, there is a lady, easily recognised as the _angel_; then a man of
military aspect, who addresses her as "Hermanita," unquestionably a
gentleman with a second and older man wearing spectacles, by both spoken
of as "el medico."  Strange inhabitants for a hovel, as that this should
be in such an odd situation--hundreds of miles beyond the borders of
civilisation, as Walt well knows.

No wonder at his wondering, above all when he discovers that his comrade
is already known to them--to the younger of the two men, who is their
host.  This, however, is soon explained.  Walt was already aware that
the young prairie trader had made a former trip to New Mexico, when and
where, as he is now told, the acquaintance commenced, along with some
other particulars, to satisfy him for the time.

In return for this confidence he gives a detailed account of the caravan
and its mischances--of the great final misfortune, which explains to
them why its owner and himself had been forced to take to the Staked
Plain, and were there wandering about, helpless fugitives.

To his narrative all three eagerly listen.  But when he enlarges on the
bravery of his young comrade, lying unconscious beside them, one bends
upon the latter eyes that express an interest amounting to admiration.
It is the "angel."

In the days that succeed she becomes Walt's fellow-watcher by the
bedside of the sufferer; and often again does he observe similar glances
given to their common patient.  Rough backwoodsman though he be, he can
tell them to be looks of love.

He thinks less about them because he has himself found something of like
kind stealing over his thoughts.  All his cares are not given to his
invalided comrade; for in the hut is a fourth individual, whose habitual
place is the _cocina_, coming and going, as occasion calls.

A little brown-skinned beauty, half Spanish, half Pueblo Indian, whose
black eyes have burnt a hole through his buckskin hunting-shirt, and set
fire to his heart.  Though but little more than half his height, in less
than a week after making her acquaintance she has become his master, as
much as if their stature were reversed.

Walt does not want her for his mistress.  No; the hunter is too noble,
too honourable, for that His glance following her as she flits about the
room, taking in her dainty shape, and the expression of her pretty face,
always wreathed in smiles, he has but one single-hearted desire, to
which he gives muttered expression, saying,--

"Thet's jest the kind o' gurl a fellow ked freeze to.  I ne'er seed a
apple dumplin' as looked sweeter or more temptin'; an' if she's
agreeable, we two air born to be bone o' one bone, and flesh o' one
flesh!"



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

A SWEET AWAKENING.

For many days the young Kentuckian remains unconscious of all that is
passing around.  Fortunately for him, he has fallen into the right
hands; for the old gentleman in spectacles is in reality a medical man--
a skilled surgeon as well as a physician, and devotes all his time and
skill to restoring his patient to health.

Soon the wound shows signs of healing, and, along with it, the fever
begins gradually to abate.  The brain at length relieved, reason resumes
its sway.

Hamersley becomes conscious that he still lives, on hearing voices.
They are of men.  Two are engaged in a dialogue, which appears to be
carried on with some difficulty, as one is speaking English, which the
other but slightly understands.  Neither is the English of the first
speaker of a very correct kind, nor is his voice at all euphonious.  For
all that, it sounds in Hamersley's ears sweet as the most seraphic
music, since in its tones he recognises the voice of Walt Wilder.

A joyous throb thrills through his heart on discovering that his comrade
has rejoined him.  After their parting upon the plain he had his fears
they might never come together again.

Walt is not within sight, for the conversation is carried on outside the
room.  The invalid sees that he is in a room, a small one, of which the
walls are wood, roughly-hewn slabs, with furniture fashioned in a style
corresponding.  He is lying upon a _catre_, or camp bedstead, rendered
soft by a mattress of bearskins, while a _serape_ of bright-coloured
pattern is spread over him, serving both for blanket and counterpane.
In the apartment is a table of the rudest construction, with two or
three chairs, evidently from the hand of the same unskilful workman,
their seats being simply hides with the hair on.  On the table is a cup
with a spoon in it, and two or three small bottles, that have the look
of containing medicines.

All these objects come under his eyes at the first dim glance; but as
his vision grows clearer, and he feels strength enough to raise his head
from the pillow, other articles are disclosed to view, in strange
contrast with the chattels first observed.  Against the wall hang
several articles of female apparel--all of a costly kind.  They are of
silk and silk-velvet, richly brocaded; while on a second table, slab
like the first, he can distinguish bijouterie, with other trifles
usually belonging to a lady's toilet.

These lie in front of a small mirror set in a frame which appears to be
silver; while above is suspended a guitar, of the kind known as
_bandolon_.

The sick man sees all these things with a half-bewildered gaze, for his
senses are still far from clear.  The costly articles of apparel and
adornment would be appropriate in a lady's boudoir or bed chamber.  But
they appear strange, even grotesque, in juxtaposition with the
roughly-hewn timbers of what is evidently a humble cottage--a log cabin!

Of course he connects them with her, that singular being who has
succoured, and perhaps saved his life.  He can have no other conjecture.
He remembers seeing a house as they approached its outside.  It must be
that he is now in; though, from the last conscious thought, as he felt
himself swooning in the saddle, all has been as blank as if he had been
lying lifeless in a tomb.  Even yet it might appear as a dream but for
the voice of Walt Wilder, who, outside, seems labouring hard to make
himself intelligible to some personage with whom he is conversing.

Hamersley is about to utter a cry that will summon his comrade to his
side, when he perceives that the voices are becoming fainter, as if the
two speakers had gone outside the house and were walking away from it.
Feeling too weak even for the slightest exertion, he remains silent,
taking it for granted they will soon return.

It is broad daylight, the sun glancing in through an aperture in the
wall that serves for a window.  It has neither frame nor glass, and
along with the bright beams there drifts in a cool breeze laden with the
delicious fragrance of flowers, among which he can distinguish the
aromatic perfume of the wild China tree.  There are voices of birds
mingling their music with the sough of falling water--sounds very
