Rare forms of vegetation were around or near at hand: the arborescent
aloes, with their tall flower-spikes of coral red, and euphorbias of
many shapes; and _zamia_, with its palm-like fronds; and the soft-leaved
_Strelitzia reginae_.  All these were observed in the neighbourhood of
this new-discovered fountain.

But what received little Truey's admiration more than any other was the
beautiful blue waterlily (_Nympha caerulea_), which is certainly one of
the loveliest of Africa's flowers.  Close by the spring, but a little
farther in the direction of the plain, was a vley, or pool--in fact, it
might have been termed a small lake--and upon the quiet bosom of its
water the sky-blue corollas lay sleeping in all their gorgeous beauty.

Truey, leading her little pet in a string, had gone down on the bank to
look at them.  She thought she could never cease gazing at such pretty
things.

"I hope papa will stay here a long time," she said to her companion,
little Jan.

"And I hope so too.  Oh!  Truey, what a fine tree yon is!  Look! nuts as
big as my head, I declare.  Bless me, sis! how are we to knock some, of
them down?"

And so the children conversed, both delighted with the new scenes around
them.

Although all the young people were inclined to be happy, yet they were
checked in their expression of it, by observing that there was a cloud
on the brow of their father.  He had seated himself under the great
tree, but his eyes were upon the ground, as though he were busy with
painful reflections.  All of them noticed this.

His reflections were, indeed, painful--they could not well have been
otherwise.  There was but one course left for him--to return to the
settlements, and begin life anew.  But how to begin it?  What could he
do?  His property all gone, he could only serve some of his richer
neighbours; and for one accustomed all his life to independence, this
would be hard indeed.

He looked towards his five horses, now eagerly cropping the luxuriant
grass that grew under the shadow of the cliffs.  When would they be
ready to trek back again?  In three or four days he might start.  Fine
animals, most of them were--they would carry the wagon lightly enough.

So ran the reflections of the field-cornet.  He little thought at the
moment that those horses would never draw wagon more, nor any other
vehicle.  He little thought that those five noble brutes were doomed!

Yet so it was.  In less than a week from that time, the jackals and
hyenas were quarrelling over their bones.  Even at that very moment,
whilst he watched them browsing, the poison was entering their veins,
and their death-wounds were being inflicted.  Alas! alas! another blow
awaited Von Bloom.

The field-cornet had noticed, now and again, that the horses seemed
uneasy as they fed.  At times they started suddenly, whisked their long
tails, and rubbed their heads against the bushes.

"Some fly is troubling them," thought he, and had no more uneasiness
about the matter.

It was just that--just a fly that was troubling them.  Had Von Bloom
known what that fly was, he would have felt a very different concern
about his horses.  Had he known the nature of that little fly, he would
have rushed up with all his boys, caught the horses in the greatest
hurry, and led them far away from those dark cliffs.  But he knew not
the "tsetse" fly.

It still wanted some minutes of sunset, and the horses were permitted to
browse freely, but Von Bloom observed that they were every moment
getting more excited--now striking their hoofs upon the turf,--now
running a length or two--and at intervals snorting angrily.  At the
distance they were off--a quarter of a mile or so--Von Bloom could see
nothing of what was disturbing them; but their odd behaviour at length
induced him to walk up to where they were.  Hans and Hendrik went along
with him.  When they arrived near the spot, they were astonished at what
they then beheld.  Each horse seemed to be encompassed by a swarm of
bees!

They saw, however, they were not bees, but insects somewhat smaller, of
a brown colour, resembling gad-flies, and exceedingly active in their
flight.  Thousands of them hovered above each horse, and hundreds could
be seen lighting upon the heads, necks, bodies, and legs of the
animals,--in fact, all over them.  They were evidently either biting or
stinging them.  No wonder the poor brutes were annoyed.

Von Bloom suggested that they should drive the horses farther out into
the plain, where these flies did not seem to haunt.  He was only
concerned about the _annoyance_ which the horses received from them.
Hendrik also pitied their sufferings; but Hans, alone of all the three,
guessed at the truth.  He had read of a fatal insect that frequented
some districts in the interior of South Africa, and the first sight of
these flies aroused his suspicions that it might be they.

He communicated his thoughts to the others, who at once shared his
alarm.

"Call Swartboy hither!" said Von Bloom.

The Bushman was called, and soon made his appearance, coming up from the
spring.  He had for the last hour been engaged in unpacking the wagon,
and had taken no notice of the horses or the interest they were
exciting.

As soon, however, as he got near, and saw the winged swarm whirring
around the horses, his small eyes opened to their widest extent, his
thick lips fell, and his whole face yielded itself to an expression of
amazement and alarm.

"What is it, Swart?" inquired his master.

"Mein baas! mein baas! der duyvel um da--dar skellum is da `tsetse!'"

"And what if it be the tsetse?"

"Mein baas!--all dead--dead--ebery horse!"

Swartboy then proceeded to explain, with a loud and continuous
"clicking," that the fly which they saw was fatal in its bite, that the
horses would surely die--sooner or later, according to the number of
stings they had already received; but, from the swarm of insects around
them, the Bushman had no doubt they had been badly stung and a single
week would see all five of the horses dead.

"Wait, mein baas--morrow show."  And to-morrow _did_ show; for before
twelve o'clock on the next day, the horses were swollen all over their
bodies and about their heads.  Their eyes were quite closed up; they
refused any longer to eat, but staggered blindly among the luxuriant
grass, every now and then expressing the pain they felt by a low
melancholy whimpering.  It was plain to every one they were going to
die.

Von Bloom tried bleeding, and various other remedies; but to no purpose.
There is no cure for the bite of the tsetse fly!



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE LONG-HORNED RHINOCEROS.

Great, indeed, was now the affliction of the field-cornet.  Fortune
seemed to be adverse in everything.  Step by step he had been sinking
for years, every year becoming poorer in worldly wealth.  He had now
reached the lowest point--poverty itself.  He owned nothing whatever.
His horses might be regarded as dead.  The cow had escaped from the
tsetse by avoiding the cliffs, and keeping out upon the plain; and this
animal now constituted his whole live-stock,--his whole property!  True,
he still had his fine wagon; but of what use would that be without
either oxen or horses? a wagon without a team!  Better a team without a
wagon.

What could he do?  How was he to escape from the position he was placed
in?  To say the least, it was an awkward one--nearly two hundred miles
from any civilised settlement, and no means of getting there,--no means
except by walking; and how were his children to walk two hundred miles?
Impossible!

Across desert tracts, exposed not only to terrible fatigue, but to
hunger, thirst, and fierce carnivorous animals.  It appeared impossible
that they could accomplish such a task.

And what else was there to be done? asked the field-cornet of himself.
Were they to remain there all their lives, subsisting precariously on
game and roots?  Were his children to become "Bush-boys,"--himself a
Bushman?

With these reflections passing through his mind, no wonder that Von
Bloom felt deeply afflicted.

"Merciful Heaven!" he exclaimed, as he sat with his head between his
hands, "what will become of me and mine?"

Poor Von Bloom! he had reached the lowest point of his fortunes.

He had, in reality, reached the _lowest_ point; for on that very day,--
even within that very hour--an incident occurred, that not only gave
relief to his afflicted spirit, but that promised to lay the foundation
of future wealth and prosperity.  In one hour from that time the
prospects of the field-cornet had undergone a complete change,--in one
hour from that time he was a happy man, and all around him were as happy
as he!

You are impatient to hear how this change was effected?  What little
fairy had sprung out of the spring, or come down from the cliffs, to
befriend the good field-cornet in his hour of misery?  You are impatient
to hear!  Then you _shall_ hear.

The sun was just going down.  They were all seated under the great tree,
and near a fire, upon which they had cooked their supper.  There was no
talking, no cheerful conversation,--for the children saw that their
father was in trouble, and that kept them silent.  Not a word passed
between them, or only an occasional whisper.

It was at this moment that Von Bloom gave utterance to his sad thoughts
in words as above.

As if seeking for an answer, his eyes were raised to heaven, and then
wandered around the plain.  All at once they became fixed upon a
singular object, that appeared at some distance off, and was just
emerging from the bushes.

It was an animal of some kind, and from its vast size Von Bloom and the
others at first took it to be an elephant.  None of them, except
Swartboy, were accustomed to elephants in their wild state,--for,
although these animals once inhabited the most southerly portion of
Africa, they have long since deserted the settled districts, and are now
only to be found far beyond the frontier of the colony.  But they knew
that there were elephants in these parts--as they had already observed
their tracks--and all now supposed the huge creature that was
approaching must be one.

Not all, Swartboy was an exception.  As soon as his eyes fell upon the
animal he cried out,--

"Chukuroo--a chukuroo!"

"A rhinoster, is it?" said Von Bloom, knowing that "chukuroo" was the
native name for the rhinoceros, or "rhinoster," as he called it in
Dutch.

"Ya, baas," replied Swartboy; "and one o' da big karles--da `kobaoba,'
da long-horn white rhinoster."

What Swartboy meant by this was that the animal in question was a large
species of rhinoceros, known among the natives as the "kobaoba."

Now I dare say, young reader, you have been all your life under the
impression that there was but one species of rhinoceros in the world--
that is _the_ rhinoceros.  Is it not so?  Yes.

Well, permit me to inform you, that you have been under a wrong
impression.  There is quite a number of distinct species of this very
singular animal.  At least eight distinct kinds I know of; and I do not
hesitate to say that when the central parts of Africa have been fully
explored, as well as South Asia and the Asiatic islands, nearly half as
many more will be found to exist.

In South Africa four distinct species are well-known; one in North
Africa differs from all these; while the large Indian rhinoceros bears
but slight resemblance to any of them.  A distinct species from any is
the rhinoceros of Sumatra, an inhabitant of that island; and still
another is the Java rhinoceros, found in the island of Java.  Thus we
have no less than eight kinds, all specifically differing from one
another.

The best known in museums, zoological collections, and pictures, is
perhaps the Indian animal.  It is the one marked by the singular
foldings of its skin, thickly embellished with protuberances or knobs,
that give it a shield-like appearance.  This distinguishes it from the
African species, all of which are without these knobs, though the hides
of some are knotty or warty.  The Abyssinian rhinoceros has also
foldings of the skin, which approach it somewhat to the character of the
Indian species.  Both the Sumatra and Java kinds are small compared with
their huge cousin, the Indian rhinoceros, which inhabits only
continental India, Siam, and Cochin China.

The Javan species more resembles the Indian, in having scutellae over
the skin and being one-horned.  It is, however, without the singular
folds which characterise the latter.  That of Sumatra has neither folds
nor scutellae.  Its skin has a slight covering of hair, and a pair of
horns gives it some resemblance to the two-horned species of Africa.

The natives of South Africa are acquainted with four distinct species of
rhinoceros, to which they give distinct names; and it may be remarked
that this observation of species by native hunters is far more to be
depended upon than the speculations of mere closet-naturalists, who draw
their deductions from a tubercle, or the tooth, or a stuffed skin.  If
there be any value in a knowledge of animated nature, it is not to these
we are indebted for that knowledge, but far oftener to the "rude
hunters," whom they affect to despise, and who, after all, have taught
us pretty much all we know of the habits of animals.  Such a "rude
hunter" as Gordon Cumming, for example, has done more to increase the
knowledge of African zoology than a whole college full of "speculating"
_savans_.

This same Gordon Cumming, who has been accused of exaggeration (but in
my opinion very wrongfully accused), has written a very modest and
truthful book, which tells you that there are four kinds of rhinoceroses
in Southern Africa; and no man is likely to know better than he.

These four kinds are known among the natives as the "borele," the
"keitloa," the "muchocho," and "kobaoba."  The two first are "black
rhinoceroses,"--that is, the general colour of their skin is dark--while
the "muchocho" and "kobaoba" are white varieties, having the skin of a
dingy whitish hue.  The black rhinoceroses are much smaller--scarce half
the size of the others, and they differ from them in the length and set
of their horns, as _well_ as in other particulars.

The horns of the "borele" are placed--as in all rhinoceroses,--upon a
bony mass over the nostrils,--hence the word "rhinoceros" (_rhis_, the
nose, _chiras_, a horn.)

In the "borele" they stand erect, curving slightly backwards, and one
behind the other.  The anterior horn is the longer--rarely above
eighteen inches in length--but it is often broken or rubbed shorter, and
in no two individuals is there equality in this respect.  The posterior
horn in this species is only a sort of knob; whereas in the "keitloa,"
or two-horned black rhinoceros, both horns are developed to a nearly
equal length.

In the "muchocho" and "kobaoba," the after horns can hardly be said to
exist, but the anterior one in both species far exceeds in length those
of the borele and keitloa.  In the muchocho it is frequently three feet
in length, while the kobaoba is often seen with a horn four feet long,
jutting out from the end of its ugly snout--a fearful weapon!

The horns of the two last do not curve back, but point forward; and as
both these carry their heads low down the long sharp spike is often
borne horizontally.  In the form and length of their neck, the set of
their ears, and other respects, the black rhinoceroses differ materially
from the white ones.  In fact, their habits are quite unlike.  The
former feed chiefly on the leaves and twigs of thorns, such as the
_Acacia horrida_, or "wait-a-bits," while the latter live upon grass.
The former are of fiercer disposition--will attack man or any other
animal on sight; and even sometimes seem to grow angry with the bushes,
charging upon them and breaking them to pieces!

The white rhinoceroses, although fierce enough when wounded or provoked,
are usually of pacific disposition, and will permit the hunter to pass
without molestation.

These become very fat, and make excellent eating.  The flesh of no
African animal is esteemed superior to the calf of the white rhinoceros,
whereas the black varieties never grow fat, and their flesh is tough and
unpalatable.

The horns of all four are used by the natives for many purposes, being
solid, of fine texture, and susceptible of a high polish.  Out of the
longer horns the natives manufacture "knobkerries" (clubs), and
