
Being by that time convinced, apparently, that he was the victim of foul
play, the bear lost his temper, and tried to rise.  He tripped as
before, came down heavily on his side, and hit the back of his head
against a stone.  This threw him into a violent rage, and he began to
bounce.

At all times bouncing is ineffectual and silly, even in a grizzly bear.
The only result was that he bruised his head and nose, tumbled among
stones and stumps, and strained the rope so powerfully that the limb of
the tree to which it was attached was violently shaken, and Little Tim
was obliged to hold on to avoid being shaken off.

Experience teaches bears as well as fools.  On discovering that it was
useless to bounce, he sat down in a disconsolate manner, poked as much
as he could of his nose through one of the meshes, and sniggered at
Little Tim, who during these outbursts was naturally in a state of great
excitement.  Then the bear went to work leisurely to gnaw the mesh close
to his mouth.

The hunter was not prepared for this.  He had counted on the creature
struggling with its net till it was in a state of complete exhaustion,
when, by means of additional ropes, it could be so wound round and
entangled in every limb as to be quite incapable of motion.  In this
condition it might be slung to a long pole and carried by a sufficient
number of men to the small, but immensely strong, cage on wheels which
the agent had brought with him.

Not only was there the danger of the bear breaking loose and escaping,
or rendering it necessary that he should be shot, but there was another
risk which Little Tim had failed at first to note.  The scene on which
he had decided to play out his little game was on the gentle slope of a
hill, which terminated in a precipice of considerable height, and each
time the bear struggled and rolled over in his network purse, he
naturally gravitated towards the precipice, over which he was certain to
go if the rope which held him to the tree should snap.

The hunter had just become thoroughly alive to this danger when, with a
tremendous struggle, the bear burst two of the meshes in rear, and his
hind-quarters were free.

Little Tim seized his gun, feeling that the crisis had come.  He was
loath to destroy the creature, and hesitated.  Instead of backing out of
his prison, as he might easily have done, the bear made use of his free
hind legs to make a magnificent bound forward.  He was checked, of
course, by the rope, but Tim had miscalculated the strength of his
materials.  A much stronger rope would have broken under the tremendous
strain.  The line parted like a piece of twine, and the bear, rolling
head over heels down the slope, bounded over the precipice, and went
hurling out into space like a mighty football!

There was silence for a few seconds, then a simultaneous thud and
bursting cry that was eminently suggestive.

"H'm!  It's all over," sighed Little Tim, as he slid down the branch to
the ground.

And so it was.  The bear was effectually killed, and the poor hunter had
to return to the Indian village crestfallen.

"But hold on, stranger," he said, on meeting the agent; "don't you give
way to despair.  I said there was lots of 'em in these parts.  You come
with me up to a hut my son's got in the mountains, an' I'll circumvent a
b'ar for you yet.  You can't take the cart quite up to the hut but you
can git near enough, at a place where there's a Injin' friend o' mine
as'll take care of ye."

The agent agreed, and thus it came to pass that at the time of which we
now write, Little Tim was doing his best to catch a live bear, but, not
liking to be laughed at even by his son in the event of failure, he had
led him and his bride to suppose that he had merely gone out hunting in
the usual way.

It was on this expedition that Little Tim had set forth when Whitewing
was expected to arrive at Tim's Folly--as the little hut or fortress had
come to be named--and it was the anxiety of his friends and kindred at
his prolonged absence which resulted, as we have seen, in the formation
and departure of a search expedition.



CHAPTER NINE.

A DARING EXPLOIT.

To practised woodsmen like Whitewing and Big Tim it was as easy to
follow the track of Little Tim as if his steps had been taken through
newly-fallen snow, although very few and slight were the marks left on
the green moss and rugged ground over which the hunter had passed.

Six picked Indians accompanied the prairie chief, and these marched in
single file, each treading in the footsteps of the man in front with the
utmost care.

At first the party maintained absolute silence.  Their way lay for some
distance along the margin of the brawling stream which drained the gorge
at the entrance of which Tim's Folly stood.  The scenery around them was
wild and savage in the extreme, for the higher they ascended, the
narrower became the gorge, and the masses of rock which had fallen from
the frowning cliffs on either side had strewn the lower ground with
shapeless blocks, and so impeded the natural flow of the little stream
that it became, as it were, a tormented and foaming cataract.

At the head of the gorge the party came to a pass or height of land,
through which they went with caution, for, although no footsteps of man
had thus far been detected by their keen eyes save those of Little Tim,
it was not beyond the bounds of possibility that foes might be lurking
on the other side of the pass.  No one, however, was discovered, and
when they emerged at the other end of the pass it was plain that, as Big
Tim remarked, the coast was clear, for from their commanding position
they could see an immeasurable distance in front of them, over an
unencumbered stretch of land.

The view from this point was indeed stupendous.  The vision seemed to
range not only over an almost limitless world of forests, lakes, and
rivers--away to where the haze of the horizon seemed to melt with them
into space--but beyond that to where the great backbone of the New World
rose sharp, clear, and gigantic above the mists of earth, until they
reached and mingled with the fleecy clouds of heaven.  To judge from
their glittering eyes, even the souls of the not very demonstrative
Indians were touched by the scene.  As for the prairie chief, who had
risen to the perceptions of the new life in Christ he halted and stood
for some moments as if lost in contemplation.  Then, turning to the
young hunter at his side, he said softly--

"The works of the Lord are great."

"Strange," returned Big Tim, "that you should use the very same words
that I've heard my daddy use sometimes when we've come upon a grand view
like that."

"Not so strange when I tell you," replied Whitewing, "that these are
words from the Book of Manitou, and that your father and I learned them
together long ago from the preacher who now lies wounded in your hut."

"Ay, ay!  Daddy didn't tell me that.  He's not half so given to serious
talk as you are, Whitewing, though I'm free to admit that he does take a
fit o' that sort now an' again, and seems raither fond of it.  The fact
is, I don't quite understand daddy.  He puzzles me."

"Perhaps Leetil Tim is too much given to fun when he talks with Big
Tim," suggested the red chief gravely, but with a slight twinkle in his
eyes, which told that he was not quite destitute of Little Tim's
weakness--or strength, as the reader chooses.

After a brief halt the party descended the slope which led to the
elevated valley they had now reached, and, having proceeded a few miles,
again came to a halt because the ground had become so rocky that the
trail of the hunter was lost.

Ordering the young men to spread themselves over the ground, Whitewing
went with Big Tim to search over the ridge of a neighbouring eminence.

"It is as I expected," he said, coming to a sudden stand, and pointing
to a faint mark on the turf.  "Leetil Tim has taken the short cut to the
Lopstick Hill, but I cannot guess the reason why."

Big Tim was down on his knees examining the footprints attentively.

"Daddy's futt, an' no mistake," he said, rising slowly.  "I'd know the
print of his heel among a thousand.  He's got a sort o' swagger of his
own, an' puts it down with a crash, as if he wanted to leave his mark
wherever he goes.  I've often tried to cure him o' that, but he's
incurable."

"I have observed," returned the chief, with, if possible, increased
gravity, "that many sons are fond of trying to cure their fathers; also,
that they never succeed."

Big Tim looked quickly at his companion, and laughed.

"Well, well," he said, "the daddies have a good go at us in youth.  It's
but fair that we should have a turn at _them_ afterwards."

A sharp signal from one of the young Indians in the distance interrupted
further converse, and drew them away to see what he had discovered.  It
was obvious enough--the trail of the Blackfoot Indians retiring into the
mountains.

At first Big Tim's heart sank, for this discovery, coupled with the
prolonged absence of his father, suggested the fear that he had been
waylaid and murdered.  But a further examination led them to think--at
least to hope--that the savages had not observed the hunter's trail,
owing to his having diverged at a point of the track further down, where
the stony nature of the ground rendered trail-finding, as we have seen,
rather difficult.  Still, there was enough to fill the breasts of both
son and friend with anxiety, and to induce them to push on thereafter
swiftly and in silence.

Let us once again take flight ahead of them, and see what the object of
their anxiety is doing.

True to his promise to try his best, the dauntless little hunter had
proceeded alone, as before, to a part of the mountain region where he
knew from past experience that grizzlies were to be easily found.  There
he made his preparations for a new effort on a different plan.

The spot he selected for his enterprise was an open space on a bleak
hillside, where the trees were scattered and comparatively small.  This
latter peculiarity--the smallness of the trees--was, indeed, the only
drawback to the place, for few of them were large enough to bear his
weight, and afford him a secure protection from his formidable game.  At
last however, he found one,--not, indeed, quite to his mind, but
sufficiently large to enable him to get well out of a bear's reach, for
it must be remembered that although some bears climb trees easily, the
grizzly bear cannot climb at all.  There was a branch on the lower part
of the tree which seemed quite beyond the reach of the tallest bear even
on tiptoe.

Having made his disposition very much as on the former occasion, Little
Tim settled himself on this branch, and awaited the result.

He did not, however, sit as comfortably as on the previous occasion, for
the branch was small and had no fork.  Neither did he proceed to sup as
formerly, for it was yet too early in the day to indulge in that meal.

His plan this time was, not to net, but to lasso the bear; and for that
purpose he had provided four powerful ropes made of strips of raw,
undressed buffalo hide, plaited, with a running noose on each.

"Now," said Little Tim, with a self-satisfied smirk, as he seated
himself on the branch and surveyed the four ropes complacently, "it'll
puzzle the biggest b'ar in all the Rocky Mountains to break them ropes."

Any one acquainted with the strength of the material which Tim began to
uncoil would have at once perceived that the lines in question might
have held an elephant or a small steamer.

"I hope," murmured Tim, struggling with a knot in one of the cords that
bound the coils, "I hope I'll be in luck to-day, an' won't have to wait
long."

Little Tim's hope reached fruition sooner than he had expected--sooner
even than he desired--for as he spoke he heard a rustle in the bushes
behind him.  Looking round quickly, he beheld "the biggest b'ar, out o'
sight, that he had iver seen in all his life."  So great was his
surprise--we would not for a moment call it alarm--that he let slip the
four coils of rope, which fell to the ground.

Grizzly bears, it must be known, are gifted with insatiable curiosity,
and they are not troubled much with the fear of man, or, indeed, of
anything else.  Hearing the thud of the coils on the ground, this
monster grizzly walked up to and smelt them.  He was proceeding to taste
them, when, happening to cast his little eyes upwards, he beheld Little
Tim sitting within a few feet of his head.  To rise on his hind legs,
and solicit a nearer interview, was the work of a moment.  To the poor
hunter's alarm, when he stretched his tremendous paws and claws to their
utmost he reached to within a foot of the branch.  Of course Little Tim
knew that he was safe, but he was obliged to draw up his legs and lay
out on the branch, which brought his head and eyes horribly near to the
nose and projecting tongue of the monster.

To make matters worse, Tim had left his gun leaning against the stem of
the tree.  He had his knife and hatchet in his belt, but these he knew
too well were but feeble weapons against such a foe.  Besides, his
object was not to slay, but to secure.

Seeing that there was no possibility of reaching the hunter by means of
mere length of limb, and not at that time having acquired the art of
building a stone pedestal for elevating purposes, the bear dropped on
its four legs and looked round.  Perceiving the gun, it went leisurely
up and examined it.  The examination was brief but effective.  It gave
the gun only one touch with its paw, but that touch broke the lock and
stock and bent the barrel so as to render the weapon useless.

Then it returned to the coil of ropes, and, sitting down, began to chew
one of them, keeping a serious eye, however, on the branch above.

It was a perplexing situation even for a backwoodsman.  The branch on
which Tim lay was comfortable enough, having many smaller branches and
twigs extending from it on either side, so that he did not require to
hold on very tightly to maintain his position.  But he was fully aware
of the endurance and patience of grizzly bears, and knew that, having
nothing else to do, this particular Bruin could afford to bide his time.

And now the ruling characteristic of Little Tim beset him severely.  His
head felt like a bombshell of fermenting ingenuity.  Every device,
mechanical and otherwise, that had ever passed through his brain since
childhood, seemed to rush back upon him with irresistible violence in
his hopeless effort to conceive some plan by which to escape from his
present and pressing difficulty--he would not, even to himself, admit
that there was danger.  The more hopeless the case appeared to him, the
less did reason and common-sense preside over the fermentation.  When he
saw his gun broken, his first anxiety began.  When he reflected on the
persistency of grizzlies in watching their foes, his naturally buoyant
spirits began to sink and his native recklessness to abate.  When he saw
the bear begin steadily to devour one of the lines by which he had hoped
to capture it, his hopes declined still more; and when he considered the
distance he was from his hut, the fact that his provision wallet had
been left on the ground along with the gun, and that the branch on which
he rested was singularly unfit for a resting-place on which to pass many
hours, he became wildly ingenious, and planned to escape, not only by
pitching his cap to some distance off so as to distract the bear's
attention, and enable him to slip down and run away, but by devising
methods of effecting his object by clockwork, fireworks, wings,
balloons--in short, by everything that ever has, in the history of
design, enabled men to achieve their ends.

His first and simplest method, to fling his cap away, was indeed so far
successful that it did distract the bear's attention for a moment, but
it did not disturb his huge body, for he sat still, chewing his buffalo
quid leisurely, and, after a few seconds, looked up at his victim as
though to ask, "What d'you mean by that?"

When, after several hours, all his attempts had failed, poor Little Tim
groaned in spirit, and began to regret his having undertaken the job;
but a sense of the humorous, even in that extremity, caused him to give
vent to a short laugh as he observed that Bruin had managed to get
several feet of the indigestible rope down his throat, and fancied what
a surprise it would give him if he were to get hold of the other end of
the rope and pull it all out again.

