tramp through the streets of London with the letters of the lieges in
his care.  The dim twilight of early morning found him poking about,
like a solitary ghoul, disembowelling the pillar posts.  The rising sun
sent a deflected ray from chimney-pot or steeple to welcome him--when
fog and smoke permitted.  The noon-tide beams broiled him in summer and
cheered him in winter on his benignant path of usefulness.  The evening
fogs and glimmering lamps beheld him hard at work, and the nightly
returning stars winked at him with evident surprise when they found him
still fagging along through heat and cold, rain and snow, with the sense
of urgent duty ever present in his breast, and part of the recorded
hopes, joys, fears, sorrows, loves, hates, business, and humbug of the
world in his bag.

Besides being a hard-working man, Solomon Flint was a public man, and a
man of note.  In the district of London which he frequented, thousands
of the public watched for him, wished for him, even longed for him, and
received him gladly.  Young eyes sometimes sparkled and old eyes
sometimes brightened when his well-known uniform appeared.  Footmen
opened to him with good-will, and servant-girls with smiles.  Even in
the low neighbourhoods of his district--and he traversed several such--
Solomon was regarded with favour.  His person was as sacred as that of a
detective or a city missionary.  Men who scowled on the world at large
gave a familiar nod to him, and women who sometimes desired to tear off
people's scalps never displayed the slightest wish to damage a hair of
the postman's head.  He moved about, in fact, like a benign influence,
distributing favours and doing good wherever he went.  May it not be
said truly that in the spiritual world we have a good many news-bearers
of a similar stamp?  Are not the loving, the gentle, the
self-sacrificing such?--in a word, the Christ-like, who, if they do not
carry letters about, are themselves living epistles "known and read of
all men?"

One of the low districts through which Solomon Flint had to pass daily
embraced the dirty court in which Abel Bones dwelt.  Anticipating a very
different fate for it, no doubt, the builder of this region had named it
Archangel Court.

As he passed rapidly through it Solomon observed a phenomenon by no
means unusual in London and elsewhere, namely, a very small girl taking
charge of an uncommonly large baby.  Urgent though his duties were,
Solomon would have been more than human if he had not stopped to observe
the little girl attempt the apparently impossible feat of lifting the
frolicsome mass of fat which was obviously in a rebellious state of
mind.  Solomon had occasionally seen the little girl in his rounds, but
never before in possession of a baby.  She grasped him round the waist,
which her little arms could barely encircle, and, making a mighty
effort, got the rebel on his legs.  A second heave placed him on her
knees, and a third effort, worthy of a gymnast, threw him on her little
bosom.  She had to lean dangerously far back to keep him there, and
being incapable of seeing before her, owing to the bulk of her burden,
was compelled to direct her course by faith.  She knew the court well,
however, and was progressing favourably, when a loose stone tripped her
and she fell.  Not having far to fall, neither she nor the baby was the
worse for it.

"Hallo, little woman!" said Solomon, assisting her to rise, "can't he
walk?"

"Yes, sir; but 'e won't," replied the little maid, turning up her pretty
face, and shaking back her dishevelled hair.

The baby looked up and crowed gleefully, as though it understood her,
and would, if able to speak, have said, "That's the exact truth,--`he
won't!'"

"Come, I'll help you," said Solomon, carrying the baby to the mouth of
the alley pointed out by the little girl.  "Is he your brother?"

"O no, sir; I ain't got no brother.  He b'longed to a neighbour who's
just gone dead, an' mother she was fond o' the neighbour, an' promised
to take care of the baby.  So she gave 'im to me to nuss.  An' oh!
you've no hidea, sir, what a hobstinate thing 'e is.  I've 'ad 'im three
days now."

Yes; the child had had him three days, and an amazing experience it had
been to her.  During that brief period she had become a confirmed
staggerer, being utterly incapable of _walking_ with baby in her arms.
During the same period she had become unquestionably entitled to the
gold medals of the Lifeboat Institution and the Humane Society, having,
with reckless courage, at the imminent risk of her life, and on
innumerable occasions, saved that baby from death by drowning in
washtubs and kennels, from mutilation by hot water, fire, and steam, and
from sudden extinction by the wheels of cabs, carriages, and drays,
while, at the same time she had established a fair claim to at least the
honorary diploma of the Royal College of Surgeons, by her amazing
practice in the treatment of bruises and cuts, and the application of
sticking-plaster.

"Have you got a father or mother, my dear?" asked the letter-carrier.

"Yes, sir; I've got both of 'em.  And oh!  I'm so miserable.  I don't
know what to do."

"Why, what's wrong with you?"

The child's eyes filled with tears as she told how her father had gone
off "on the spree;" how her mother had gone out to seek him, promising
to be back in time to relieve her of the baby so as to let her keep an
appointment she had with a lady; and how the mother had never come back,
and didn't seem to be coming back; and how the time for the engagement
was already past, and she feared the lady would think she was an
ungrateful little liar, and she had no messenger to send to her.

"Where does the lady live, and what's her name, little woman?" asked
Solomon.

"Her name is Miss Lillycrop, sir, and she lives in Pimlico."

"Well, make your mind easy, little woman.  It's a curious coincidence
that I happen to know Miss Lillycrop.  Her house lies rather far from my
beat, but I happen to have a messenger who does his work both cheaply
and quickly.  I do a deal of work for him too, so, no doubt, he'll do a
little for me.  His name is Post-Office.--What is your's, my dear?"

"Tottie Bones," replied the child, with the air of a full-grown woman.
"An' please, sir, tell 'er I meant to go back to her at the end of three
days, as I promised; but I couldn't leave the 'ouse with baby inside,
an' the fire, an' the kittle, with nobody to take care on 'em--could I,
sir?"

"Cer'nly not, little woman," returned the letter-carrier, with a solemn
look at the overburdened creature who appealed to him.  Giving her
twopence, and a kindly nod, Solomon Flint walked smartly away--with a
reproving conscience--to make up for lost time.

That evening Mrs Bones returned without her husband, but with an
additional black eye, and other signs of bad treatment.  She found the
baby sound asleep, and Tottie in the same condition by his side, on the
outside of the poor counterpane, with one arm round her charge, and her
hair tumbled in confusion over him.  She had evidently been herself
overcome while in the act of putting the baby to sleep.

Mrs Bones rushed to the bed, seized Tottie, clasped her tightly to her
bosom, sat down on a stool, and began to rock herself to and fro.

The child, nothing loath to receive such treatment, awoke sufficiently
to be able to throw her arms round her mother's neck, fondled her for a
moment, and then sank again into slumber.

"Oh!  God help me!  God save my Abel from drink and bad men!" exclaimed
the poor woman, in a voice of suppressed agony.

It seemed as if her prayer had been heard, for at that moment the door
opened and a tall thin man entered.  He was the man who had accosted
George Aspel on his first visit to that region.

"You've not found him, I fear?" he said kindly, as he drew a stool near
to Mrs Bones and sat down, while Tottie, who had been re-awakened by
his entrance, began to bustle about the room with something of the
guilty feeling of a sentry who has been found sleeping at his post.

"Yes, Mr Sterling; thank you kindly for the interest you take in 'im.
I found 'im at the old place, but 'e knocked me down an' went out, an'
I've not been able to find 'im since."

"Well, take comfort, Molly," said the city missionary, for such he was;
"I've just seen him taken up by the police and carried to the station as
drunk and incapable.  That, you know, will not bring him to very great
trouble, and I have good reason to believe it will be the means of
saving him from much worse."

He glanced at the little girl as he spoke.

"Tottie, dear," said Mrs Bones, "you go out for a minute or two; I want
to speak with Mr Sterling."

"Yes, mother, and I'll run round to the bank; I've got twopence more to
put in," said Tottie as she went out.

"Your lesson has not been lost, sir," said the poor woman, with a faint
smile; "Tottie has a good bit o' money in the penny savings-bank now.
She draws some of it out every time Abel brings us to the last gasp, but
we don't let 'im know w'ere it comes from.  To be sure, 'e don't much
care.  She's a dear child is Tottie."

"Thank the Lord for _that_, Molly.  He is already answering our
prayers," said Mr Sterling.  "Just trust Him, keep up heart, and
persevere; we're _sure_ to win at last."

When Tottie Bones left the dark and dirty den that was the only home she
had ever known, she ran lightly out into the neighbouring street, and,
threading her way among people and vehicles, entered an alley, ascended
a stair, and found herself in a room which bore some resemblance to an
empty schoolroom.  At one corner there was a desk, at which stood a
young man at work on a business-looking book.  Before him were several
children of various ages and sizes, but all having one characteristic in
common--the aspect of extreme poverty.  The young man was a gratuitous
servant of the public, and the place was, for the hour at least, a penny
savings-bank.

It was one of those admirable institutions, which are now numerous in
our land, and which derive their authority from Him who said, "Gather up
the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost."  Noble work was being
done there, not so much because of the mere pence which were saved from
the grog and tobacco shops, as because of the habits of thrift which
were being formed, as well as the encouragement of that spirit of
thoughtful economy, which, like the spirit of temperance, is one of the
hand-maids of religion.

"Please, sir," said Tottie to the penny banker, "I wants to pay in
tuppence."

She handed over her bank-book with the money.  Receiving the former
back, she stared at the mysterious figures with rapt attention.

"Please, sir, 'ow much do it come to now?" she asked.

"It's eight and sevenpence, Tottie," replied the amiable banker, with a
smile.

"Thank you, sir," said Tottie, and hurried home in a species of heavenly
contemplation of the enormous sum she had accumulated.

When Solomon Flint returned home that night he found Miss Lillycrop
seated beside old Mrs Flint, shouting into her deafest ear.  She
desisted when Solomon entered, and rose to greet him.

"I have come to see my niece, Mr Flint; do you expect her soon?"

The letter-carrier consulted his watch.

"It is past her time now, Miss Lillycrop; she can't be long.  Pray, sit
down.  You'll stay and 'ave a cup of tea with us?  Now, don't say no.
We're just goin' to 'ave it, and my old 'ooman delights in company.--
There now, sit down, an' don't go splittin' your lungs on _that_ side of
her next time you chance to be alone with her.  It's her deaf side.  A
cannon would make no impression on that side, except you was to fire it
straight _into_ her ear.--I've got a message for you, Miss Lillycrop."

"A message for me?"

"Ay, from a beautiful angel with tumbled hair and jagged clothes named
Tottie Bones.  Ain't it strange how coincidences happen in this life!  I
goes an' speaks to Tottie, which I never did before.  Tottie wants very
bad to send a message to Miss Lillycrop.  I happens to know Miss
Lillycrop, an' takes the message, and on coming home finds Miss
Lillycrop here before me--and all on the same night--ain't it odd?"

"It is very odd, Mr Flint; and pray what was the message?"

The letter-carrier, having first excused himself for making arrangements
for the evening meal while he talked, hereupon related the circumstances
of his meeting with the child, and had only concluded when May Maylands
came in, looking a little fagged, but sunny and bright as usual.

Of course she added her persuasions to those of her landlord, and Miss
Lillycrop, being induced to stay to tea, was taken into May's private
boudoir to put off her bonnet.

While there the good lady inquired eagerly about her cousin's health and
work and companions; asked for her mother and brother, and chatted
pleasantly about her own work among the poor in the immediate
neighbourhood of her dwelling.

"By the way," said she, "that reminds me that I chanced to meet with
that tall, handsome friend of your brother's in very strange
circumstances.  Do you know that he has become a shopman in the
bird-shop of my dear old friend Mr Blurt, who is very ill--has been
ill, I should have said,--were you aware of that?"

"No," answered May, in a low tone.

"I thought he came to England by the invitation of Sir Somebody
Something, who had good prospects for him.  Did not you?"

"So I thought," said May, turning her face away from the light.

"It is very strange," continued Miss Lillycrop, giving a few hasty
touches to her cap and hair; "and do you know, I could not help thinking
that there was something queer about his appearance?  I can scarce tell
what it was.  It seemed to me like--like--but it is disagreeable even to
think about such things in connection with one who is such a fine,
clever, gentlemanly fellow--but--"

Fortunately for poor May, her friend was suddenly stopped by a shout
from the outer room.

"Hallo, ladies! how long are you goin' to be titivatin' yourselves?
There ain't no company comin'.  The sausages are on the table, and the
old 'ooman's gittin' so impatient that she's beginnin' to abuse the
cat."

This last remark was too true and sad to be passed over in silence.  Old
Mrs Flint's age had induced a spirit of temporary oblivion as to
surroundings, which made her act, especially to her favourite cat, in a
manner that seemed unaccountable.  It was impossible to conceive that
cruelty could actuate one who all her life long had been a very pattern
of tenderness to every living creature.  When therefore she suddenly
changed from stroking and fondling her cat to pulling its tail, tweaking
its nose, slapping its face, and tossing it off her lap, it is only fair
to suppose that her mind had ceased to be capable of two simultaneous
thoughts, and that when it was powerfully fixed on sausages she was not
aware of what her hands were doing to the cat.

"You'll excuse our homely arrangements, Miss Lillycrop," said Mr Flint,
as he helped his guest to the good things on the table.  "I never could
get over a tendency to a rough-and-ready sort o' feedin'.  But you'll
find the victuals good."

"Thank you, Mr Flint.  I am sure you must be very tired after the long
walks you take.  I can't think how postmen escape catching colds when
they have such constant walking in all sorts of weather."

"It's the constancy as saves us, ma'am, but we don't escape altogether,"
said Flint, heaping large supplies on his grandmother's plate.  "We
often kitch colds, but they don't often do us damage."

This remark led Miss Lillycrop, who had a very inquiring mind, to induce
Solomon Flint to speak about the Post-Office, and as that worthy man was
enthusiastic in regard to everything connected with his profession, he
willingly gratified his visitor.

"Now, I want to know," said Miss Lillycrop, after the conversation had
run on for some time, and appetites began to abate,--"when you go about
the poorer parts of the city in dark nights, if you are ever attacked,
or have your letters stolen from you."

"Well, no, ma'am--never.  I can't, in all my long experience, call to
mind sitch a thing happenin'--either to me or to any other
letter-carrier.  The worst of people receives us kindly, 'cause, you
see, we go among 'em to do 'em service.  I did indeed once hear of a
letter being stolen, but the thief was not a man--he was a tame raven!"

"Oh, Solomon!" said May, with a laugh.  "Remember that Grannie hears
you."

"No, she don't, but it's all the same if she did.  Whatever I say about
the Post-Office I can give chapter and verse for.  The way of it was
this.  The letter-carrier was a friend o' mine.  He was goin' his rounds
at Kelvedon, in Essex, when a tame raven seized a money letter he had in
his hand and flew away with it.  After circlin' round the town he
alighted, and, before he could be prevented, tore the letter to pieces.
On puttin' the bits together the contents o' the letter was found to be
a cheque for thirty pounds, and of course, when the particulars o' the
strange case were made known the cheque was renewed!--There now,"
concluded Solomon, "if you don't believe that story, you've only got to
turn up the Postmaster-General's Report for 1862, and you'll find it
there on page 24."

"How curious!" said Miss Lillycrop.  "There's another thing I want to
know," she added, looking with deep interest into the countenance of her
host, while that stalwart man continued to stow incredible quantities of
sausages and crumpets into his capacious mouth.  "Is it really true that
people post letters without addresses?"

"True, ma'am? why, of course it's true.  Thousands of people do.  The
average number of letters posted without addresses is about eighty a
day."

"How strange!  I wonder what causes this?"

Miss Lillycrop gazed contemplatively into her teacup, and Solomon became
suddenly aware that Grannie's plate was empty.  Having replenished it,
he ordered Dollops to bring more crumpets, and then turned to his guest.

"I'll tell you what it is, ma'am, that causes this--it's forgetfulness,
or rather, what we call absence of mind.  It's my solemn belief, ma'am,
that if our heads warn't screwed on pretty tight you'd see some hundreds
