leisurely examined some papers on the notice board. Was she going to
stay there all the afternoon? At last she moved, and went inside the
gymnasium, and Gwen plucked up courage to make a dash for the street
door. She hurried along with such enormous strides that passers-by
turned to look at her and smiled, but careless of the notice she was
attracting, she even broke into a run as she caught sight of the
Market Hall clock. She was panting and altogether out of breath by the
time she reached the china shop, and not at all sure what she ought to
say. She marched up to the counter, and produced the bill which she
had received.

"Look here! You've sent me this," she began, "and I want to know
whether it was really paid or not."

"I'll just enquire, miss," said the assistant, referring to his
superior; then returning, after a whispered colloquy, he continued:
"No, miss. Mr. Evans says it certainly never has been paid. You've no
receipt for it?"

"I gave the money to the housemaid at school, and told her to take
it," faltered Gwen.

"Have you asked her about it, miss?"

"She's left, and I don't know where she's gone."

The assistant shook his head.

"I'm afraid, in that case, she won't want to be found, though perhaps
the police could trace her if you cared to prosecute."

"Would it not be simpler if we sent the account to your father,
missy?" suggested the shopwalker, coming to join the assistant at the
counter. "Ah! I forget whether we have your home address? Always best
to refer bills to one's father, isn't it? Then there's no trouble."

His tone verged on the familiar and impertinent. Gwen drew herself up
very straight.

"I prefer to manage it myself, thank you," she replied icily. "If you
will take ten shillings on account now, I will pay you the balance
after Christmas. Will you let it remain till then?"

"I dare say Mr. Parker wouldn't object--that's to say, if you don't
mind giving me your home address as a reference."

"You can put 'c/o Miss Goodwin, The Thorns, Manor Road, Stedburgh',"
said Gwen, who wished at any cost to avoid the chance of a letter
being sent to her at her own home. She got a receipt for the ten
shillings on account, and put it carefully away in her purse. She
thought both the shopmen looked at her very inquisitively, but she
took no notice. She did not mean to gratify their curiosity by
explaining the details of how she had incurred the expense. She wished
Netta were with her; it was so much harder to keep up her dignity
alone. With a curt "Good afternoon!" she left the china stores and
hurried back to school. She was only just in time, for the second bell
was already ringing. Fortunately the dressing-room was empty, except
for one agitated Junior, who was in too great haste to notice
anything. Gwen scuttled into the Fifth exactly five seconds before
Miss Douglas, and sat down at her desk, exhausted but congratulating
herself. She contrived to write a surreptitious note to Netta, and to
pass it, neatly rolled into a ball, on the waste-paper tray. Its tenor
was calculated to be ambiguous to outsiders, but intelligible to the
initiated.

     "All hail, Protector of the Poor! This is to inform you that
     the deed is done--successfully. I thought I was within an
     ace of exposure, but things righted themselves, and lo! I
     triumphed. For the present the supplier of brittle goods is
     satisfied, and for the future--well, I leave it to luck. I
     feel like a warrior who has been through a campaign--I'm not
     sure if I haven't acquired some wounds. My head is swimming,
     and I'm a broken flower for the afternoon. Expect me to
     collapse in maths. My brains are capable of nothing more
     arduous than the three R's. I am living till four, when I
     can have the exhilaration of reciting my breathless
     experiences to your sympathetic ear.

"Yours in abject gratitude,

"G.G."




CHAPTER IX

Keeping Christmas


The end of the term seemed to arrive very rapidly--too quickly for the
amount of work that had to be done, yet too slowly in the estimation
of the three hundred and eleven girls who were looking forward to the
holidays. Exam week came and went, leaving inkstained fingers and a
crop of headaches; mistresses were busy correcting papers; "swatters"
were daring to congratulate themselves, and "slackers" were bewailing
the difficulty of the questions. Gwen, who had done pretty well on the
whole, considering her handicaps, ventured to think she must be
through in most subjects, and not such a disgrace to the Fifth as to
necessitate her dismissal to the Lower School again, a consummation at
which one or two of her detractors had occasionally hinted in times of
irritation.

The few days left were chiefly occupied with what the girls called
"scratch lessons", just something to keep them employed until the
lists were out. A good deal of latitude was allowed to those
rehearsing for the various performances, and though Gwen could not
claim that excuse for exemption, she managed to make a little work
spin out a long way without incurring reproof.

She was tired with the strain of the term; it had needed much effort
to keep up with the rest of the Form, and the daily bus journey and
walk to and from home were all extra exertion. She had grown
enormously in the last few months--"grown out of all conscience", said
Beatrice, who sighed ruefully over boots too small and skirts too
short--and she had become so pale and lanky and angular in the process
that Winnie unfeelingly compared her to a plant raised in a cellar.
Her unlucky hands and feet seemed bigger than ever, and more inclined
to fidget and shuffle, and to her bad habit of wrinkling up her
forehead she had added a nervous blink of her eyes.

"Winnie Gascoyne is charming," confided Miss Douglas to a fellow
mistress, "and Lesbia is about the loveliest child I've ever seen. I
can't imagine why Gwen should vary from pretty to plain continually.
But she does."

Unfortunately, Gwen's temper suffered in exact proportion to her
increased inches. She was snappy at school and snarly at home,
difficult to please, and ready to take offence at everything. Probably
a week's rest in bed, on a feeding diet and a good tonic, was what her
tired body and irritable nerves required, but nobody had the hardihood
to make such a suggestion. Except in cases of dire necessity, the
Gascoynes did not indulge in the luxury of medical advice or chemist's
bills, so Gwen perforce did without a doctor, and the medicine he
would most undoubtedly have prescribed for her. So far from thinking
of rest, she was making plans sufficient to fill five holidays instead
of one; even she herself laughed sometimes at the largeness of her
projects compared with the brief month in which she was to carry them
out.

Meantime the two days of the dramatic performances had arrived. The
Seniors always had the first afternoon and the Juniors the second, the
audience being composed of the rest of the school together with the
mistresses. The outside public was not invited, as the little plays
were only intended to be acted among the girls themselves. The Sixth
naturally led off, and Gwen quaked as she sat with her Form in front
of the heavy red curtains. She was afraid an unpleasant surprise
awaited her comrades, and she wondered how they would take it. Exactly
what she expected happened. The bell rang, the curtains were drawn
aside to reveal--alas, alas, for the Fifth!--a very excellently got up
trial scene from the _Merchant of Venice_. Bessie Manners, the head of
the school, was a majestic Portia in a handsome scarlet robe; Winnie
made an attractive Nerissa; while all the other characters were
arrayed in slightly more sumptuous costumes than Elspeth and Hilda had
been able to collect.

A shudder of cold horror ran through the unfortunate Fifth, the
dramatic representatives of which listened with a kind of fascination
to their own speeches, tripped off lightly and easily by their
Seniors. It was more particularly galling as all realized that the
whole thing was on a rather higher scale than theirs; it was better
staged, much prompter, the actions were more appropriate, and the
players less stiff and self-conscious, to say nothing of the superior
dresses. In gloomy resignation they sat the scene out, and had the
magnanimity to applaud heartily at the end. Then came the crisis.

"We can't possibly give the very same thing all over again," whispered
Hilda to Elspeth. "We shall just have to announce that ours is 'off'."

Deeply humiliated and disgusted, the Fifth retired to its own
classroom to discuss the untoward event.

"It's too sickening--when I'd borrowed the wig on purpose!" wailed
Hilda. "You can't think how I had to pester Dad to lend it."

"And my Bassanio doublet and tights were made at a dressmaker's!"
lamented Louise Mawson.

"Who'd have thought of the Sixth choosing that very scene?"

"Well, I tried to persuade you to take something else instead,"
declared Gwen, offering Job's comfort to the disappointed ones.

"Gwen Gascoyne, I verily believe you knew all the time what the Sixth
were going to have."

"You must have known when your sister was in it."

"I wasn't sure, but I had an inkling," confessed Gwen.

"Then why didn't you tell?" howled the girls in chorus.

"Why? Because it didn't seem fair. Winnie hadn't said a word--I only
guessed. You know we're all supposed to keep our own secrets."

"In this case you ought to have warned us properly. It was too bad to
let us rehearse all that time, and get all the costumes together--for
this!"

"We've made ourselves ridiculous, and it's your fault entirely."

"Couldn't you act it here, just among ourselves?" suggested Gwen
humbly; but her proposal was squashed by an indignant and scornful
majority.

"Act it here indeed! Who'd care to do that, I wonder? Don't be so
idiotic. You've spoilt our performance, Gwen Gascoyne, when you might
have saved it. Why couldn't you stay in the Lower School? You haven't
sense enough to be a Senior."

It was not a very satisfactory ending to a first term, even though
Gwen had done better in the exams than she expected, so that her place
in her new Form was well assured. She still felt an outcast, and as
she shut her desk for the last time on breaking-up day, she gave a
sigh of intense relief to think that she was going to enjoy a whole
month's freedom from the society of her classmates.

Home at present was the _summum bonum_ of her wishes. She almost
danced along the road from school, and behaved so jubilantly in the
bus that Winnie had to interfere, and give her a hint to restrain her
hilarity before the other passengers. She rushed into the Parsonage
like a cyclone, and flung her satchel under the bookcase.

"There! That's done with! Hurrah! No more horrid, hateful, scrambly,
early breakfasts, and tramping off through the mud. Every day's a
Saturday, and I'm just going to have a glorious time."

"There's plenty for you to do," said Beatrice, fishing out the satchel
and putting it tidily away on Gwen's special shelf. "I haven't
finished those texts I was making for the church yet, and--"

"Oh, wow! Don't set me to work too soon! I've a heap of things of my
own that want doing first. Winnie is far cleverer at cutting texts
than I am."

"She's more to be depended upon, certainly," said Beatrice dryly.

Each member of the family was mysteriously occupied with special
secrets. There were still five days before Christmas, time for an
energetic person to get through a great deal, and Gwen hoped to
accomplish wonders. She was in a sad quandary about her Christmas
gifts. Her savings box, which ought to have contained over fifteen
shillings, only held a threepennybit and two halfpennies; and she
shook her head dismally as she reviewed her pauper condition.

"I must make presents, that's the long and short of it," she told
herself. "They can't be handsome ones. And, oh dear! they'll all think
me so horribly stingy and mean. Well, they'll have to, for I can't
explain! It's absolutely sickening, but it's inevitable."

So Gwen shut herself up in her bedroom, locked out the injured Lesbia,
who had plans of her own which she wished to pursue in privacy, put on
a thick jacket and a pair of mittens to keep herself warm, and set to
work bravely. It is rather hard to make bricks without straw, and her
supply of materials, mostly purloined from Beatrice's piece-box, was
decidedly scanty. She held a review of the articles when she had
finished, and screwed up her face over them in expressive
dissatisfaction.

"They're a shabby little lot, that's flat!" she decided.

She turned them over disconsolately--the needle-book for Beatrice, not
too tidily sewn; the blotter for Winnie, with its brown paper cover,
hastily painted with a spray of roses, and its one sheet of blotting
paper begged from Father's writing-table; the pincushion for Lesbia,
trimmed with a piece of washed ribbon; and the two postcard albums for
Basil and Giles, made out of pieces of cardboard with slits cut in the
corners.

"I can afford to spend the threepennybit on Father and Martin," she
thought; "but I must leave the halfpennies to rattle in my box, so
that it doesn't sound empty."

The village shop did not offer a very large selection of goods for an
expenditure of threepence. Gwen was almost at her wits' end what to
choose, and finally came away with a cake of oatmeal soap and a large
red chalk pencil. Walking back up the village she met Beatrice.

"I've just been to see the Casses," said the latter. "They're in awful
trouble. Thomas Cass has sprained his wrist and can't go out in his
boat, and Mrs. Cass is in bed with bronchitis. Johnnie's running about
with his toes all through his boots, and says he can't come to church
or Sunday School because he hasn't another pair."

"Haven't you an old pair of Lesbia's or Stumps's?" suggested Gwen.

"Not one. We sold them all at the Rummage Sale."

"Then he'll have to go barefoot, I suppose."

"I was wondering," said Beatrice tentatively, "if we could manage to
get him a pair ourselves. Winnie would give something, I'm sure, and
so would I, and so would Father."

Gwen was silent.

"I thought perhaps as you'd rescued him you might feel interested in
him, and you'd care--"

Beatrice did not finish the sentence, but looked at her sister
hopefully.

Gwen stared at the ground and went very red, but she said nothing, and
Beatrice, after waiting a moment, turned away and entered the post
office.

"Of all absolute frauds, I feel the meanest!" groaned Gwen. "Beatrice
will think me a perfect miser, hoarding up my money and not willing to
spend a farthing on anybody! If she only knew the bankruptcy of my
