children grew tired, they laid their burden on the ground and sat down
beside it.  Thus, by easy stages, was Tom Brixton conveyed away from the
spot where he had given himself up as hopelessly lost.

Now, it could not have been more than six hours after Tom had thus been
borne away that poor Tolly Trevor came upon the same scene.  We say
"poor" advisedly, for he had not only suffered the loss of much
fragmentary clothing in his passage through that tangled wood, but also
most of the food with which he had started, and a good deal of skin from
his shins, elbows, knuckles, and knees, as well as the greater part of
his patience.  Truly, he was in a pitiable plight, for the forest had
turned out to be almost impassable for horses, and in his journey he had
not only fallen off, and been swept out of the saddle by overhanging
branches frequently, but had to swim swamps, cross torrents, climb
precipitous banks, and had stuck in quagmires innumerable.

As for the horses--their previous owner could not have recognised them.
It is true they were what is styled "all there," but there was an
inexpressible droop of their heads and tails, a weary languor in their
eyes, and an abject waggle about their knees which told of hope deferred
and spirit utterly gone.  The pony was the better of the two.  Its
sprightly glance of amiability had changed into a gaze of humble
resignation, whereas the aspect of the obstinate horse was one of
impotent ill-nature.  It would have bitten, perhaps, if strength had
permitted, but as to its running away--ha!

Well, Tolly Trevor approached--it could hardly be said he rode up to--
the spring before mentioned, where he passed the footprints in stupid
blindness.

He dismounted, however, to drink and rest a while.

"Come on--you brute!" he cried, almost savagely, dragging the horse to
the water.

The creature lowered its head and gazed as though to say, "What liquid
is that?"

As the pony, however, at once took a long and hearty draught it also
condescended to drink, while Tolly followed suit.  Afterwards he left
the animals to graze, and sat down under a neighbouring tree to rest and
swallow his last morsel of food.

It was sad to see the way in which the poor boy carefully shook out and
gathered up the few crumbs in his wallet so that not one of them should
be lost; and how slowly he ate them, as if to prolong the sensation of
being gratified!  During the two days which he had spent in the forest
his face had grown perceptibly thinner, and his strength had certainly
diminished.  Even the reckless look of defiant joviality, which was one
of the boy's chief characteristics, had given place to a restless
anxiety that prevented his seeing humour in anything, and induced a
feeling of impatience when a joke chanced irresistibly to bubble up in
his mind.  He was once again reduced almost to the weeping point, but
his sensations were somewhat different for, when he had stood gazing at
the wreck of Bevan's home, the nether lip had trembled because of the
sorrows of friends, whereas now he was sorrowing because of an exhausted
nature, a weakened heart, and a sinking spirit.  But the spirit had not
yet utterly given way!

"Come!" he cried, starting up.  "This won't do, Tolly.  Be a man!  Why,
only think--you have got over two days and two nights.  That was the
time allowed you by Paul, so your journey's all but done--must be.  Of
course those brutes--forgive me, pony, _that_ brute, I mean--has made me
go much slower than if I had come on my own legs, but notwithstanding,
it cannot be--hallo! what's that!"

The exclamation had reference to a small dark object which lay a few
yards from the spot on which he sat.  He ran and picked it up.  It was
Tom Brixton's cap--with his name rudely written on the lining.  Beside
it lay a piece of bark on which was pencil-writing.

With eager, anxious haste the boy began to peruse it, but he was
unaccustomed to read handwriting, and when poor Tom had pencilled the
lines his hand was weak and his brain confused, so that the characters
were doubly difficult to decipher.  After much and prolonged effort the
boy made out the beginning.  It ran thus:

"This is probably the last letter that I, Tom Brixton, shall ever write.
(I put down my name now, in case I never finish it.)  O dearest
mother!--"

Emotion had no doubt rendered the hand less steady at this point, for
here the words were quite illegible--at least to little Trevor--who
finally gave up the attempt in despair.  The effect of this discovery,
however, was to send the young blood coursing wildly through the veins,
so that a great measure of strength returned, as if by magic.

The boy's first care was naturally to look for traces of the lost man,
and he set about this with a dull fear at his heart, lest at any moment
he should come upon the dead body of his friend.  In a few minutes he
discovered the track made by the Indians, which led him to the spot near
to the spring where Tom had fallen.  To his now fully-awakened senses
Trevor easily read the story, as far as signs could tell it.

Brixton had been all but starved to death.  He had lain down under a
tree to die--the very tree under which he himself had so recently given
way to despair.  While lying there he--Brixton--had scrawled his last
words on the bit of birch-bark.  Then he had tried to reach the spring,
but had fainted either before reaching it or after leaving.  This he
knew, because the mark of Tom's coat, part of his waist-belt and the
handle of his bowie-knife were all impressed on the softish ground with
sufficient distinctness to be discerned by a sharp eye.  The moccasined
footprints told of Indians having found Brixton--still alive, for they
would not have taken the trouble to carry him off if he had been dead.
The various sizes of the moccasined feet told that the party of Indians
numbered three; and the trail of the red men, with its occasional
halting-places, pointed out clearly the direction in which they had
gone.  Happily this was also the direction in which little Trevor was
going.

Of course the boy did not read this off as readily as we have written it
all down.  It cost him upwards of an hour's patient research; but when
at last he did arrive at the result of his studies he wasted no time in
idle speculation.  His first duty was to reach Simpson's Gully, discover
his friend Paul Bevan, and deliver to him the piece of birch-bark he had
found, and the information he had gleaned.

By the time Tolly had come to this conclusion his horse and pony had
obtained both rest and nourishment enough to enable them to raise their
drooping heads and tails an inch or two, so that when the boy mounted
the former with some of his old dash and energy, it shook its head, gave
a short snort, and went off at a fair trot.

Fortunately the ground improved just beyond this point, opening out into
park-like scenery, which, in another mile or two, ran into level prairie
land.  This Trevor knew from description was close to the mountain
range, in which lay the gully he was in quest of.  The hope which had
begun to rise increased, and communicating itself, probably by
sympathetic electricity, to the horse, produced a shuffling gallop,
which ere long brought them to a clump of wood.  On rounding this they
came in sight of the longed-for hills.

Before nightfall Simpson's Gully was reached, and little Trevor was
directed to the tent of Paul Bevan, who had arrived there only the day
before.

"It's a strange story, lad," said Paul, after the boy had run rapidly
over the chief points of the news he had to give, to which Betty, Fred,
and Flinders sat listening with eager interest.

"We must be off to search for him without delay," said Fred Westly,
rising.

"It's right ye are, sor," cried Flinders, springing up.  "Off to-night
an' not a moment to lose."

"We'll talk it over first, boys," said Paul.  "Come with me.  I've a
friend in the camp as'll help us."

"Did you not bring the piece of bark?" asked Betty of the boy, as the
men went out.

"Oh!  I forgot.  Of course I did," cried Trevor, drawing it from his
breast-pocket.  "The truth is I'm so knocked up that I scarce know what
I'm about."

"Lie down here on this deer-skin, poor boy, and rest while I read it."

Tolly Trevor flung himself on the rude but welcome couch, and almost
instantly fell asleep, while Betty Bevan, spreading the piece of
birch-bark on her knee, began to spell out the words and try to make
sense of Tom Brixton's last epistle.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

With considerable difficulty Betty Bevan succeeded in deciphering the
tremulous scrawl which Tom Brixton had written on the piece of
birch-bark.  It ran somewhat as follows:--

"This is probably the last letter that I, Tom Brixton, shall ever write.
(I put down my name now, in case I never finish it.)  O dearest mother!
what would I not now give to unsay all the hard things I have ever said
to you, and to undo all the evil I have done.  But this cannot be.
`Twice bought!'  It is strange how these words run in my mind.  I was
condemned to death at the gold-fields--my comrades bought me off.
Fred--dear Fred--who has been true and faithful to the last--reminded me
that I had previously been bought with the blood of Jesus--that I have
been _twice bought_!  I think he put it in this way to fix my obstinate
spirit on the idea, and he has succeeded.  The thought has been burned
in upon my soul as with fire.  I am very, _very_ weak--dying, I fear, in
the forest, and alone!  How my mind seems to wander!  I have slept since
writing the last sentence, and dreamed of food!  Curious mixing of
ideas!  I also dreamed of Betty Bevan.  Ah, sweet girl! if this ever
meets your eye, believe that I loved you sincerely.  It is well that I
should die, perhaps, for I have been a thief, and would not ask your
hand now even if I might.  I would not sully it with a touch of mine,
and I could not expect you to believe in me after I tell you that I not
only robbed Gashford, but also Fred--my chum Fred--and gambled it all
away, and drank away my reason almost at the same time...  I have slept
again, and dreamed of water this time--bright, pure, crystal water--
sparkling and gushing in the sunshine.  O God! how I despised it once,
and how I long for it now!  I am too weak and wandering, mother, to
think about religion now.  But why should I?  Your teaching has not been
altogether thrown away; it comes back like a great flood while I lie
here dreaming and trying to write.  The thoughts are confused, but the
sense comes home.  All is easily summed up in the words you once taught
me, `I am a poor sinner, and nothing at all, but Jesus Christ is all in
all.'  Not sure that I quote rightly.  No matter, the sense is there
also.  And yet it seems--it is--such a mean thing to sin away one's life
and ask for pardon only at the end--the very end!  But the thief on the
cross did it; why not I?  Sleep--_is_ it sleep? may it not be
slowly-approaching death?--has overpowered me again.  I have been
attempting to read this.  I seem to have mixed things somehow.  It is
sadly confused--or my mind is.  A burning thirst consumes me--and--I
_think_ I hear water running!  I will--"

Here the letter ended abruptly.

"No doubt," murmured Betty, as she let the piece of bark fall on the
table and clasped her hands over her eyes, "he rose and tried to reach
the water.  Praise God that there is hope!"

She sat for a few seconds in profound silence, which was broken by Paul
and his friends re-entering the tent.

"It's all arranged, Betty," he said, taking down an old rifle which hung
above the door; "old Larkins has agreed to look arter my claim and take
care of you, lass, while we're away."

"I shall need no one to take care of me."

"Ah! so you think, for you're as brave as you're good; but--I think
otherwise.  So he'll look arter you."

"Indeed he won't, father!" returned Betty, smiling, "because I intend
that _you_ shall look after me."

"Impossible, girl!  I'm going to sarch for Tom Brixton, you see, along
with Mister Fred an' Flinders, so I can't stop here with you."

"But I am going too, father!"

"But--but we can't wait for you, my good girl," returned Paul, with a
perplexed look; "we're all ready to start, an' there ain't a hoss for
you except the poor critters that Tolly Trevor brought wi' him, an', you
know, they need rest very badly."

"Well, well, go off, father; I won't delay you," said Betty; "and don't
disturb Tolly, let him sleep, he needs it, poor boy.  I will take care
of him and his horses."

That Tolly required rest was very obvious, for he lay sprawling on the
deer-skin couch just as he had flung himself down, buried in the
profoundest sleep he perhaps ever experienced since his career in the
wilderness began.

After the men had gone off, Betty Bevan--who was by that time better
known, at least among those young diggers whose souls were poetical, as
the Rose of Oregon, and among the matter-of-fact ones as the Beautiful
Nugget--conducted herself in a manner that would have increased the
admiration of her admirers, if they had seen her, and awakened their
curiosity also.  First of all she went out to the half-ruined log-hut
that served her father for a stable, and watered, fed, and rubbed down
the horse and pony which Tolly had brought, in a manner that would have
done credit to a regular groom.  Then, returning to the tent, she
arranged and packed a couple of saddle-bags with certain articles of
clothing, as well as biscuits, dried meat, and other provisions.  Next
she cleaned and put in order a couple of revolvers, a bowie-knife, and a
small hatchet; and ultimately, having made sundry other mysterious
preparations, she lifted the curtain which divided the tent into two
parts, and entered her own private apartment.  There, after reading her
nightly portion of God's Word and committing herself, and those who were
out searching in the wilderness for the lost man, to His care, she lay
down with her clothes on, and almost instantly fell into a slumber as
profound as that which had already overwhelmed Tolly.  As for that
exhausted little fellow, he did not move during the whole night, save
once, when an adventurous insect of the earwig type walked across his
ruddy cheek and upper lip and looked up his nose.  There are sensitive
portions of the human frame which may not be touched with impunity.  The
sleeper sneezed, blew the earwig out of existence, rolled over on his
back, flung his arms wide open, and, with his mouth in the same
condition, spent the remainder of the night in motionless repose.

The sun was well up next morning, and the miners of Simpson's Gully were
all busy, up to their knees in mud and gold, when Betty Bevan awoke,
sprang up, ran into the outer apartment of her tent, and gazed
admiringly at Tolly's face.  A band of audacious and early flies were
tickling it, and causing the features to twitch, but they could not
waken the sleeper.  Betty gazed only for a moment with an amused
expression, and then shook the boy somewhat vigorously.

"Come, Tolly, rise!"

"Oh! d-on't b-borrer."

"But I must bother.  Wake up, I say.  Fire!"

At the last word the boy sat up and gazed idiotically.

"Hallo!  Betty--my dear Nugget--is that you?  Why, where am I?"

"Your body is here," said Betty, laughing.  "When your mind comes to the
same place I'll talk to you."

"I'm _all_ here now, Betty; so go ahead," said the boy, with a hearty
yawn as he arose and stretched himself.  "Oh!  I remember now all about
it.  Where is your father?"

"I will tell you presently, but first let me know what you mean by
calling me Nugget."

"Why, don't you know?  It's the name the men give you everywhere--one of
the names at least--the Beautiful Nugget."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the Nugget with a laugh and blush; "very impudent of
the men; and, pray, if this is one of the names, what may the others
be?"

"There's only one other that I know of--the Rose of Oregon.  But come,
it's not fair of you to screw my secrets out o' me when I'm only half
awake; and you haven't yet told me where Paul Bevan is."

"I'll tell you that when I see you busy with this pork pie," returned
the Rose.  "I made it myself, so you ought to find it good.  Be quick,
for I have work for you to do, and there is no time to lose.  Content
yourself with a cold breakfast for once."

"Humph! as if I hadn't contented myself with a cold breakfast at any
time.  Well, it _is_ a good pie.  Now--about Paul?"

"He has gone away with Mr Westly and Flinders to search for Mr
Brixton."

"What! without _me_?" exclaimed Tolly, overturning his chair as he
started up and pushed his plate from him.

"Yes, without you, Tolly; I advised him not to awake you."

"It's the unkindest thing you've ever done to me," returned the boy,
scarcely able to restrain his tears at the disappointment.  "How can
they know where to search for him without me to guide them?  Why didn't
you let them waken me!"

"You forget, Tolly, that my father knows every inch of these woods and
plains for at least fifty miles round the old house they have blown up;
and, as to waking you, it would have been next to impossible to have
done so, you were so tired, and you would have been quite unable to keep
your eyes open.  Besides, I had a little plan of my own which I want you
to help me to carry out.  Go on with your breakfast and I'll explain."

The boy sat down to his meal again without speaking, but with a look of
much curiosity on his expressive face.

"You know, without my telling you," continued Betty, "that I, like my
father, have a considerable knowledge of this part of the country, and
of the ways of Indians and miners, and from what you have told me,
coupled with what father has said, I think it likely that the Indians
have carried poor T---Mr Brixton, I mean--through the Long Gap rather
than by the plains--"

"So _I_ would have said, had they consulted _me_," interrupted the boy,
with an offended air.

"Well, but," continued Betty, "they would neither have consulted you nor
me, for father has a very decided will, you know, and a belief in his
own judgment--which is quite right of course, only I cannot help
differing from him on this occasion--"

"No more can I," growled Tolly, thrusting his fork into the pie at a
tempting piece of pork.

"So, you see, I'm going to take the big horse you brought here and ride
round by the Long Gap to see if I'm right, and I want you to go with me
on the pony and take care of me."

Tolly Trevor felt his heart swell with gratification at the idea of his
being the chosen protector of the Rose of Oregon--the Beautiful Nugget;
selected by herself, too.  Nevertheless his good sense partially subdued
his vanity on the point.

"But, I say," he remarked, looking up with a half-serious expression,
"d'you think that you and I are a sufficient party to make a good fight
if we are attacked by Redskins?  You know your father will hold me
responsible, for carrying you off into the midst of danger in this
fashion."

"I don't mean to fight at all," returned Betty, with a pleasant laugh,
"and I will free you from all responsibility; so, have done, now, and
come along."

"It's _so_ good," said Tolly, looking as though he were loath to quit
the pork pie; "but, come, I'm your man!  Only don't you think it would
be as well to get up a good fighting party among the young miners to go
with us?  They'd only be too happy to take service under the Beautiful
Nugget, you know."

"Tolly," exclaimed the Nugget, with more than her wonted firmness, "if
you are to take service under _me_ you must learn to obey without
question.  Now, go and saddle the horses.  The big one for me, the pony
for yourself.  Put the saddle-bags on the horse, and be quick."

There was a tone and manner about the usually quiet and gentle girl
which surprised and quite overawed little Trevor, so that he was reduced
at once to an obedient and willing slave.  Indeed he was rather glad
than otherwise that Betty had declined to listen to his suggestion about
the army of young diggers--which an honest doubt as to his own capacity
to fight and conquer all who might chance to come in his way had induced
him to make--while he was by no means unwilling to undertake,
singlehanded, any duties his fair conductor should require of him.

In a few minutes, therefore, the steeds were brought round to the door
of the tent, where Betty already stood equipped for the journey.

Our fair readers will not, we trust, be prejudiced against the Rose of
Oregon when we inform them that she had adopted man's attitude in
riding.  Her costume was arranged very much after the pattern of the
Indian women's dress--namely, a close-fitting body, a short woollen
skirt reaching a little below the knees, and blue cloth leggings in
continuation.  These latter were elegantly wrought with coloured silk
thread, and the pair of moccasins which covered her small feet were
similarly ornamented.  A little cloth cap, in shape resembling that of a
cavalry foraging cap, but without ornaments, graced her head, from
beneath which her wavy hair tumbled in luxuriant curls on her shoulders,
and, as Tolly was wont to remark, looked after itself anyhow.  Such a
costume was well adapted to the masculine position on horseback, as well
as to the conditions of a land in which no roads, but much underwood,
existed.

Bevan's tent having been pitched near the outskirts of Simpson's Camp,
the maiden and her gallant protector had no difficulty in quitting it
unobserved.  Riding slowly at first, to avoid attracting attention as
well as to pick their steps more easily over the somewhat rugged ground
near the camp, they soon reached the edge of an extensive plain, at the
extremity of which a thin purple line indicated a range of hills.  Here
Tolly Trevor, unable to restrain his joy at the prospect of adventure
before him, uttered a war-whoop, brought his switch down smartly on the
pony's flank, and shot away over the plain like a wild creature.  The
air was bracing, the prospect was fair, the sunshine was bright.  No
wonder that the obedient pony, forgetting for the moment the fatigues of
the past, and strong in the enjoyment of the previous night's rest and
supper, went over the ground at a pace that harmonised with its young
rider's excitement; and no wonder that the obstinate horse was inclined
to emulate the pony, and stretched its long legs into a wild gallop,
encouraged thereto by the Rose on its back.

The gallop was ere long pressed to racing speed, and there is no saying
