
An hour sufficed for breakfast.  While it was preparing, the two friends
sauntered into the forest in search of game, in which they were
unsuccessful; in fact, with the exception of the gulls before mentioned,
there was not a feather to be seen--save, always, one or two
whisky-johns.

Whisky-johns are the most impudent, puffy, conceited little birds that
exist.  Not much larger in reality than sparrows, they nevertheless
manage to swell out their feathers to such an extent that they appear to
be as large as magpies, which they further resemble in their plumage.
Go where you will in the woods of Rupert's Land, the instant that you
light a fire two or three whisky-johns come down and sit beside you, on
a branch, it may be, or on the ground, and generally so near that you
cannot but wonder at their recklessness.  There is a species of
impudence which seems to be specially attached to little birds.  In them
it reaches the highest pitch of perfection.  A bold, swelling, arrogant
effrontery--a sort of stark, staring, sell-complacent, comfortable, and
yet innocent impertinence--which is at once irritating and amusing,
aggravating and attractive, and which is exhibited in the greatest
intensity in the whisky-john.  He will jump down almost under your nose,
and seize a fragment of biscuit or pemmican.  He will go right into the
pemmican-bag, when you are but a few paces off, and pilfer, as it were,
at the fountain-head.  Or if these resources are closed against him, he
will sit on a twig, within an inch of your head, and look at you as only
a whisky-john _can_ look.

"I'll catch one of these rascals," said Harry, as he saw them jump
unceremoniously into and out of the pemmican bag.

Going down to the boat, Harry hid himself under the tarpaulin, leaving a
hole open near to the mouth of the bag.  He had not remained more than a
few minutes in this concealment when one of the birds flew down, and
alighted on the edge of the boat.  After a glance round to see that all
was right, it jumped into the bag.  A moment after, Harry, darting his
hand through the aperture, grasped him round the neck and secured him.
Poor whisky-john screamed and pecked ferociously, while Harry brought
him in triumph to his friend; but so unremittingly did the bird scream
that his captor was fain at last to let him off, the more especially as
the cook came up at the moment and announced that breakfast was ready.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE STORM.

Two days after the events of the last chapter, the brigade was making
one of the traverses which have already been noticed as of frequent
occurrence in the great lakes.  The morning was calm and sultry.  A deep
stillness pervaded nature, which tended to produce a corresponding
quiescence in the mind, and to fill it with those indescribably solemn
feelings that frequently arise before a thunderstorm.  Dark, lurid
clouds hung overhead in gigantic masses, piled above each other like the
battlements of a dark fortress, from whose ragged embrasures the
artillery of heaven was about to play.

"Shall we get over in time, Louis?" asked Mr Park, as he turned to the
guide, who sat holding the tiller with a firm grasp; while the men,
aware of the necessity of reaching shelter ere the storm burst upon
them, were bending to the oars with steady and sustained energy.

"Perhaps," replied Louis, laconically.--"Pull, lads, pull! else you'll
have to sleep in wet skins to-night."

A low growl of distant thunder followed the guide's words, and the men
pulled with additional energy; while the slow, measured hiss of the
water, and the clank of oars, as they cut swiftly through the lake's
clear surface, alone interrupted the dead silence that ensued.

Charley and his friend conversed in low whispers; for there is a strange
power in a thunderstorm, whether raging or about to break, that overawes
the heart of man,--as if Nature's God were nearer then than at other
times; as if He--whose voice indeed, if listened to, speaks even in the
slightest evolution of natural phenomena--were about to tread the
visible earth with more than usual majesty, in the vivid glare of the
lightning flash, and in the awful crash of thunder.

"I don't know how it is, but I feel more like a coward," said Charley,
"just before a thunderstorm than I think I should do in the arms of a
polar bear.  Do you feel queer, Harry?"

"A little," replied Harry, in a low whisper; "and yet I'm not
frightened.  I can scarcely tell what I feel, but I'm certain it's not
fear."

"Well, I don't know," said Charley.  "When father's black bull chased
Kate and me in the prairies, and almost overtook us as we ran for the
fence of the big field, I felt my heart leap to my mouth, and the blood
rush to my cheeks, as I turned about and faced him, while Kate climbed
the fence; but after she was over, I felt a wild sort of wickedness in
me, as if I should like to tantalise and torment him,--and I felt
altogether different from what I feel now while I look up at these black
clouds.  Isn't there something quite awful in them, Harry?"

Ere Harry replied, a bright flash of lightning shot athwart the sky,
followed by a loud roar of thunder, and in a moment the wind rushed,
like a fiend set suddenly free, down upon the boats, tearing up the
smooth surface of the water as it flew, and cutting it into gleaming
white streaks.  Fortunately the storm came down behind the boats, so
that, after the first wild burst was over, they hoisted a small portion
of their lug sails, and scudded rapidly before it.

There was still a considerable portion of the traverse to cross, and the
guide cast an anxious glance over his shoulder occasionally, as the dark
waves began to rise, and their crests were cut into white foam by the
increasing gale.  Thunder roared in continued, successive peals, as if
the heavens were breaking up, while rain descended in sheets.  For a
time the crews continued to ply their oars; but as the wind increased,
these were rendered superfluous.  They were taken in, therefore, and the
men sought partial shelter under the tarpaulin; while Mr Park and the
two boys were covered, excepting their heads, by an oilcloth, which was
always kept at hand in rainy weather.

"What think you now, Louis?" said Mr Park, resuming the pipe which the
sudden outburst of the storm had caused him to forget.  "Have we seen
the worst of it?"

Louis replied abruptly in the negative, and in a few seconds shouted
loudly, "Look out, lads! here comes a squall.  Stand by to let go the
sheet there!"

Mike Brady, happening to be near the sheet, seized hold of the rope, and
prepared to let go; while the men rose, as if by instinct, and gazed
anxiously at the approaching squall, which could be seen in the distance
extending along the horizon, like a bar of blackest ink, spotted with
flakes of white.  The guide sat with compressed lips, and motionless as
a statue, guiding the boat as it bounded madly towards the land, which
was now not more than half a mile distant.

"Let go!" shouted the guide, in a voice that was heard loud and clear
above the roar of the elements.

"Ay, ay," replied the Irishman, untwisting the rope instantly, as with a
sharp hiss the squall descended on the boat.

At that moment the rope became entangled round one of the oars, and the
gale burst with all its fury on the distended sail, burying the prow in
the waves, which rushed inboard in a black volume, and in an instant
half filled the boat.

"Let go!" roared the guide again, in a voice of thunder; while Mike
struggled with awkward energy to disentangle the rope.

As he spoke, an Indian, who during the storm had been sitting beside the
mast, gazing at the boiling water with a grave, contemplative aspect,
sprang quickly forward, drew his knife, and with two blows (so rapidly
delivered that they seemed but one) cut asunder first the sheet and then
the halyards, which let the sail blow out and fall flat upon the boat.
He was just in time.  Another moment and the gushing water, which curled
over the bow, would have filled them to the gunwale.  As it was, the
little vessel was so full of water that she lay like a log, while every
toss of the waves sent an additional torrent into her.

"Bail for your lives, lads!" cried Mr Park, as he sprang forward, and,
seizing a tin dish, began energetically to bail out the water.
Following his example, the whole crew seized whatever came first to hand
in the shape of dish or kettle, and began to bail.  Charley and Harry
Somerville acted a vigorous part on this occasion--the one with a bark
dish (which had been originally made by the natives for the purpose of
holding maple-sugar), the other with his cap.

For a time it seemed doubtful whether the curling waves should send most
water _into_ the boat, or the crew should bail most out of it.  But the
latter soon prevailed, and in a few minutes it was so far got under that
three of the men were enabled to leave off bailing and reset the sail,
while Louis Peltier returned to his post at the helm.  At first the boat
moved but slowly, owing to the weight of water in her; but as this grew
gradually less, she increased her speed and neared the land.

"Well done, Redfeather," said Mr Park, addressing the Indian as he
resumed his seat; "your knife did us good service that time, my fine
fellow."

Redfeather, who was the only pure native in the brigade, acknowledged
the compliment with a smile.

"_Ah, oui_," said the guide, whose features had now lost their stern
expression.  "Them Injins are always ready enough with their knives.
It's not the first time my life has been saved by the knife of a
redskin."

"Humph! bad luck to them," muttered Mike Brady; "it's not the first time
that my windpipe has been pretty near spiflicated by the knives o' the
redskins, the murtherin' varmints!"

As Mike gave vent to this malediction, the boat ran swiftly past a low,
rocky point, over which the surf was breaking wildly.

"Down with the sail, Mike," cried the guide, at the same time putting
the helm hard up.  The beat flew round, obedient to the ruling power,
made one last plunge as it left the rolling surf behind, and slid gently
and smoothly into still water under the lee of the point.

Here, in the snug shelter of a little bay, two of the other boats were
found, with their prows already on the beach, and their crews actively
employed in landing their goods, opening bales that had received damage
from the water, and preparing the encampment; while ever and anon they
paused a moment, to watch the various boats as they flew before the
gale, and one by one doubled the friendly promontory.

If there is one thing that provokes a voyageur more than another, it is
being wind-bound on the shores of a large lake.  Rain or sleet, heat or
cold, icicles forming on the oars, or a broiling sun glaring in a
cloudless sky, the stings of sandflies, or the sharp probes of a million
mosquitoes, he will bear with comparative indifference; but being
detained by high wind for two, three, or four days together--lying
inactively on shore, when everything else, it may be, is favourable: the
sun bright, the sky blue, the air invigorating, and all but the wind
propitious--is more than his philosophy can carry him through with
equanimity.  He grumbles at it; sometimes makes believe to laugh at it;
very often, we are sorry to say, swears at it; does his best to sleep
through it; but whatever he does, he does with a bad grace, because he's
in a bad humour, and can't stand it.

For the next three days this was the fate of our friends.  Part of the
time it rained, when the whole party slept as much as was possible, and
then _endeavoured_ to sleep _more_ than was possible, under the shelter
afforded by the spreading branches of the trees.  Part of the time was
fair, with occasional gleams of sunshine, when the men turned out to eat
and smoke and gamble round the fires; and the two friends sauntered down
to a sheltered place on the shore, sunned themselves in a warm nook
among the rocks, while they gazed ruefully at the foaming billows, told
endless stories of what they had done in time past, and equally endless
_prospective_ adventures that they earnestly hoped should befall them in
time to come.

While they were thus engaged, Redfeather, the Indian who had cut the
ropes so opportunely during the storm, walked down to the shore, and
sitting down on a rock not far distant, fell apparently into a reverie.

"I like that fellow," said Harry, pointing to the Indian.

"So do I.  He's a sharp, active man.  Had it not been for him we should
have had to swim for it."

"Indeed, had it not been for him I should have had to sink for it," said
Harry, with a smile, "for I can't swim."

"Ah, true, I forgot that.  I wonder what the redskin, as the guide calls
him, is thinking about," added Charley, in a musing tone.

"Of home, perhaps, `sweet home,'" said Harry, with a sigh.  "Do you
think much of home, Charley, now that you have left it?"

Charley did not reply for a few seconds; he seemed to muse over the
question.

At last he said slowly--

"Think of home?  I think of little else when I am not talking with you,
Harry.  My dear mother is always in my thoughts, and my poor old father.
Home? ay; and darling Kate, too, is at my elbow night and day, with the
tears streaming from her eyes, and her ringlets scattered over my
shoulder, as I saw her the day we parted, beckoning me back again, or
reproaching me for having gone away--God bless her!  Yes, I often, very
often, think of home, Harry."

Harry made no reply.  His friend's words had directed his thoughts to a
very different and far-distant scene--to another Kate, and another
father and mother, who lived in a glen far away over the waters of the
broad Atlantic.  He thought of them as they used to be when he was one
of the number, a unit in the beloved circle, whose absence would have
caused a blank there.  He thought of the kind voice that used to read
the Word of God, and the tender kiss of his mother as they parted for
the night.  He thought of the dreary day when he left them all behind,
and sailed away, in the midst of strangers, across the wide ocean to a
strange land.  He thought of them now--_without_ him--accustomed to his
absence, and forgetful, perhaps, at times that he had once been there.
As he thought of all this a tear rolled down his cheek, and when Charley
looked up in his face, that tear-drop told plainly that he too thought
sometimes of home.

"Let us ask Redfeather to tell us something about the Indians," he said
at length, rousing himself.  "I have no doubt he has had many adventures
in his life.  Shall we, Charley?"

"By all means.--Ho, Redfeather! are you trying to stop the wind by
looking it out of countenance?"

The Indian rose, and walked towards the spot where the boys lay.

"What was Redfeather thinking about?" said Charley, adopting the
somewhat pompous style of speech occasionally used by Indians.  "Was he
thinking of the white swan and his little ones in the prairie; or did he
dream of giving his enemies a good licking the next time he meets them?"

"Redfeather has no enemies," replied the Indian.  "He was thinking of
the great Manito, [God] who made the wild winds, and the great lakes,
and the forest."

"And pray, good Redfeather, what did your thoughts tell you?"

"They told me that men are very weak, and very foolish, and wicked; and
that Manito is very good and patient to let them live."

"That is to say," cried Harry, who was surprised and a little nettled to
hear what he called the heads of a sermon from a redskin, "that _you_,
being a man, are very weak, and very foolish, and wicked; and that
Manito is very good and patient to let _you_ live?"

"Good," said the Indian calmly; "that is what I mean."

"Come, Redfeather," said Charley, laying his hand on the Indian's arm,
"sit down beside us, and tell us some of your adventures.  I know that
you must have had plenty, and it's quite clear that we're not to get
away from this place all day, so you've nothing better to do."

The Indian readily assented, and began his story in English.

Redfeather was one of the very few Indians who had acquired the power of
speaking the English language.  Having been, while a youth, brought much
into contact with the fur-traders, and having been induced by them to
enter their service for a time, he had picked up enough of English to
make himself easily understood.  Being engaged at a later period of life
as guide to one of the exploring parties sent out by the British
Government to discover the famous North-west Passage, he had learned to
read and write, and had become so much accustomed to the habits and
occupations of the "palefaces," that he spent more of his time, in one
way or another, with them than in the society of his tribe, which dwelt
in the thick woods bordering on one of the great prairies of the
interior.  He was about thirty years of age; had a tall, thin, but wiry
and powerful frame; and was of a mild, retiring disposition.  His face
wore a habitually grave expression, verging towards melancholy; induced,
probably, by the vicissitudes of a wild life (in which he had seen much
of the rugged side of nature in men and things) acting upon a sensitive
heart and a naturally warm temperament.  Redfeather, however, was by no
means morose; and when seated along with his Canadian comrades round the
camp fire, he listened with evidently genuine interest to their stories,
and entered into the spirit of their jests.  But he was always an
auditor, and rarely took part in their conversations.  He was frequently
consulted by the guide in matters of difficulty, and it was observed
that the "redskin's" opinion always carried much weight with it,
although it was seldom given unless asked for.  The men respected him
much because he was a hard worker, obliging, and modest--three qualities
that ensure respect, whether found under a red skin or a white one.

"I shall tell you," he began, in a soft, musing tone, as if he were
wandering in memories of the past--"I shall tell you how it was that I
came by the name of Redfeather."

"Au!" interrupted Charley, "I intended to ask you about that; you don't
wear one."

"I did once.  My father was a great warrior in his tribe," continued the
Indian; "and I was but a youth when I got the name.

"My tribe was at war at the time with the Chipewyans, and one of our
scouts having come in with the intelligence that a party of our enemies
was in the neighbourhood, our warriors armed themselves to go in pursuit
of them.  I had been out once before with a war-party, but had not been
successful, as the enemy's scouts gave notice of our approach in time to
enable them to escape.  At the time the information was brought to us,
the young men of our village were amusing themselves with athletic
games, and loud challenges were being given and accepted to wrestle, or
race, or swim in the deep water of the river, which flowed calmly past
the green bank on which our wigwams stood.  On a bank near to us sat
about a dozen of our women--some employed in ornamenting moccasins with
coloured porcupine quills; others making rogans of bark for maple sugar,
or nursing their young infants; while a few, chiefly the old women,
grouped themselves together and kept up an incessant chattering, chiefly
with reference to the doings of the young men.

"Apart from these stood three or four of the principal men of our tribe,
smoking their pipes, and although apparently engrossed in conversation,
still evidently interested in what was going forward on the bank of the
river.

"Among the young men assembled there was one of about my own age, who
had taken a violent dislike to me because the most beautiful girl in all
the village preferred me before him.  His name was Misconna.  He was a
hot-tempered, cruel youth; and although I endeavoured as much as
possible to keep out of his way, he sought every opportunity of picking
a quarrel with me.  I had just been running a race along with several
other youths, and although not the winner, I had kept ahead of Misconna
all the distance.  He now stood leaning against a tree, burning with
rage and disappointment.  I was sorry for this, because I bore him no
ill-will, and if it had occurred to me at the time, I would have allowed
him to pass me, since I was unable to gain the race at any rate.

"`Dog!' he said at length, stepping forward and confronting me, `will
you wrestle?'

"Just as he approached I had turned round to leave the place.  Not
wishing to have more to do with him, I pretended not to hear, and made a
step or two towards the lodges.  `Dog!' he cried again, while his eyes
flashed fiercely, and he grasped me by the arm, `will you wrestle, or
are you afraid?  Has the brave boy's heart changed into that of a girl?'

"`No, Misconna,' said I.  `You _know_ that I am not afraid; but I have
no desire to quarrel with you.'

"`You lie!' cried he, with a cold sneer,--`you are afraid; and see,' he
added, pointing towards the women with a triumphant smile, `the
dark-eyed girl sees it and believes it too!'

"I turned to look, and there I saw Wabisca gazing on me with a look of
blank amazement.  I could see, also, that several of the other women,
and some of my companions, shared in her surprise.

"With a burst of anger I turned round.  `No, Misconna,' said I, `I am
_not_ afraid, as you shall find;' and springing upon him, I grasped him
round the body.  He was nearly, if not quite, as strong a youth as
myself; but I was burning with indignation at the insolence of his
conduct before so many of the women,--which gave me more than usual
energy.  For several minutes we swayed to and fro, each endeavouring in
vain to bend the other's back; but we were too well matched for this,
and sought to accomplish our purpose by taking advantage of an unguarded
movement.  At last such a movement occurred.  My adversary made a sudden
and violent attempt to throw me to the left, hoping that an inequality
in the ground would favour his effort.  But he was mistaken.  I had seen
the danger, and was prepared for it, so that the instant he attempted it
I threw forward my right leg, and thrust him backwards with all my
might.  Misconna was quick in his motions.  He saw my intention--too
late, indeed, to prevent it altogether, but in time to throw back his
left foot and stiffen his body till it felt like a block of stone.  The
effort was now entirely one of endurance.  We stood, each with his
muscles strained to the utmost, without the slightest motion.  At length
I felt my adversary give way a little.  Slight though the motion was, it
instantly removed all doubt as to who should go down.  My heart gave a
bound of exultation, and with the energy which such a feeling always
inspires, I put forth all my strength, threw him heavily over on his
back, and fell upon him.

"A shout of applause from my comrades greeted me as I rose and left the
ground; but at the same moment the attention of all was taken from
myself and the baffled Misconna by the arrival of the scout, bringing us
information that a party of Chipewyans were in the neighbourhood.  In a
moment all was bustle and preparation.  An Indian war-party is soon got
