all. Nobody would think of interfering, if he saw a party of
drunken sailors in an English port fighting with the constables. If
he did interfere, it ought to be on the side of the law. Why, then,
should anyone take the part of drunken sailors, in a foreign port,
against the guardians of the peace? To do so is an act of the
grossest folly.

"In the first place, the chances are in favour of getting your head
laid open with a sword cut. These fellows know they don't stand a
chance against Englishmen's fists, and they very soon whip out
their swords. In the second place, you would have to pass the night
in a crowded lockup, where you would be half smothered before
morning. And lastly, if you were lucky enough not to get a week's
confinement in jail, you would have a smart fine to pay.

"There is plenty of fighting to be done, in days like these; but
people should see that they fight on the right side, and not be
taking the part of every drunken scamp who gets into trouble,
simply because he happens to be an Englishman.

"You showed plenty of pluck, lad, when the balls were flying about
the other day; and when I see your uncle, I am sure he will be
pleased when I tell him how well you behaved, under fire; but I am
equally certain he would not have been, by any means, gratified at
hearing that I had had to leave you behind at Lisbon, either with a
broken head or in prison, through getting into a street row, in
which you had no possible concern, between drunken sailors and the
Portuguese civil guards."

Bob saw that the captain was perfectly right, and said so, frankly.

"I see I should have been a fool, indeed, if I had got into the
row, captain; and I shall remember what you say, in future. Still,
you know, I didn't get into it."

"No, I give you credit for that, lad; but you acknowledge your
strong impulse to do so. Now, in future you had better have an
impulse just the other way and, when you find yourself in the midst
of a row in which you have no personal concern, let your first
thought be how to get out of it, as quickly as you can. I got into
more than one scrape, myself, when I was a young fellow, from the
conduct of messmates who had got too much liquor in them; but it
did them no good, and did me harm.

"So, take my advice: fight your own battles, but never interfere to
fight other people's, unless you are absolutely convinced that they
are in the right. If you are, stick by them as long as you have a
leg to stand upon."



Chapter 6: The Rock Fortress.


On the third day after her arrival at Lisbon, the Antelope's anchor
was hove up, and she dropped down the river. Half an hour later, a
barque and another brig came out and joined her; the three captains
having agreed, the day before, that they would sail in company, as
they were all bound through the Straits. Captain Lockett had
purchased two 14-pounder guns, at Lisbon; and the brig, therefore,
now carried three guns on each side, besides her long 18 pounder.
The barque carried fourteen guns, and the other brig ten; so that
they felt confident of being able to beat off any French privateer
they might meet, on the way.

One or two suspicious sails were sighted, as they ran down the
coast; but none of these approached within gunshot, the three craft
being, evidently, too strong to be meddled with. Rounding Cape St.
Vincent at a short distance, they steered for the mouth of the
Straits. After the bold cliffs of Portugal, Bob was disappointed
with the aspect of the Spanish coast.

"Ah! It is all very well," the first mate replied, when he
expressed his opinion. "Give me your low, sandy shores, and let
those who like have what you call the fine, bold rocks.

"Mind, I don't mean coasts with sandbanks lying off them; but a
coast with a shelving beach, and pretty deep water, right up to it.
If you get cast on a coast like that of Portugal, it is certain
death. Your ship will get smashed up like an eggshell, against
those rocks you are talking of, and not a soul gets a chance of
escape; while if you are blown on a flat coast, you may get carried
within a ship's length of the beach before you strike, and it is
hard if you can't get a line on shore; besides, it is ten to one
the ship won't break up, for hours.

"No, you may get a landsman to admire your bold cliffs, but you
won't get a sailor to agree with him."

"We seem to be going along fast, although there is not much wind."

"Yes, there is a strong current. You see, the rivers that fall into
the Mediterranean ain't sufficient to make up for the loss by
evaporation, and so there is always a current running in here. It
is well enough for us, going east; but it is not so pleasant, when
you want to come out. Then you have got to wait till you can get a
breeze, from somewhere about east, to carry you out. I have been
kept waiting, sometimes, for weeks; and it is no unusual thing to
see two or three hundred ships anchored, waiting for the wind to
change."

"Are there any pirates over on that side?" Bob asked, looking
across at the African coast.

"Not about here. Ceuta lies over there. They are good friends with
us, and Gibraltar gets most of its supplies from there. But once
through the Straits we give that coast a wide berth; for the
Algerine pirates are nearly as bad as ever, and would snap up any
ship becalmed on their coast, or that had the bad luck to be blown
ashore. I hope, some day, we shall send a fleet down, and blow the
place about their ears. It makes one's blood boil, to think that
there are hundreds and hundreds of Englishmen working, as slaves,
among the Moors.

"There, do you see that projecting point with a fort on it, and a
town lying behind? That is Tarifa. That used to be a great place,
in the time when the Moors were masters in Spain."

"Yes," the captain, who had just joined them, said. "Tarif was a
great Moorish commander, I have heard, and the place is named after
him. Gibraltar is also named after a Moorish chief, called Tarik
ibn Zeyad."

Bob looked surprised.

"I don't see that it is much like his name, captain."

"No, Master Repton, it doesn't sound much like it, now. The old
name of the place was Gebel Tarik, which means Tank's Hill; and it
is easy to see how Gebel Tarik got gradually changed into
Gibraltar."

In another two hours the Straits were passed, and the Rock of
Gibraltar appeared, rising across a bay to the left.

Illustration: View of Gibraltar from the Mediterranean.

View of Gibraltar from the Mediterranean.

"There is your destination, lad," the captain said. "It is a
strong-looking place, isn't it?"

"It is, indeed, Captain," Bob said, taking the captain's glass from
the top of the skylight, and examining the Rock.

"You see," the captain went on, "the Rock is divided from the
mainland by that low spit of sand. It is only a few hundred yards
wide, and the sea goes round at the back of the Rock, and along the
other side of that spit--though you can't see it from here--so
anything coming to attack it must advance along the spit, under the
fire of the guns.

"There, do you see that building, standing up on the hill above the
town? That is the old Moorish castle, and there are plenty of
modern batteries scattered about near it, though you can't see
them. You see, the Rock rises sheer up from the spit; and it is
only on this side, close to the water's edge, that the place can be
entered.

"The weak side of the place is along this sea face. On the other
side, the Rock rises right out of the water; but on this side, as
you see, it slopes gradually down. There are batteries, all along
by the water's edge; but if the place were attacked by a fleet
strong enough to knock those batteries to pieces, and silence their
guns, a landing could be effected.

"At the southern end you see the rocks are bolder, and there is no
landing there. That is called Europa Point, and there is a battery
there, though you can't make it out, from here."

The scene was a very pretty one, and Bob watched it with the
greatest interest. A frigate, and two men-of-war brigs, were
anchored at some little distance from the Rock; and around them
were some thirty or forty merchantmen, waiting for a change in the
wind to enable them to sail out through the Straits. White-sailed
boats were gliding about among them.

At the head of the bay were villages nestled among trees, while the
country behind was broken and hilly. On the opposite side of the
bay was a town of considerable size, which the captain told him was
Algeciras. It was, he said, a large town at the time of the Moors,
very much larger and more important than Gibraltar. The ground rose
gradually behind it, and was completely covered with foliage,
orchards, and orange groves.

The captain said:

"You see that rock rising at the end of the bay from among the
trees, lads. That is called 'the Queen of Spain's Chair.' It is
said that, at a certain siege when the Moors were here, the then
Queen of Spain took her seat on that rock, and declared she would
never go away till Gibraltar was taken. She also took an oath never
to change her linen, until it surrendered. I don't know how she
managed about it, at last, for the place never did surrender. I
suppose she got a dispensation, and was able to get into clean
clothes again, some day.

"I have heard tell that the Spaniards have a colour that is called
by her name--a sort of dirty yellow. It came out at that time. Of
course, it would not have been etiquette for other ladies to wear
white, when her majesty was obliged to wear dingy garments; so they
all took to having their things dyed, so as to match hers; and the
tint has borne her name, ever since."

"It is a very nasty idea," Bob said; "and I should think she took
pretty good care, afterwards, not to take any oaths. It is hot
enough, now; and I should think, in summer, it must be baking
here."

"It is pretty hot, on the Rock, in summer. You know, they call the
natives of the place Rock scorpions. Scorpions are supposed to like
heat, though I don't know whether they do. You generally find them
lying under pieces of loose rock; but whether they do it for heat,
or to keep themselves cool, I can't say.

"Now, Mr. Probert, you may as well take some of the sail off her.
We will anchor inside those craft, close to the New Mole. They may
want to get her alongside, to unload the government stores we have
brought out; and the nearer we are in, the less trouble it will be
to warp her alongside, tomorrow morning. Of course, if the landing
place is full, they will send lighters out to us."

Illustration: View of Gibraltar from the Bay.

View of Gibraltar from the Bay.

The sails were gradually got off the brig, and she had but little
way on when her anchor was dropped, a cable's length from the end
of the Mole. Scarcely had she brought up when a boat shot out from
the end of the pier.

"Hooray!" Bob shouted. "There are my sister, and Gerald."

"I thought as much," the captain said. "We hoisted our number, as
soon as we came round the point; and the signal station, on the top
of the Rock, would send down the news directly they made out our
colours."

"Well, Bob, it gave me quite a turn," his sister said, after the
first greetings were over, "when we saw how the sails were all
patched, and everyone said that the ship must have been in action.
I was very anxious, till I saw your head above the bulwarks."

"Yes, we have been in a storm, and a fight, and we came pretty near
being taken. Did you get out all right?"

"Yes, we had a very quiet voyage."

The captain then came up, and was introduced.

"I have a box or two for you, madam, in addition to your brother's
kit. Mr. Bale sent them down, a couple of days before we sailed.

"At one time, it didn't seem likely that you would ever see their
contents, for we had a very close shave of it. In the first place,
we had about as bad a gale as I have met with, in crossing the bay;
and were blown into the bight, with the loss of our bowsprit,
fore-topmast and four of our guns, that we had to throw overboard
to lighten her.

"Then a French lugger, that would have been a good deal more than a
match for her, at any time, came up. We might have out sailed her,
if we could have carried all our canvas; but with only a jury
topmast, she was too fast for us. As you may see by our sails, we
had a smart fight but, by the greatest good fortune, we knocked the
mainmast out of her.

"Then we were chased by a French frigate, with the lugger to help
her. However, we gave them the slip in the night, and here we are.

"I am afraid you won't get your brother's boxes, till tomorrow.
Nothing can go ashore till the port officer has been on board, and
the usual formalities gone through. I don't know, yet, whether we
shall discharge into lighters, or go alongside; but I will have
your boxes all put together, in readiness for you, the first thing
in the morning, whichever way it is."

"We shall be very glad if you will dine with us, tomorrow," Captain
O'Halloran said. "We dine at one o'clock or, if that would be
inconvenient for you, come to supper at seven."

"I would rather do that, if you will let me," Captain Lockett
replied. "I shall be pretty busy tomorrow, and you military
gentlemen do give us such a lot of trouble--in the way of papers,
documents, and signatures--that I never like leaving the ship, till
I get rid of the last bale and box with the government brand on
it."

"Very well, then; we shall expect you to supper."

"I shall come down first thing in the morning, captain," Bob said,
"so I need not say goodbye to anyone, now."

"You had better bring only what you may want with you for the
night, Bob," his sister put in, as he was about to run below. "The
cart will take everything else up, together, in the morning."

"Then I shall be ready in a minute," Bob said, running below; and
it was not much more before he reappeared, with a small handbag.

"I shall see you again tomorrow, Mr. Probert. I shall be here about
our luggage;" and he took his place in the boat beside the others,
who had already descended the ladder.

"And you have had a pleasant voyage, Bob?" Captain O'Halloran
asked.

"Very jolly, Gerald; first rate. Captain Lockett was as kind as
could be; and the first mate was very good, too, though I did not
think he would be, when I first saw him; and Joe Lockett, the
second mate, is a capital fellow."

"But how was it that you did not take that French privateer, Bob?
With a fellow like you on board--the capturer of a gang of
burglars, and all that sort of thing--I should have thought that,
instead of running away, you would have gone straight at her; that
you would have thrown yourself on her deck at the head of the
boarders, would have beaten the Frenchmen below, killed their
captain in single combat, and hauled down their flag."

"There is no saying what I might have done," Bob laughed, "if it
had come to boarding; but as it was, I did not feel the least wish
for a closer acquaintance with the privateer. It was too close to
be pleasant, as it was--a good deal too close. It is a pity you
were not there, to have set me an example."

"I am going to do that now, Bob, and I hope you will profit by it.

"Now then, you jump out first, and give Carrie your hand. That is
it."

And, having settled with the boatman, Captain O'Halloran followed
the others' steps. It was a busy scene. Three ships were
discharging their cargoes, and the wharf was covered with boxes and
bales, piles of shot and shell, guns, and cases of ammunition.
Fatigue parties of artillery and infantry men were piling the
goods, or stowing them in handcarts. Goods were being slung down
from the ships, and were swinging in the air, or run down to the
cry of "Look below!"

"Mind how you go, Carrie," Captain O'Halloran said, "or you will be
getting what brains you have knocked out."

"If that is all the danger, Gerald," she laughed, "you are safe,
anyhow.

"Now, Bob, do look out!" she broke off as, while glancing round, he
tripped over a hawser and fell. "Are you hurt?"

"Never mind him, Carrie--look out for yourself. A boy never gets
hurt.

"Now, keep your eyes about you, Bob. You can come and look at all
this, any day."

At last they got to the end of the Mole. Then they passed under an
archway, with a massive gate, at which stood a sentry; then they
found themselves in a sort of yard, surrounded by a high wall, on
the top of which two cannon were pointed down upon them. Crossing
the yard, they passed through another gateway. The ground here rose
sharply, and a hundred yards further back stood another battery;
completely commanding the Mole, and the defences through which they
had passed.

The ground here was comparatively level, rising gradually to the
foot of the rock, which then rose steeply up. A few houses were
scattered about, surrounded by gardens. Hedges of cactus lined the
road. Parties of soldiers and sailors, natives with carts, and
women in picturesque costumes passed along. The vegetation on the
low ground was abundant, and Bob looked with delight at the
semi-tropical foliage.

Turning to the right they followed the road, passed under an
archway in a strong wall, and were in the town, itself.

"We are not living in barracks," Carrie said. "Fortunately there
was no room there, and we draw lodging allowance, and have taken
the upper portion of a Spanish house. It is much more pleasant.
Besides, if we had had to live in quarters, we should have had no
room for you."

"The streets are steep," Bob said. "I can't make out how these
little donkeys keep their feet on the slippery stones, with those
heavy loads.

"Oh! I say, there are two rum-looking chaps. What are they--Moors?"

"Yes. You will see lots of them here, Bob. They come across from
Ceuta, and there are some of them established here, as traders.
What with the Moors, and Spaniards, and Jews, and the sailors from
the shipping, you can hear pretty nearly every European language
spoken, in one walk through the streets."

"Oh, I say, isn't this hot?" Bob exclaimed, mopping his face; "and
isn't there a glare from all these white walls, and houses! How
much higher is it?"

"About another hundred yards, Bob. There, you see, we are getting
beyond the streets now."

They had now reached a flat shoulder; and on this the houses were
somewhat scattered, standing in little inclosures, with hedges of
cactus and geranium, and embowered in shrubs and flowers.

"This is our house," Carrie said, stopping before a rickety wooden
gateway, hung upon two massive posts of masonry. "You see, we have
got a flight of steps outside, and we are quite cut off from the
people below."

They ascended the stairs. At the top there was a sort of wide
porch, with a wooden roof; which was completely covered with
creepers, growing from two wooden tubs. Four or five plants,
covered with blossoms, stood on the low walls; and two or three
chairs showed that the little terrace was used as an open-air
sitting room.

"In another hour, when the sun gets lower, Bob, we can come and sit
here. It is a lovely view, isn't it?"

"Beautiful!" Bob said, leaning on the wall.

Below them lay the sea front, with its gardens and bright foliage
and pretty houses, with Europa Point and the sea stretching away
beyond it. A little to the right were the African hills; and then,
turning slightly round, the Spanish coast, with Algeciras nestled
in foliage, and the bay with all its shipping. The head of the bay
was hidden, for the ground behind was higher than that on which the
house stood.

"Come in, Bob," Captain O'Halloran said. "You had better get out of
the sun. Of course, it is nothing to what it will be; but it is hot
now, and we are none of us acclimatized, yet."

The rooms were of a fair size, but the light-coloured walls gave
them a bare appearance, to Bob's eyes. They were, however,
comfortably furnished, matting being laid down instead of carpets.

"It is cooler, and cheaper," Carrie said, seeing Bob looking at
them.

"This is your room, and this is the kitchen," and she opened the
door into what seemed to Bob a tiny place, indeed.

Across one end was a mass of brickwork, rather higher than an
ordinary table. Several holes, a few inches deep, were scattered
about over this. In some of these small charcoal fires were
burning, and pots were placed over them. There were small openings
from the front, leading to these tiny fireplaces; and a Spanish
girl was driving the air into one of these, with a fan, when they
entered.

"This is my brother, Manola," Mrs. O'Halloran said.

The girl smiled and nodded, and then continued her work.

"She speaks English?" Bob said, as they went out.

"She belongs to the Rock, Bob. Almost all the natives here talk a
little English."

"Where do these steps lead to? I thought we were at the top of the
house."

"Come up and see," Carrie said, leading the way.

Following her, Bob found himself on a flat terrace, extending over
the whole of the house. Several orange trees--in tubs--and many
flowers, and small shrubs in pots stood upon it; and three or four
light cane-work lounging chairs stood apart.

"Here is where we come when the sun is down, Bob. There is no finer
view, we flatter ourselves, anywhere in Gib. Here we receive our
guests, in the evening. We have only begun yet, but we mean to make
a perfect garden of it."

