
"`Come, come, boy,' said Sir Richard, gettin' redder in the face than I
ever before saw him, `I am not accustomed to low pleasantry, and--'

"`An' I ain't accustomed,' broke in the boy, `to 'igh hinsults.  Do you
think that every gent what years a coat an' pants with 'oles in 'em is a
beggar?'

"For some moments master seemed to be struck speechless, an' I feared
that in spite of his well-known gentleness of character he'd throw the
ink-stand at the boy's head, but he didn't; he merely said in a low
voice, `I would dismiss you at once, boy, were it not that I have
promised my daughter to offer you employment, and you can see by her
looks how much your unnatural conduct grieves her.'

"An' this was true, for poor Miss Di sat there with her hands clasped,
her eyes full of tears, her eyebrows disappearin' among her hair with
astonishment, and her whole appearance the very pictur' of distress.
`However,' continued Sir Richard, `I still make you the offer, though I
doubt much whether you will be able to retain the situation.  Your wages
will--'

"`Please sir,' pleaded the boy, `don't mention the wages.  I couldn't
stand that.  Indeed I couldn't; it would really be too much for me.'

"`Why, what do you mean?' says master.

"`I mean,' says Impudence, `that I agree with you.  I don't think I
_could_ retain the sitivation, cause w'y?  In the fust place, I ain't
got no talent at gardenin'.  The on'y time I tried it was w'en I planted
a toolip in a flower-pot, an' w'en I dug it up to see 'ow it was
a-gittin on a cove told me I'd planted it upside down.  However, I
wasn't goin' to be beat by that cove, so I say to 'im, Jack, I says, I
planted it so a purpus, an' w'en it sprouts I'm a-goin' to 'ang it up to
see if it won't grow through the 'ole in the bottom.  In the second
place, I couldn't retain the sitivation 'cause I don't intend to take
it, though you was to offer me six thousand no shillin's an' no pence no
farthin's a year as salary.'

"I r'ally did think master would ha' dropt out of his chair at that.  As
for Miss Di, she was so tickled that she gave a sort of hysterical
laugh.

"`Balls,' said master, `show him out, and--' he pulled up short, but I
knew he meant to say have an eye on the great-coats and umbrellas, so I
showed the boy out, an' he went down-stairs, quite quiet, but the last
thing I saw of him was performin' a sort of minstrel dance at the end of
the street just before he turned the corner and disappeared."

"Imp'rence!" exclaimed the cook.

"Naughty, ungrateful boy!" said Mrs Screwbury.

"But it was plucky of him," said Jessie Summers.

"I would call it cheeky," said Balls, "I can't think what put it into
his head to go on so."

If Mr Balls had followed Bobby Frog in spirit, watched his subsequent
movements, and listened to his remarks, perhaps he might have understood
the meaning of his conduct a little better.

After he had turned the corner of the street, as above mentioned, Bobby
trotted on for a short space, and then, coming to a full stop, executed
a few steps of the minstrel dance, at the end of which he brought his
foot down with tremendous emphasis on the pavement, and said--

"Yes, I've bin an' done it.  I know'd I was game for a good deal, but I
did _not_ think I was up to that.  One never knows wot 'e's fit for till
'e tries.  Wot'll Hetty think, I wonder?"

What Hetty thought he soon found out, for he overtook her on the Thames
embankment on her way home.  Bobby was fond of that route, though a
little out of his way, because he loved the running water, though it
_was_ muddy, and the sight of steamers and barges.

"Well, Bobby," she said, laying her hand on his shoulder, "where have
you been?"

"To see old Swallow'd-the-poker, Hetty."

"What took you there?" asked the girl in surprise.

"My legs.  You don't suppose I've set up my carriage yet, do you?"

"Come, you know what I mean."

"Vell, then, I went because I was sent for, an' wot d'ye think? the old
gen'l'man hoffered me the sitivation of under-gardener!"

"You don't say so!  Oh!  Bobby, what a lucky boy--an' what a kind
gentleman!  Tell me all about it now," said Hetty, pressing her hand
more tenderly on her brother's shoulder.  "What wages is he to give
you?"

"No wages wotsomever."

Hetty looked into her brother's face with an expression of concerned
surprise.  She knew some tradespeople who made her work hard for so very
little, that it was not difficult to believe in a gentleman asking her
brother to work for nothin'!  Still she had thought better of Sir
Richard, and expected to hear something more creditable to him.

"Ah, you may look, but I do assure you he is to give me no wages, an'
I'm to do no work."

Here Bobby executed a few steps of his favourite dance, but evidently
from mere habit, and unconsciously, for he left off in the middle, and
seemed to forget the salient point of emphasis with his foot.

"What _do_ you mean, Bobby?--be earnest, like a dear boy, for once."

"Earnest!" exclaimed the urchin with vehemence.  "I never was more in
earnest in my life.  You should 'ave seen Swallow'd-the-poker w'en I
refused to 'ave it."

"Refused it?"

"Ay--refused it.  Come Hetty, I'll explain."

The boy dropped his facetious tone and manner while he rapidly ran over
the chief points of his interview with Sir Richard.

"But why did you refuse so good an offer?" asked Hetty, still unable to
repress her surprise.

"Because of daddy."

"Daddy?"

"Ay, daddy.  You know he's fond o' me, is daddy, and, d'ye know, though
p'r'aps you mayn't believe it, I'm raither fond o' _him_; but 'e's a bad
'un, is daddy.  He's bent on mischief, you see, an' 'e's set his 'art on
my 'elpin' of 'im.  But I _wont_ 'elp 'im--that's flat.  Now, what d'ye
think, Hetty," (here he dropped his voice to almost a whisper and looked
solemn), "dad wants to make use o' me to commit a burglary on
Swallow'd-the-poker's 'ouse."

"You don't mean it, Bobby!"

"But I do, Hetty.  Dad found out from that rediklous butler that goes
veepin' around our court like a leeky pump, that the old gen'l'man was
goin' to hoffer me this sitivation, an 'e's bin wery 'ard on me to
accept it, so that I may find out the ways o' the 'ouse where the plate
an' waluables lay, let 'im in some fine dark night an' 'elp 'im to carry
off the swag."

A distressed expression marked poor Hetty's reception of this news, but
she said never a word.

"Now you won't tell, Hetty?" said the boy with a look of real anxiety on
his face.  "It's not so much his killin' me I cares about, but I
wouldn't bring daddy to grief for any money.  I'd raither 'elp 'im than
that.  You'll not say a word to nobody?"

"No, Bobby, I won't say a word."

"Vell, you see," continued the boy, "ven I'd made myself so disagreeable
that the old gen'l'man would 'ave nothin' to do with me, I came straight
away, an' 'ere I am; but it _was_ a trial, let me tell you, specially
ven 'e come to mention wages--an sitch a 'eavenly smell o' roasted
wittles come up from the kitchen too at the moment, but I 'ad only to
look at Miss Di, to make me as stubborn as a nox or a hass.  `Wot!'
thinks I to myself, `betray that hangel--no, never!' yet if I was to go
into that 'ouse I know I'd do it, for daddy's got sitch a wheedlin' way
with 'im w'en 'e likes, that I couldn't 'old hout long--so I giv' old
Swallowed-the-poker sitch a lot o' cheek that I thought 'e'd kick me
right through the winder.  He was considerable astonished as well as
riled, I can tell you, an' Miss Di's face was a pictur', but the old
butler was the sight.  He'd got 'is face screwed up into sitch a state
o' surprise that it looked like a eight-day clock with a gamboil.  Now,
Hetty, I'm goin' to tell 'ee what'll take your breath away.  I've made
up my mind to go to Canada!"

Hetty did, on hearing this, look as if her breath had been taken away.
When it returned sufficiently she said:

"Bobby, what put that into your head?"

"The 'Ome of Hindustry," said Bobby with a mysterious look.

"The Home of Industry," repeated the girl in surprise, for she knew that
Institution well, having frequently assisted its workers in their labour
of love.

"Yes, that's the name--'Ome of Hindustry, what sends off so many ragged
boys to Canada under Miss Macpherson."

"Ay, Bobby, it does a great deal more than that," returned the girl.
"Sending off poor boys and girls to Canada is only one branch of its
work.  If you'd bin to its tea-meetin's for the destitute, as I have,
an' its clothin' meetin's and its mothers' meetin's, an--"

"'Ow d'ye know I 'aven't bin at 'em all?" asked the boy with an impudent
look.

"Well, you know, you couldn't have been at the mothers' meetings,
Bobby."

"Oh! for the matter o' that, no more could you."

"True, but I've heard of them all many and many a time; but come, tell
me all about it.  How did you come to go near the Home of Industry at
all after refusing so often to go with me?"

"Vell, I didn't go because of bein' axed to go, you may be sure o' that,
but my little dosser, Tim Lumpy, you remember 'im?  The cove wi' the
nose like a button, an' no body to speak of--all legs an' arms, like a
'uman win'-mill; vell, you must know they've nabbed 'im, an' given 'im a
rig-out o' noo slops, an' they're goin' to send 'im to Canada.  So I
'appened to be down near the 'Ome one day three weeks past, an' I see
Lumpy a-goin' in.  `'Allo!' says I.  `'Allo!' says 'e; an' then 'e told
me all about it.  `Does they feed you well?'  I axed.  `Oh! don't they,
just!' said 'e.  `There's to be a blow hout this wery night,' said 'e.
`I wonder,' says I, `if they'd let me in, for I'm uncommon 'ungry, I
tell you; 'ad nuffin' to heat since last night.'  Just as I said that, a
lot o' fellers like me came tumblin' up to the door--so I sneaked in wi'
the rest--for I thought they'd kick me hout if they knowed I'd come
without inwitation."

"Well, and what then?" asked Hetty.

Here our little street-Arab began to tell, in his own peculiar language
and style, how that he went in, and found a number of ladies in an upper
room with forms set, and hot tea and bread to be had--as much as they
could stuff--for nothing; that the boys were very wild and unruly at
first, but that after the chief lady had prayed they became better, and
that when half-a-dozen nice little girls were brought in and had sung a
hymn or two they were quite quiet and ready to listen.  Like many other
people, this city Arab did not like to speak out freely, even to his
sister, on matters that touched his feelings deeply, but he said enough
to let the eager and thankful Hetty know that not only had Jesus and His
love been preached to the boys, but she perceived that what had been
said and sung had made an unusual impression, though the little ragged
waif sought to conceal it under the veil of cool pleasantry, and she now
recognised the fact that the prayers which she had been putting up for
many a day in her brother's behalf had been answered.

"Oh!  I'm so happy," she said; and, unable to restrain herself, flung
her arms round Bobby's neck and kissed him.

It was evident that the little fellow rather liked this, though he
pretended that he did not.

"Come, old gal," he said brusquely, "none o' that sort o' thing.  I
can't stand it.  Don't you see, the popilation is lookin' at us in
surprise; besides, you've bin an' crushed all my shirt front!"

"But," continued Hetty, as they walked on again, "I'm not happy to hear
that you are goin' to Canada.  What ever will I do without you, Bobby?"

Poor girl, she could well afford to do without him in one sense, for he
had hitherto been chiefly an object of anxiety and expense to her,
though also an object of love.

"I'm sorry to think of goin' too, Hetty, for your sake an' mother's, but
for daddy's sake and my own I _must_ go.  You see, I can't 'old hout
agin 'im.  W'en 'e makes up 'is mind to a thing you know 'e sticks to
it, for 'e's a tough un; an' 'e's got sitch a wheedlin' sort o' way with
'im that I can't 'elp givin' in a'most.  So, you see, it'll be better
for both of us that I should go away.  But I'll come back, you know,
Hetty, with a fortin--see if I don't--an' then, oh! won't I keep a
carridge an' a ridin' 'oss for daddy, an' feed mother an' you on
plum-duff an' pork sassengers to breakfast, dinner, an' supper, with ice
cream for a relish!"

Poor Hetty did not even smile at this prospect of temporal felicity.
She felt that in the main the boy was right, and that the only chance he
had of escaping the toils in which her father was wrapping him by the
strange union of affection and villainy, was to leave the country.  She
knew, also, that, thanks to the Home of Industry and its promoters, the
sending of a ragged, friendless, penniless London waif, clothed and in
his right mind, to a new land of bright and hopeful prospects, was an
event brought within the bounds of possibility.

That night Bob Frog stood with his dosser, (i.e. his friend), Tim Lumpy,
discussing their future prospects in the partial privacy of a
railway-arch.  They talked long, and, for waifs, earnestly--both as to
the land they were about to quit and that to which they were going; and
the surprising fact might have been noted by a listener--had there been
any such present, save a homeless cat--that neither of the boys
perpetrated a joke for the space of at least ten minutes.

"Vy," observed little Frog at length, "you seem to 'ave got all the fun
drove out o' you, Lumpy."

"Not a bit on it," returned the other, with a hurt look, as though he
had been charged with some serious misdemeanour, "but it do seem sitch a
shabby thing to go an' forsake my blind old mother."

"But yer blind old mother wants you to go," said Bobby, "an' says she'll
be well looked arter by the ladies of the 'Ome, and that she wouldn't
stand in the way o' your prospec's.  Besides, she ain't yer mother!"

This was true.  Tim Lumpy had neither father nor mother, nor relative on
earth, and the old woman who, out of sheer pity, had taken him in and
allowed him to call her "_mother_," was a widow at the lowest possible
round of that social ladder, at the top of which--figuratively
speaking--sits Her Gracious Majesty the Queen.  Mrs Lumpy had found him
on her door-step, weeping and in rags, at the early age of five years.
She had taken him in, and fed him on part of a penny loaf which formed
the sole edible substance for her own breakfast.  She had mended his
rags to the extent of her ability, but she had not washed his face,
having no soap of her own, and not caring to borrow from neighbours who
were in the same destitute condition.  Besides, she had too hard a
battle to fight with an ever-present and pressing foe, to care much
about dirt, and no doubt deemed a wash of tears now and then sufficient.
Lumpy himself seemed to agree with her as to this, for he washed
himself in that fashion frequently.

Having sought for his parents in vain, with the aid of the police, Mrs
Lumpy quietly kept the boy on; gave him her surname, prefixed that of
Timothy, answered to the call of mother, and then left him to do very
much as he pleased.

In these circumstances, it was not surprising that little Tim soon grew
to be one of the pests of his alley.  Tim was a weak-eyed boy, and
remarkably thin, being, as his friend had said, composed chiefly of legs
and arms.  There must have been a good deal of brain also, for he was
keen-witted, as people soon began to find out to their cost.  Tim was
observant also.  He observed, on nearing the age of ten years, that in
the great river of life which daily flowed past him, there were certain
faces which indicated tender and kindly hearts, coupled with defective
brain-action, and a good deal of self-will.  He became painfully shrewd
in reading such faces, and, on wet days, would present himself to them
with his bare little red feet and half-naked body, rain water, (doing
duty for tears), running from his weak bloodshot eyes, and falsehoods of
the most pitiable, complex, and impudent character pouring from his thin
blue lips, whilst awful solemnity seemed to shine on his visage.  The
certain result was--coppers!

These kindly ones have, unwittingly of course, changed a text of
Scripture, and, for the words "_consider_ the poor," read "throw coppers
to the poor!"  You see, it is much easier to relieve one's feelings by
giving away a few pence, than to take the trouble of visiting, inquiring
about, and otherwise _considering_, the poor!  At all events it would
seem so, for Tim began to grow comparatively rich, and corrupted, still
more deeply, associates who were already buried sufficiently in the
depths of corruption.

At last little Tim was met by a lady who had befriended him more than
once, and who asked him why he preferred begging in the streets to going
to the ragged school, where he would get not only food for the body, but
for the soul.  He replied that he was hungry, and his mother had no
victuals to give him, so he had gone out to beg.  The lady went straight
to Mrs Lumpy, found the story to be true, and that the poor half-blind
old woman was quite unable to support the boy and herself.  The lady
prevailed on the old woman to attend the meetings for poor, aged, and
infirm women in Miss Macpherson's "Beehive," and little Tim was taken
into the "Home for Destitute Little Boys under ten years of age."

It was not all smooth sailing in that Home after Tim Lumpy entered it!
Being utterly untamed, Tim had many a sore struggle ere the temper was
brought under control.  One day he was so bad that the governess was
obliged to punish him by leaving him behind, while the other boys went
out for a walk.  When left alone, the lady-superintendent tried to
converse with him about obedience, but he became frightfully violent,
and demanded his rags that he might return again to the streets.
Finally he escaped, rushed to his old home in a paroxysm of rage, and
then, getting on the roof, declared to the assembled neighbours that he
would throw himself down and dash out his brains.  In this state a
Bible-woman found him.  After offering the mental prayer, "Lord, help
me," she entreated him to come down and join her in a cup of tea with
his old mother.  The invitation perhaps struck the little rebel as
having a touch of humour in it.  At all events he accepted it and
forthwith descended.

Over the tea, the Bible-woman prayed aloud for him, and the poor boy
broke down, burst into tears, and begged forgiveness.  Soon afterwards
he was heard tapping at the door of the Home--gentle and subdued.

Thus was this waif rescued, and he now discussed with his former comrade
the prospect of transferring themselves and their powers, mental and
physical, to Canada.  Diverging from this subject to Bobby's father, and
his dark designs, Tim asked if Ned Frog had absolutely decided to break
into Sir Richard Brandon's house, and Bobby replied that he had; that
