Peter went off to the stables in hot haste, remarking as he ran--

"_What_ a hyperkrite I is, to be sure!"



CHAPTER NINE.

HESTER INTRODUCED TO A NEW HOME AND NEW FRIENDS UNDER PECULIAR
CIRCUMSTANCES, AND A NEW NAME.

Long before their flight was discovered Hester Sommers and Dinah had
penetrated into a dense thicket, where the negress proceeded to produce
a wonderful metamorphosis.

"Now, my dear," she said, hastily undoing a large bundle which she
carried, while Hester, panting and terrified, sat down on the grass
beside her, "don't you be frighted.  I's your fri'nd.  I's Dinah, de
sister ob Peter de Great, an' de fri'nd also ob Geo'ge.  So you make
your mind easy."

"My mind is quite easy," said Hester; "and even if you were not Peter's
sister, I'd trust you, because of the tone of your kind voice.  But who
is Geo'ge?"

Dinah opened her eyes very wide at this question, for Peter had already
enlightened her mind a little as to the middy's feelings towards Hester.

"You not know Geo'ge?" she asked.

"Never heard of him before, Dinah."

"Geo'ge Foster?"

"Oh, I understand!  It was your way of pronouncing his name that puzzled
me," returned the girl, with a faint smile.  "I'm glad you are his
friend, too, poor fellow!"

"Well, you _is_ a babby!" exclaimed Dinah, who had been mixing up what
appeared to be black paint in a wooden bowl.  "Now, look yar, don't you
be frighted.  It's a matter ob life an' deaf, you know, but _I's_ your
fri'nd!  Jest you do zackly what I tells you."

"Yes, Dinah," said Hester, alarmed, notwithstanding, by the earnestness
and solemnity of her new friend, "what am I to do?"

"You come yar, an' don't moob whateber I does to you.  Dere, I's goin'
to make you a nigger!"

She applied a large brush to Hester's forehead, and drew it thence down
her left cheek, under her chin, up the right cheek, and back to the
starting point, thus producing a black band or circle two inches broad.

"Now shut your bootiful eyes," she said, and proceeded to fill up the
circle.

In a quarter of an hour Hester was as black as the ace of spades--neck,
hands, and arms, as well as face--her fair hair was effectually covered
and concealed by a cotton kerchief, and then her dress was changed for
the characteristic costume of negro women.

"Now your own mudder wouldn't know you," said Dinah, stepping back to
survey her work, and, strange to say, putting her black head quite
artistically a little on one side.  "You's a'most as good-lookin' as
myself--if you was on'y a little fatter.  Now, mind, you's a dumb gal!
Can't speak a word.  Don't forgit dat.  An' your name's Geo'giana.  Come
along."

Leaving her fine clothes concealed in a deep hole, Hester followed her
companion as fast as she could.  On returning to the road Dinah took her
friend by the hand and helped her to run for a considerable distance.
Then they walked, and then ran again, until poor Hester was almost
exhausted.

Resuming their walk after a short rest, they gained the main road and
met with several people, who paid no attention to them whatever, much to
Hester's relief, for she had made sure of being detected.  At last they
reached the city gate, which was still open, as the sun had not yet set.
Passing through unchallenged, Dinah at once dived into a maze of narrow
streets, and, for the first time since starting, felt comparatively
safe.

Fortunately for the success of their enterprise, the negress costume
fitted loosely, so that the elegance of Hester's form was not revealed,
and her exhaustion helped to damage the grace of her carriage!

"Now, dearie, you come in yar an' rest a bit," said Dinah, turning into
a dark cellar-like hole, from which issued both sounds and smells that
were not agreeable.  It was the abode of one of Dinah's friends--also a
negress--who received her with effusive goodwill.

Retiring to the coal-hole--or some such dark receptacle--Dinah held her
friend in conversation for about a quarter of an hour, during which time
several hearty Ethiopian chuckles were heard to burst forth.  Then,
returning to the cellar, Dinah introduced her friend to Hester as Missis
Lilly, and Hester to Missis Lilly as Miss Geo'giana.

Wondering why her friend had selected for her the name--if she
remembered rightly--of one of Blue Beard's wives, Hester bowed, and was
about to speak when Dinah put her flat nose close to hers and sternly
said, "Dumb."

"Moreober," she continued, "you mustn't bow like a lady, or you'll be
diskivered 'mediately.  You must bob.  Sally!"

This last word was shouted.  The instant effect was the abrupt stoppage
of one of the disagreeable sounds before referred to--a sound as of
pounding--and the appearance of a black girl who seemed to rise out of a
pit in the floor at the darkest end of the cellar.

"Sally, show dis yar stoopid gal how to bob."

The girl instantly broke off, so to speak, at the knees for a moment,
and then came straight again.

"Now, Geo'giana, you bob."

Hester entered into the spirit of the thing and broke off admirably,
whereat Dinah and Lilly threw back their heads and shook their sides
with laughter.  Sally so far joined them as to show all her teeth and
gums.  Otherwise she was expressionless.

"Now you come yar wid me into dis room," said Dinah, taking Hester's
hand and heading her along a passage which was so profoundly dark that
the very walls and floor were invisible.  Turning suddenly to the left,
Dinah advanced a few paces and stood still.

"You stop where you is, Geo'giana, till I gits a light.  Don't stir,"
she said, and left her.

A feeling of intense horror began to creep over the poor girl when she
was thus left alone in such a horrible place, and she began almost to
regret that she had forsaken the comfortable home of the Moor, and to
blame herself for ingratitude.  In her agony she was about to call aloud
to her negro friend not to forsake her, when the words, "Call upon Me in
the time of trouble," occurred to her, and, falling on her knees, she
cast herself upon God.

She was not kept waiting long.  Only a minute or two had elapsed when
Dinah returned with a candle and revealed the fact that they stood in a
small low-roofed room, the brick floor of which was partially covered
with casks, packing-cases, and general lumber.

"Dis am to be your room, Geo'giana," said her friend, holding the candle
over her head and surveying the place with much satisfaction.

Poor Hester shuddered.

"It is an awful place," she said faintly.

"Yes, it am a awrful good place," said Dinah, with satisfaction.  "Not
easy to find you yar; an' if dey did git dis lengt' widout breakin' dere
legs, dere's a nice leetil hole yar what you could git in an' larf to
youself."

She led the poor girl to the other end of the room, where, in a recess,
there was a boarded part of the wall.  Removing one of the boards, she
disclosed an opening.

"Das a small hole, Geo'giana, but it's big enough to hold _you_, an'
when you's inside you've on'y got to pull de board into its place, and
fix it--so."

Setting down the candle, the woman stepped into the hole, and went
through the performance that would devolve upon Hester in case of
emergency.

"But why leave me here at all?" pleaded Hester, when Dinah had exhausted
her eulogy of the hiding-place.  "Why not take me to your own home?"

"Cause it's not so safe as dis," answered Dinah.  "P'r'aps in time you
may come dere--not now.  Moreober, Missis Lilly is a fuss-rate creetur,
most as good as myself, if her temper was a leetil more 'eavenly.  But
she's a winged serubim wid dem as don't rile 'er, an' she'll be awrful
good to you for my sake an' Peter's.  You see, we was all on us took by
the pints at de same time, and we're all Christ'ns but ob course we
don't say much about dat yar!"

"And am I to be always dumb--never to speak at all?" asked Hester, in a
rather melancholy tone.

"Oh! no--bress you!  It's on'y when you're in de front or outside dat
you's dumb.  When you's back yar you may speak to Lilly an' Sally much
as you like, on'y not too loud; an' keep your eyes open, an' your ears
sharp always.  If you don't it's lost you will be.  Don't forgit Osman!"

Hester shuddered again; said that she would _never_ forget Osman, and
would be as careful and attentive to orders as possible.

"An' dey'll gib you a little work to do--not much--on'y a little.  When
peepil speak to you, just point to your ears and mout', an' shake your
head.  Das enuff.  Dey won't boder you arter dat.  Now, dearie, I must
go.  I'll come an' see you sometimes--neber fear.  What's to become ob
you in de long-run's more'n I kin tell, for it's Peter de Great as'll
hab to settle dat kestion.  You's in his hands.  I knows not'ing, so
you'll hab to be patient."

Patient, indeed!  Little did that poor painted slave think what demands
would yet be made upon her patience.  Full two months elapsed before she
again saw Peter, or heard anything about Ben-Ahmed and her former
friends at Mustapha!

Meanwhile, Dinah having departed, she wisely set herself to make the
most of her new friends.

Mrs Lilly she soon found to be quite as amiable as Dinah had described
her.  She and Sally were slaves to the Moor who dwelt in the house which
formed the superstructure of their cellars; but, unlike white slaves,
they were allowed a good deal of personal liberty; first, because there
was no danger of their running away, as they had no place to run to;
second, because their master wanted them to buy and sell vegetables and
other things, in order that he might reap the profit; and, last,
because, being an easy-going man, the said master had no objection to
see slaves happy as long as their happiness did not interfere in any way
with his pleasure.

"Now, Geo'giana," said Mrs Lilly, in the course of their first
conversation, "my massa he neber come down yar, nor trouble his head
about us, as long's I take him a leetle money ebery day, an' nobody else
hab got a right to come, so you's pretty safe if dey don't send de
janissaries to make a sarch--an' if dey do, you know whar to go.  I'll
tell massa we make more money if I gits anoder slabe-gal, an' he'll
agree, for he agrees to eberyt'ing ob dat sort!  Den he'll forgit all
about it, an' den you an' Sally kin go about town what you like."

"But I fear, Mrs Lilly, that I won't be able to help you to make more
money," objected Hester timidly.

"Oh yes, you will.  You'll larn to 'broider de red an' blue slippers.
Das pay well when neatly done, an' I kin see by de shape ob your fingers
you do it neatly.  You's hungry now, I darsay, so go to work at your
grub, an' den I'll show you what to do."

Somewhat comforted by the kindly tone and motherly bearing of Mrs
Lilly, Hester went into one of the dark cellar-like rooms of the
interior of her new home, and found it to be a sort of kitchen, which
borrowed its light from the outer room by means of a convenient wall
that was white-washed for the purpose of transmitting it.  This
reflector was not an eminent success, but it rendered darkness visible.
At the time we write of, however, the sun having set, the kitchen was
lighted by a smoky oil-lamp of classic form and dimness.  Here she found
Sally busy with her evening meal.

Sally was apparently about as little of a human being as was consistent
with the possession of a human form and the power of speech.  Most of
her qualities seemed to be negative--if we may say so.  She was
obviously not unamiable; she was not unkind; and she was not sulky,
though very silent.  In fact, she seemed to be the nearest possible
approach to a human nonentity.  She may be described as a black
maid-of-all-work, but her chief occupation was the pounding of roasted
coffee-beans.  This operation she performed in the pit in the floor
before mentioned, which may be described as a hole, into which you
descended by four steps from the front room.  As the front room itself
was below the level of the street, it follows that the "pit" penetrated
considerably deeper into the bowels of the earth.  In this pit Sally
laboured hard, almost day and night, pounding the coffee-beans in an
iron mortar, with an iron pestle so heavy that she had to stand up and
use it with both hands.  She had got into the habit of relieving herself
by an audible gasp each time she drove the pestle down.  It was not a
necessary gasp, only a remonstrative one, as it were, and conveyed more
to the intelligent listener than most of the girl's average conversation
did.  This gasp was also one of the disagreeable sounds which had
saluted the ears of Hester on her first entrance into the new home.

"Mrs Lilly is very kind," said Hester, as she sat down at a small table
beside her fellow-slave.

Sally stopped eating for a moment and stared.  Supposing that she had
not understood the remark, Hester repeated it.

"Yes," assented Sally, and then stopped the vocal orifice with a huge
wooden spoonful of rice.

Judging that her companion wished to eat in undisturbed silence, Hester
helped herself to some rice, and quietly began supper.  Sally eyed her
all the time, but was too busy feeding herself to indulge in speech.  At
last she put down her spoon with a sigh of satisfaction, and said, "Das
good!" with such an air of honest sincerity that Hester gave way to an
irresistible laugh.

"Yes, it is very good indeed.  Did you cook it?" asked Hester, anxious
to atone for her impoliteness.

"Yes.  I cook 'im.  I do all de cookin' in dis yar ouse--an' most ob de
eatin' too."

"By the way, Sally, what is it that you keep pounding so constantly in
that--that hole off the front room?"

"Coffee," answered Sally, with a nod.

"Indeed!  Surely not the household coffee.  You cannot drink such a
quantity!"

Sally stared for a minute; then opened her mouth, shut her eyes, threw
back her head, and chuckled.

"No," she said, with sudden gravity; "if we drink'd it all we'd all
bu'st right off.  I pounds it, Missis Lilly sells it, an' massa pockets
de money."

"Do you pound much?" asked Hester, in a tone of sympathy.

"Oh! housefuls," said Sally, opening her eyes wide.  "'Gin at daylight--
work till dark, 'cept when doin' oder t'ings.  De Moors drink it.
Awrful drinkers am de Moors.  Mornin', noon, an' night dey swill leetle
cups ob coffee.  Das de reason dey's all so brown."

"Indeed?  I never heard before that the brown-ness of their complexion
was owing to that.  Are you sure?"

"Oh yes; kite sure.  Coffee comes troo de skin--das it," returned Sally,
with perfect confidence of tone and manner.

Suddenly she was smitten with a new idea, and stared for some time at
her fellow-slave.  At last she got it out.

"Missis Lilly say dat you's dumb.  How kin you speak so well if you's
dumb?"

Poor Hester was greatly perplexed.  She did not know how far her
companion had been let into the secret reason of her being there, and
was afraid to answer.  At last she made up her mind.

"I am not really dumb, you know; I have only to be dumb when in the
street, or when any visitor is in the house here; but when alone with
Mrs Lilly or you I am allowed to speak low."

A gleam of intelligence beamed on the black girl's face as she said,
"No, you's not dumb.  Moreober, you's not black!"

"Oh, Sally!" exclaimed Hester, in quite a frightened tone; "how did you
find that out?"

"Hasn't I got eyes an' ears?" demanded Sally.  "Your voice ain't nigger,
your 'plexion ain't nigger, an' your mout' an' nose ain't nigger.  Does
you t'ink Sally's an ass?"

"No, indeed, I am sure you are not; but--but, you--you won't betray me,
Sally?"

"Whas dat?"

"You won't tell upon me?  Oh, you can't think what dreadful punishment I
shall get if I am found out!  You won't tell on me, _dear_ Sally--won't
you not?" entreated Hester, with tears in her eyes.

"Dere, stop dat!  Don't cry!  Das wuss dan speakin', for de tearz'll
wash all de black off your face!  Tell on you?  Dee see dat?"

Hester certainly did see "dat," for Sally had suddenly protruded we fear
to say how many inches of red flesh from her mouth.

"I cut dat off wid de carvin'-knife sooner dan tell on you, for you's my
fri'nd, because Peter de Great am your fri'nd.  But you muss be dumb--
dumb as you kin, anyhow--an' you mus' neber--neber cry!"

The earnestness of this remark caused Hester to laugh even when on the
verge of weeping, so she grasped Sally's hand and shook it warmly, thus
cementing the friendship which had so auspiciously begun.

After the meal Mrs Lilly took her lodger into the front room and gave
her embroidery work to do.  She found it by no means difficult, having
learned something like it during her residence with Ben-Ahmed's
