success.  Either circumstances were against him, or his heart had failed
him at the push.  He walked up and down the deck with uncertain steps,
sat down and rose up frequently, and growled a good deal--all of which
symptoms were put down by Stanley to the fact that there was no wind.

At last Morley stopped in front of his passenger and said to him--

"I really think you'd better go below and have a nap, Mr Hall.  It's
quite clear that we are not goin' to have a breeze till night, and it
may be early morning when we call you to go ashore; so, if you want to
be fit for much work to-morrow, you'd better sleep while you may."

"Thank you, I don't require much sleep," replied Stanley; "in fact, I
can easily do without rest at any time for a single night, and be quite
able for work next day.  Besides, I have no particular work to do
to-morrow, and I delight to sit at this time of the night and watch the
shipping.  I'm not in your way, am I?"

"Oh, not at all, not at all," replied the fish-merchant, as he resumed
his irregular walk.

This question was prompted by the urgency with which the advice to go
below had been given.

Seeing that nothing was to be made of his passenger in this way, Morley
Jones cast about in his mind to hit upon another expedient to get rid of
him, and reproached himself for having been tempted by a good fare to
let him have a passage.

Suddenly his eye was attracted by a dark object floating in the sea a
considerable distance to the southward of them.

"That's lucky," muttered Jones, after examining it carefully with the
glass, while a gleam of satisfaction shot across his dark countenance;
"could not have come in better time.  Nothing could be better."

Shutting up the glass with decision, he turned round, and the look of
satisfaction gave place to one of impatience as his eye fell on Stanley
Hall, who still sat with folded arms on the skylight, looking as
composed and serene as if he had taken up his quarters there for the
night.  After one or two hasty turns on the deck, an idea appeared to
hit Mr Jones, for he smiled in a grim fashion, and muttered, "I'll try
that, if the breeze would only come."

The breeze appeared to have been waiting for an invitation, for one or
two "cat's-paws" ruffled the surface of the sea as he spoke.

"Mind your helm, boy," said Mr Jones suddenly; "let her away a point;
so, steady.  Keep her as she goes; and, harkee" (he stooped down and
whispered), "_when I open the skylight_ do you call down, `breeze
freshenin', sir, and has shifted a point to the west'ard.'"

"By the way, Mr Hall," said Jones, turning abruptly to his passenger,
"you take so much interest in navigation that I should like to show you
a new chart I've got of the channels on this part of the coast.  Will
you step below?"

"With pleasure," replied Stanley, rising and following Jones, who
immediately spread out on the cabin table one of his most intricate
charts,--which, as he had expected, the young student began to examine
with much interest,--at the same time plying the other with numerous
questions.

"Stay," said Jones, "I'll open the skylight--don't you find the cabin
close?"

No sooner was the skylight opened than the small voice of Billy Towler
was heard shouting--

"Breeze freshenin', sir, and has shifted a pint to the west'ard."

"All right," replied Jones;--"excuse me, sir, I'll take a look at the
sheets and braces and see that all's fast--be back in a few minutes."

He went on deck, leaving Stanley busy with the chart.

"You're a smart boy, Billy.  Now do as I tell 'ee, and keep your weather
eye open.  D'ye see that bit o' floating wreck a-head?  Well, keep
straight for that and _run right against it_.  I'll trust to 'ee, boy,
that ye don't miss it."

Billy said that he would be careful, but resolved in his heart that he
_would_ miss it!

Jones then went aft to a locker near the stern, whence he returned with
a mallet and chisel, and went below.  Immediately thereafter Billy heard
the regular though slight blows of the mallet, and pursed his red lips
and screwed up his small visage into a complicated sign of intelligence.

There was very little wind, and the sloop made slow progress towards the
piece of wreck although it was very near, and Billy steered as far from
it as he could without absolutely altering the course.

Presently Jones returned on deck and replaced the mallet and chisel in
the locker.  He was very warm and wiped the perspiration frequently from
his forehead.  Observing that the sloop was not so near the wreck as he
had expected, he suddenly seized the small steersman by the neck and
shook him as a terrier dog shakes a rat.

"Billy," said he, quickly, in a low but stern voice, "it's of no use.  I
see what you are up to.  Your steerin' clear o' that won't prevent this
sloop from bein' at the bottom in quarter of an hour, if not sooner!  If
you hit it you may save yourself and me a world of trouble.  It's so
much for your own interest, boy, to hit that bit of wreck, _that I'll
trust you again_."

So saying, Jones went down into the cabin, apologised for having kept
Stanley waiting so long, said that he could not leave the boy at the
helm alone for more than a few minutes at a time, and that he would have
to return on deck immediately after he had made an entry on the log
slate.

Had any one watched Morley Jones while he was making that entry on the
log slate, he would have perceived that the strong man's hand trembled
excessively, that perspiration stood in beads upon his brow, and that
the entry itself consisted of a number of unmeaning and wavering
strokes.

Meanwhile Billy Towler, left in sole possession of the sloop, felt
himself in a most unenviable state of mind.  He knew that the crisis had
arrived, and the decisive tone of his tyrant's last remark convinced him
that it would be expedient for himself to obey orders.  On the other
hand, he remembered that he had deliberately resolved to throw off his
allegiance, and as he drew near the piece of wreck, he reflected that he
was at that moment assisting in an act which might cost the lives of all
on board.

Driven to and fro between doubts and fears, the poor boy kept changing
the course of the sloop in a way that would have soon rendered the
hitting of the wreck an impossibility, when a sudden and rather sharp
puff of wind caused the Nora to bend over, and the foam to curl on her
bow as she slipped swiftly through the water.  Billy decided at that
moment to _miss_ the wreck when he was close upon it, and for that
purpose deliberately and smartly put the helm hard a-starboard.

Poor fellow, his seamanship was not equal to his courage!  So badly did
he steer, that the very act which was meant to carry him past the wreck,
thrust him right upon it!

The shock, although a comparatively slight one, was sufficiently severe
to arouse the sleepers, to whom the unwonted sensation and sound carried
the idea of sudden disaster.  Jim and Grundy rushed on deck, where they
found Morley Jones already on the bulwarks with a boat-hook, shouting
for aid, while Stanley Hall assisted him with an oar to push the sloop
off what appeared to be the topmast and cross-trees of a vessel, with
which she was entangled.

Jim and Grundy each seized an oar, and, exerting their strength, they
were soon clear of the wreck.

"Well," observed Jim, wiping his brow with the sleeve of his coat, "it's
lucky it was but a light topmast and a light breeze, it can't have done
us any damage worth speaking of."

"I don't know that," said Jones.  "There are often iron bolts and sharp
points about such wreckage that don't require much force to drive 'em
through a ship's bottom.  Take a look into the hold, Jim, and see that
all's right."

Jim descended into the hold, but immediately returned, exclaiming
wildly--

"Why, the sloop's sinkin'!  Lend a hand here if you don't want to go
down with her," he cried, leaping towards the boat.

Stanley Hall and Grundy at once lent a hand to get out the boat, while
the fish-merchant, uttering a wild oath, jumped into the hold as if to
convince himself of the truth of Jim's statement.  He returned quickly,
exclaiming--

"She must have started a plank.  It's rushing in like a sluice.  Look
alive, lads; out with her!"

The boat was shoved outside the bulwarks, and let go by the run; the
oars were flung hastily in, and all jumped into her as quickly as
possible, for the deck of the Nora was already nearly on a level with
the water.  They were not a minute too soon.  They had not pulled fifty
yards from their late home when she gave a sudden lurch to port and went
down stern foremost.

To say that the party looked aghast at this sudden catastrophe, would be
to give but a feeble idea of the state of their minds.  For some minutes
they could do nothing but stare in silence at the few feet of the Nora's
topmast which alone remained above water as a sort of tombstone to mark
her ocean grave.

When they did at length break silence, it was in short interjectional
remarks, as they resumed the oars.

Mr Jones, without making a remark of any kind, shipped the rudder; the
other four pulled.

"Shall we make for land?" asked Jim Welton, after a time.

"Not wi' the tide running like this," answered Jones; "we'll make the
Gull, and get 'em to take us aboard till morning.  At slack tide we can
go ashore."

In perfect silence they rowed towards the floating light, which was not
more than a mile distant from the scene of the disaster.  As the ebb
tide was running strong, Jim hailed before they were close
alongside--"Gull, ahoy! heave us a rope, will you?"

There was instant bustle on board the floating light, and as the boat
came sweeping past a growl of surprise was heard to issue from the
mate's throat as he shouted, "Look out!"

A rope came whirling down on their heads, which was caught and held on
to by Jim.

"All right, father," he said, looking up.

"All wrong, I think," replied the sire, looking down.  "Why.  Jim, you
always turn up like a bad shilling, and in bad company too.  Where ever
have you come from this time?"

"From the sea, father.  Don't keep jawin' there, but help us aboard, and
you'll hear all about it."

By this time Jones had gained the deck, followed by Stanley Hall and
Billy.  These quickly gave a brief outline of the disaster, and were
hospitably received on board, while Jim and Grundy made fast the tackles
to their boat, and had it hoisted inboard.

"You won't require to pull ashore to-morrow," said the elder Mr Welton,
as he shook his son's hand.  "The tender will come off to us in the
morning, and no doubt the captain will take you all ashore."

"So much the better," observed Stanley, "because it seems to me that our
boat is worthy of the rotten sloop to which she belonged, and might fail
to reach the shore after all!"

"Her owner is rather fond of ships and boats that have got the rot,"
said Mr Welton, senior, looking with a somewhat stern expression at
Morley Jones, who was in the act of stooping to wring the water out of
the legs of his trousers.

"If he is," said Jones, with an equally stern glance at the mate, "he is
the only loser--at all events the chief one--by his fondness."

"You're right," retorted Mr Welton sharply; "the loss of a kit may be
replaced, but there are _some things_ which cannot be replaced when
lost.  However, you know your own affairs best.  Come below, friends,
and have something to eat and drink."

After the wrecked party had been hospitably entertained in the cabin
with biscuit and tea, they returned to the deck, and, breaking up into
small parties, walked about or leaned over the bulwarks in earnest
conversation.  Jack Shales and Jerry MacGowl took possession of Jim
Welton, and, hurrying him forward to the windlass, made him there
undergo a severe examination and cross-questioning as to how the sloop
Nora had met with her disaster.  These were soon joined by Billy Towler,
to whom the gay manner of Shales and the rich brogue of MacGowl were
irresistibly attractive.

Jim, however, proved to be much more reticent than his friends deemed
either necessary or agreeable.  After a prolonged process of pumping, to
which he submitted with much good humour and an apparent readiness to be
pumped quite dry, Jerry MacGowl exclaimed--

"Och, it ain't of no use trying to git no daiper.  Sure we've sounded
'im to the bottom, an' found nothin' at all but mud."

"Ay, he's about as incomprehensible as that famous poet you're for ever
givin' us screeds of.  What's 'is name--somebody's _son_?"

"Tenny's son, av coorse," replied Jerry; "but he ain't incomprehensible,
Jack; he's only too daip for a man of or'nary intellick.  His thoughts
is so awful profound sometimes that the longest deep-sea lead line as
ever was spun can't reach the bottom of 'em.  It's only such oncommon
philosophers as Dick Moy there, or a boardin'-school miss (for extremes
meet, you know, Jack), that can rightly make him out."

"Wot's that you're sayin' about Dick Moy?" inquired that worthy, who had
just joined the group at the windlass.

"He said you was a philosopher," answered Shales.  "You're another,"
growled Dick, bluntly, to MacGowl.

"Faix, that's true," replied Jerry; "there's two philosophers aboord of
this here light, an' the luminous power of our united intellicks is so
strong that I've had it in my mind more than wance to suggest that if
they wos to hoist you and me to the masthead together, the Gull would
git on first-rate without any lantern at all."

"Not a bad notion that," said Jack Shales.  "I'll mention it to the
superintendent to-morrow, when the tender comes alongside.  P'raps he'll
report you to the Trinity House as being willin' to serve in that way
without pay, for the sake of economy."

"No, not for economy, mate," objected Dick Moy.  "We can't afford to do
dooty as lights without increased pay.  Just think of the intellektooal
force required for to keep the lights agoin' night after night."

"Ay, and the amount of the doctor's bill," broke in MacGowl, "for curin'
the extra cowlds caught at the mast-head in thick weather."

"But we wouldn't go up in thick weather, stoopid," said Moy,--"wot ud be
the use?  Ain't the gong enough at sich times?"

"Och, to be sure.  Didn't I misremember that?  What a thing it is to be
ready-witted, now!  And since we are makin' sich radical changes in the
floating-light system, what would ye say, boys, to advise the Boord to
use the head of Jack Shales instead of a gong?  It would sound
splendiferous, for there ain't no more in it than an empty cask.  The
last gong they sint us down was cracked, you know, so I fancy that's
considered the right sort; and if so, Jack's head is cracked enough in
all conscience."

"I suppose, Jerry," said Shales, "if my head was appointed gong, you'd
like that your fist should git the situation of drumstick."

"Stop your chaffin', boys, and let's catch some birds for to-morrow's
dinner," said one of the men who had been listening to the conversation.
"There's an uncommon lot of 'em about to-night, an' it seems to me if
the fog increases we shall have more of 'em."

"Ho-o-o!

  "`Sich a gittin' up stairs, and
  A playin' on the fiddle,'"

Sang Jack Shales, as he sprang up the wire-rope ladder that led to the
lantern, round which innumerable small birds were flitting, as if
desirous of launching themselves bodily into the bright light.

"What is that fellow about?" inquired Stanley Hall of the mate, as the
two stood conversing near the binnacle.

"He's catching small birds, sir.  We often get a number in that way
here.  But they ain't so numerous about the Gull as I've seen them in
some of the other lightships.  You may find it difficult to believe, but
I do assure you, sir, that I have caught as many as five hundred birds
with my own hand in the course of two hours."

"Indeed! what sort of birds?"

"Larks and starlings chiefly, but there were other kinds amongst 'em.
Why, sir, they flew about my head and round the lantern like clouds of
snowflakes.  I was sittin' on the lantern just as Shales is sittin' now,
and the birds came so thick that I had to pull my sou'-wester down over
my eyes, and hold up my hands sometimes before my face to protect
