"For me?" said Mary, in blank astonishment.

It was indeed addressed to her, and contained a short note:


"The girl who was not afraid of six angry men is requested to accept
this silk dress, with the compliments of her admiring friends,

"SEVEN OLD MEN OF MERTONVILLE."


"Oh, but, Mrs. Murdoch," said Mary, in confusion, "I don't know what to
say or do.  It's very kind of them!--but ought I to take it?"

This testimonial pleased Mr. Murdoch even more than it pleased Mary.
He insisted Mary should keep it, and she at last consented.

But not even the new dress made Mary forget to wonder how Jack was
faring.


The lightning express made short work of the trip to Albany, and Jack
was glad of it, for he had not had any dinner.  His new acquaintances
invited him to accompany them to the Delavan House.

As they left the station, Mr. Magruder took from his pocket a small
pamphlet.

"Humph!" he said.  "Guide-book to the New York City and Hudson River.
I had forgotten that I had it.  Don't you want it, Ogden?  It'll be
something to read on the boat."

"Won't you keep it?" asked Jack, hesitating.

"Oh, no," said Mr. Magruder.  "I was going to throw it away."

So Jack put the book into his pocket.  It was a short walk to the
Delavan House, but it was through more bustle and business, considering
how quiet everybody was, Jack thought, than he ever saw before.  He
went with the rest to the hotel office, and heard Mr. Magruder give
directions about Jack's room and bill.

"He's going to pay for me for one day," Jack said to himself, "and
until the evening boat goes to-morrow."

"Ogden," said Mr. Magruder, "I can't ask you to dine with us.  It's a
private party--have your dinner, and then wait for me here."

"All right," said Jack, and then he stood still and tried to think what
to do.

"I must go to my room, now, and leave my satchel there," he said to
himself.  "I don't want anybody to know I never was in a big hotel
before."

He managed to get to his room without making a single blunder, but the
moment he closed the door he felt awed and put down.

"It's the finest room I was ever in in all my life!" he exclaimed.
"They must have made a mistake.  Perhaps I'll have a bedroom like this
in my own house some day."

Jack made himself look as neat as if he had come out of a bandbox,
before he went down-stairs.

The dining-room was easily found, and he was shown to a seat at one of
the tables, and a bill of fare was handed him; but that was only one
more puzzle.

"I don't know what some of these are," he said to himself.  "I'll try
things I couldn't get in Crofield.  I'll begin on those clams with
little necks."

So the waiter set before him a plate of six raw clams.

That was a good beginning; for every one of them seemed to speak to him
of the salt ocean.

After that he went farther down the bill of fare and selected such
dishes as, he said, "nobody ever saw in Crofield."

It was a grand dinner, and Jack was almost afraid he had been too long
over it.

He went out to the office and looked around, and asked the clerk if Mr.
Magruder had been inquiring for him.

"Not yet, Mr. Ogden," said the clerk.  "He is not yet through dinner.
Did you find your room all right?"

"All right," said Jack.  "I'll sit down and wait for Mr. Magruder."

It was an hour before the railway gentlemen returned.  There were twice
as many of them now, however, and Mr. Magruder remarked:

"Come, Ogden, we won't detain you long.  After that you can do what you
like.  Thank you very much, too."

Jack followed them into a private sitting-room, which seemed to him so
richly furnished that he really wished it had been plainer; but he
found the men very straightforward about their business.

They all sat down around the table in the middle of the room.

"We'll finish Ogden first, and let him go," said Mr. Magruder,
laughing.  "Ogden, here's a map of Crofield and all the country from
there to Mertonville.  I want to ask some questions."

He knew what to ask, too; but Jack's first remark was not an answer.

"Your map's all wrong," said he.  "There isn't sand and gravel in that
hill across the Cocahutchie, beyond the bridge."

[Illustration: _"Your map's all wrong," said Jack._]

"What is there, then?" asked a gentleman, who seemed to be one of the
civil engineers, pettishly.  "I say it's earth and gravel, mainly."

"Clear granite," said Jack.  "Go down stream a little and you'll see."

"All right," exclaimed Mr. Magruder; "it will be costly cutting it, but
we shall want the stone.  Go ahead now.  You're just the man we needed."

Jack thought so before they got through, for he had to tell all there
was to tell about the country, away down to Link's bridge.

"Look here," said one of them, quizzically.  "Ogden, have you lived all
your life in every house in Crofield and in Mertonville and everywhere?
You know even the melon-patches and hen-roosts!"

"Well, I know some of 'em," said Jack, coloring and trying to join in
the general laugh.  "I wouldn't talk so much, but Mr. Magruder asked me
to stay over and tell what you didn't know."

Then the laughter broke out again, and it was not at Jack's expense.

They had learned all they expected from him, however, and Mr. Magruder
thanked him very heartily.

"I hope you'll have a good time to-morrow," he said.  "Look at the
city.  I'll see that you have a ticket ready for the boat."

"I didn't expect--" began Jack.

"Nonsense, Ogden," said Mr. Magruder.  "We owe you a great deal, my
boy.  I wouldn't have missed knowing about that granite ledge.  It's
worth something to us.  The ticket will be handed you by the clerk.
Good-evening, Jack Ogden.  I hope I'll see you again, some day."

"I hope so," said Jack.  "Good-evening, sir.  Good-evening, gentlemen."

Out he walked, and as the door closed behind him the engineer remarked:

"He ought to be a railway contractor.  Brightest young fellow I've seen
in a long time."

Jack felt strange.  The old, grown-up feeling seemed to have been
questioned out of him, by those keen, peremptory, clear-headed business
men, and he appeared to himself to be a very small, green, poor,
uneducated boy, who hardly knew where he was going next, or what he was
going to do when he got there.  "I don't know about that either," he
said to himself, when he reached the office.  "I know I'm going to bed,
next, and I believe that I'll go to sleep when I get there!"

Weary, very weary, and almost blue, in spite of everything, was Jack
Ogden that night, when he crept into bed.

"'Tisn't like that old cot in the _Eagle_ office," he thought.  "I'm
glad it isn't to be paid for out of my nine dollars."

Jack was tired all over, and in a few minutes he was sound asleep.

He had gone to bed quite early, and he awoke with the first sunshine
that came pouring into his room.

"It isn't time to get up," he said.  "It'll be ever so long before
breakfast, but I can't stay here in bed."

As he put on his coat something swung against his side, and he said:

"There!  I'd forgotten that pamphlet.  I'll see what's in it."

The excitement of getting to the Delavan House, and the dinner and the
talk afterward, had driven the pamphlet out of his mind until then, but
he opened it eagerly.

"Good!" he said, as he turned the leaves.  "Maps and pictures, all the
way down.  Everything about the Hudson.  Pictures of all the places
worth seeing in New York.  Tells all about them.  Where to go when you
get there.  Just what I wanted!"

Down he sat, and he came near forgetting his breakfast, so intensely
was he absorbed by that guide-book.  He shut it up, at last, however,
remarking: "I'll have breakfast, and then I'll go out and see Albany.
It's all I've got to do till the boat leaves this evening.  First city
I ever saw."  He ate with all the more satisfaction because he knew
that he was not eating up any part of his nine dollars, and it did not
seem like so much money as it would have seemed in Crofield.  He was in
no haste, for he had no idea where to go, and did not mean to tell
anybody how ignorant he was.  He walked out of the Delavan House, and
strolled away to the right.  Even the poorer buildings were far better
than anything in Crofield or Mertonville, and he soon had a bit of a
surprise.  He reached a corner where a very broad street opened, at the
right, and went up a steep hill.  It was not a very long street, and it
ended at the crest of the hill, where there were some trees, and above
them towered what seemed to be a magnificent palace of a building.

"I'll go and see that," said Jack.  "I'll know what it is when I see
the sign,--or I'll ask somebody."

His interest in that piece of architecture grew as he walked on up the
hill; and he was a little warm and out of breath when he reached the
street corner, at the top.  Upon the corner, with his hands folded
behind him and his hat pushed back on his head, stood a well-dressed
man, somewhat above middle height, heavily built and portly, who seemed
to be gazing at the same object.

"Mister," said Jack, "will you please tell me what that building is?"

"Certainly," replied the gentleman, turning to him with a bow and a
smile.  "That's the New York State Miracle; one of the wonders of the
world."

"The State Miracle?" said Jack.

"What's your name?" asked the gentleman, with another bow and smile.

"Ogden--Jack Ogden."

"Yes, Jack Ogden; thank you.  My name's 'Guvner.'  That's a miracle.
It can never be finished.  There's magic in it.  Do you know what that
is?"

"That's one of the things I don't know, Mr. Guvner," said Jack.

"I don't know what it is either," smiled Mr. Guvner.  "When they built
it they put in twenty tons of pure, solid gold, my lad.  Didn't you
ever hear of it?  Where do you live when you're at home?"

"My home's in Crofield," said Jack, not aware of a group of gentlemen
and ladies who were standing still, a few yards away, looking at them.
"I'm on my way to New York, but I wanted to see Albany."

Mr. Guvner put a large hand on his shoulder, and smiled in his face.

"Jack, my son," he said, "go up and look all over the State Miracle.
Many other States have other similar miracles.  Don't stay in it too
long, though."

"Is it unhealthy?" asked Jack, with a smile.

The portly gentleman was smiling also.

"No, no; not unhealthy, my boy; but they persuade some men to stay
there a long time, and they're never the same men again.  Come out as
soon as you've had a good view of it."

"I'll take a look at it any way," said Jack, turning away.  "Thank you,
Mr. Guvner.  I'll see the Miracle."

He had gone but a few paces, and the others were stepping forward, when
he was called by Mr. Guvner.

"Jack, come back a moment!"

"What is it, Mr. Guvner?" asked Jack.

"I'm almost sorry you're going to the city.  It's as bad as the Capitol
itself.  You'll never be the same man again.  Don't get to be the wrong
kind of man."

"I'll remember, Mr. Guvner," said Jack, and he walked away again; but
as he did so he heard a lady laughing, and a solemn-faced gentlemen
saying:

"Good morning, Gov-er-nor.  A very fine morning?"

"I declare!" exclaimed Jack, with almost a shiver.  "I've been talking
with the Governor of the State himself, and I'm going to see the
Capitol.  I couldn't have done that in Crofield.  And I'll be in New
York City to-morrow!"




CHAPTER X.

THE STATE-HOUSE AND THE STEAMBOAT.

Mary Ogden had three dresses, one quite pretty, but none were of silk.
Aunt Melinda was always telling Mary what she ought not to wear at her
age, and with hair and eyes as dark as hers.  Mary felt very proud,
therefore, when she saw on the table in her room the parcel containing
the black silk and trimmings.

"It must have been expensive," she said, and she unfolded it as if
afraid it would break.

"What will mother say?" she thought.  "And Aunt Melinda!  I'm too young
for it--I know I am!"

The whole Murdoch family arose early, and the editor, after looking at
the black silk, said that he felt pretty well.

"So you ought," said his wife.  "You had more new subscribers yesterday
than you ever had before in your life in any one day."

"That makes me think," said Mr. Murdoch.  "I owe Mary Ogden five
dollars--there it is--for getting out that number of the _Eagle_."

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Mary.  "I did that, and Jack did it, only because--"

He put the bank-note into her hand.

"I'd rather you'd take it," he said.  "You'll never be a good editor
till you learn to work on a business basis."

As he insisted, she put the bill into her pocket-book, thanking him
gratefully.

"I had two dollars when I came," she thought, "and I haven't spent a
cent; but I may need something.  Besides, I'll have to pay for making
up my new dress."

But she was wrong.  Mrs. Murdoch went out to see a neighbor after
breakfast, and before noon it was certain that if seven old men of
Mertonville had paid for the silk, at least seven elderly women could
be found who were very willing to make it up.

About that time Jack was walking up to the door of the Senate Chamber,
in the Capitol, at Albany, after having astonished himself by long
walks and gazings through the halls and side passages.

"It's true enough," he said to himself.  "The Governor's right.  No
fellow could go through this and come out just as he came in."

He understood about the "twenty tons of pure gold" in the building, but
nevertheless he could not keep from looking all around after signs of
it.

"There's plenty of gilding," he said, "but it's very thin.  It's all
finished, too.  I don't see what more they could do, now the roof's on
and it's all painted.  He must have been joking when he said that."

Jack roamed all over the Capitol, for the Legislature was not in
session, and the building was open to sight-seers.  There were many of
them, and from visitors, workmen, and some boys whom he met, Jack
managed to find out many interesting things.

The Assembly Chamber seemed to him a truly wonderful room, and upon the
floor were several groups of people admiring it.

He saw one visitor seat himself in the Speaker's chair.  "There's room
in that chair for two or three small men," said Jack; "I'll try it by
and by."

So he did.

"The Speaker was a boy once, too, and so was the Governor," he said to
himself aloud.

"Yes, my boy," said a lady, who was near enough to hear him; "so they
were.  So were all the presidents, and some went barefoot and lived in
log-cabins."

"Well, I've often gone barefoot," said Jack, laughing.

"Many boys go barefoot, but they can't all become governors," she said,
pleasantly.

She looked at Jack for a moment, and then said with a smile, "You look
like a bright young man, though.  Do you suppose you could ever be
Governor?"

"Perhaps I could," he said.  "It can't be harder to learn than any
other business."

The lady laughed, and her friends laughed, and Jack arose from the
Speaker's chair and walked away.

He had seen enough of that vast State House.  It wearied him, there was
so much of it, and it was so fine.

"To build this house cost twenty tons of gold!" he said, as he went out
through the lofty doorway.  "I wish I had some of it.  I've kept my
nine dollars yet, anyway.  The Governor's right.  I don't know what he
meant, but I'll never be just the same fellow again."

It was so.  But it was not merely seeing the Capitol that had changed
him.  He was changing from a boy who had never seen anything outside of
