
"Suppose you come upstairs to our room," suggested Mr. Tolman. "That
will give us more quiet and privacy. Will that be agreeable to you?"

"Perfectly."

As the three walked toward the elevator Steve glanced with trepidation
at the plain-clothes man.

The boy knew he had done nothing wrong; but would he be able to convince
the detective of the truth of his story? He was thoroughly frightened
and wondered whether his father was also alarmed.

If, however, Mr. Tolman was worried he at least did not show it. Instead
he courteously led the way from the elevator down the dim corridor and
unlocked the door of Number 379.

"Come in, Mr. Donovan," he said cordially. "Here is a chair and a cigar.
Now, son, tell us the story of this troublesome pocketbook from
beginning to end."

In a trembling voice Stephen began his tale. He spoke slowly,
uncertainly, for he was well scared. Gradually, however, he forgot his
agitation and his voice became more positive. He recounted the details
of the omnibus ride with great care, adding ingenuously when he came to
the termination of the narrative:

"And I hoped the man's name would be inside the pocketbook because I
liked him very much and wanted to return to him what he had lost."

"And wasn't it?" put in Mr. Donovan quickly.

"I don't know," was the innocent retort. "Don't you remember I told you
that I hadn't looked inside yet?"

The detective laughed with satisfaction.

"That was a shabby trick of mine, youngster," said he. "It was mean to
try to trap you."

"Trap me?" repeated Steve vaguely.

"There, there, sonny!" went on Donovan kindly. "Don't you worry a minute
more about this mix-up. Mr. Ackerman, the gentleman who lost the bill
book, did not think for a second that you had taken it. He simply was so
sure that he had lost it on the bus that he wanted to locate you and
find out whether you knew anything about it or not. His name was not
inside the pocketbook, you see, and therefore any one who found it would
have no way of tracing its owner. What it contains are valuable papers
and a big wad of Liberty Bonds which, as your father knows, could
quickly be converted into cash. In consequence Mr. Ackerman decided that
the sooner the pocketbook was found the better. The omnibus people
denied any knowledge of it and you were the only remaining clue."

Mr. Tolman sank back in his chair and a relaxation of his muscles
betrayed for the first time that he had been much more disturbed than he
had appeared to be.

"Well," he said, lighting a fresh cigar, "the bill book is not only
located but we can hand it back intact to its owner. If you can inform
us where the gentleman lives, my boy and I will call a taxi and go to
his house or office with his property."

A flush of embarrassment suffused the face of the officer.

"Maybe you would like to come with us, Donovan," added Mr. Tolman, who
instantly interpreted the man's confusion.

"I hate to be dogging your footsteps, sir, in this fashion," Mr. Donovan
answered, with obvious sincerity. "Still, I--"

"You have your orders, no doubt."

"Well, yes, sir," admitted the plain-clothes man with reluctance. "I
have."

"You were to keep your eye on us until the pocketbook reached its
owner."

"That's about it, sir. Not that I personally have the least suspicion
that a gentleman like you would--"

"That is all right, my man. I perfectly understand your position," Mr.
Tolman cut in. "After all, you have your duty to do and business is
business. We'll just telephone Mr. Ackerman that we are coming so that
we shall be sure of catching him, and then we will go right up there."

"Very well, sir."

Stephen's father started toward the telephone and then, as if struck by
a sudden thought, paused and turned.

"Steve," he said, "I believe you are the person to communicate with Mr.
Ackerman. Call him up and tell him you have found his purse and that you
and your father would like to come up to his house, if it will be
convenient, and return it."

"All right, Dad."

"You will find his number on this slip of paper, sonny," the detective
added, handing the lad a card. "He is not at his office. He went home to
lunch in the hope that he had left the pocketbook there."

After some delay Stephen succeeded in getting the number written on the
card. A servant answered the summons.

"May I speak to Mr. Ackerman, please?" inquired the lad. "He is at
luncheon? No, it would not do the least good for me to tell you my name
for he would not know who it was. Just tell him that the boy who sat
beside him this morning on the Fifth Avenue bus--" there was a little
chuckle. "Oh, he will be here directly, will he? I thought perhaps he
would."

A moment later a cheery voice which Steve at once recognized to be that
of the steamboat man came over the wire:

"Well, sonny?"

"I found your bill book, Mr. Ackerman, and my father and I would like to
bring it up to you."

"Well, well! that is fine news!" cried the man at the other end of the
line. "How did you know who it belonged to?"

"Oh, I--we--found out--my father and I," stammered the lad. "May we come
up to your house with it now?"

"You would much better let me come to you; then only one person will be
inconvenienced," the New Yorker returned pleasantly. "Where are you
staying?"

"At the Manhattan."

"You must not think of taking the trouble of coming way up here. Let me
join you and your father at your hotel."

"Very well, Mr. Ackerman. If you'd rather--"

"I certainly should rather!" was the emphatic answer. "I could not think
of bringing two people so far out of their way."

"There are three of us!" squeaked Stephen.

"Three?"

"Yes, sir. We have another person--a friend--with us," explained the
boy, with quiet enjoyment. How easy it was to laugh now!

"All the more reason why I should come to you, then," asserted Mr.
Ackerman. "I will be at the Manhattan within half an hour. Perhaps if
you and your father and your friend have the afternoon free you would
like to go to some sort of a show with me after we conclude our
business. Since you are here on a holiday you can't be very busy."

Stephen's eyes sparkled with merriment.

"I don't know whether our friend can go or not," he replied politely,
"but I think perhaps Dad and I could; and if we can we should like to
very much."

"That will be excellent. I will come right along. Not only shall I be
glad to get my pocketbook back again but I shall be glad to see you once
more. I told you this morning that I had a feeling we should meet some
time. Whom shall I ask for at the hotel?"

"Stephen Tolman."

With a click the boy hung up the receiver.

"Mr. Ackerman is coming right down," said he, addressing his father and
the detective with a mischievous smile. "He has invited the three of us
to go to the matinee with him."

"The three of us!" echoed the plain-clothes man.

"Yes," returned the lad. "I told him we had a friend with us and so he
said to bring him along."

"Good heavens!" Donovan ejaculated.

Mr. Tolman laughed heartily.

"Not all the thieves you arrest take you to a theater party afterward,
do they, Officer?" he asked.

"I said from the first you were gentlemen," Mr. Donovan asserted with
humor.

"But couldn't you go?" inquired Steve, quite seriously.

"Bless you, no, sonny!" replied the man. "I am from headquarters, you
know, and my work is chasing up crooks--not going to matinees."

Nevertheless there was an intonation of gentleness in his voice, as he
added, "I am obliged to you just the same, for in spite of my calling I
am a human being and I appreciate being treated like one."




CHAPTER IX

AN ASTOUNDING CALAMITY


Mr. Ackerman was as good as his word, for within half an hour he
presented himself at the hotel where he found Mr. Tolman, Mr. Donovan
and Steve awaiting him in their pleasant upstairs room. As he joined
them his eye traveled inquiringly from one to another of the group and
lingered with curiosity on the face of the detective. The next instant
he was holding out his hand to Stephen.

"Well, my boy, I am glad to see you again," said he, a ring of
heartiness in his voice.

"And I am glad to see you, too, Mr. Ackerman," Steve replied, returning
the hand-clasp with fervor. "This is my father, sir; and this"--for a
second he hesitated, then continued, "is our friend, Mr. Donovan."

With cordiality the New Yorker acknowledged the introductions.

"Mr. Donovan," explained Mr. Tolman, scanning Mr. Ackerman's countenance
with a keen, half-quizzical expression, "is from headquarters."

The steamboat magnate started and shot a quick glance at those present.
It was plain he was disconcerted and uncertain as to how to proceed.

Mr. Donovan, however, came to his rescue, stepping tactfully into the
breach:

"I was not needed for anything but to supply your address, sir; but I
was able to do that, so between us all we have contrived to return your
pocketbook to you as good as before it left your possession."

As he spoke Mr. Tolman drew forth the missing bill book and held it
toward its owner.

"That looks pretty good to me!" Mr. Ackerman exclaimed, as he took the
article from Mr. Tolman's outstretched hand and regarded it
reflectively. "I don't know when I have ever done anything so careless
and stupid. You see I had got part way to the bank before I remembered
that I had left my glasses, on which I am absolutely dependent, at home.
Therefore, there being no taxi in sight, I hailed a passing bus and
climbed up beside this youngster. How the bill book happened to slip out
of my pocket I cannot explain. It seemed to me it would be safer to have
the securities upon my person than in a bag that might be snatched from
me; but apparently my logic was at fault. I was, however, so certain of
my wisdom that I never thought to question it until I had reached the
sidewalk and the bus had gone.

"Your boy, Mr. Tolman, confided while we rode along this morning that he
was visiting in New York for a few days; but of course I did not ask his
name or address and so when I wanted his help in tracing the missing
pocketbook I had no way of locating him beyond assuming that he must be
staying at one of the hotels. Therefore when the omnibus company could
furnish no clue, I got into touch with an agency whose business it is to
hunt people up. If the pocketbook had been dropped on the bus I felt
sure your boy, who was almost the only other person on top of the coach,
would know about it; if, on the other hand, it had been dropped in the
street, my problem would be a different one. In either case the sooner I
knew my course of action the better. I hope you will believe, Mr.
Tolman, that when I called in the aid of detectives I had no suspicions
against your son's honesty."

Mr. Tolman waved the final remark aside good-humoredly.

"We have not taken the affair as a personal matter at all," he declared.
"We fully appreciate your difficulty in finding Stephen, for he was also
up against the problem of finding you. New York is a rather large city
anyway, and for two people who do not even know one another's names to
get together is like hunting a needle in a haystack. Our only recourse
to discovering the owner of the pocketbook would be through the
advertising columns of the papers and that is the method we should have
followed had not Donovan appeared and saved us the trouble."

He exchanged a smile with the detective.

"The advertising column was my one hope," Mr. Ackerman replied. "I felt
sure that any honest person who picked up the purse would advertise it.
It was not the honest people I was worrying about. It was the thought
that I had dropped the bill book in the street where any
Tom-Dick-and-Harry could run away with it that concerned me. Moreover,
even if your boy had found it on the bus, he might have turned it in to
an employee of the coach line who was not honest enough to give it in
turn to his superiors. So I wanted to know where I stood; and now that I
do I cannot tell you how grateful I am both to Stephen and to this
officer here for the service they have rendered me." Then, turning
toward Mr. Tolman, he added in an undertone, "I hope neither you nor
your son have suffered any annoyance through this unfortunate incident."

"Not in the least," was the prompt response. "I confess we were a trifle
disconcerted at first; but Mr. Donovan has performed his duty with such
courtesy that we entertain toward him nothing but gratitude."

"I am glad of that," Mr. Ackerman replied, "for I should deeply regret
placing either you or your boy, even for a moment, in an uncomfortable
position, or one where it might appear that I--"

But Mr. Tolman cut him short.

"You took the quickest, most sensible course, Ackerman," said he. "Too
much was at stake for you to risk delay. When a pocketbook filled with
negotiable securities disappears one must of necessity act with speed.
Neither Stephen nor I cherish the least ill-will about the affair; do
we, son?"

"No, indeed."

Then smiling ingenuously up into the face of the New York man, he said:

"Don't you want to look in your pocketbook and see if everything is all
right, sir?"

The steamboat financier laughed.

"You are a prudent young man," declared he. "No, I am quite willing to
risk that the property you have so kindly guarded is intact."

"It ought to be," the boy said. "I haven't even opened the pocketbook."

"A better proof still that everything is safe within it," chuckled Mr.
Ackerman. "No, sonny, I am not worrying. I should not worry even if you
had ransacked the bill book from one end to the other. I'd take a chance
on the honesty of a boy like you."

Mr. Tolman, however, who had been listening, now came forward and broke
into the conversation:

"Stephen's suggestion is a good, businesslike one, Ackerman," he
declared. "As a mere matter of form--not as a slam against our morals--I
am sure that both he and I would prefer that you examined your property
while we are all here together and assure yourself that it is all
right."

"Pooh! Pooh! Nonsense!" objected the financier.

"It is a wise notion, Mr. Ackerman," rejoined Mr. Donovan. "Business is
business. None of us questions the honor of Mr. Tolman or his son. They
know that. Nevertheless I am sure we should all feel better satisfied
if you went through the formality of an investigation."

"Very well, just as you say. But I want it understood that I do it at
their and your request. I am perfectly satisfied to leave things as they
are."

Taking the now familiar red pocketbook from his coat he opened it
unconcernedly; then the three persons watching him saw a look of
consternation banish the smile from his face.

"What's wrong, Ackerman?" inquired the plain-clothes man quickly.

Without a word the other held the bill book toward him. It was empty.
Bonds, securities, money were gone! A gasp of incredulity came from
Stephen.

"I didn't open it--truly I didn't!" exclaimed he, in a terror-stricken
voice.

But Mr. Ackerman did not heed the remark.

"I am afraid this looks pretty black for us, Ackerman," said Mr. Tolman
slowly. "We have nothing to give you but the boy's word."

Mr. Donovan, however, who had been studying the group with a hawklike
scrutiny now sprang to his feet and caught up his hat.

"I don't see how they dared put it over!" he exclaimed excitedly. "But
