this tree grows in plenty, it is employed for posts and fence-rails, as
it is one of the most durable woods in existence.  It is a great
favourite also for kindling fires, as it catches quickly, and blazes up
in a few seconds, so as to ignite the heavier logs of other timbers,
such as the oak and the pine.

The red cedar usually attains a height of about thirty to forty feet,
but in favourable situations it grows still larger.  The soil which it
loves best is of a stony, and often sterile character, and dry barren
hill-tops are frequently covered with cedars, while the more moist and
fertile valleys between possess a _sylva_ of a far different character.
There is a variety of the red cedar, which trails upon the ground like a
creeping plant, its branches even taking root again.  This is rather a
small bush than a tree, and is often seen hanging down the face of
inaccessible cliffs.  It is known among botanists as the _Juniperus
prostrata_.

"Now," said Norman, after examining a few of the cedar-trees, "we have
here all that's wanted to make our canoe.  We need lose no more time,
but go to work at once!"

"Very well," replied the three brothers, "we are ready to assist you,--
tell us what to do."

"In the first place," said the other, "I think we had better change our
camp to this spot, as I see all the different kinds of trees here, and
much better ones than those near the river.  There," continued he,
pointing to a piece of moist ground in the valley,--"there are some
journeys if we go back and bring our meat to this place at once."

To this they all of course agreed, and started back to their first camp.
They soon returned with the meat and other things, and having chosen a
clean spot under a large-spreading cedar-tree, they kindled a new fire
and made their camp by it--that is, they strung up the provisions, hung
their horns and pouches upon the branches around, and rested their guns
against the trees.  They had no tent to pitch, but that is not necessary
to constitute a camp.  In the phraseology of the American hunter,
wherever you kindle your fire or spend the night is a "camp."



CHAPTER TWELVE.

HOW TO BUILD A BARK CANOE.

Norman expected that they would be able to finish the canoe in about a
week.  Of course, the sooner the better, and no time was lost in setting
about it.  The ribs or "timbers" were the first thing to be fashioned,
and a number of straight branches of cedar were cut, out of which they
were to be made.  These branches were cleared of twigs, and rendered of
an equal thickness at both ends.  They were then flattened with the
knife; and, by means of a little sweating in the ashes, were bent so as
to bear some resemblance in shape to the wooden ox-yokes commonly used
in America, or indeed to the letter U.  The ribs when thus bent were not
all of the same width.  On the contrary, those which were intended to be
placed near the middle or gangway of the vessel, were about two feet
across from side to side, while the space between the sides of the
others was gradually less in each fresh pair, according as their
position was to be near to the stem and stern.  When the whole of them
had been forced into the proper shape, they were placed, one inside the
other after the manner of dishes, and then all were firmly lashed
together, and left to dry.  When the lashing should be removed, they
would hold to the form thus given them, and would be ready for fastening
to the kelson.

While Norman was occupied with the timbers the others were not idle.
Basil had cut down several of the largest and straightest birches, and
Lucien employed himself in carefully removing the bark and cleansing it
of nodules and other inequalities.  The broad sheets were suspended by a
smoke fire, so as completely to dry up the sap, and render it tough and
elastic.  Francois had his part to play, and that was to collect the
resinous gum which was distilled, in plenty from the trunks of the
epinette or spruce-trees.  This gum is a species of pitch, and is one of
the most necessary materials in the making of a bark canoe.  It is used
for "paying" the seams, as well as any cracks that may show themselves
in the bark itself; and without it, or some similar substance, it would
be difficult to make one of these little vessels watertight.  But that
is not the only thing for which the epinette is valued in
canoe-building; far from it.  This tree produces another indispensable
material; its long fibrous roots when split, form the twine-like threads
by which the pieces of bark are sewed to each other and fastened to the
timbers.  These threads are as strong as the best cords of hemp, and are
known among the Indians by the name of "watap."  In a country,
therefore, where hemp and flax cannot be readily procured, the "watap"
is of great value.  You may say that deer are plenty, and that thongs of
buckskin would serve the same purpose.  This, however, is not the case.
The buckskin would never do for such a use.  The moment it becomes wet
it is liable to stretch, so that the seams would open and the canoe get
filled with water.  The watap, wet or dry, does not yield, and has
therefore been found to be the best thing of all others for this
purpose.  The only parts now wanted were the gunwale and the bottom.
The former was easily obtained.  Two long poles, each twenty feet in
length, were bent somewhat like a pair of bows, and then placed with
their concave sides towards each other, and firmly lashed together at
the ends.  This was the gunwale.  The bottom was the most difficult part
of all.  For that a solid plank was required, and they had no saw.  The
axe and the hatchet, however, were called into requisition, and a log
was soon hewn and thinned down to the proper dimensions.  It was
sharpened off at the ends, so as to run to a very acute angle, both at
the stem and stern.  When the bottom was considered sufficiently
polished, and modelled to the right shape, the most difficult part of
the undertaking was supposed to be accomplished.  A few long poles were
cut and trimmed flat.  These were to be laid longitudinally between the
ribs and the bark, somewhat after the fashion of laths in the roofing of
a house.  Their use was to prevent the bark from splitting.  The
materials were now all obtained complete, and, with a few days' smoking
and drying, would be ready for putting together.

While waiting for the timbers to dry, paddles were made, and Norman,
with the help of the others, prepared what he jokingly called his
"dock," and also his "ship-yard."  This was neither more nor less than a
long mound of earth--not unlike a new-made grave, only three times the
length of one, or even longer.  It was flat upon the top, and graded
with earth so as to be quite level and free from inequalities.

At length all the materials were considered quite ready for use, and
Norman went to work to put them together.

His first operation was to untie the bundle of timbers, and separate
them.  They were found to have taken the exact form into which they had
been bent, and the thongs being no longer necessary to keep them in
place, were removed.  The timbers themselves were next placed upon the
bottom or kelson, those with the widest bottoms being nearer to
"midships," while those with the narrower bend were set towards the
narrower ends of the plank.  Thus placed, they were all firmly lashed
with strong cords of watap, by means of holes pierced in the bottom
plank.  Fortunately Lucien happened to have a pocket-knife, in which
there was a good awl or piercer, that enabled them to make these holes--
else the matter would have been a much more difficult one, as an awl is
one of the most essential tools in the construction of a bark canoe.  Of
course it took Norman a considerable time to set all the ribs in their
proper places, and fasten them securely; but he was ably assisted by
Francois, who waited upon him with much diligence, handing him now the
awl, and then the watap, whenever he required them.

Norman's next operation was the laying of his kelson "in dock."  The
timbers being attached to it, it was lifted up on the earthen mound,
where it reached quite from end to end.  Half-a-dozen large heavy stones
were then placed upon it, so that, pressed down by these upon the even
surface of the mould, it was rendered quite firm; and, moreover, was of
such a height from the ground that the young shipwright could work upon
it without too much bending and kneeling.

The gunwale, already prepared, was next placed so as to touch the ends
of the ribs all round, and these ends were adjusted to it with great
nicety, and firmly joined.  Strong cross-pieces were fixed, which were
designed, not only to keep the gunwale from spreading or contracting,
but afterwards to serve as seats.

Of course the gunwale formed the complete mouth, or upper edge of the
canoe.  It was several feet longer than the bottom plank, and, when in
place, projected beyond the ribs at both ends.  From each end of the
bottom plank, therefore, to the corresponding end of the gunwale, a
straight piece of wood was stretched, and fastened.  One of these pieces
would form the stem or cutwater, while the other would become the stern
of the craft.  The long poles were next laid longitudinally upon the
ribs outside, and lashed in their places; and this done, the skeleton
was completed, ready for the bark.

The latter had been already cut to the proper dimensions and shape.  It
consisted of oblong pieces--each piece being a regular parallelogram, as
it had been stripped from the tree.  These were laid upon the ribs
longitudinally, and then sewed to the edge of the bottom plank, and also
to the gunwale.  The bark itself was in such broad pieces that two of
them were sufficient to cover half a side, so that but one seam was
required lengthwise, in addition to the fastenings at the top and
bottom.  Two lengths of the bark also reached cleverly from stem to
stern, and thus required only one transverse seam on each side.  There
was an advantage in this arrangement, for where the birch-bark can only
be obtained in small flakes, a great number of seams is a necessary
consequence, and then it is extremely difficult to keep the canoe from
leaking.  Thanks to the fine birch-trees, that grew in abundance around,
our boat-builders had procured the very best bark.

The canoe was now completed all but the "paying," and that would not
take long to do.  The gum of the epinette had to be boiled, and mixed
with a little grease, so as to form a species of wax.  For this the fat
already obtained from the buffaloes was the very thing; and a small tin
cup which Basil had saved from the wreck (it had been strung to his
bullet-pouch), enabled them to melt the gum, and apply it hot.  In less
than an hour the thing was done.  Every crack and awl-hole was payed,
and the canoe was pronounced "watertight," and, as Francois added, with
a laugh, "seaworthy."

A small pond was near, at the bottom of the hill: Francois espied it.

"Come, boys," cried he, "a launch! a launch!"

This was agreed to by all.  The great stones were taken out.  Basil and
Norman, going one to the stem the other to the stern, lifted the canoe
from the "dock," and, raising it upon their shoulders, carried it down
to the pond.  The next moment it was pushed into the water, where it
floated like a cork.  A loud cheer was given, in which even Marengo
joined; and a salute was then fired--a full broadside--from the four
guns.  Francois, to complete the thing, seized one of the paddles, and
leaping into the canoe, shot the little craft out upon the bosom of the
pond, cheering all the while like one frantic.  After amusing himself
for some minutes, he paddled back to the shore, when they all looked
eagerly into the canoe, and perceived to their gratification that not as
much as a drop of water had leaked during the "trip."  Thanks and
congratulations now greeted Norman from every side; and, taking their
vessel from the water, the young voyageurs returned to their camp, to
regale themselves with a grand dinner, which Lucien had cooked for the
occasion.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE CHAIN OF LAKES.

Our young voyageurs now prepared to resume their journey.  While Norman
was engaged in building his canoe, with his assistant, Francois, the
others had not been idle.  Basil was, of course, the hunter of the
party; and, in addition to the small game, such as hares, geese, and
grouse, he had killed three caribou, of the large variety known as
"woodland caribou."  These are a species of the reindeer (_Cervus
tarandus_), of which I have more to say hereafter.  Lucien had attended
to the drying of their flesh; and there was enough of it still left, as
our voyageurs believed, to supply their wants until they should reach
Cumberland House, where they would, of course, procure a fresh stock of
provisions.  The skins of the caribou had also been scraped and dressed
by Lucien--who understood the process well--and these, with the skin of
the antelope, were sufficient to make a pair of hunting-shirts for Basil
and Norman, who, it will be remembered, had lost theirs by cutting them
up.

Next morning the canoe was launched upon the river--below the rapids--
and the dried meat, with their other matters, snugly stowed in the
stern.  Then the young voyageurs got in, and, seating themselves in
their places, seized hold of the paddles.  The next moment the canoe
shot out into the stream; and a triumphant cheer from the crew announced
that they had recommenced their journey.  They found to their delight
that the little vessel behaved admirably,--shooting through the water
like an arrow, and leaking not water enough, as Francois expressed it,
"to drown a mosquito."  They had all taken their seats in the order
which had been agreed upon for the day.  Norman was "bowsman," and, of
course, sate in the bow.  This, among the regular Canadian voyageurs, is
esteemed the post of honour, and the bowsman is usually styled "Captain"
by the rest of the crew.  It is also the post that requires the greatest
amount of skill on the part of its occupant, particularly where there
are rapids or shoals to be avoided.  The post of "steersman" is also one
of honour and importance; and both steersman and bowsman receive higher
wages than the other voyageurs, who pass under the name of "middlemen."
The steersman sits in the stern, and that place was now occupied by
Lucien, who had proved himself an excellent steersman.  Basil and
Francois were, of course, the "middlemen," and plied the paddles.  This
was the arrangement made for the day; but although on other days the
programme was to be changed, so as to relieve Basil and Francois, on all
occasions when there were rapids or other difficulties to be encountered
they were to return to this order.  Norman, of course, understood canoe
navigation better than his Southern cousins; and therefore, by universal
assent, he was acknowledged "the Captain," and Francois always addressed
him as such.  Lucien's claim to the post of second honour was admitted
to be just, as he had proved himself capable of filling it to the
satisfaction of all.  Marengo had no post, but lay quietly upon the
buffalo skin between Lucien's legs, and listened to the conversation
without joining in it, or in any way interfering in the working of the
vessel.

In a few hours our voyageurs had passed through the low marshy country
that lies around the mouth of the Red River, and the white expanse of
the great Lake Winnipeg opened before them, stretching northward far
beyond the range of their vision.  Norman knew the lake, having crossed
it before, but its aspect somewhat disappointed the Southern travellers.
Instead of a vast dark lake which they had expected to see, they looked
upon a whitish muddy sheet, that presented but few attractive points to
the eye, either in the hue of its water or the scenery of its shores.
These, so far as they could see them, were low, and apparently marshy;
and this is, in fact, the character of the southern shores of Winnipeg.
On its east and north, however, the country is of a different character.
There the geological formation is what is termed _primitive_.  The
rocks consist of granite, sienite, gneiss, etcetera; and, as is always
the case where such rocks are found, the country is hilly and rugged.
On the western shores a _secondary_ formation exists.  This is
_stratified limestone_,--the same as that which forms the bed of many of
the great prairies of America; and, indeed, the Lake Winnipeg lies
between this secondary formation and the primitive, which bounds it on
the east.  Along its western shores extends the flat limestone country,
partly wooded and partly prairie land, running from that point for
hundreds of miles up to the very foot of the Rocky Mountains, where the
primitive rocks again make their appearance in the rugged peaks of that
stupendous chain.  Lake Winnipeg is nearly three hundred miles in
length, but it is very narrow--being in its widest reach not over fifty
miles, and in many places only fifteen miles from shore to shore.  It
trends nearly due north and south, leaning a little north-west and
south-east, and receives many large rivers, as the Red, the
Saskatchewan, and the Winnipeg.  The waters of these are again carried
out of it by other rivers that run from the lake, and empty into the
Hudson's Bay.  There is a belief among the hunters and voyageurs that
this lake has its tides like the ocean.  Such, however, is not the case.
There is at times a rise and overflow of its waters, but it is not
periodical, and is supposed to be occasioned by strong winds forcing the
waters towards a particular shore.

Lake Winnipeg is remarkable, as being in the very centre of the North
American continent, and may be called the centre of the _canoe
navigation_.  From this point it is possible to travel _by water_ to
Hudson's Bay on the north-east, to the Atlantic Ocean on the east, to
the Gulf of Mexico on the south, to the Pacific on the west, and to the
Polar Sea on the north and north-west.  Considering that some of these
distances are upwards of three thousand miles, it will be perceived that
Lake Winnipeg holds a singular position upon the continent.  All the
routes mentioned can be made without any great "portage," and even a
choice of route is often to be had upon those different lines of
communication.

