recognition of the law behind it was not a happen; nor was the patient
and persistent toil that went into the perfecting of the instrument a
matter of chance. Alexander Graham Bell had the genius to recognize the
value and significance of the truth on which he stumbled and turn it to
practical purposes. Many another might perhaps have heard the self-same
sounds that came to him over that reach of wire and, detecting nothing
unusual in the whining vibrations, have passed them by. But to Mr. Bell
they were magic music, the sesame to a new country. Strangely enough,
too, it was the good luck of a boy not much older than Ted to share
with the discoverer the wonderful secret."

"How?" demanded both Laurie and Ted in a breath.

"I can't tell you that story to-day," Mr. Hazen expostulated. "It would
take much too long. We must give over talking and put our minds on this
telephone of our own which does not seem to be making any great
progress. I begin to be afraid we haven't the proper outfit."

As he spoke, a shadow crossed the window and in another instant Mr.
Clarence Fernald poked his head in at the door.

"What are you three conspirators up to?" inquired he. "You look as if
you were making bombs or some other deadly thing."

"We are making a telephone, Dad, and it won't work," was Laurie's
answer.

Mr. Fernald smiled with amusement.

"You seem to have plenty of wire," he said. "In fact, if I were
permitted to offer a criticism, I should say you had more wire than
anything else. How lengthy a circuit do you expect to cover?"

"Oh, we're not ambitious," Laurie replied. "If we can cross the room we
shall be satisfied, although now that you mention it, perhaps it
wouldn't be such a bad thing if it could run from my room at home over
here." He eyed his father furtively. "Then when I happened to have to
stay in bed I could talk to Ted and he could cheer me up."

"So he could!" echoed Mr. Fernald in noncommittal fashion.

"It would be rather nice, too, for Mr. Wharton," went on the diplomat
with his sidelong glance still fixed on his father. "He must sometimes
wish he could reach Ted without bothering to send a man way over here.
And then there are the Turners! Of course a telephone to the shack
would give them no end of pleasure. They must miss Ted and often want
to speak with him."

He waited but there was no response from Mr. Fernald.

"Ted might be sick, too; or have an accident and wish to get help
and----"

At last the speaker was rewarded by having the elder man turn quickly
upon him.

"In other words, you young scoundrel, you want me to install a
telephone in this shack for the joy and delight of you two electricians
who can't seem to do it for yourselves," said Mr. Fernald gruffly.

"Now however do you suppose he guessed it?" exclaimed Laurie
delightedly, as he turned with mock gravity to Ted. "Isn't he the mind
reader?"

It was evident that Laurie Fernald thoroughly understood his father and
that the two were on terms of the greatest affection.

"Did I say I wanted a telephone?" he went on meekly.

"You said everything else," was the grim retort.

"Did I? Well, well!" commented the boy mischievously. "I needn't have
taken so much trouble after all, need I? But every one isn't such a
Sherlock Holmes as you are, Dad."

Mr. Fernald's scowl vanished and he laughed.

"What a young wheedler you are!" observed he, playfully rumpling up his
son's fair hair. "You could coax every cent I have away from me if I
did not lock my money up in the bank. I really think, though, that a
telephone here in the hut would be an excellent idea. But what I don't
see is why you don't do the job yourselves."

"Oh, we could do the work all right if there wasn't danger of our
infringing the patent of the telephone company," was Laurie's impish
reply. "If we should get into a lawsuit there would be no end of
trouble, you know. I guess we'd much better have the thing installed in
the regular way."

"I guess so too!" came from his father.

"You'll really have it put in, Dad?" cried Laurie.

"Sure!"

"That will be bully, corking!" Laurie declared. "You're mighty good,
Dad."

"Pooh! Nonsense!" his father protested, as he shot a quick glance of
tenderness toward the boy. "A telephone over here will be a useful
thing for us all. I may want to call Ted up myself sometimes. We never
can tell when an emergency may arise."

Within the following week the telephone was in place and although Ted
had not minded his seclusion, or thought he had not, he suddenly found
that the instrument gave him a very comfortable sense of nearness to
his family and to the household at Pine Lea. He and Laurie chattered
like magpies over the wire and were far worse, Mrs. Fernald asserted,
than any two gossipy boarding-school girls. Moreover, Ted was now able
to speak each day with his father at the Fernald shipping rooms and by
this means keep in closer touch with his family. As for Mr. Wharton, he
marvelled that a telephone to the shack had not been put in at the
outset.

"It is not a luxury," he insisted. "It's a necessity! An indispensable
part of the farm equipment!"

Certainly in the days to come it proved its worth!




CHAPTER IX

THE STORY OF THE FIRST TELEPHONE


"I am going down to Freeman's Falls this afternoon to get some rubber
tape," Ted remarked to Laurie, as the two boys and the tutor were
eating a picnic lunch in Ted's cabin one Saturday.

"Oh, make somebody else do your errand and stay here," Laurie begged.
"Anybody can buy that stuff. Some of the men must be going to the
Falls. Ask Wharton to make them do your shopping."

"Perhaps Ted had other things to attend to," ventured Mr. Hazen.

"No, I hadn't," was the prompt reply.

"In that case I am sure any of the men would be glad to get whatever
you please," the tutor declared.

"Save your energy, old man," put in Laurie. "Electrical supplies are
easy enough to buy when you know what you want."

"They are now," Mr. Hazen remarked, with a quiet smile, "but they have
not always been. In fact, it was not so very long ago that it was
almost impossible to purchase either books on electricity or electrical
stuff of any sort. People's knowledge of such matters was so scanty
that little was written about them; and as for shops of this type--why,
they were practically unknown."

"Where did persons get what they wanted?" asked Ted with surprise.

"Nobody wanted electrical materials," laughed Mr. Hazen. "There was no
call for them. Even had the shops supplied them, nobody would have
known what to do with them."

"But there must have been some who would," the boy persisted. "Where,
for example, did Mr. Bell get his things?"

"Practically all Mr. Bell's work was done at a little shop on Court
Street, Boston," answered Mr. Hazen. "This shop, however, was nothing
like the electrical supply shops we have now. Had Alexander Graham Bell
entered its doors and asked, for instance, for a telephone transmitter,
he would have found no such thing in stock. On the contrary, the shop
consisted of a number of benches where men or boys experimented or made
crude electrical contrivances that had previously been ordered by
customers. The shop was owned by Charles Williams, a clever mechanical
man, who was deeply interested in electrical problems of all sorts. In
a tiny showcase in the front part of the store were displayed what few
textbooks on electricity he had been able to gather together and these
he allowed the men in his employ to read at lunch time and to use
freely in connection with their work. He was a person greatly beloved
by those associated with him and he had the rare wisdom to leave every
man he employed unhampered, thereby making individual initiative the
law of his business."

The tutor paused, then noticing that both the boys were listening
intently, he continued:

"If a man had an idea that had been carefully thought out, he was given
free rein to execute it. Tom Watson, one of the boys at the shop,
constructed a miniature electric engine, and although the feat took
both time and material, there was no quarrel because of that. The place
was literally a workshop, and so long as there were no drones in it and
the men toiled intelligently, Mr. Williams had no fault to find. You
can imagine what valuable training such a practical environment
furnished. Nobody nagged at the men, nobody drove them on. Each of the
thirty or forty employees pegged away at his particular task, either
doing work for a specific customer or trying to perfect some notion of
his own. If you were a person of ideas, it was an ideal conservatory in
which to foster them."

"Gee! I'd have liked the chance to work in a place like that!" Ted
sighed.

"It would not have been a bad starter, I assure you," agreed Mr. Hazen.
"At that time there were, as I told you, few such shops in the country;
and this one, simple and crude as it was, was one of the largest. There
was another in Chicago which was bigger and perhaps more perfectly
organized; but Williams's shop was about as good as any and certainly
gave its men an excellent all-round education in electrical matters.
Many of them went out later and became leaders in the rapidly growing
world of science and these few historic little shops thus became the
ancestors of our vast electrical plants."

"It seems funny to think it all started from such small beginnings,
doesn't it," mused Laurie thoughtfully.

"It certainly is interesting," Mr. Hazen replied. "And if it interests
us in this far-away time, think what it must have meant to the pioneers
to witness the marvels half a century brought forth and look back over
the trail they had blazed. For it was a golden era of discovery, that
period when the new-born power of electricity made its appearance; and
because Williams's shop was known to be a nursery for ideas, into it
flocked every variety of dreamer. There were those who dreamed
epoch-making dreams and eventually made them come true; and there were
those who merely saw visions too impractical ever to become realities.
To work amid this mecca of minds must have been not only an education
in science but in human nature as well. Every sort of crank who had
gathered a wild notion out of the blue meandered into Williams's shop
in the hope that somebody could be found there who would provide either
the money or the labor to further his particular scheme.

"Now in this shop," went on Mr. Hazen, "there was, as I told you, a
young neophyte by the name of Thomas Watson. Tom had not found his
niche in life. He had tried being a clerk, a bookkeeper, and a
carpenter and none of these several occupations had seemed to fit him.
Then one fortunate day he happened in at Williams's shop and
immediately he knew this was the place where he belonged. He was a boy
of mechanical tastes who had a real genius for tools and machinery. He
was given a chance to turn castings by hand at five dollars a week and
he took the job eagerly."

"Think how a boy would howl at working for that now," Laurie exclaimed.

"No doubt there were boys who would have howled then," answered Mr.
Hazen, "although in those days young fellows expected to work hard and
receive little pay until they had learned their trade. Perhaps the
youthful Mr. Watson had the common sense to cherish this creed; at any
rate, there was not a lazy bone in his body, and as there were no such
things to be had as automatic screw machines, he went vigorously to
work making the castings by hand, trying as he did so not to blind his
eyes with the flying splinters of metal."

"Then what happened?" demanded Laurie.

"Well, Watson stuck at his job and in the meantime gleaned right and
left such scraps of practical knowledge as a boy would pick up in such
a place. By the end of his second year he had had his finger in many
pies and had worked on about every sort of electrical contrivance then
known: call bells, annunciators, galvanometers; telegraph keys,
sounders, relays, registers, and printing telegraph instruments. Think
what a rich experience his two years of apprenticeship had given him!"

"You bet!" ejaculated Ted appreciatively.

"Now as Tom Watson was not only clever but was willing to take infinite
pains with whatever he set his hand to, never stinting nor measuring
his time or strength, he became a great favorite with those who came to
the shop to have different kinds of experimental apparatus made. Many
of the ideas brought to him to be worked out came from visionaries who
had succeeded in capturing the financial backing of an unwary believer
and convinced themselves and him that here was an idea that was to stir
the universe. But too many of these schemes, alas, proved worthless and
as their common fate was the rubbish heap, it is strange that the
indefatigable Thomas Watson did not have his faith in pioneer work
entirely destroyed. But youth is buoyed up by perpetual hope; and
paradoxical as it may seem, his enthusiasm never lagged. Each time he
felt, with the inventor, that they might be standing on the brink of
gigantic unfoldings and he toiled with energy to bring something
practical out of the chaos. And when at length it became evident beyond
all question that the idea was never to unfold into anything practical,
he would, with the same zealous spirit, attack another seer's problem."

"Didn't he ever meet any successful inventors?" questioned Ted.

"Yes, indeed," the tutor answered. "Scattered among the cranks and
castle builders were several brilliant, solid-headed men. There was
Moses G. Farmer, for example, one of the foremost electricians of that
time, who had many an excellent and workable idea and who taught young
Watson no end of valuable lessons. Then one day into the workshop came
Alexander Graham Bell. In his hand he carried a mechanical contrivance
Watson had previously made for him and on espying Tom in the distance
he made a direct line for the workman's bench. After explaining that
the device did not do the thing he was desirous it should, he told
Watson that it was the receiver and transmitter of his Harmonic
Telegraph."

"And that was the beginning of Mr. Watson's work with Mr. Bell?" asked
Ted breathlessly.

"Yes, that was the real beginning."

"Think of working with a man like that!" the boy cried with sparkling
eyes. "It must have been tremendously interesting."

"It was interesting," responded Mr. Hazen, "but nevertheless much of
the time it must have been inexpressibly tedious work. A young man less
patient and persistent than Watson would probably have tired of the
task. Just why he did not lose his courage through the six years of
