time the old mahowt was clinging to his back, not daring to slip off.

"The men now began to lay large rope-nooses about here and there, in the
hope that he would accidentally put a foot into one of them.  But Mowla
Buksh was much too knowing to be caught in this way.  Whenever he came
across one of these nooses, he took it up with his trunk and tossed it
contemptuously aside.  Gradually he worked his way up to a cluster of
trees, near the tent in which our Director's wife had been seated all
the time--with what feelings I will not pretend to guess.  In this
cluster he spent two hours, smashing down trees all the time, and
occasionally, by way of variety, trying to lay hold of the poor mahowt,
who was gradually becoming exhausted through terror and the exertion of
holding on.

"Strange to say, now and then the man appeared to regain control over
the beast, though only for a few seconds.  During one of these intervals
he even succeeded in making Mowla Buksh partially sit down.

"`Och! now or niver!  Off wid ye!' yelled a splitting voice close to my
ear!  I need not tell you whose voice that was, or that its owner was
skipping about like a gorilla, almost as mad as the elephant!"

"Ah! sor," interrupted Quin, "don't ye remimber how yourself was--but
I'll have mercy on ye!  Go on, sor."

"Well, I confess," resumed Jackman, "that I was a little excited.
However, the Bulrampore men echoed Quin's advice in eagerly expressed
Hindustani.  The mahowt took it, slipped to the ground, and ran for his
life!  Fortunately the excited Mowla either did not perceive or did not
care.  He rose up and recommenced his work of destruction.

"All this time he had been freeing himself from the ropes, with which he
was imperfectly bound.  At last he detached them entirely, and began to
make furious rushes in every direction.

"At that critical moment our Director arrived on the scene.  Seeing how
matters stood he at once gave orders to have the fighting elephants
brought to the front, as the only chance that remained to bring the
mischief to an end.  The orders were gladly and promptly obeyed.

"Before they arrived, however, Mowla Buksh, in one of his rushes, came
straight to where Quin and I were standing--"

"Skippin', sor, ye said."

"Well, skipping.  But we stopped skipping at once, and took to running
as hard as we could.  We both ran through some soft reedy ground, where
the brute overtook us.  I glanced over my shoulder and saw him knock
Quin into the rushes and set his enormous foot on him--"

"Oh! was he killed?" exclaimed Junkie with a look of consternation at
the now heroic Quin!

There was a general burst of laughter, in which Junkie joined, for he
saw the absurdity of the question, which sudden anxiety had forced from
him.

"But why wasn't you killed?" he asked almost indignantly.

"Whisht! honey, an' ye'll hear, av ye'll howld your tongue."

"You must know," continued Jackman, "that the place he had tumbled into
was wet, soft ground, and Quin has a sharp way of looking after his
life!  Although half stunned he rolled to one side, so that only the
side of the great foot came down on his shoulder and thrust him deep
into the mud.  I stopped at once with a feeling of horror, but without
the slightest conception of what I meant to do, and the horror was
deepened as I saw the monster turn with the evident intention of
completing his work.

"At that terrible moment the colossal forms of Raj Mungul, Isri Pershad,
and the mighty Chand Moorut appeared, coming towards us.  Mowla Buksh
did not carry out his deadly intentions.  There was `method in his
madness.'  Seeing the koonkies approach, he retreated at once to the
shelter of the cluster of trees, and waited.

"I rushed forward, expecting to find my man dead and flattened, but he
rose slowly as I came up, and with an indescribable expression of
countenance said, `Arrah! then, but he _was_ heavy!'"

"An' _that_ must have been true--what-ever" said McGregor, unable to
restrain a comment at this point.

"What you remark is true likewise, Shames," said the skipper.

"Go on--quick!" cried Junkie, eagerly.

"Well, our Director gave orders, to take Raj Mungul to the south side of
the clump of trees, Isri Pershad to the west, and Chand Moorut to the
east.  It was impossible to let the last go in, though he was impatient
to do so, for by that time it was getting dark, and his mahowt would
have probably been swept off his back by the branches; and the risk of
such a gladiator being let loose without a controlling hand was not to
be thought of for a moment.

"The difficulty was got over by means of a ruse.  Two men were sent to
the north side of the clump with orders to talk and attract the
attention of Mowla.  The plan succeeded.  The moment the still fuming
brute heard their voices, he went at them furiously!  Now was the chance
for the heroic Chand Moorut; and that warrior was never known to let an
opportunity slip.  No British bull-dog ever gave or accepted a challenge
with more hilarious alacrity than he.  As soon as Mowla came out of the
trees, Chand Moorut went at him with a rush that seemed incredible in
such a mountain of usually slow and dignified flesh.  But darkness,
coupled perhaps with haste, interfered.  He missed his mark, and Mowla
Buksh, turning round, dashed straight at the tent, in front of which our
Director and a friend were standing.  The friend, who was a V.C. as well
as a cool and intrepid sportsman, directed the light of a lantern full
on the monster's face till it was close upon him, thus enabling the
Director to plant a bullet in his head.  Whether the shot gave him a
headache or not, I cannot tell.  The only certain effect it had was to
turn the animal aside, and cause it to rush off in the direction of the
main camp, closely followed by Isri Pershad and Raj Mungul.  Chand
Moorut was held back in reserve.  Happily Raj Mungul managed to outstrip
and turn the runaway, and as Mowla Buksh came back, Chand Moorut got
another chance at him.  Need I say that he took advantage of it?
Charging in like a live locomotive, he sent the mad creature flying--as
if it had been a mere kitten--head over heels into a small hollow!"

"Well done!  Capital!" shouted Junkie, at this point unable to restrain
himself, as, with glittering eyes, he glanced round the circle of
listeners.

A laugh at his enthusiasm seemed to Junkie to endorse his sentiment, so
he turned to Jackman and earnestly bade him to "go on."

"There is not much to go on with now, my boy," continued the narrator;
"for Mowla Buksh being down, the fighting elephants took good care to
punish him well before they let him up again.  But as the encounter had
aroused the combative propensities of Chand Moorut, it was thought wise
to remove him from the scene before he became too excited.  This being
managed by his mahowt, the punishing of the rebel was left to Isri
Pershad and Raj Mungul, who did their work thoroughly.  No sooner did
the culprit scramble out of the hollow than Isri Pershad knocked him
back into it, and pummelled him heartily with trunk and legs.  Again
Mowla Buksh rose, and this time Raj Mungul gave him a tap on the
forehead with his own ponderous head, which sent him into a bed of giant
rushes, over the top of which his little tail was seen to wriggle
viciously as he disappeared with a crash.

"There he would probably have been content to lie still for a time, but
his opponents had other views in regard to him.  They went at him
together, and so cuffed, kicked, bumped and pummelled him, that in about
five minutes he was reduced to a pitiable state of humiliation.  As Quin
truly remarked at the time, his own mother would have failed to
recognise him.

"Just at this point, to my surprise, the old mahowt came forward, with
tears in his eyes, and begged that his elephant might be spared!  It had
been punished quite sufficiently, he thought.  I was much impressed with
this display of a tender, forgiving spirit towards a brute that had done
its very best to take his own life.  But no one sympathised with him at
the moment, and the punishment was continued until Mowla Buksh was
thoroughly subdued, and compelled by his conquerors to return to his
standing-place, where he was finally and firmly secured.  Thus, at last,
ended this exciting and most unexpected commencement to our hunt, and
the whole camp was soon after steeped in silence and repose.  Not a bad
beginning, eh, Junkie?"

"Yes, but go on wi' the hunt," said the boy with eager promptitude, a
request which was loudly echoed by his brothers.

"No, no, boys; you've had enough to digest for one day; besides, I see
the cart coming up the road to fetch our deer.  And perhaps your father
has more work cut out for us."

"Well, not much," replied the laird, who had been quite as much
interested in the elephant story as his sons.  "There is another drive
on the east side of the hill, which we have still time for, though I
don't expect much from it.  However, we can try it.  Come now, lads,
we'll be going."

"Shames," said Captain McPherson, as the party moved away from the
lunching-ground, "I wonder if a good thrashin' like that would make the
elephant a better beast afterwards?"

"Weel now, Captain Mcphairson, I don't think it would," replied McGregor
after a pause for consideration.

"You are right, Shames," said Ian Anderson, the old fisherman, who was a
deep-thinking man.  "It has always appeared to me, that the object of
poonishment, is a not to make us coot, but to make us obedient."

"Then what for are ye always poonishin' me, an' tellin' me to be coot,
when ye say it won't make me coot?" asked Donald.

"Because, Tonal', it iss my duty to _tell_ ye to be coot, although I
cannot _make_ ye coot, ye rascal!" answered the fisherman, sternly; "but
I can make ye obey me by poonishin' you--ay, an' I wull do it too."

Donald knew too well from experience that it was not safe to attempt
arguing the question, but he gave a peculiarly defiant shake of his
ragged head, which said as plainly as words that the time was coming
when "poonishment" would cease to secure even obedience--at least in his
case!

"You are right, Ian," said Jackman, turning round, for he had overheard
the conversation.  "Punishment compelled Mowla Buksh to walk to his
standing-place and submit to be tied up, for he did not dare to disobey
with Isri Pershad and Raj Mungul standing guard over him, but it
certainly did not make him good.  I went, with many others, to see him
the next morning.  On the way over to the elephant camp, I saw the huge
trees which he had smashed down in his rage lying about in all
directions, and on reaching his standing-place, found him looking
decidedly vicious and bad-tempered.  It was quite evident that any one
venturing within reach of his trunk would receive harsh treatment and no
mercy.  A small red spot in his great forehead showed that our
Director's aim had been a fairly good one, though it had not hit the
deadly spot in the centre."

"But I want to know," said Junkie, who kept close to Jackman's side,
thirsting for every word that fell from his lips, "why did the bullet
not go in and kill Bowly Muksh?"

"Because the head of Mowla Buksh was too thick," said Jackman, laughing.
"You see, to be a thick-head is not always a disadvantage."

"There, you ought to take comfort from that, Junkie," remarked his
brother Archie, with that fine spirit of tenderness which is so often
observable in brothers.

"Ha! ha! ha!" yelled Eddie, with that delicacy of feeling which is
equally common.

"Hold your tongues!" growled Junkie--the more classic "shut up" not
having at that time found its way to the Western Isles.

"You must know, Junkie, that all parts of an elephant's head are not of
equal thickness," said Jackman in that kindly confidential tone which
tends so powerfully to soothe a ruffled spirit.  "The only point in an
elephant's forehead that can be pierced by a rifle ball is exactly in
the centre.  It is about the size of a saucer, and if you miss that, you
might as well fire against the Eagle Cliff itself, for the ball would
only stick in the skull."

With this explanation Junkie was fain to rest content at the time, for
the party had reached a part of the hill where it became necessary to
station the guns at their several posts.  In regard to this drive, we
have only to say that it ended in nothing except heavy rain and a severe
draft on the patience of the sportsmen, without any reward, save that
which may be derived from mild martyrdom.

Now, when the events which we have described were taking place on the
mountains of Loch Lossie, a very different scene was occurring in the
nursery of Kinlossie House.  In that interesting apartment, which was
one of the chief country residences of the spirits Row and Smash, little
Flora was seated all alone in the afternoon of that day.  Her seat was a
low chair, before her was a low table to match.  On the table sat her
favourite doll, Blackie, to whom she was administering counsel of the
gravest kind, in tones the most solemn.  The counsel, we need scarcely
say, gave unquestionable proof that her mother's admonitions to herself
had been thoroughly understood, though not always acted on.  Flo was in
the midst of one of her most pathetic appeals to Blackie to be "dood,"
when her mother entered hastily.

"Come with me, darling, to visit poor old Mrs Donaldson.  She is not
very well, I hear."

Flo required no second bidding, for she was extremely fond of the
keeper's mother--and love needs no persuasion.

As we have said, Mrs Donaldson's little cottage stood behind that of
her son Ivor.  It was very small, consisting of only one apartment with
a box bed and a few articles of old furniture, the most cherished of
which was a little clock with a staring face, and a poor landscape on
it.

"What caused the bruise, Maggie?" asked Mrs Gordon, after much talk on
the subject of fomentations and bandages.  The old woman hesitated to
tell, but after a little pressing she said, in half apologetic
tone,--"Weel, mem, it was na Ivor's fau't, but the day before yesterday
he cam in--fou--ye ken he's fond o' his glass, mem, an' he was swingin'
aboot his airms, poor falla, an' withoot the least intention, his haund
cam doon wi' sik a ding on my heed that knockit me doon.  But he kens na
aboot it, so ye'll no speak o't to him--or to the laird."

"You may depend upon it, poor Maggie, that I will not.  My mentioning it
could do no good.  And, as you say, Ivor was not quite himself at the
time."

"Thank'ee, mem, that's just it.  An' he's the best sons to me--_whan
he's sober_."

Soon afterwards a shout outside told that the sportsmen had returned
from the hills, so, bidding the old woman good-bye, Mrs Gordon and her
sympathetic child returned to the house.



CHAPTER NINE.

A QUIET DAY WITH A STIRRING TERMINATION.

What fisher does not know the charm, the calm delight, of a quiet day by
the river-side, after, it may be, months of too much contact with
society?  On such an occasion a congenial comrade is an advantage, but
unless the comrade be congenial, one is better alone.

This may sound selfish to some ears, but is it really so?  When a man
has all but immolated himself for ten or eleven months, it may be, on
the altar of business, art, and social duty, is a tremendous thirst for
Nature and solitude altogether selfish?  We think not.  And evidently
MacRummle thought not, as he wandered one soft, delightful morning, rod
in hand, down to the river-side.

The river-side!  There is something restfully suggestive in the very
words.  The quiet pools, the gurgling deeps, the rushing rapids, the
rippling shallows, the little cascades--what ardent hopes, what wild
suggestions, what grand possibilities these have for the young; what
gentle excitations, what pleasant, even though sad, memories for the
old!

Of course the non-fisher knows nothing of all this.  His terrestrial
joys are limited, poor thing!  The painter, indeed, has some part in the
matter--as regards his own line, so to speak--and when he goes on what
is vulgarly termed his own hook.  We have profound sympathy with the
painter.  But for the poor fellow who neither fishes nor paints, alas!
To be sure he may botanise.  Strange to say, we had almost forgotten
that! and also geologise; but our concern at present is with fishers,
or, rather, with that fishing enthusiast, MacRummle.

The sunshine of his face was second only to that of Nature.  His visage
beamed with satisfaction; his eyes gleamed with hope, as he sat down on
the bank near to his first pool, and began to select flies.

We have probably given the impression that MacRummle was alone, but this
is not strictly correct.  In his own estimation he was, indeed, in
absolute solitude, and, so far, his felicity was unbroken; but his steps
had been dogged that morning, and the dogger was Junkie.

That eccentric youngster possessed a mind which it is not easy to
analyse or describe.  One strong element in it, however, was curiosity.
Another was ambition.  The blending of these two qualities produced
wonder in Junkie--wonder that he, though as ardent a sportsman as
MacRummle, should go forth frequently to fish and catch little or
nothing, while the old gentleman went out and was wont to return with
baskets full to overflowing.  There must be a secret of some sort.  He
did not like to ask what that secret was, so he made up his mind to
follow the old man and watch him--not of course with the slightest
intention of doing anything sly or wrong, but secretly, because he was
well aware that MacRummle did not like to be distracted by company--
especially _his_ company!

Following, then, at a respectful distance, and relying for success very
much on the fisher's partial blindness and deafness, Junkie went out to
have a day of it.  He even went so far, in the matter of forethought, as
to provide himself with a massive slice of bread and cheese to sustain
him while carrying on his investigations.

Before he had got far from the house, however, he encountered Donald of
the ragged head, who had hung about the place in hopes of another
deer-drive, and whom he styled "Tonal'," in semi-sarcastic imitation of
old Ian.  Him he at once took into his confidence.

"I'll co wuth ye," said Donald.

"Come along, then.  But mind, if you make a noise, or show yourself; if
you so much as cough or sneeze, I'll punch your head an' tumble you into
the river."

"Fery coot," said Donald.  And upon this clear understanding they
advanced.

The other members of the company at the house, meanwhile, had scattered
in various directions to fish, shoot, paint or botanise, according to
fancy.

We may explain here that there were several trouting streams in the
vicinity of the house, besides the "river" at the head of the loch.
Thus it was that MacRummle had a stream all to himself.

At first the fisher tried fly, to which he was partial, but success did
not attend his efforts.  The water was not in the best condition for
fly, being rather swollen by recent rains.  Perseverance, however, was
one of MacRummle's strong qualities.  He was not to be easily beaten.

There was a certain big boulder about the size of a dog-cart near the
mouth of the stream, which narrowed its bed considerably, and thus
produced a formation of rock below water favourable to the shelter of
fish.  It also sent an oily ripple over the surface of the water, which
was favourable to the operations of the fisher.  The old gentleman
seldom failed to raise or hook a good sea-trout there, and always made
his first cast with eager expectation.  But the fish were either
obdurate or blind that morning.  They could not or they would not see.
With a slight, but by no means desponding, sigh, the old man changed his
cast and tried again.  He knew every stone and ledge of the pool, and
cast again and again with consummate skill and unusual care.  Still,
without result.

"That's odd," he muttered, for, being naturally a sociable man, he found
talking to himself an immense relief.  "Try once more, just at the tail
o' yon swirl, Dick, my boy."

His Christian name was Richard.  No one would have presumed to call him
Dick but himself.

No result following this appeal to the tail of the swirl, he sat down on
the bank and once more changed his hook.  The nature of change might
have been heard by the insects among the heather close by, if they were
listening, for Donald whispered to his companion,--"He's coin' to try
pait!"

"Didn't I bid ye hau'd your tongue?"

"Ay."

"Do't then."

MacRummle dropped a worm gently into the head of the pool, and let it go
with the current.  Instantly the line straightened, the rod bent, the
reel spun, and from the other side of the pool there leaped a lovely bar
of silver, which fell back to its native element with a considerable
splash.

"A two-pounder!" gasped Donald, unable to restrain his excitable spirit,
as he half rose.

Junkie had him by the throat in a moment, and crammed his ragged head
down among the heather.

"Tonal'!" he whispered remonstratively.

"I forgot," whispered Donald, when the strong little hands relaxed.
"I'll not do't again."

"Ye better no'," returned Junkie, with a shake of his fist that required
no explanation.

By this time the fish had darted like a lightning flash twice up stream,
