the nature of female Highland metal.

In the midst of all this the dogs suddenly became restive, and began to
growl.  Soon after, a knock came to the door, and the dogs rushed at it,
barking violently.  Mr McAllister went out, and found that a company of
wandering beggars had arrived, and prayed to be allowed to sleep in the
barn.  Unfortunate it was for them that they came so soon after Mr
Sudberry's unpleasant rencounter with one of their fraternity.  The good
man of the house, although naturally humane and hospitable to such poor
wanderers, was on the present occasion embittered against them; so he
ordered them off.

This incident brought the evening to an abrupt termination, as it was
incumbent on the farmer to see the intruders safely off his premises.
So the Sudberrys returned, in a state of great delight, excitement, and
physical warmth, to their own parlour.

The only other fact worth recording in regard to this event is, that the
Sudberrys were two hours late for breakfast next morning!



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 16.

THE EFFECTS OF COMPASSES.

The first few weeks of the Sudberrys' residence in their Highland home
were of an April cast--alternate sunshine and shower.  Sometimes they
had a day of beaming light from morning till night; at other times they
had a day of unmitigated rain, or, as Mr Sudberry called it, "a day of
cats and dogs;" and occasionally they had a day which embraced within
its own circuit both conditions of weather--glorious bursts of sunshine
alternating with sudden plumps of rain.

Thus far the weather justified and strengthened the diverse opinions of
both husband and wife.

"Did I not tell you, my love, that the climate was charming?" was Mr
Sudberry's triumphant remark when a dazzling blaze of light would roll
over flood and fell, and chase the clouds away.

"There, didn't I say so?" was the withering rejoinder of Mrs Sudberry,
when a black cloud rolled over the sky and darkened the landscape as
with a wipe of ink.

Hitherto victory leaned decidedly to neither side, the smile of triumph
and the humbled aspect of defeat rested alternate on either countenance,
so that both faces taken together formed a sort of contradictory human
barometer, which was not a bad one--at all events it was infinitely
superior to that instrument of the banjo type, which Mr Sudberry was
perpetually tapping in order to ascertain whether or not its tendencies
were dropsical.

When father was up at "set fair," mother was certain to be depressed,
inclining to much rain; yet, strangely enough, it was on such occasions
_very dry_!  When mother was "fair," (barometrically speaking, of
course), father was naturally down at "changeable"!  Yet there was
wonderful contradiction in the readings of this barometer; for, when
mother's countenance indicated "much rain," father sometimes went down
to "stormy," and the tails of his coat became altogether unmanageable.

But, towards the middle of the holidays, father gained a decided
victory.  For three weeks together they had not a drop of rain--scarcely
a cloud in the sky; and mother, although fairly beaten and obliged to
confess that it was indeed splendid weather, met her discomfiture with a
good grace, and enjoyed herself extremely, in a quiet way.

During this bright period the Sudberry Family, one and all, went ahead,
as George said, "at a tremendous pace."  The compasses having arrived,
Mr Sudberry no longer laid restrictions on the wandering propensities
of his flock but, having given a compass to each, and taught them all
the use of it, sent them abroad upon the unexplored ocean of hills
without fear.  Even Jacky received a compass, with strict injunctions to
take good care of it.  Being naturally of an inquiring disposition, he
at once took it to pieces, and this so effectually that he succeeded in
analysing it into a good many more pieces than its fabricator had ever
dreamed of.  To put it together again would have taxed the ingenuity of
the same fabricator--no wonder that it was beyond the power of Jacky
altogether.  But this mattered nothing to the "little darling," as he
did not understand his father's learned explanation of the uses of the
instrument.  To do Mr Sudberry justice, he had not expected that his
boy could understand him; but he was aware that if he, Jacky, did not
get a compass as well as the rest of them, there would be no peace in
the White House during _that_ season.  Moreover, Jacky did not care
whether he should get lost or not.  In fact, he rather relished it; for
he knew that it would create a pleasant excitement for a time in the
household, and he entertained the firm belief that McAllister and his
men could find any creature on the hills, man or beast, no matter how
hopelessly it should be lost.

There being, then, no limit to the wanderings of the Sudberrys, they one
and all gave themselves over deliberately to a spirit of riotous
rambling.  Of course they all, on various occasions, lost themselves,
despite the compasses; but, having become experienced mountaineers, they
always took good care to find themselves again before sunset.  George
and Fred candidly declared that they preferred to steer by "dead
reckoning," and left their compasses at home.  Lucy always carried hers,
and frequently consulted it, especially when in her father's presence,
for she was afflicted, poor girl, with that unfashionable weakness, an
earnest desire to please her father even in trifles.  Nevertheless, she
privately confided to Fred one day that she was often extremely puzzled
by her compass, and that she had grave doubts as to whether, on a
certain occasion, when she had gone for a long ramble with Hector and
Flora Macdonald, and been lost, the blame of that disaster was not due
to her compass.  Fred said he thought it was, and believed that it would
be the means of compassing her final disappearance from the face of the
earth if she trusted to it so much.

As for Mr Sudberry himself; his faith in the compass was equal to that
of any mariner.  The worthy man was, or believed himself to be, (which
is the same thing, you know!) of profoundly scientific _tendencies_.  He
was aware, of course, that he had never really _studied_ any science
whatever; but he had dabbled in a number of them, and he felt that he
had immense _capacity_ for deep thought and subtle investigation.  His
mind was powerfully analytical--that's what it was.  One consequence of
this peculiarity of mind was that he "took his bearings" on short and
known distances, as well as on long venturesome rambles; he tested
himself and his compass, as it were.

One day he had walked out alone in the direction of the village, four
miles distant from the White House, whence the family derived their
supplies.  He had set out with his rod, (he never walked near the river
without his rod), intending to take a cast in what he styled the "lower
pools."  By degrees he fished so near to the village that he resolved to
push forward and purchase a few books.  Depositing rod and basket among
the bushes, he walked smartly along the road, having previously, as a
matter of course, taken his bearings from the village by compass.  A
flock of sheep met him, gazed at him in evident surprise, and passed on.
At their heels came the collie dog, with his tongue out.  It bestowed a
mild, intelligent glance on the stranger, and also passed on.  Close
behind the dog came the shepherd, with plaid bonnet and thick stick.

"A fine day, friend," said Mr Sudberry.

"Oo, ay, it _is_ a fine day."

He also passed on.

Another turn in the road, and Mr Sudberry met a drove of shaggy cattle,
each cow of which looked sturdy and fierce enough for any ordinary bull;
while the bull himself was something awful to look upon.  There is
nothing ladylike or at all feminine in the aspect of a Highland cow!

Mr Sudberry politely stepped to one side, and made way for them.  Many
of the animals paused for an instant, and gazed at the Englishman with
profound gravity, and then went on their way with an air that showed
they evidently could make nothing of him.  The drover thought otherwise,
for he stopped.

"Coot-tay to you, sir."

"Good-day, friend, good-day.  Splendid weather for the--for the--"

Mr Sudberry did not know exactly for which department of agriculture
the weather was most favourable, so he said--"for the cattle."

"Oo, ay, the w'ather's no that ill.  Can she tell the time o' day?"

Out came the compass.

"West-nor'-west, and by--Oh!  I beg your pardon," (pulling out his watch
and replacing the compass), "a quarter-past two."

The drover passed on, and Mr Sudberry, chuckling at his mistake, took
the bearings of a tall pine that grew on a distant knoll.

On gaining the outskirts of the village, Mr Sudberry felt a sensation
of hunger, and instantly resolved to purchase a bun, which article he
had now learned to call by its native name of "cookie."  At the same
instant a bright idea struck him--he would steer for the baker's shop by
compass!  He knew the position of the shop exactly--the milestone gave
him the distance--he would lay his course for it.  He would walk
conscientiously with his eyes on the ground, except when it was
necessary to refer to the compass, and he would not raise them until he
stood within the shop.  It would be a triumphant exhibition of the
practical purposes, in a small way, to which the instrument might be
applied.

Full of this idea, he took a careful observation of the compass, the
sun, and surrounding nature; laid his course for the baker's shop, which
was on the right side of the village, and walked straight into the
butcher's, which lay on its left extremity.  He was so much put out on
lifting his eyes to those of the butcher, that he ordered a leg of
mutton and six pounds of beefsteaks on the spot.  The moment after, he
recollected that two legs of mutton and a round of beef had been
forwarded to the White House by coach the day before, and that there was
a poached brace of moor-fowl in the larder at that moment; but, having
given the order in a prompt, business tone of voice, he felt that he
lacked moral courage to rescind it.

"Ye'll ha'e frien's comin' to veesit ye," observed the butcher, who was
gifted with a peculiar and far-sighted faculty of "putting that and that
together."

"No; we have no immediate prospect of such a pleasure."

"Ay?  Hum! it's wonderfu' what an appeteet the hill air gives to
strangers."

"A tremendous appetite!  Good-day, friend."

Mr Sudberry said this heartily, and went off to the baker's--by dead
reckoning--discomfited but chuckling.

The butcher pondered and philosophised over the subject the remainder of
the afternoon with much curiosity, but with no success.  Had the wisdom
of Plato been mingled with his Scotch philosophy, the compound reduced
to an essential oil of investigative profundity, and brought to bear on
the subject in question, he would have signally failed to discover the
reason of the Sudberrys' larder being crammed that week with an
unreasonable quantity of butcher-meat.

Yes! during these three weeks of sunshine the Sudberrys made hay of
their time as diligently as the McAllisters made hay of their grass, and
the compasses played a prominent part in all their doings, and led them
into many scrapes.  Among other things, they led them to Glen Ogle.
More of this in the next chapter.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 17.

THE TRIP TO GLEN OGLE.

Without entering into minute comparisons, it may be truly said that Glen
Ogle is one of the grandest and wildest of mountain passes in the
highlands of Perthshire.  Unlike the Trossachs, which Sir Walter Scott
has immortalised in his "Lady of the Lake," Glen Ogle is a wild, rugged,
rocky pass, almost entirely destitute of trees, except at its lower
extremity; and of shrubs, except along the banks of the little burn
which meanders like a silver thread down the centre of the glen.  High
precipitous mountains rise on either hand--those on the left being more
rugged and steep than those on the right.  The glen is very narrow
throughout--a circumstance which adds to its wildness; and which, in
gloomy weather, imparts to the spot a truly savage aspect.  Masses of
_debris_ and fallen rocks line the base of the precipices, or speckle
the sides of the mountains in places where the slopes, being less
precipitous than elsewhere, have served to check the fallen matter; and
the whole surface of the narrow vale is dotted with rocks of various
sizes, which have bounded from the cliffs, and, overleaping every
obstacle, have found a final resting-place on a level with the little
stream.

The road follows the course of the stream at the foot of the glen; but,
as it advances, it ascends the mountains on the right, and runs along
their sides until the head of the pass is gained.  Here it crosses, by
means of a rude stone bridge, a deep chasm, at the bottom of which the
waters of the burn leap and roar among chaotic rocks--a foretaste of the
innumerable rushes, leaps, tumbles, and plunges, which await them all
down the glen.  Just beyond this bridge is a small level patch of
mingled rocky and mossy ground.  It is the summit of the mountain ridge;
yet the highest peaks rise above it, and so hem it in that it resembles
the arena of a rude amphitheatre.  In the centre of this spot lies a
clear, still lake, or tarn, not more than a hundred yards in diameter.
This is the fountain-head of two streams.  From the pools and springs,
within a stone's cast of the tarn, arise the infant waters of the burn
already mentioned, which, descending Glen Ogle, find their way to the
Firth of Tay, through Strath Earn.  From the opposite side of the tarn
issues another brook, which, leaping down the other side of the
mountains, mingles its waters with Loch Tay, and finds its way, by a
much more circuitous route, to the same firth.  The whole region is
desolate and lonely in the extreme, and so wild that a Rocky Mountain
hunter, transported thither by fairy power, might find himself quite at
home, except in the matter of big-horned goats and grisly bears.  But,
for the matter of that, he would find mountain sheep with very
respectable horns in their way; and, as to bears, the hill-sides are
bare enough to satisfy any hunter of moderate expectations.

Up to this elevated tarn, among the hoary mountain peaks, the Sudberry
Family struggled one hot, sunny, lovely forenoon.  Bent on a long and
bold flight, they had travelled by the stage-coach to the foot of the
glen, near the head of Loch Earn.  Here they were deposited at the door
of a picturesque white-washed house, which was styled the Inn, and from
this point they toiled up the glen on foot, intoxicating themselves on
the way with deep draughts of mingled excitement, fresh air, and
romance.

The whole family were out upon this occasion, including Mrs Brown,
Hobbs, and Peter.  The delicate Tilly was also there, and to her Master
Jacky devoted himself with an assiduity worthy of even a _good_ boy.  He
took occasion several times, however, to tell Peter, in a grave way,
that, whenever he felt tired, he would be glad to carry his basket for
him, and himself too, for the matter of that, if he should get quite
knocked up.  He indemnified himself for these concessions on the side of
virtue by inflicting various little torments on the bodies and minds of
Mrs Brown and his mother, such as hiding himself at some distance
ahead, and suddenly darting out from behind a rock with a hideous yell;
or coming up behind with eyes staring and hair flying, and screaming
"mad bull," with all the force of his lungs.

Hector and Flora Macdonald were also of the party.  George and Fred were
particularly attentive to Flora, and Hector was ditto to Lucy.  He
carried her botanical box, and gave her a good deal of information in
regard to plants and wild flowers, in which Lucy professed a deep
interest, insomuch that she stopped frequently to gather specimens and
listen to Hector's learned observations, until they were more than once
left a considerable way behind the rest of the party.  Indeed, Lucy's
interest in science was so great that she unwittingly pulled two or
three extremely rare specimens to pieces while listening to these
eloquent discourses, and was only made conscious of her wickedness by a
laughing remark from Hector that she "must surely have the bump of
destructiveness largely developed."

Arrived at the tarn, each individual deposited his and her basket or
bundle on a selected spot of dry ground, and the ladies began to spread
out the viands, while Mr Sudberry took the exact bearings of the spot
by compass.  While thus philosophically engaged, he observed that fish
were rising in the tarn.

"Hallo!  Hector; why, I see fish in the pond."

"True," replied the young man, "plenty of trout; but they are small."

"I'll fish," said Mr Sudberry.

"So will I," cried George.

And fish they did for half an hour, at the end of which period they were
forcibly torn away from the water-side and made to sit down and eat
sandwiches--having caught between them two dozen of trout, the largest
of which was about five inches long.

"Why, how did ever the creatures get up into such a lake?" inquired Mr
Sudberry, eyeing the trout in surprise: "they could never jump up all
the waterfalls that we have passed to-day."

"I suppose they were born in the lake," suggested Hector, with a smile.

"Born in it?" murmured Mr Sudberry, pondering the idea; "but the
_first_ ones could not have been born in it.  How did the first ones get
there?"

"The same way as what the first fishes came into the sea, of course,"
said Jacky, looking very pompous.

Unfortunately he unintentionally tried to perform that impossible feat,
which is called swallowing a crumb down the wrong throat, thereby nearly
choking himself; and throwing his mother into a flutter of agitation.

There was something so exhilarating in the atmosphere of that elevated
region that none of the party felt inclined to waste much time over
luncheon.  Mr Sudberry, in particular, was very restless and migratory.
His fishing propensities had been aroused, and could not be quieted.
He had, in the course of a quarter of an hour, gobbled what he deemed it
his duty to eat and drink, and, during the remainder of the meal, had
insisted on helping everybody to everything, moving about as he did so,
and thereby causing destruction to various articles of crockery.  At
last he declared that he was off to fish down the burn, and that the
rest of the party would pick him up on their way back to the coach,
which was to start from the inn at Loch Earn Head at five in the
afternoon.

"Now don't be late," said he; "be at the inn by half-past four
precisely."

"Ay, ay; yes, yes," from everybody; and away he went alone to enjoy his
favourite sport.

The rest of the party scattered.  Some went to good points for
sketching, some to botanise, and others to ascend the highest of the
neighbouring peaks.  Mrs Brown and Hobbs were left in charge of the
_debris_ of luncheon, to the eating up of which they at once devoted
themselves with the utmost avidity as soon as the others were gone.

"Come, this is wot I calls comfortable," said Hobbs; (he spoke huskily,
through an immense mouthful of sandwich.) "Ain't it, Mrs Brown?"

"Humph!" said Mrs Brown.

It is to be remarked that Mrs Brown was out of temper--not that that
was an unusual thing; but she had found the expedition more trying than
she had anticipated, and the torments of mind and body to which Jacky
had subjected her were of an uncommonly irritating nature.

"Wot," continued Hobbs, attacking a cold tongue, "d'you think of the
natives of this 'ere place?"

"Nothink at all," was Mrs Brown's prompt rejoinder.

Hobbs, who was naturally of a jolly, sociable disposition, felt a little
depressed at Mrs Brown's repellent manner; so he changed his mode of
address.

"Try some of this 'ere fowl, Mrs Brown, it's remarkably tender, it is;
just suited to the tender lips of--dear me, Mrs Brown, how improvin'
the mountain hair is to your complexion, if I may wenture to speak of
improvin' that w'ich is perfect already."

"Get along, Hobbs!" said Mrs Brown, affecting to be displeased.

"My dear, I'm gettin' along like a game chicken, perhaps I might say
like Dan, who's got the most uncommon happetite as I ever did see.  He's
a fine fellow, Dan is, ain't he, Mrs Brown?"

"Brute," said Mrs Brown; "they're all brutes."

"Ah!" said Hobbs, shaking his head, "strong language, Mrs Brown.  But,
admitting that, (merely for the sake of argument, of course), you cannot
deny that they are raither clever brutes."

"I do deny it," retorted Mrs Brown, taking a savage bite out of the leg
of a chicken, as if it represented the whole Celtic race.  "Don't they
talk the most arrant stuff?--specially that McAllister, who is forever
speakin' about things that he don't understand, and that nobody else
does!"

"Speak for yourself; ma'am," said Hobbs, drawing himself up with as much
dignity as was compatible with a sitting posture.

"I _do_ speak for myself.  Moreover, I speak for _some_ whom I might
name, and who ain't _verra_ far away."

"If, ma'am, you mean that insinivation to apply--"

"I make no insinivations.  Hand me that pot of jam--no, the unopened
one."

Hobbs did as he was required with excruciating politeness, and
thereafter took refuge in dignified silence; suffering, however, an
expression of lofty scorn to rest on his countenance.  Mrs Brown
observed this, and her irate spirit was still further chafed by it.  She
meditated giving utterance to some withering remarks, while, with
agitated fingers, she untied the string of the little pot of
cranberry-jam.  Worthy Mrs Brown was particularly fond of
cranberry-jam.  She had put up this pot in her own basket expressly for
