"Fortunately your brother had the good sense to warn his allies to act
carefully and not alarm the thief, so that the life of the dog might
not be jeopardized. He seems to have thought of everything, this
brother Bob of yours. If we get Lola back it will be largely his
doing--and yours. I sha'n't forget the fact, either."

Walter flushed under the great man's praise.

"It was just a happen," murmured he. "I thought I had blundered."

He saw Mr. Crowninshield color at having his own word hurled back at
him.

"Some of the most fortunate strokes in our lives are achieved by
chance," replied he, laughing. "See how capable I am of shifting my
philosophy," he added with good humor. "Nevertheless, although this
indiscretion of yours has turned out well I still maintain that,
generally speaking, a silent tongue is a great asset. In nine cases
out of ten keeping still does far less harm than talking. Jerry is a
shining example of my creed. In all the years he has been here he has
never let his tongue outrun his solid judgment. And yet," concluded he
with a twinkle, "had we trusted to Jerry, we should never have heard
of his Brockton telephone communication. So there you are! Which is
the better way? It seems to be a toss up in this case."

"I guess the better way is never to make a mistake," smiled Walter.

"Do you know the infallible person who can boast such a record?" came
whimsically from Mr. Crowninshield.

"N--o, sir."

"Nor I."

A pause fell between them and Walter rose to go.

"Do you suppose you will hear anything more to-night?" questioned he
shyly.

"There is no telling. We may have news at any moment; or again we may
hear nothing until into the night or till morning."

"I'm crazy to get tidings, aren't you?" In his earnestness the lad had
forgotten that they were not of an age or quite of the same station.

The master smiled indulgently.

"I'm every bit as crazy to hear as you are," said he, quite as if Lola
were their joint possession.

"Do you think you'll get any message before I go to bed?"

Once more Mr. Crowninshield regarded him with friendly comradeship.

"That depends on what time you turn in."

"At home Ma makes me go at nine o'clock. I've done it pretty much,
too, since I've been here. She wanted I should."

"You are a sensible fellow. Nine o'clock is late enough for anybody to
sit up, although I will admit," the man chuckled mischievously, "that
in New York we occasionally sit up later than that."

But Walter ignored the jest.

"Do you think you will hear by nine?" persisted he.

"There is no way of knowing, sonny," was the kind answer. "The best
thing for you to do, however, is to go to bed as you usually do. You
are tired out with excitement. I can see that."

"No I'm not," contradicted the boy, his eyes very wide open.

"But you are--a deal more fagged than you realize. I am myself. Now
I'll tell you what we'll do. I'll go to bed and you go to bed; and if
any message comes I'll tell them to waken me and then I'll waken you.
I can call you on the wire that goes from the house down to your
quarters. How will that do?"

"But suppose I shouldn't hear it?" objected the lad.

"Somebody will. The chauffeurs do not go to sleep as early as you do,
I rather fancy. I will give orders for one of them to tell you if a
call comes."

"I'd much prefer to sit up, sir. Why couldn't I just sit here on the
piazza? It wouldn't disturb anybody and I should be on the spot."

"You might sit here all night and catch your death of cold, and no
tidings come until morning, sonny. No, my plan is much the better one.
You trot along to bed. I'll fulfill my part of the contract and go
also. And if there is anything to tell before morning you shall hear
it."

Reluctantly the lad moved away.

He was not in the least sleepy. Nevertheless because he had given his
word he dragged himself across the lawn, mounted the stairs to his
room, and began to undress. His spirits were very high. Within an hour
or two--three hours at the very most--the telephone would ring and
Mr. Crowninshield would announce to him the glad tidings that the
thief had been caught. Then some one would motor to Barnstable,
Brockton, or wherever it was, recapture Lola, and bring her back, and
the events of the past few hours would be only a nightmare. And it
would be Bob--he and Bob--who brought about this glorious climax to a
day of catastrophes. And if such a result was accomplished had not the
owner of Surfside promised that he would never forget the service?

For his own part Walter wanted nothing. If Lola could only be found
his happiness would be complete. But if only Mr. Crowninshield would
do something wonderful for Bob! Perhaps he might give him a big sum of
money; he could well afford to. Or maybe he would put him in the way
of earning it. There was no telling what Aladdin-like feats he might
perform. Such a man was all powerful. Why, he could send Bob to Europe
if he chose! Or pay the mortgage on the house. He could make Bob's
fortune.

The younger boy thrilled at the thought.

With these optimistic and intriguing fancies in mind he slipped into
bed and soon dozed off into dreams wilder and even more extravagant.
He slept soundly and awoke with a bewildered cry when a knock came at
the door.

"It's I--Wheeler, shaver! The boss wants you on the telephone."

Up scrambled Walter, his stupor banished by the agitation of the
moment.

He did not wait to don his clothes but in his pajamas took the stairs
two at a time and soon had his ear to the receiver.

"Walter?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, we have some news, such as it is." Mr. Crowninshield's voice
sounded dubious and discouraged. "They tracked the car we were after
to Buzzard's Bay and found it there empty; its occupants had
disappeared."

"Disappeared!" repeated the astounded boy.

"Yes, they're gone! Vanished in thin air! Not a trace of them is to be
found. The abandoned automobile with its number removed, was
discovered on a side road."

"The man must be hiding somewhere in the vicinity then."

"That does not follow, son; I wish it did."

"What else could he do?"

"His accomplice from Brockton could meet him with another car, for one
thing."

"A different car, and throw us off the scent!"

"Precisely."

For a second neither of them spoke. Walter was too nonplussed and his
employer too disheartened.

"Isn't that the limit!" the lad presently gathered indignation enough
to ejaculate.

"I expected something of the sort," was the reply. "We are up against
professionals, you see, and not amateurs. This gang is being paid big
money and does not intend either to fail in what it has undertaken or
be trapped. We had it too easy at the beginning and were too much
elated by our initial success."

"What are you going to do now?"

"I've wired New York for detectives. I ought to have followed my first
impulse and done it immediately, and I should have had we not seemed
on the high road to success without help. The plain-clothes men will
probably be miffed at being called in now that we have meddled with
the case and messed it all up."

"But I don't see how we have done any harm," retorted His Highness,
feeling it a little ungrateful of Mr. Crowninshield to veer so quickly
from commendation to censure.

"Oh, untrained people never can compete with skilled ones in any
line," was the sharp answer. "I ought to have remembered it. Doubtless
in our zeal we betrayed ourselves somehow and our man became
suspicious and adopted other tactics in consequence."

"I don't believe so," Walter maintained stoutly. "I'll bet this is
just what he had arranged to do anyway."

"Well, perhaps it was. We cannot tell about that," yawned the man at
the other end of the wire. "The result, however, is the same. Instead
of netting our catch we have allowed it to slip through our fingers."

There was an edge of exasperation in the tone.

"Maybe we'll have better luck than you think," ventured the lad, not
knowing what else to say, and unwilling to betray his chagrin.

"We'll have neither good luck nor bad in future," responded the master
curtly. "After this we keep our hands off and the detectives manage
the affair. There have been blunders enough."

With this ungracious comment the great man hung up the receiver and
stumbling through the darkness His Highness felt his way upstairs and
dropped into bed.

Like a house of cards his roseate dreams for the future had suddenly
collapsed. There would be now no wonderful career for Bob, no bag of
gold, no fairy fortune! Instead of being a hero he had again become a
mere duffer, a blunderer, had played the fool.

Since failure had come in place of the coveted success Mr.
Crowninshield would most likely blame it all to him.

Fleeting, indeed, was the favor and gratitude of princes!




CHAPTER X

BOB


By late afternoon of the following day the New York detectives arrived
and Wheeler drove their dusty and travel-stained car around to the
garage.

"Must have speeded up some!" commented he, on viewing the throbbing
machine. "Left New York at midnight," they said. "Some friends of the
master's likely, come to play golf."

Ever given to frankness it was on the tip of Walter's tongue to
declare the real identity of the strangers, but fortunately he
bethought him in time to halt the words.

"What did they look like?" inquired he, eager to know and yet anxious
not to appear inquisitive.

"Look like? Like any other dusty, muddy guys," grumbled Wheeler,
eyeing with disdain the grimy automobile which he knew he would be
expected to clean.

"Old or young?" persisted His Highness.

"Old enough to know better than to heat up an engine this way, but
young enough to do it," snapped Wheeler. "Shouldn't think their car
had seen water in years, it's that filthy. A rum job for me!"

Walter, however, did not reply. He was not in the least interested in
the mud-caked car. It was its occupants that aroused his curiosity. In
all his life he had never seen a genuine detective and he was all
impatience for a peep at persons allied with such an intriguing
profession. While his reason told him they must, of course, look
precisely like other men, nevertheless the hope would persist that
perhaps, after all, they didn't. And even if they did appear like
ordinary mortals were there not their myriad disguises? He hoped with
all his heart they would wear some of these, that the exigencies of
the case would compel it.

Very great, then, was his surprise and disappointment when on being
summoned to the big house soon after the arrival of these interesting
creatures he was presented to two commonplace beings who, although
charming gentlemen, were not in the least different from anybody else.
Mr. Dacie, the younger of the men, was a pleasant, blond-haired fellow
who instantly ingratiated himself in the boy's affections by asking
him if he collected stamps and bestowing on him two rare ones from
China. In fact he seemed to like everything a boy liked and appeared
to be almost a boy himself.

Mr. Lyman was older but he, too, when he was not being stern and
business-like, was very jolly. No one could possibly be afraid of
either one of them and then and there His Highness's faith in the
ultimate success of Mr. Crowninshield's cause dwindled and died. They
weren't disguised at all; and if they had pistols they must have had
them well concealed for the only suspicious articles produced from
their pockets were notebooks and pencils. He had expected to be quite
awed by their presence but on the contrary he found, when he started
out to show them the kennels and the place where he had seen the
automobile tracks, that he was chattering away to both of them quite
as if he had known them all his life.

Mr. Dacie was particularly friendly, and as they walked along he
talked much of sports, dogs, and fishing. Furthermore he was intensely
interested in Bob and listened attentively to all that was told him
about this remarkable big brother. He had a bully brother himself, he
said. In short, before a half hour had passed His Highness had not
only decided to become a detective but to become one exactly like Mr.
Dacie.

And yet as he thought it over afterward the hero of his sudden
adoration had not uttered one syllable about jails, criminals,
robberies, or crimes of any sort. In fact he had talked really very
little. What he had done had been to smile, nod, and let the other
fellow babble. It had, to be sure, been a delightful experience to
find yourself a lion, and everything you did of interest to your
listener; but you did not learn much about the business of being a
detective, reflected Walter, a bit mortified by his discovery. Well,
the next time he was with Mr. Dacie he would ask him some questions
and let him relate everything about his mysterious calling.

Strange to say, however, the moment for such disclosures never
appeared to come right. There was always so much else to talk of. Mr.
Dacie wanted most terribly to catch some flounders and wondered if
there were any to be found; and of course as Walter knew of three
secret places where flounders were sure to lurk he eagerly told his
new friend about them. And then he had to talk swimming and
school--and how he hated it! Why, there were endless things to tell
Mr. Dacie. The visit of the two men was, moreover, surprisingly short.
They remained at Surfside only one night and the next morning,
together with Mr. Crowninshield, who led the way in his car, they
disappeared leaving His Highness none the wiser and regretfully
mourning his lost opportunity to be initiated into the gruesome
mysteries of a detective's career.

The realization that in exchange for telling everything he knew or
ever had thought Mr. Dacie had told him nothing suddenly caused the
lad to speculate as to whether after all both Mr. Dacie and his
associate, Mr. Lyman, were not cleverer than they looked to be.

It seemed incredible to recall, now that they were gone, that he had
not once asked them what they thought about Lola and whether they had
any idea where the man who had taken her had gone. How much better it
would have been had he made that inquiry instead of chattering about
his own affairs. But somehow when there had been a lull in the
conversation they had always been busy measuring footprints or
automobile ruts, and writing down these unending dimensions.
Moreover, something which he was unable to explain always halted the
questions.

Well, it was useless to regret his vanished opportunities. The
detectives were now far beyond his reach and probably he would never
see them again. He might as well go about his work and put them,
together with Lola and her baffling disappearance, out of his mind.
This he tried valiantly to do, but in spite of his utmost endeavor his
thought constantly reverted to the missing dog, and when toward dusk
Mr. Crowninshield's car came whirling up the avenue His Highness had
all he could do not to rush out and demand of the master whether he
had secured any further information.

To remember that he must keep constantly in the background was, in
fact, one of the most difficult aspects of Walter's job. As a
democratic young American who had always mingled in the best society
Lovell's Harbor had to offer he had been free to give a hail to
anybody he desired to greet. But at Surfside everything was different.
He must stifle his natural impulses and curb his tongue, a role very
hard for one who had had no previous experience with class
distinctions. Difficult as it had been he had made up his mind to
being excluded from the gayety that went on about him. It was, to be
sure, no fun to view automobile loads of young people roll out of the
drive bent on a day of pleasure; to look on while motor boats pulled
up anchor and puffed across the blue of the bay. And how he would have
adored to try his hand at a set of tennis on that fine dirt court!
Ah, there were moments when to a normal, healthy boy the world
appeared a very unfair place; and the lot of one who worked for a
living a wretched one.

And then, when his spirits had reached their lowest ebb, he would
resolutely take himself to task. Was there not his pay envelope to
compensate him? He was not at Surfside to have a good time; he was
there to earn his daily bread and very fortunate was he to have so
good a place. Having read himself this lecture he was wont to turn to
his duties with lighter heart, closing his ears to the laughter and
his eyes to the merriment that made up the days of the idle. But what
he never could get used to was the fact that he must not ask questions
or voice his opinions. In a free country where one man was as good as
another the mandate seemed absurd. But it wasn't done. That was all
there was about it. Jerry said so and so did Tim.

Instead of piping, "Hi, Mr. Crowninshield, did you find out anything?"
one awaited the information until it was voluntarily imparted.

In this particular case, as good fortune would have it, His Highness's
impatience had seethed and bubbled only a half hour before who should
come strolling down to the kennels but the very gentleman the lad was
feverish to interrogate.

Arrayed in a cool Palm Beach suit and a soft hat of white felt he
sauntered up as indifferently as if the boy's curiosity were not at
the boiling point and said, "Good evening," in a perfectly calm,
self-possessed tone.

"Good evening, sir," Walter replied.

"Dogs all right?"

"Yes, sir."

"No more of them missing?"

"Not on your--no, sir."

The great man turned away to conceal a smile.

"I've been seeing your brother to-day," remarked he.

"_Bob?_"

Mr. Crowninshield nodded.

"Yes. We went over to the Seaver Bay wireless station."

The lad waited.

"You have a very fine brother, youngster, and one whom you may well be
proud of."

"Yes, sir."

(What was the use of telling him that? His Highness knew what a corker
Bob was without being told. Much better tell him what had happened at
Seaver Bay, what the detectives said, and whether Lola had been
found!)
