
After considerable discussion, the suggestion of the little villain was
adopted, with a modification, however, proposed by himself, by which
the whole party were to be implicated in the mischief. No time was to
be lost, for a portion of the faithful, who appeared still to be having
a good time on deck, would soon come below to turn in. Howe and Little
went to the main scuttle, which opened into the hold, and raised it.

"What are you going to do?" asked Raymond.

"We are going to hide in the hold, just for the fun of the thing,"
replied Little. "Won't you come down with us?"

"That's not a bad idea," suggested Lindsley. "When they come down to
look for us, they won't find us. That will make a sensation, at least,
and then we shall not be entirely ignored."

"Are you going to stay there all night?" inquired Raymond.

"Yes--why not?" answered Lindsley. "It is not quite so comfortable a
place to sleep as the mess-rooms; but we can stand it for one night."

Even the mild rebels, Hyde and Johnson, were pleased with the plan, for
it looked like an adventure. The persuasions of Lindsley induced them
to yield whatever scruples they had. It would be a rich thing to have
the principal or the officers come down into the steerage, and find it
empty. There was still a chance to make the principal do something,
even if it were only to call them up for punishment; for anything
seemed better than being entirely ignored.

Little and Howe, each with a lantern in his hand, which he had taken
from the lamp-room forward, led the way into the hold. All the members
of the three parties followed; the mild rebels regarding the movement
rather as a piece of fun than as anything which added to the guilt they
had already incurred. When the last one had descended the ladder, Howe
put on the scuttle, and the steerage was "like some banquet hall
deserted," for the stewards were either on deck or in the kitchen,
where they spent their leisure hours.

As soon as the rebels were all in the hold, they separated into three
parties again, as they had been in the steerage. Little, with his
lantern, went forward, where he was soon joined by the rest of the
runaways; Hyde and his companions went aft; and Raymond's party
remained near the main scuttle. The hold was divided into store-rooms,
forward and aft, while the space amidships was devoted to the stowage
of boxes, barrels, water casks, and other articles. The water tanks
were near the heel of the foremast, where Howe and his party had
located themselves. They contained the entire supply of the ship, while
she was going from port to port, or lying in harbor. They had been
fitted up under the direction of Mr. Lowington. The water was drawn
from them by means of a pump in the kitchen, the pipe of which could be
adjusted to either of them with screw connections.

"We must do the job quick, and get out of this place, or we may be
fastened down here, as we were in the steerage," said Little, in a low
tone, though he need not have troubled himself to use this precaution,
for the dashing of the sea against the side of the vessel made so much
noise, that those who were twenty feet distance could not have heard
him.

"Are you sure we are not burning our own fingers?" asked Ibbotson. "My
experience in the Josephine, when we were short of water, taught me
what it was to be without it, especially when you have to feed on salt
horse and hard bread."

"That's so," added Spencer.

"Can't we save some for ourselves?" inquired Wilton.

"What's the use? We shall return to Havre as soon as the officers find
that the water tanks are empty," added Little.

"But why not save some?" persisted Wilton. "There are lots of bottles
on the ballast, and a tunnel on the vinegar barrel. Hurry up, and fill
a bottle for each fellow."

A dozen of the rebels rushed aft, and procured the bottles, while
Little started the faucets which were used in drawing off the water,
when it was necessary to clean out the tanks, or for use when the pump
above was out of order. This was the precious scheme by which the
intense rebels intended to compel the principal to return to port
immediately. There could be no doubt that it would be an effectual one,
for with no fresh water the ship could not remain a single day at sea
without causing great discomfort, if not actual suffering, to those on
board. This happy expedient had been devised by Little, and it was
diabolical enough to be the invention of his fertile genius.

The bottles were brought up, and with the aid of the tunnel, a dozen
and a half of them were filled--just enough for the Howe party, for
they did not intend to look out for the comfort of those who would not
fully join them in their plans. The water rushed from the tanks, and
flowed away into the ballast underneath. The faucets were large, and in
a short time the tanks were empty. As the ship rolled each way, almost
the last drop in them was poured out.

"Now let us get out of here before we are fastened in," said Little,
after he had adjusted the faucets.

"There will be a sweet row when they find out the tanks are empty,"
added Howe, fully believing that the party had now done something to
make themselves felt.

"It will please me to hear them howl," continued Wilton.

"Keep your bottles out of sight," said Howe. "Don't let those fellows
see them, or they will smell a mice."

"Don't you suppose they know what we have been doing?" inquired Monroe.

"How should they? The swashing of the sea made so much noise they
couldn't hear the water running out," answered Little.

"Don't let on."

The party concealed their bottles under their clothing, and moved
towards the ladder by which they had descended.

"What were you doing with all those bottles?" asked Raymond.

"What bottles?" demanded Little.

"We saw you take a lot of bottles from the ballast there," replied
Raymond, whose party had been discussing the probable use to which they
were to be applied, though they reached no satisfactory conclusion.

"Well, I'll tell you what they were for," answered Little. "We were
going to have some fun, pelting them with stones, just as we used to
play duck on shore, you know; but we concluded not to do so, lest the
stewards in the kitchen should hear the noise, and make a row about
it--that's all."

"Where are you going now?" inquired Lindsley, who was not quite
satisfied with this lucid explanation--as though fellows engaged in a
mutiny would care to amuse themselves pelting bottles!

"We have just made up our minds that it is not quite safe to stay down
here any longer."

"Why not?"

"Suppose they should fasten us in?"

"Suppose they should? I thought you intended to stay down here," said
Raymond, who concluded that the runaways were very fickle in their
purposes.

"We did intend to do so; but we hadn't looked over all the ground. It
has just occurred to us that the thirty lambs, who kiss the rod that
smites them, would not come into the steerage to-night. It will take
about the whole of them to stand watch, and if any of them go below,
they will sleep on the floor of the main and after cabins, where they
cannot be corrupted by such wicked fellows as you and I, Raymond. So,
you see, if we can't get up any sensation by sleeping on the ballast,
what's the use of making yourself uncomfortable for nothing. That's the
idea. Let us go into the steerage, and turn in for the night."

"I don't believe in backing out," said Raymond, not very well pleased
to hear Little class him with himself.

"Don't back out, then, my dear fellow. Stay here all night, and have a
good time," added the little villain, as he ascended the ladder, and
opened the scuttle.

"I'm not going to stay here if the rest don't," interposed Lindsley;
and all the Howe party followed the runaways.

Hyde's party, seeing that all the others were retreating, came to the
ladder, and asked for an explanation. Howe replied that the runaways
were sick of the game, and had returned to the steerage; and the third
squad followed the example of the other two. The hold was left as empty
of human beings as the tanks were of water.

By this time the watch on deck had been stationed, and the rest of the
crew were permitted to retire. As there was no danger that the
mutineers would escape from the ship, the grating was removed from the
main hatch; but a portion of the watch, including Peaks and the head
steward, were posted near it, to prevent any seaman not wearing the
white ribbon of the Order of the Faithful from coming on deck. Fifteen
of the thirty who had done their duty came below to turn in. Their
appearance created a sensation among the disaffected. Now they would
ascertain what had been said on deck about their refusal to answer the
call. Now they could hear, second-handed, the sermon which the
principal had preached, and which they had heard the faithful applaud.
Now, they could learn what terrible fate had been marked out for the
rebels.

When the faithful came into the steerage, the first thing the rebels
noticed was the white ribbons which adorned their breasts. Of course
they wanted to know what it meant; but they felt a little embarrassed
under the circumstances, and did not like to ask direct questions at
first. They wished and expected the faithful to open the subject by
telling them what a mistake they had made in not being "good." But the
lambs did not say a word to them; did not appear to notice them, or to
indicate by their actions that any unusual event was in progress on
board. There was a great deal of silent skirmishing in the steerage.
Raymond, who had always been pretty intimate with Tremere, as they both
berthed in the same mess-room, continually threw himself in the way of
the latter, in order to tempt him to speak of the evening's
occurrences. Tremere was as silent as a marble statue, though he looked
as composed and good-natured as ever; indeed, rather more so than
usual.

"How's the weather on deck, Tremere?" finally asked Raymond, when no
hint would induce the faithful one to speak first.

"It looks like a change. I shouldn't wonder if all hands were called to
furl top-gallant sails and reef topsails before eight bells," answered
Tremere.

"How did you get along working ship?"

"For further particulars, inquire of the principal," replied he.

"What do you mean by that?"

"Speech is silver, silence is golden."

"Humph!" sneered Raymond, puzzled by the singular replies of his
friend.

"Yours truly," laughed Tremere.

"Why don't you speak?"

"I haven't learned my piece."

"You have learned a piece of impudence."

    "'He that hath but impudence
    To all things has a fair pretence.'"

"Are you mad, Tremere?"

"'Though this be madness, yet there's method in it.'"

"Quit your quotations! What's that on your coat?"

"A coat-ation."

"If you are mad with me, Tremere, say so."

"'I am not mad! no, no, I am not mad!'" shouted the member of the Order
of the Faithful, with appropriate gestures and expression.

"Come, quit fooling! Can't you talk sense?"

"I can and will; for

    "'Want of decency is want of sense.'

    "'In college halls, in ancient times, there dwelt
    A sage called Discipline.'"

"But you didn't go to school to the old fellow, Raymond."

"I believe you have lost your wits! Now, be reasonable, and talk like a
sensible fellow. What is this?" asked Raymond, putting his finger on
the white ribbon.

"A ribbon."

"What is it for?"

"For me."

"Who gave it to you?"

"The person who had it next before I did."

"Humph! How silly you are! Where did you get it?"

"On deck."

"But who gave it to you."

"The donor thereof."

"Who is the donor thereof."

"The one who gave it to me."

"If you won't answer me, say so. Don't try to make a fool of me."

"I usurp not nature's kindly office."

"Do you mean to insult me?"

"No; I mean to turn in, for I may be called before I have had my snooze
out;" and Tremere, yawning as if he were bored and very indifferent,
walked into the mess-room which contained his berth.

Those who had listened to the conversation were very much amused by it,
and the rest of the Faithful took their cue from Tremere. Not one of
them would answer a question or give a particle of information in
regard to what had transpired on deck. All of them appeared to be
astonishingly good-natured, and no one seemed to be disconcerted by the
rebellion, except the rebels.




CHAPTER VIII.

SHORT OF WATER.


"They may play bluff as much as they like; but you had better believe
there will be a sensation in the morning, if not before," said
Howe,--after the fifteen members of the Order of the Faithful had
retired to their rooms,--addressing Raymond, who manifested no little
vexation at the cavalier manner in which he had been treated by his
friend and messmate.

"What will that be?" asked the milder rebel.

"Wait, and you will see," replied Howe, mysteriously. "We didn't go
down into the hold for nothing."

"What did you go down for?"

"You will find out soon."

"Well, I want you to understand that I didn't have anything to do with
your plots and schemes," added Raymond, cautiously.

"You didn't! Who said you didn't? I say, Raymond, you are a good fellow
to kiss the hand that smites you; and I hope you will keep on kissing
it. What did you try to pump Tremere for, after you saw what he was up
to?"

"I wanted to know what he was up to."

"Don't you know? It is a game of bluff. Those fellows pretend to be
indifferent to what we are doing."

"They certainly seem to be very indifferent. Have you any idea what
that white ribbon means?"

"Have I? Certainly I have. Can't you see through the side of the ship,
when there's a port in it? That ribbon is to distinguish the lambs from
the black sheep, like you and me."

"Pooh! What's the use of that?"

"So that the officers can tell them in the dark as well as at noonday.
But Little has given those fellows a name already. He calls them the
White Feathers. We must laugh at them, make game of them, whip them
with their own weapons. Hark!" said Howe, suddenly turning his head
towards the kitchen, near the door of which they stood.

"What's the matter?"

"They are trying the pump," replied Howe, as both of them plainly heard
the sucking, "squilching" noise made by the copper pump, from which the
cook was trying to draw water from the tanks below.

"What of it?" demanded Raymond, who did not see anything remarkable in
the circumstance.

"Never mind; you will find out soon enough," answered the chief
runaway, as he left his companion thoroughly mystified, and not a
little alarmed; for it was evident that some terrible mischief had been
perpetrated.

The pump sucked and groaned under the efforts of the cook, who had been
directed to make a pot of coffee for the use of the watch, and was now
trying to obtain water for that purpose. None would come, and it was
plain to him that the pump was out of order. Taking a bucket and a
lantern, he passed into the steerage, and opened the scuttle. The
runaways observed him with intense interest; for the time had come when
they were to "make themselves felt." The cook went down into the hold,
and was absent about a quarter of an hour. He returned with an empty
bucket in his hand, and hastened on deck with the alarming intelligence
that the water tanks were all empty, which he communicated to the head
steward.

As the tanks had been filled just before the ship left the dock at
Havre, the head steward was not willing to believe the startling
report. He went into the hold himself with the cook. By this time the
runaways thought it prudent to keep out of sight, and all of them
retired to their rooms, and most of them to their berths. The head
steward tried the tanks, and was satisfied with the truth of the
report. When the ship rolled, the faucets on the lee side poured out a
few drops of water. Sounded with a mallet, the tanks gave forth only a
hollow, empty sound. The steward was astonished and mortified at the
