Striped Chipmunk.

Old Mother Nature smiled.  "You certainly do make good use of yours,"
said she.  "But there are others who have even greater need of
pockets, and among them are the Pocket Mice.  Of course, it is
because of their pockets that they are called Pocket Mice.  All of
these pretty little fellows live in the dry parts of the Far West
and Southwest in the same region where Longfoot the Kangaroo Rat
lives.  They are close neighbors and relatives of his.

"Midget the Silky Pocket Mouse is one of the smallest animals in
all the Great World, so small that Whitefoot the Wood Mouse is a
giant compared with him.  He weighs less than an ounce and is a
dear little fellow.  His back and sides are yellow, and beneath
he is white.  He has quite long hind legs and a long tail, and
these show at once that he is a jumper.  In each cheek is a pocket
opening from the outside, and these pockets are lined with hair.
He is called Silky Pocket Mouse because of the fineness and
softness of his coat.  He has some larger cousins, one of them
being a little bigger than Nibbler the House Mouse.  Neighbors
and close relatives are the Spiny Pocket Mice."

"Do they have spines like Prickly Porky?" demanded Peter Rabbit.

Old Mother Nature laughed.  "I don't wonder you ask," said she.
"I think it is a foolish name myself, for they haven't any spines at
all.  Their fur isn't as fine as that of Midget, and it has all
through it long coarse hairs almost like bristles, and from these
they get their name.  The smallest of the Spiny Pocket Mice is
about the size of Nibbler the House Mouse and the largest is twice
as big.  They are more slender than their Silky cousins, and their
tails are longer in proportion to their size and have little tufts
of hair at the ends.  Of course, they have pockets in their cheeks.

"In habits all the Pocket Mice are much alike.  They make burrows
in the ground, often throwing up a little mound with several
entrances which lead to a central passageway connecting with the
bedroom and storerooms.  By day the entrances are closed with
earth from inside, for the Mice are active only at night.
Sometimes the burrows are hidden under bushes, and sometimes
they are right out in the open.  Living as they do in a hot, dry
country, the Pocket Mice have learned to get along without
drinking water.  Their food consists mainly of a variety of
small seeds.

"Another Mouse of the West looks almost enough like Whitefoot to
be a member of his branch of the family.  He has a beautiful
yellowish-brown coat and white waistcoat, and his feet are white.
But his tail is short in comparison with Whitefoot's and instead
of being slim is quite thick.  His fur is like velvet.  He is
called the Grasshopper Mouse."

"Is that because he eats Grasshoppers?" asked Peter Rabbit at once.

"You've guessed it," laughed Old Mother Nature.  "He is very, very
fond of Grasshoppers and Crickets.  He eats many kinds of insects,
Moths, Flies, Cutworms, Beetles, Lizards, Frogs and Scorpions.
Because of his fondness for the latter he is called the Scorpion
Mouse in some sections.  He is fond of meat when he can get it.
He also eats seeds of many kinds.  He is found all over the West
from well up in the North to the hot dry regions of the Southwest.
When he cannot find a convenient deserted burrow of some other
animal, he digs a home for himself and there raises several families
each year.  In the early evening he often utters a fine, shrill,
whistling call note.

"Another little member of the Mouse family found clear across the
country is the Harvest Mouse.  He is never bigger than Nibbler the
House Mouse and often is much smaller.  In fact, he is one of the
smallest of the entire family.  In appearance he is much like
Nibbler, but his coat is browner and there are fine hairs on his
tail.  He loves grassy, weedy or brushy places.

"As a rule he does little harm to man, for his food is chiefly
seeds of weeds, small wild fruits and parts of wild plants of no
value to man.  Once in a while his family becomes so large that
they do some damage in grain fields.  But this does not happen
often.  The most interesting thing about this little Mouse is the
way he builds his home.  Sometimes he uses a hole in a tree or
post and sometimes a deserted birds' nest, but more frequently
he builds a nest for himself--a little round ball of grass and
other vegetable matter.  This is placed in thick grass or weeds
close to the ground or in bushes or low trees several feet from
the ground.

"They are well-built little houses and have one or more little
doorways on the under side when they are in bushes or trees.  Inside
is a warm, soft bed made of milkweed or cattail down, the very
nicest kind of a bed for the babies.  No one has a neater home than
the Harvest Mouse.  He is quite as much at home in bushes and low
trees as Happy Jack Squirrel is in bigger trees.  His long tail
comes in very handy then, for he often wraps it around a twig to
make his footing more secure.

"Now this is all about the native Mice and--what is it, Peter?"

"You've forgotten Nibbler the House Mouse," replied Peter.

"How impatient some little folks are and how fearful that their
curiosity will not be satisfied," remarked Old Mother Nature.  "As
I was saying, this is all about our native Mice; that is, the Mice
who belong to this country.  And now we come to Nibbler the House
Mouse, who, like Robber the Brown Rat, has no business here at all,
but who has followed man all over the world and like Robber has
become a pest to man."

Peter Rabbit looked rather sheepish when he discovered that Old
Mother Nature hadn't for gotten, and resolved that in the future
he would hold his tongue.

"Have any of you seen Nibbler?" asked Old Mother Nature.

"I have," replied Danny Meadow Mouse.  "Once I was carried to
Farmer Brown's barn in a shock of corn and I found Nibbler living
in the barn."

"It is a wonder he wasn't living in Farmer Brown's house," said
Old Mother Nature.  "Probably other members of his family were.
He is perfectly at home in any building put up by man, just as
is Robber the Rat.  Because of his small size he can go where
Robber cannot.  He delights to scamper about between the walls.
Being a true Rodent he is forever gnawing holes in the corners
of rooms and opening on to pantry shelves so that he may steal
food.  He eats all sorts of food, but spoils more for man, by
running about over it, than he eats.  In barns and henhouses he
gets into the grain bins and steals a great deal of grain.

"It is largely because of Robber the Rat and Nibbler that men keep
the Cats you all hate so.  A Cat is Nibbler's worst enemy.  Nibbler
is slender and graceful, with a long, hairless tail and ears of
good size.  He is very timid, ready to dart into his hole at the
least sound.  He raises from four to nine babies at a time and
several sets of them in a year.

"If Mr. and Mrs. Nibbler are living in a house, their nest is made
of scraps of paper, cloth, wool and other soft things stolen from
the people who live in the house.  In getting this material they
often do great damage.  If they are living in a barn, they make
their nest of hay and any soft material they can find.

"While Nibbler prefers to live in or close to the homes of men,
he sometimes is driven out and then takes to the fields, especially
in summer.  There he lives in all sorts of hiding places, and isn't
at all particular what the place is, if it promises safety and food
can be obtained close by.  I'm sorry Nibbler ever came to this
country.  Man brought him here and now he is here to stay and quite
as much at home as if he belonged here the way the rest of you do.

"This finishes the lessons on the order of Rodents, the animals
related by reason of having teeth for the purpose of gnawing.  I
suspect these are the only ones in whom you take any interest, and
so you will not care to come to school any more.  Am I right?"

"No, marm," answered Happy Jack the Gray Squirrel, who, you remember,
had laughed at Peter Rabbit for wanting to go to school.  "No, marm.
There are ever so many other people of the Green Forest and the
Green Meadows we want to know more about than we now know.  Isn't
that so?"  Happy Jack turned to the others and every one nodded,
even Prickly Porky.

"There is one little fellow living right near here who looks to me
as if he must be a member of the Mouse family, but he isn't like any
of the Mice you have told us about," continued Happy Jack.  "He is
so small he can hide under a leaf.  I'm sure he must be a Mouse."

"You mean Teeny Weeny the Shrew," replied Old Mother Nature, smiling
at Happy Jack.  "He isn't a Mouse.  He isn't even a Rodent.  I'll
try to have him here to-morrow morning and we will see what we can
find out about him and his relatives."



CHAPTER XIX  Teeny Weeny and His Cousin

"Of course Old Mother Nature knows, but just the same it is hard
for me not to believe that Teeny Weeny is a member of the Mouse
family," said Happy Jack Squirrel to Peter Rabbit, as they
scampered along to school.  "I never have had a real good look
at him, but I've had glimpses of him lots of times and always
supposed him a little Mouse with a short tail.  It is hard to
believe that he isn't."

"I hope Old Mother Nature will put him where we can get a good
look at him," replied Peter.  "Perhaps when you really see him he
won't look so much like a Mouse."

When all had arrived Old Mother Nature began the morning lesson at
once.  "You have learned about all the families in the order of
Rodents," said she, "so now we will take up another and much smaller
order called Insectivora.  I wonder if any of you can guess what
that means."

"It sounds," said Peter Rabbit, "as if it must have something to do with
insects."

"That is a very good guess, Peter," replied Old Mother Nature,
smiling at him.  "It does have to do with insects.  The members
of this order live very largely on insects and worms, and the name
Insectivora means insect-eating.  There are two families in this
order, the Shrew family and the Mole family."

"Then Teeny Weeny and Miner the Mole must be related," spoke
Peter quickly.

"Right again, Peter," was the prompt reply.  "The Shrews and the
Moles are related in the same way that you and Happy Jack Squirrel
are related."

"And isn't Teeny Weeny the Shrew related to the Mice at all?"
asked Happy Jack.

"Not at all," said Old Mother Nature.  "Many people think he is
and often he is called Shrew Mouse.  But this is a great mistake.
It is the result of ignorance.  It seems strange to me that people
so often know so little about their near neighbors."  She looked
at Happy Jack Squirrel as she said this, and Happy Jack looked
sheepish.  He felt just as he looked.  All this time the eyes of
every one had been searching this way, that way, every way, for
Teeny Weeny, for Old Mother Nature had promised to try to have
him there that morning.  But Teeny Weeny was not to be seen.  Now
and then a leaf on the ground close by Old Mother Nature's feet
moved, but the Merry Little Breezes were always stirring up
fallen leaves, and no one paid any attention to these.

Old Mother Nature understood the disappointment in the faces before
her and her eyes began to twinkle.  "Yesterday I told you that I
would try to have Teeny Weeny here," said she.  A leaf moved.
Stooping quickly she picked it up.  "And here he is," she finished.

Sure enough where a second before the dead brown leaf had been was
a tiny little fellow, so tiny that that leaf had covered him
completely, and it wasn't a very big leaf.  It was Teeny Weeny the
Shrew, also called the Common Shrew, the Long-tailed Shrew and the
Shrew Mouse, one of the smallest animals in all the Great World.
He started to dart under another leaf, but Old Mother Nature stopped
him.  "Sit still," she commanded sharply.  "You have nothing to fear.
I want everybody to have a good look at you, for it is high time
these neighbors of yours should know you.  I know just how nervous
and uncomfortable you are and I'll keep you only a few minutes.
Now everybody take a good look at Teeny Weeny."

This command was quite needless, for all were staring with all
their might.  What they saw was a mite of a fellow less than four
inches long from the tip of his nose to the tip of his tail, and
of this total length the tail was almost half.  He was slender,
had short legs and mouselike feet.  His coat was brownish above
and grayish beneath, and the fur was very fine and soft.

But the oddest thing about Teeny Weeny was his long, pointed head
ending in a long nose.  No Mouse has a head like it.  The edges of
the ears could be seen above the fur, but the eyes were so tiny
that Peter Rabbit thought he hadn't any and said so.

Old Mother Nature laughed.  "Yes, he has eyes, Peter," said she.
"Look closely and you will see them.  But they don't amount to
much--little more than to tell daylight from darkness.  Teeny
Weeny depends on his nose chiefly.  He has a very wonderful little
nose, flexible and very sensitive.  Of course, with such poor eyes
he prefers the dark when there are fewer enemies abroad."

All this time Teeny Weeny had been growing more and more uneasy.
Old Mother Nature saw and understood.  Now she told him that he
might go.  Hardly were the words out of her mouth when he vanished,
darting under some dead leaves.  Hidden by them he made his way
to an old log and was seen no more.

"Doesn't he eat anything but insects and worms?" asked
Striped Chipmunk.

"Yes," replied Old Mother Nature.  "He is very fond of flesh, and
if he finds the body of a bird or animal that has been killed he
will tear it to pieces.  He is very hot-tempered, as are all his
family, and will not hesitate to attack a Mouse much bigger than
himself.  He is so little and so active that he has to have a
great deal of food and probably eats his own weight in food every
day.  Of course, that means he must do a great deal of hunting,
and he does.

"He makes tiny little paths under the fallen leaves and in swampy
places--little tunnels through the moss.  He is especially fond of
old rotted stumps and logs and brush piles, for in such places he
can find grubs and insects.  At the same time he is well hidden.
He is active by day and night, but in the daytime takes pains to
keep out of the light.  He prefers damp to dry places.  In winter
he tunnels about under the snow.  In summer he uses the tunnels
and runways of Meadow Mice and others when he can.  He eats seeds
and other vegetable food when he cannot find insects or flesh."

"How about his enemies?" asked Chatterer the Red Squirrel.

"He has plenty," replied Old Mother Nature, "but is not so much
hunted as the members of the Mouse family.  This is because he has
a strong, unpleasant scent which makes him a poor meal for those
at all particular about their food.  Some of the Hawks and Owls
appear not to mind this, and these are his worst enemies."

"Has he any near relatives?" asked Jumper the Hare.

"Several," was the prompt response.  "Blarina the Short-tailed
Shrew, also called Mole Shrew, is the best known.  He is found
everywhere, in forests, old pastures and along grassy banks, but
seldom far from water.  He prefers moist ground.  He is much
larger and thicker than Teeny Weeny and has a shorter tail.
People often mistake him for Miner the Mole, because of the thick,
fine fur which is much like Miner's and his habit of tunneling
about just beneath the surface, but if they would look at his
fore feet they would never make that mistake.  They are small
and like the feet of the Mouse family, not at all like Miner's
big shovels.  Moreover, he is smaller than Miner, and his tunnels
are seldom in the earth but just under the leaves and grass.

"His food is much the same as that of Teeny Weeny--worms, insects,
flesh when he can get it, and seeds.  He is fond of beechnuts.  He
is quite equal to killing a Mouse of his own size or bigger and
does not hesitate to do so when he gets the chance.  He makes a
soft, comfortable nest under a log or in a stump or in the ground
and has from four to six babies at a time.  Teeny Weeny sometimes
has as many as ten.  The senses of smell and hearing are very keen
and make up for the lack of sight.  His eyes, like those of other
Shrews, are probably of use only in distinguishing light from
darkness.  His coat is dark brownish-gray.

"Another of the Shrew family is the Marsh Shrew, also called Water
Shrew and Black-and white Shrew.  He is longer than either of the
others and, as you have guessed, is a lover of water.  He is a good
swimmer and gets much of his food in the water--water Beetles and
grubs and perhaps Tadpoles and Minnows.  Now who among you knows
Miner the Mole?"

"I do.  That is, I have seen him," replied Peter Rabbit.

"Very well, Peter, to-morrow morning we will see how much you know
about Miner," replied Old Mother Nature.



CHAPTER XX  Four Busy Little Miners

Scampering along on his way to school and thinking of nothing so
uninteresting as watching his steps, Peter Rabbit stubbed his toes.
Yes, sir, Peter stubbed his toes.  With a little exclamation of
impatience he turned to see what he had stumbled over.  It was a
little ridge where the surface of the ground had been raised a
trifle since Peter had passed that way the day before.

Peter chuckled.  "Now isn't that funny?" he demanded of no one at
all, for he was quite alone.  Then he answered himself.  "It
certainly is," said he.  "Here I am on my way to learn something
about Miner the Mole, and I trip over one of the queer little
ridges he is forever making.  It wasn't here yesterday, so that
means that he is at work right around here now.  Hello, I
thought so!"

Peter had been looking along that little ridge and had discovered
that it ended only a short distance from him.  Now as he looked at
it again, he saw the flat surface of the ground at the end of the
ridge rise as if being pushed up from beneath, and that little
ridge became just so much longer.  Peter understood perfectly.  Out
of sight beneath the surface Miner the Mole was at work.  He was
digging a tunnel, and that ridge was simply the roof to that
tunnel.  It was so near the surface of the ground that Miner simply
pushed up the loose soil as he bored his way along, and this made
the little ridge over which Peter had stumbled.

Peter watched a few minutes, then turned and scampered,
lipperty-lipperty-lip, for the Green Forest.  He arrived at school quite
out of breath, the last one.  Old Mother Nature was about to chide him
for being late, but noticing his excitement, she changed her mind.

"Well, Peter," said she.  "What is it now?  Did you have a narrow
escape on your way here?"

Peter shook his head.  "No," he replied.  "No, I didn't have a
narrow escape, but I discovered something."

Happy Jack Squirrel snickered.  "Peter is always discovering
something," said he.  "He is a great little discoverer.  Probably
he has just found out that the only way to get anywhere on time
is to start soon enough."

"No such thing!" declared Peter indignantly.  "You--"

"Never mind him, Peter," interrupted Old Mother Nature soothingly.
"What was it you discovered?"

"That the very one we are to learn about is only a little way from
here this very minute.  Miner the Mole is at work on the Green
Meadow; close to the edge of the Green Forest," cried Peter eagerly.
"I thought perhaps you would want to-"

"Have this morning's lesson right there where we can at least see
his works if not himself," interrupted Old Mother Nature again.
"That is fine, Peter.  We will go over there at once.  It is always
better to see things than to merely hear about them."

So Peter led the way to where he had stumbled over that little
ridge on his way to school.  It was longer than when he had left
it, but even as the others crowded about to look, the earth was
pushed up and it grew in length.  Old Mother Nature stooped and
made a little hole in that ridge.  Then she put her lips close to
it and commanded Miner to come out.  She spoke softly, pleasantly,
but in a way that left no doubt that she expected to be obeyed.

She was.  Almost at once a queer, long, sharp nose was poked out
of the little hole she had made, and a squeaky voice asked
fretfully, "Do I have to come way out?"

"You certainly do," replied Old Mother Nature.  "I want some of
your friends and neighbors to get a good look at you, and they
certainly can't do that with only that sharp nose of yours to be
seen.  Now scramble out here.  No one will hurt you.  I will keep
you only a few minutes.  Then you can go back to your everlasting
digging.  Out with you, now!"

While the others gathered in a little circle close about that hole
there scrambled into view one of the queerest little fellows in all
the Great World.  Few of them had ever seen him close to before.
He was a stout little fellow with the softest, thickest, gray coat
imaginable.  He was about six inches long and had a funny, short,
pinkish-white, naked tail that at once reminded Peter of an Angleworm.

His head seemed to be set directly on his shoulders, so that
there was no neck worth mentioning.  His nose was long and sharp
and extended far beyond his mouth.  Neither ears nor eyes were
to be seen.

Striped Chipmunk at once wanted to know how Miner could see.  "He
doesn't see as you do," replied Old Mother Nature.  "He has very
small eyes, tiny things, which you might find if you should part
the fur around them, but they are of use only to distinguish light
