hoppin' back wid a whole passel er bamboo vines all tied tergedder. Mr.
Man, he 'low:--

"'Dat line mighty long.'

"Brer Rabbit he 'low:--

"'Tooby sho', you want de win' fer ter git 'twix' you en dat meat.'

"Den Mr. Man tuck'n tied de bamboo line ter de meat. Brer Rabbit he
broke off a 'simmon bush, he did, en 'low dat he'd stay behime en keep
de flies off. Mr. Man he go on befo' en drag de meat, en Brer Rabbit he
stay behime, he did, en take keer un it."

Here Uncle Remus was compelled to pause and laugh before he could
proceed with the story.

"En he is take keer un it, mon--dat he is. He tuck'n git 'im a rock, en
w'iles Mr. Man gwine 'long bidout lookin' back, he ondo de meat en tie
de rock ter de bamboo line, en w'en Brer Fox foller on, sho' nuff, dar
lay de meat. Mr. Man, he drug de rock, he did, en Brer Rabbit he keep de
flies off, twel atter dey gone on right smart piece, en den w'en Mr.
Man look 'roun', whar wuz ole man Rabbit?

"Bless yo' soul, Brer Rabbit done gone back en jine Brer Fox, en he wuz
des in time, at dat, 'kaze little mo' en Brer Fox would 'a' done bin
outer sight en yearin'. En so dat de way Brer Rabbit git Mr. Man meat."

The little boy reflected a little, and then said:--

"Uncle Remus, was n't that stealing?"

"Well, I tell you 'bout dat, honey," responded the old man, with the air
of one who is willing to compromise. "In dem days de creeturs bleedz ter
look out fer deyse'f, mo' speshually dem w'at ain't got hawn en huff.
Brer Rabbit ain't got no hawn en huff, en he bleedz ter be he own
lawyer."

Just then the little boy heard his father's buggy rattling down the
avenue, and he ran out into the darkness to meet it. After he was gone,
Uncle Remus sat a long time rubbing his hands and looking serious.
Finally he leaned back in his chair, and exclaimed:--

"Dat little chap gittin' too much fer ole Remus--dat he is!"




XXIV

HOW BRER RABBIT GOT THE MEAT


When the little boy next visited Uncle Remus the cabin was dark and
empty and the door shut. The old man was gone. He was absent for several
nights, but at last one night the little boy saw a welcome light in the
cabin, and he made haste to pay Uncle Remus a visit. He was full of
questions:--

"Goodness, Uncle Remus! Where in the world have you been? I thought you
were gone for good. Mamma said she reckoned the treatment here did n't
suit you, and you had gone off to get some of your town friends to hire
you."

"Is Miss Sally tell you dat, honey? Well, ef she ain't de beatenes'
w'ite 'oman dis side er kingdom come, you kin des shoot me. Miss Sally
tuck'n writ me a pass wid her own han's fer ter go see some er my kin
down dar in de Ashbank settlement. Yo' mammy quare 'oman, honey, sho'!

"En yit, w'at de good er my stayin' yer? T'er night, I ain't mo'n git
good en started 'fo' you er up en gone, en I ain't seed ha'r ner hide un
you sence. W'en I see you do dat, I 'low ter myse'f dat hit's des 'bout
time fer ole man Remus fer ter pack up he duds en go hunt comp'ny
some'r's else."

"Well, Uncle Remus," exclaimed the little boy, in a tone of
expostulation, "did n't Brother Fox get the meat, and was n't that the
end of the story?"

Uncle Remus started to laugh, but he changed his mind so suddenly that
the little boy was convulsed. The old man groaned and looked at the
rafters with a curious air of disinterestedness. After a while he went
on with great seriousness:--

"I dunner w'at kinder idee folks got 'bout Brer Rabbit nohow, dat I
don't. S'pozen you lays de plans so some yuther chap kin git a big hunk
er goody, is you gwine ter set off some'r's en see 'im make way wid it?"

"What kind of goody, Uncle Remus?"

"Dish yer kinder goody w'at town folks keeps. Mint draps and reezins, en
sweet doin's lak Miss Sally keep und' lock en key. Well, den, if you
gits some er dat, er may be some yuther kinder goody, w'ich I wish 't
wuz yer right dis blessid minnit, is you gwine ter set quile up in dat
cheer en let n'er chap run off wid it? Dat you ain't--dat you ain't!"

"Oh, I know!" exclaimed the little boy. "Brother Rabbit went back and
made Brother Fox give him his part of the meat."

"Des lak I tell you, honey; dey wa'n't no man 'mungs de creeturs w'at
kin stan' right flat-footed en wuk he min' quick lak Brer Rabbit. He
tuck'n tie de rock on de string, stidder de meat, en he pursue long
atter it, he did, twel Mr. Man tu'n a ben' in de road, en den Brer
Rabbit, he des lit out fum dar--_terbuckity-buckity, buck-buck-buckity!_
en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he tuck'n kotch up wid Brer Fox. Dey tuck de
meat, dey did, en kyar'd it way off in de woods, en laid it down on a
clean place on de groun'.

"Dey laid it down, dey did," continued Uncle Remus, drawing his chair up
closer to the little boy, "en den Brer Fox 'low dey better sample it, en
Brer Rabbit he 'gree. Wid dat, Brer Fox he tuck'n gnyaw off a hunk, en
he shut bofe eyes, he did, en he chaw en chaw, en tas'e en tas'e, en
chaw en tas'e. Brer Rabbit, he watch 'im, but Brer Fox, he keep bofe
eyes shot, en he chaw en tas'e, en tas'e en chaw."

Uncle Remus not only furnished a pantomime accompaniment to this recital
by shutting his eyes and pretending to taste, but he lowered his voice
to a pitch of tragical significance in reporting the dialogue that
ensued:--

"Den Brer Fox smack he mouf en look at de meat mo' closeter, en up'n
'low:--

"'Brer Rabbit, _hit's lam'!_'

"'_No_, Brer Fox! _sho'ly not!_'

"'Brer Rabbit, _hit's lam'!_'

"'Brer Fox, _tooby sho'ly not!_'

"Den Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n gnyaw off a hunk, en he shot bofe eyes, en
chaw en tas'e, en tas'e en chaw. Den he smack he mouf, en up'n 'low:--

"'Brer Fox, _hit's shote!_'

"'Brer Rabbit, you foolin' me!'

"'Brer Fox, _I vow hit's shote!_'

"'Brer Rabbit, hit des _can't be!_'

"'Brer Fox, _hit sho'ly is!_'

"Dey tas'e en dey 'spute, en dey 'spute en dey tas'e. Atter w'ile, Brer
Rabbit make lak he want some water, en he rush off in de bushes, en
d'reckly yer he come back wipin' he mouf en cle'rin' up he th'oat. Den
Brer Fox he want some water sho' nuff:--

"'Brer Rabbit, whar you fin' de spring?'

"'Cross de road, en down de hill en up de big gully.'

"Brer Fox, he lope off, he did, en atter he gone Brer Rabbit totch he
year wid he behime foot lak he flippin' 'im good-bye. Brer Fox, he cross
de road en rush down de hill, he did, yit he ain't fin' no big gully. He
keep on gwine twel he fin' de big gully, yit he ain't fin' no spring.

"W'iles all dish yer gwine on, Brer Rabbit he tuck'n grabble a hole in
de groun', he did, en in dat hole he hid de meat. Atter he git it good
en hid, he tuck'n cut 'im a long keen hick'ry, en atter so long a time,
w'en he year Brer Fox comin' back, he got in a clump er bushes, en tuck
dat hick'ry en let in on a saplin', en ev'y time he hit de saplin', he
'ud squall out, Brer Rabbit would, des lak de patter-rollers had 'im:--

"_Pow, pow!_ 'Oh, pray, Mr. Man!'--_Pow, pow!_ 'Oh, pray, Mr.
Man!'--_Chippy-row, pow!_ 'Oh, Lordy, Mr. Man! Brer Fox tuck yo'
meat!'--_Pow!_ 'Oh, pray, Mr. Man! Brer Fox tuck yo' meat!'"

Every time Uncle Remus said "_Pow!_" he struck himself in the palm of
his hand with a shoe-sole by way of illustration.

"Co'se," he went on, "w'en Brer Fox year dis kinder doin's, he fotch up,
he did, en lissen, en ev'y time he year de hick'ry come down _pow!_ he
tuck'n grin en 'low ter hisse'f, 'Ah-yi! you fool me 'bout de water!
Ah-yi! you fool me 'bout de water!'

"Atter so long a time, de racket sorter die out, en seem lak Mr. Man wuz
draggin' Brer Rabbit off. Dis make Brer Fox feel mighty skittish. Bimeby
Brer Rabbit come a-cally-hootin' back des a-hollerin':--

"'Run, Brer Fox, run! Mr. Man say he gwine to kyar dat meat up de road
ter whar he son is, en den he's a-comin' back atter you. Run, Brer Fox,
run!'

"En I let you know," said Uncle Remus, leaning back and laughing to see
the little boy laugh, "I let you know Brer Fox got mighty skace in dat
neighborhood!"




XXV

AFRICAN JACK


Usually, the little boy, who regarded himself as Uncle Remus's partner,
was not at all pleased when he found the old man entertaining, in his
simple way, any of his colored friends; but he was secretly delighted
when he called one night and found Daddy Jack sitting by Uncle Remus's
hearth. Daddy Jack was an object of curiosity to older people than the
little boy. He was a genuine African, and for that reason he was known
as African Jack, though the child had been taught to call him Daddy
Jack. He was brought to Georgia in a slave-ship when he was about twenty
years old, and remained upon one of the sea-islands for several years.
Finally, he fell into the hands of the family of which Uncle Remus's
little partner was the youngest representative, and became the trusted
foreman of a plantation, in the southern part of Georgia, known as the
Walthall Place. Once every year he was in the habit of visiting the Home
Place in Middle Georgia, and it was during one of these annual visits
that the little boy found him in Uncle Remus's cabin.

Daddy Jack appeared to be quite a hundred years old, but he was probably
not more than eighty. He was a little, dried-up old man, whose weazened,
dwarfish appearance, while it was calculated to inspire awe in the minds
of the superstitious, was not without its pathetic suggestions. The
child had been told that the old African was a wizard, a conjurer, and a
snake-charmer; but he was not afraid, for, in any event,--conjuration,
witchcraft, or what not,--he was assured of the protection of Uncle
Remus.

As the little boy entered the cabin Uncle Remus smiled and nodded
pleasantly, and made a place for him on a little stool upon which had
been piled the odds and ends of work. Daddy Jack paid no attention to
the child; his thoughts seemed to be elsewhere.

"Go en shake han's, honey, en tell Daddy Jack howdy. He lak good
chilluns." Then to Daddy Jack: "Brer Jack, dish yer de chap w'at I bin
tellin' you 'bout."

The little boy did as he was bid, but Daddy Jack grunted ungraciously
and made no response to the salutation. He was evidently not fond of
children. Uncle Remus glanced curiously at the dwarfed and withered
figure, and spoke a little more emphatically:--

"Brer Jack, ef you take good look at dis chap, I lay you'll see mo'n you
speck ter see. You'll see sump'n' dat'll make you grunt wusser dan you
grunted deze many long year. Go up dar, honey, whar Daddy Jack kin see
you."

The child went shyly up to the old African and stood at his knee. The
sorrows and perplexities of nearly a hundred years lay between them; and
now, as always, the baffled eyes of age gazed into the Sphinx-like face
of youth, as if by this means to unravel the mysteries of the past and
solve the problems of the future.

Daddy Jack took the plump, rosy hands of the little boy in his black,
withered ones, and gazed into his face so long and steadily, and with
such curious earnestness, that the child did n't know whether to laugh
or cry. Presently the old African flung his hands to his head, and
rocked his body from side to side, moaning and mumbling, and talking to
himself, while the tears ran down his face like rain.

"Ole Missy! Ole Missy! 'E come back! I bin shum dey-dey, I bin shum de
night! I bin yeddy 'e v'ice, I bin yeddy de sign!"

"Ah-yi!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, into whose arms the little boy had fled;
"I des know'd dat 'ud fetch 'im. Hit's bin manys de long days sence
Brer Jack seed Ole Miss, yit ef he ain't seed 'er dat whack, den I ain't
settin' yer."

After a while Daddy Jack ceased his rocking, and his moaning, and his
crying, and sat gazing wistfully into the fireplace. Whatever he saw
there fixed his attention, for Uncle Remus spoke to him several times
without receiving a response. Presently, however, Daddy Jack exclaimed
with characteristic but laughable irrelevance:--

"I no lakky dem gal wut is bin-a stan' pidjin-toe. Wun 'e fetch pail er
water on 'e head, water churray, churray. I no lakky dem gal wut tie 'e
wool up wit' string; mekky him stan' ugly fer true. I bin ahx da' 'Tildy
gal fer marry me, un 'e no crack 'im bre't' fer mek answer 'cep' 'e
bre'k out un lahf by me werry face. Da' gal do holler un lahf un stomp
'e fut dey-dey, un dun I shum done gone pidjin-toe. Oona bin know da'
'Tildy gal?"

"I bin a-knowin' dat gal," said Uncle Remus, grimly regarding the old
African; "I bin a-knowin' dat gal now gwine on sence she 'uz knee-high
ter one er deze yer puddle-ducks; en I bin noticin' lately dat she
mighty likely nigger."

"Enty!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, enthusiastically, "I did bin mek up ter
da' lilly gal troo t'ick un t'in. I bin fetch 'im one fine 'possum, un
mo' ez one, two, free peck-a taty, un bumbye I bin fetch 'im one bag
pop-co'n. Wun I bin do dat, I is fley 'roun' da' lilly gal so long tam,
un I yeddy 'im talk wit' turrer gal. 'E do say: 'Daddy Jack fine ole man
fer true.' Dun I is bin talk: 'Oona no call-a me Daddy Jack wun dem
preacher man come fer marry we.' Dun da' lilly gal t'row 'e head back;
'e squeal lak filly in canebrake."

The little boy understood this rapidly spoken lingo perfectly well, but
he would have laughed anyhow, for there was more than a suggestion of
the comic in the shrewd seriousness that seemed to focus itself in Daddy
Jack's pinched and wrinkled face.

"She tuck de truck w'at you tuck'n fotch 'er," said Uncle Remus, with
the air of one carefully and deliberately laying the basis of a judicial
opinion, "en den w'en you sail in en talk bizness, den she up en gun you
de flat un 'er foot en de back un 'er han', en den, atter dat, she
tuck'n laff en make spote un you."

"Enty!" assented Daddy Jack, admiringly.

"Well, den, Brer Jack, youer mighty ole, en yit hit seem lak youer
mighty young; kaze a man w'at ain't got no mo' speunce wid wimmen folks
dan w'at you is neenter creep 'roun' yer callin' deyse'f ole. Dem kinder
folks ain't ole nuff, let 'lone bein' too ole. W'en de gal tuck'n laff,
Brer Jack, w'at 'uz yo' nex' move?" demanded Uncle Remus, looking down
upon the shrivelled old man with an air of superiority.

Daddy Jack shut his shrewd little eyes tightly and held them so, as if
by that means to recall all the details of the flirtation. Then he
said:--

"Da' lilly gal is bin tek dem t'ing. 'E is bin say, 'T'anky, t'anky.'
Him eaty da' 'possum, him eaty da' pop-co'n, him roas'n da' taty. 'E do
say, 'T'anky, t'anky!' Wun I talk marry, 'e is bin ris 'e v'ice un
squeal lak lilly pig stuck in 'e t'roat. 'E do holler: 'Hi, Daddy Jack!
wut is noung gal gwan do wit' so ole man lak dis?' Un I is bin say: 'Wut
noung gal gwan do wit' ole Chris'mus' cep' 'e do 'joy 'ese'f?' Un da'
lil gal 'e do lahff un flut 'ese'f way fum dey-dey."

"I know'd a nigger one time," said Uncle Remus, after pondering a
moment, "w'at tuck a notion dat he want a bait er 'simmons, en de mo'
w'at de notion tuck 'im de mo' w'at he want um, en bimeby, hit look lak
he des nat'ally erbleedz ter have um. He want de 'simmons, en dar dey is
in de tree. He mouf water, en dar hang de 'simmons. Now, den, w'at do
dat nigger do? W'en you en me en dish yer chile yer wants 'simmons, we
goes out en shakes de tree, en ef deyer good en ripe, down dey comes, en
ef deyer good en green, dar dey stays. But dish yer yuther nigger, he
too smart fer dat. He des tuck'n tuck he stan' und' de tree, en he open
he mouf, he did, en wait fer de 'simmons fer ter drap in dar. Dey ain't
none drap in yit," continued Uncle Remus, gently knocking the cold ashes
out of his pipe; "en w'at's mo', dey ain't none gwine ter drap in dar.
Dat des 'zackly de way wid Brer Jack yer, 'bout marryin'; he stan' dar,
he do, en he hol' bofe han's wide open en he 'speck de gal gwine ter
drap right spang in um. Man want gal, he des got ter grab 'er--dat's
w'at. Dey may squall en dey may flutter, but flutter'n' en squallin'
ain't done no damage yit ez I knows un, en 't ain't gwine ter. Young
chaps kin make great 'miration 'bout gals, but w'en dey gits ole ez I
is, dey ull know dat folks is folks, en w'en it come ter bein' folks, de
wimmen ain gut none de 'vantage er de men. Now dat's des de plain up en
down tale I'm a-tellin' un you."

This deliverance from so respectable an authority seemed to please Daddy
Jack immensely. He rubbed his withered hands together, smacked his lips
and chuckled. After a few restless movements he got up and went
shuffling to the door, his quick, short steps causing Uncle Remus to
remark:--

"De gal w'at git ole Brer Jack 'ull git a natchul pacer, sho'. He move
mo' one-sideder dan ole Zip Coon, w'ich he rack up de branch all night
long wid he nose p'int lak he gwine 'cross."

While the little boy was endeavoring to get Uncle Remus to explain the
nature of Daddy Jack's grievances, muffled laughter was heard outside,
and almost immediately 'Tildy rushed in the door. 'Tildy flung herself
upon the floor and rolled and laughed until, apparently, she could laugh
no more. Then she seemed to grow severely angry. She arose from the
floor and flopped herself down in a chair, and glared at Uncle Remus
with indignation in her eyes. As soon as she could control her inflamed
feelings, she cried:--

"Wat is I done ter you, Unk' Remus? 'Fo' de Lord, ef anybody wuz ter
come en tole me dat you gwine ter put de Ole Boy in dat ole Affikin
nigger head, I would n't er b'leeved um--dat I would n't. Unk' Remus,
w'at is I done ter you?"

Uncle Remus made no direct response; but he leaned over, reached out his
hand, and picked up an unfinished axe-helve that stood in the corner.
Then he took the little boy by the arm, and pushed him out of the way,
saying in his gentlest and most persuasive tone:--

"Stan' sorter 'roun' dar, honey, 'kaze w'en de splinters 'gin ter fly, I
want you ter be out'n de way. Miss Sally never gimme 'er fergivance in
de roun' worl' ef you 'uz ter git hurted on account er de frazzlin' er
dish yer piece er timber."

Uncle Remus's movements and remarks had a wonderful effect on 'Tildy.
Her anger disappeared, her eyes lost their malignant expression, and her
voice fell to a conversational tone.

"Now, Unk' Remus, you ought n't ter do me dat a-way, 'kaze I ain't done
nothin' ter you. I 'uz settin' up yon' in Aunt Tempy house, des now,
runnin' on wid Riah, en yer come dat ole Affikin Jack en say you say he
kin marry me ef he ketch me, en he try ter put he arm 'roun' me en kiss
me."

'Tildy tossed her head and puckered her mouth at the bare remembrance of
it.

"W'at wud did you gin Brer Jack?" inquired Uncle Remus, not without
asperity.

"W'at I gwine tell him?" exclaimed 'Tildy disdainfully. "I des tuck'n up
en tole 'im he foolin' wid de wrong nigger."

'Tildy would have continued her narration, but just at that moment the
shuffling of feet was heard outside, and Daddy Jack came in, puffing and
blowing and smiling. Evidently he had been hunting for 'Tildy in every
house in the negro quarter.

"Hi!" he exclaimed, "lil gal, 'e bin skeet sem lak ma'sh hen. 'E no run
no mo'."

"Pick 'er up, Brer Jack," exclaimed Uncle Remus; "she's yone."

'Tildy was angry as well as frightened. She would have fled, but Daddy
Jack stood near the door.

"Look yer, nigger man!" she exclaimed, "ef you come slobbun 'roun' me,
I'll take one er deze yer dog-iuens en brain you wid it. I ain't gwine
ter have no web-foot nigger follerin' atter me. Now you des come!--I
ain't feard er yo' cunjun. Unk' Remus, ef you got any intruss in dat ole
Affikin ape, you better make 'im lemme 'lone. G'way fum yer now!"

All this time Daddy Jack was slowly approaching 'Tildy, bowing and
smiling, and looking quite dandified, as Uncle Remus afterward said.
Just as the old African was about to lay hands upon 'Tildy, she made a
rush for the door. The movement was so unexpected that Daddy Jack was
upset. He fell upon Uncle Remus's shoe-bench, and then rolled off on the
floor, where he lay clutching at the air, and talking so rapidly that
nobody could understand a word he said. Uncle Remus lifted him to his
feet, with much dignity, and it soon became apparent that he was neither
hurt nor angry. The little boy laughed immoderately, and he was still
laughing when 'Tildy put her head in the door and exclaimed:--

"Unk' Remus, I ain't kilt dat ole nigger, is I? 'Kaze ef I got ter go
ter de gallus, I want to go dar fer sump'n' n'er bigger'n dat."

Uncle Remus disdained to make any reply, but Daddy Jack chuckled and
patted himself on the knee as he cried:--

"Come 'long, lilly gal! come 'long! I no mad. I fall down dey fer laff.
Come 'long, lilly gal, come 'long."

'Tildy went on laughing loudly and talking to herself. After awhile
Uncle Remus said:--

"Honey, I 'speck Miss Sally lookin' und' de bed en axin' whar you is.
You better leak out fum yer now, en by dis time termorrer night I'll
git Brer Jack all primed up, en he'll whirl in en tell you a tale."

Daddy Jack nodded assent, and the little boy ran laughing to the "big
house."


