lost, we ought not to worry over just a growl."

Toto was not entirely satisfied with this remark, for the more he
thought upon his lost growl the more important his misfortune became.
When no one was looking he went away among the trees and tried his best
to growl--even a little bit--but could not manage to do so. All he could
do was bark, and a bark cannot take the place of a growl, so he sadly
returned to the others.

Now, Button-Bright had no idea that he was lost, at first. He had merely
wandered from tree to tree, seeking the finest fruit, until he
discovered he was alone in the great orchard. But that didn't worry him
just then and seeing some apricot trees farther on he went to them; then
he discovered some cherry trees; just beyond these were some tangerines.

"We've found 'most ev'ry kind of fruit but peaches," he said to
himself, "so I guess there are peaches here, too, if I can find the
trees."

He searched here and there, paying no attention to his way, until he
found that the trees surrounding him bore only nuts. He put some walnuts
in his pockets and kept on searching and at last--right among the nut
trees--he came upon one solitary peach tree. It was a graceful,
beautiful tree, but although it was thickly leaved it bore no fruit
except one large, splendid peach, rosy-cheeked and fuzzy and just right
to eat.

Button-Bright had some trouble getting that lonesome peach, for it hung
far out of reach; but he climbed the tree nimbly and crept out on the
branch on which it grew and after several trials, during which he was in
danger of falling, he finally managed to pick it. Then he got back to
the ground and decided the fruit was well worth his trouble. It was
delightfully fragrant and when he bit into it he found it the most
delicious morsel he had ever tasted.

"I really ought to divide it with Trot and Dorothy and Betsy," he said;
"but p'rhaps there are plenty more in some other part of the orchard."

In his heart he doubted this statement, for this was a solitary peach
tree, while all the other fruits grew upon many trees set close to one
another; but that one luscious bite made him unable to resist eating the
rest of it and soon the peach was all gone except the pit.

Button-Bright was about to throw this peach-pit away when he noticed
that it was of pure gold. Of course this surprised him, but so many
things in the Land of Oz were surprising that he did not give much
thought to the golden peach-pit. He put it in his pocket, however, to
show to the girls, and five minutes afterward had forgotten all about
it.

For now he realized that he was far separated from his companions, and
knowing that this would worry them and delay their journey, he began to
shout as loud as he could. His voice did not penetrate very far among
all those trees, and after shouting a dozen times and getting no answer
he sat down on the ground and said:

"Well, I'm lost again. It's too bad, but I don't see how it can be
helped."

As he leaned his back against a tree he looked up and saw a Bluefinch
fly down from the sky and alight upon a branch just before him. The bird
looked and looked at him. First it looked with one bright eye and then
turned its head and looked at him with the other eye. Then,
fluttering its wings a little, it said:

[Illustration]

"Oho! so you've eaten the enchanted peach, have you?"

"Was it enchanted?" asked Button-Bright.

"Of course," replied the Bluefinch. "Ugu the Shoemaker did that."

"But why? And how was it enchanted? And what will happen to one who eats
it?" questioned the boy.

"Ask Ugu the Shoemaker; he knows," said the bird, pruning its feathers
with its bill.

"And who is Ugu the Shoemaker?"

"The one who enchanted the peach, and placed it here--in the exact
center of the Great Orchard--so no one would ever find it. We birds
didn't dare to eat it; we are too wise for that. But you are
Button-Bright, from the Emerald City, and you--_you_--YOU ate the
enchanted peach! You must explain to Ugu the Shoemaker why you did
that."

And then, before the boy could ask any more questions, the bird flew
away and left him alone.

Button-Bright was not much worried to find that the peach he had eaten
was enchanted. It certainly had tasted very good and his stomach didn't
ache a bit. So again he began to reflect upon the best way to rejoin his
friends.

"Whichever direction I follow is likely to be the wrong one," he said to
himself, "so I'd better stay just where I am and let _them_ find
_me_--if they can."

A White Rabbit came hopping through the orchard and paused a little way
off to look at him.

"Don't be afraid," said Button-Bright; "I won't hurt you."

"Oh, I'm not afraid for myself," returned the White Rabbit. "It's you
I'm worried about."

"Yes; I'm lost," said the boy.

"I fear you are, indeed," answered the Rabbit. "Why on earth did you eat
the enchanted peach?"

The boy looked at the excited little animal thoughtfully.

"There were two reasons," he explained. "One reason was that I like
peaches, and the other reason was that I didn't know it was enchanted."

"That won't save you from Ugu the Shoemaker," declared the White Rabbit
and it scurried away before the boy could ask any more questions.

"Rabbits and birds," he thought, "are timid creatures and seem afraid of
this shoemaker--whoever he may be. If there was another peach half as
good as that other, I'd eat it in spite of a dozen enchantments or a
hundred shoemakers!"

Just then Scraps came dancing along and saw him sitting at the foot of
the tree.

"Oh, here you are!" she said. "Up to your old tricks, eh? Don't you know
it's impolite to get lost and keep everybody waiting for you? Come
along, and I'll lead you back to Dorothy and the others."

Button-Bright rose slowly to accompany her.

"That wasn't much of a loss," he said cheerfully. "I haven't been gone
half a day, so there's no harm done."

Dorothy, however, when the boy rejoined the party, gave him a good
scolding.

"When we're doing such an important thing as searching for Ozma," said
she, "it's naughty for you to wander away and keep us from getting on.
S'pose she's a pris'ner--in a dungeon cell!--do you want to keep our
dear Ozma there any longer than we can help?"

"If she's in a dungeon cell, how are you going to get her out?" inquired
the boy.

"Never you mind; we'll leave that to the Wizard; he's sure to find a
way."

The Wizard said nothing, for he realized that without his magic tools he
could do no more than any other person. But there was no use reminding
his companions of that fact; it might discourage them.

"The important thing just now," he remarked, "is to find Ozma; and, as
our party is again happily reunited, I propose we move on."

As they came to the edge of the Great Orchard the sun was setting and
they knew it would soon be dark. So it was decided to camp under the
trees, as another broad plain was before them. The Wizard spread the
blankets on a bed of soft leaves and presently all of them except Scraps
and the Sawhorse were fast asleep. Toto snuggled close to his friend the
Lion, and the Woozy snored so loudly that the Patchwork Girl covered his
square head with her apron to deaden the sound.

[Illustration]




The Czarover of Herku

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 12


Trot wakened just as the sun rose and, slipping out of the blankets,
went to the edge of the Great Orchard and looked across the plain.
Something glittered in the far distance.

"That looks like another city," she said half aloud.

"And another city it is," declared Scraps, who had crept to Trot's side
unheard, for her stuffed feet made no sound. "The Sawhorse and I made a
journey in the dark, while you were all asleep, and we found over there
a bigger city than Thi. There's a wall around it, too, but it has gates
and plenty of pathways."

"Did you go in?" asked Trot.

"No, for the gates were locked and the wall was a real wall. So we came
back here again. It isn't far to the city. We can reach it in two hours
after you've had your breakfasts."

Trot went back and, finding the other girls now awake, told them what
Scraps had said. So they hurriedly ate some fruit--there were plenty of
plums and fijoas in this part of the orchard--and then they mounted the
animals and set out upon the journey to the strange city. Hank the Mule
had breakfasted on grass and the Lion had stolen away and found a
breakfast to his liking; he never told what it was, but Dorothy hoped
the little rabbits and the field mice had kept out of his way. She
warned Toto not to chase birds and gave the dog some apple, with which
he was quite content. The Woozy was as fond of fruit as of any other
food, except honey, and the Sawhorse never ate at all.

Except for their worry over Ozma they were all in good spirits as they
proceeded swiftly over the plain. Toto still worried over his lost
growl, but like a wise little dog kept his worry to himself. Before long
the city grew nearer and they could examine it with interest.

In outward appearance the place was more imposing than Thi, and it was a
square city, with a square, four-sided wall around it and on each side
was a square gate of burnished copper. Everything about the city looked
solid and substantial; there were no banners flying and the towers that
rose above the city wall seemed bare of any ornament whatever.

A path led from the fruit orchard directly to one of the city gates,
showing that the inhabitants preferred fruit to thistles. Our friends
followed this path to the gate, which they found fast shut. But the
Wizard advanced and pounded upon it with his fist, saying in a loud
voice: "Open!"

At once there rose above the great wall a row of immense heads, all of
which looked down at them as if to see who was intruding. The size of
these heads was astonishing and our friends at once realized that they
belonged to giants, who were standing within the city. All had thick,
bushy hair and whiskers, on some the hair being white and on others
black or red or yellow, while the hair of a few was just turning gray,
showing that the giants were of all ages. However fierce the heads might
seem the eyes were mild in expression, as if the creatures had been long
subdued, and their faces expressed patience rather than ferocity.

"What's wanted?" asked one old giant, in a low, grumbling voice.

"We are strangers and we wish to enter the city," replied the Wizard.

"Do you come in war or peace?" asked another.

"In peace, of course," retorted the Wizard, and he added impatiently:
"Do we look like an army of conquest?"

"No," said the first giant who had spoken, "you look like innocent
tramps; but one never can tell by appearances. Wait here until we report
to our masters. No one can enter here without the permission of Vig, the
Czarover."

"Who's that?" inquired Dorothy. But the heads had all bobbed down and
disappeared behind the wall, so there was no answer.

They waited a long time before the gate rolled back with a rumbling
sound and a loud voice cried: "Enter!" But they lost no time in taking
advantage of the invitation.

[Illustration]

On either side of the broad street that led into the city from the gate
stood a row of huge giants--twenty of them on a side and all standing so
close together that their elbows touched. They wore uniforms of blue and
yellow and were armed with clubs as big around as tree-trunks. Each
giant had around his neck a broad band of gold, riveted on, to show he
was a slave.

As our friends entered, riding upon the Lion, the Woozy, the Sawhorse
and the Mule, the giants half turned and walked in two files on either
side of them, as if escorting them on their way. It looked to Dorothy as
if all her party had been made prisoners, for even mounted on their
animals their heads scarcely reached to the knees of the marching
giants. The girls and Button-Bright were anxious to know what sort of a
city they had entered, and what the people were like who had made these
powerful creatures their slaves. Through the legs of the giants, as they
walked, Dorothy could see rows of houses on each side the street and
throngs of people standing on the sidewalks; but the people were of
ordinary size and the only remarkable thing about them was the fact that
they were dreadfully lean and thin. Between their skin and their bones
there seemed to be little or no flesh, and they were mostly
stoop-shouldered and weary looking, even to the little children.

More and more Dorothy wondered how and why the great giants had ever
submitted to become slaves of such skinny, languid masters, but there
was no chance to question anyone until they arrived at a big palace
located in the heart of the city. Here the giants formed lines to the
entrance and stood still while our friends rode into the courtyard of
the palace. Then the gates closed behind them and before them was a
skinny little man who bowed low and said in a sad voice:

"If you will be so obliging as to dismount, it will give me pleasure to
lead you into the presence of the World's Most Mighty Ruler, Vig the
Czarover."

"I don't believe it!" said Dorothy indignantly.

"What don't you believe?" asked the man.

"I don't believe your Czarover can hold a candle to our Ozma."

"He wouldn't hold a candle under any circumstances, or to any living
person," replied the man very seriously, "for he has slaves to do such
things and the Mighty Vig is too dignified to do anything that others
can do for him. He even obliges a slave to sneeze for him, if ever he
catches cold. However, if you dare to face our powerful ruler, follow
me."

"We dare anything," said the Wizard, "so go ahead."

Through several marble corridors having lofty ceilings they passed,
finding each corridor and doorway guarded by servants; but these
servants of the palace were of the people and not giants, and they were
so thin that they almost resembled skeletons. Finally they entered a
great circular room with a high domed ceiling where the Czarover sat on
a throne cut from a solid block of white marble and decorated with
purple silk hangings and gold tassels.

The ruler of these people was combing his eyebrows when our friends
entered his throne-room and stood before him, but he put the comb in his
pocket and examined the strangers with evident curiosity. Then he said:

"Dear me, what a surprise! You have really shocked me. For no outsider
has ever before come to our City of Herku, and I cannot imagine why
_you_ have ventured to do so."

