
"Yes, my dears, here is just the spot where the dear old man saluted me.
I'm quite as proud of it now as I was then, for he was a brave, good
man, and helped us in our trouble.

"He did not stay long, but we were very merry, drinking his health,
receiving his compliments, and enjoying the honor he did us.

"Down in the street there was a crowd, of course, and when he left they
wanted to take out the horses and drag him home in triumph. But he did
n't wish it; and while that affair was being arranged, we girls had been
pelting him with the flowers which we tore from the vases, the walls,
and our own topknots, to scatter over him.

"He liked that, and laughed, and waved his hand to us, while we ran, and
pelted, and begged him to come again.

"We young folks quite lost our heads that night, and I have n't a very
clear idea of how I got home. The last thing I remember was hanging out
of the window with a flock of girls, watching the carriage roll away,
while the crowd cheered as if they were mad.

"Bless my heart, it seems as if I heard'em now! 'Hurrah for Lafayette
and Mayor Quincy! Hurrah for Madam Hancock and the pretty girls! Hurrah
for Col. May!' 'Three cheers for Boston! Now, then! Hurrah! Hurrah!
Hurrah!'"

And here the old lady stopped, out of breath, with her cap askew, her
spectacles on the end of her nose, and her knitting much the worse for
being waved enthusiastically in the air, while she hung over the arm of
her chair, shrilly cheering an imaginary Lafayette. The girls clapped
their hands, and Tom hurrahed with all his might, saying, when he got
his breath, "Lafayette was a regular old trump; I always liked him."

"My dear! what a disrespectful way to speak of that great man," said
grandma, shocked at Young America's irreverence.

"Well, he was a trump, anyway, so why not call him one?" asked Tom,
feeling that the objectionable word was all that could be desired.

"What queer gloves you wore then," interrupted Fanny, who had been
trying on the much-honored glove, and finding it a tight fit.

"Much better and cheaper than we have now," returned grandma, ready
to defend "the good old times" against every insinuation. "You are an
extravagant set now-a-days, and I really don't know what you are coming
to. By the way, I've got somewhere two letters written by two young
ladies, one in 1517, and the other in 1868. The contrast between the two
will amuse you, I think."

After a little search, grandma produced an old portfolio, and selecting
the papers, read the following letter, written by Anne Boleyn before
her marriage to Henry VIII, and now in the possession of a celebrated
antiquarian:

DEAR MARY, I have been in town almost a month, yet I cannot say I have
found anything in London extremely agreeable. We rise so late in the
morning, seldom before six o'clock, and sit up so late at night, being
scarcely in bed before ten, that I am quite sick of it; and was it not
for the abundance of fine things I am every day getting I should be
impatient of returning into the country.

My indulgent mother bought me, yesterday, at a merchant's in Cheapside,
three new shifts, that cost fourteen pence an ell, and I am to have a
pair of new stuff shoes, for my Lord of Norfolk's ball, which will be
three shillings.

The irregular life I have led since my coming to this place has quite
destroyed my appetite. You know I could manage a pound of bacon and a
tankard of good ale for my breakfast, in the country, but in London I
find it difficult to get through half the quantity, though I must own
I am generally eager enough for the dinner hour, which is here delayed
till twelve, in your polite society.

I played at hot cockles, last night, at my Lord of Leicester's. The Lord
of Surrey was there, a very elegant young man, who sung a song of
his own composition, on the "Lord of Kildare's Daughter." It was much
approved, and my brother whispered me that the fair Geraldine, for so my
Lord of Surrey calls his sweetheart, is the finest woman of the age. I
should be glad to see her, for I hear she is good as she is beautiful.

Pray take care of the poultry during my absence. Poor things! I always
fed them myself; and if Margery has knitted me the crimson worsted
mittens, I should be glad if they were sent up the first opportunity.

Adieu, dear Mary. I am just going to mass, and you shall speedily have
the prayers, as you have now the kindest love of your own ANNE BOLEYN.

"Up before six, and think it late to go to bed at ten! What a
countrified thing Anne must have been. Bacon and ale for breakfast, and
dinner at twelve; how very queer to live so!" cried Fanny. "Lord Surrey
and Lord Leicester sound fine, but hot cockles, and red mittens, and
shoes for three shillings, are horrid."

"I like it," said Polly, thoughtfully, "and I'm glad poor Anne had a
little fun before her troubles began. May I copy that letter some time,
grandma?"

"Yes, dear, and welcome. Now, here's the other, by a modern girl on her
first visit to London. This will suit you better, Fan," and grandma
read what a friend had sent her as a pendant to Anne's little picture of
London life long ago:

MY DEAREST CONSTANCE, After three months of intense excitement I snatch
a leisure moment to tell you how much I enjoy my first visit to London.
Having been educated abroad, it really seems like coming to a strange
city. At first the smoke, dirt and noise were very disagreeable, but
I soon got used to these things, and now find all I see perfectly
charming.

We plunged at once into a whirl of gayety and I have had no time to
think of anything but pleasure. It is the height of the season, and
every hour is engaged either in going to balls, concerts, theatres,
fetes and church, or in preparing for them. We often go to two or three
parties in an evening, and seldom get home till morning, so of course
we don't rise till noon next day. This leaves very little time for our
drives, shopping, and calls before dinner at eight, and then the evening
gayeties begin again.

At a ball at Lady Russell's last night, I saw the Prince of Wales, and
danced in the set with him. He is growing stout, and looks dissipated. I
was disappointed in him, for neither in appearance nor conversation was
he at all princely. I was introduced to a very brilliant and delightful
young gentleman from America. I was charmed with him, and rather
surprised to learn that he wrote the poems which were so much admired
last season, also that he is the son of a rich tailor. How odd these
Americans are, with their money, and talent, and independence!

O my dear, I must not forget to tell you the great event of my first
season. I am to be presented at the next Drawing Room! Think how
absorbed I must be in preparation for this grand affair. Mamma is
resolved that I shall do her credit, and we have spent the last two
weeks driving about from milliners to mantua-makers, from merchants to
jewellers. I am to wear white satin and plumes, pearls and roses. My
dress will cost a hundred pounds or more, and is very elegant.

My cousins and friends lavish lovely things upon me, and you will open
your unsophisticated eyes when I display my silks and laces, trinkets
and French hats, not to mention billet deux, photographs, and other
relics of a young belle's first season.

You ask if I ever think of home. I really have n't time, but I do
sometimes long a little for the quiet, the pure air and the girlish
amusements I used to enjoy so much. One gets pale, and old, and sadly
fagged out, with all this dissipation, pleasant as it is. I feel quite
blase already.

If you could send me the rosy cheeks, bright eyes, and gay spirits I
always had at home, I'd thank you. As you cannot do that, please send
me a bottle of June rain water, for my maid tells me it is better than
any cosmetic for the complexion, and mine is getting ruined by late
hours.

I fancy some fruit off our own trees would suit me, for I have no
appetite, and mamma is quite desolate about me. One cannot live on
French cookery without dyspepsia, and one can get nothing simple here,
for food, like everything else, is regulated by the fashion.

Adieu, ma chere, I must dress for church. I only wish you could see my
new hat and go with me, for Lord Rockingham promised to be there.

Adieu, yours eternally, FLORENCE.

"Yes, I do like that better, and I wish I had been in this girl's place,
don't you, Polly?" said Fan, as grandma took off her glasses.

"I should love to go to London, and have a good time, but I don't think
I should care about spending ever so much money, or going to Court.
Maybe I might when I got there, for I do like fun and splendor," added
honest Polly, feeling that pleasure was a very tempting thing.

"Grandma looks tired; let's go and play in the dwying-woom," said Maud,
who found the conversation getting beyond her depth.

"Let us all kiss and thank grandma, for amusing us so nicely, before
we go," whispered Polly. Maud and Fanny agreed, and grandma looked so
gratified by their thanks, that Tom followed suit, merely waiting till
"those girls" were out of sight, to give the old lady a hearty hug, and
a kiss on the very cheek Lafayette had saluted.

When he reached the play-room Polly was sitting in the swing, saying,
very earnestly, "I always told you it was nice up in grandma's room, and
now you see it is. I wish you'd go oftener; she admires to have you,
and likes to tell stories and do pleasant things, only she thinks you
don't care for her quiet sort of fun. I do, anyway, and I think she's
the kindest, best old lady that ever lived, and I love her dearly!"

"I did n't say she was n't, only old people are sort of tedious and
fussy, so I keep out of their way," said Fanny.

"Well, you ought not to, and you miss lots of pleasant times. My mother
says we ought to be kind and patient and respectful to all old folks
just because they are old, and I always mean to be."

"Your mother's everlastingly preaching," muttered Fan, nettled by the
consciousness of her own shortcomings with regard to grandma.

"She don't preach!" cried Polly, firing up like a flash; "she only
explains things to us, and helps us be good, and never scolds, and I
'd rather have her than any other mother in the world, though she don't
wear velvet cloaks and splendid bonnets, so now!"

"Go it, Polly!" called Tom, who was gracefully hanging head downward
from the bar put up for his special benefit.

"Polly's mad! Polly's mad!" sung Maud, skipping rope round the room.

"If Mr. Sydney could see you now he would n't think you such an angel
any more," added Fanny, tossing a bean-bag and her head at the same
time.

Polly was mad, her face was very red, her eyes very bright and her lips
twitched, but she held her tongue and began to swing as hard as she
could, fearing to say something she would be sorry for afterward. For a
few minutes no one spoke, Tom whistled and Maud hummed but Fan and Polly
were each soberly thinking of something, for they had reached an
age when children, girls especially, begin to observe, contrast, and
speculate upon the words, acts, manners, and looks of those about them.
A good deal of thinking goes on in the heads of these shrewd little
folks, and the elders should mind their ways, for they get criticised
pretty sharply and imitated very closely.

Two little things had happened that day, and the influence of a few
words, a careless action, was still working in the active minds of the
girls.

Mr. Sydney had called, and while Fanny was talking with him she saw his
eye rest on Polly, who sat apart watching the faces round her with the
modest, intelligent look which many found so attractive. At that minute
Madam Shaw came in, and stopped to speak to the little girl. Polly rose
at once, and remained standing till the old lady passed on.

"Are you laughing at Polly's prim ways?" Fanny had asked, as she saw Mr.
Sydney smile.

"No, I am admiring Miss Polly's fine manners," he answered in a grave,
respectful tone, which had impressed Fanny very much, for Mr. Sydney
was considered by all the girls as a model of good breeding, and that
indescribable something which they called "elegance."

Fanny wished she had done that little thing, and won that approving
look, for she valued the young man's good opinion, because it was
so hard to win, by her set at least. So, when Polly talked about old
people, it recalled this scene and made Fan cross.

Polly was remembering how, when Mrs. Shaw came home that day in her fine
visiting costume, and Maud ran to welcome her with unusual affection,
she gathered up her lustrous silk and pushed the little girl away
saying, impatiently, "Don't touch me, child, your hands are dirty."
Then the thought had come to Polly that the velvet cloak did n't cover
a right motherly heart, that the fretful face under the nodding purple
plumes was not a tender motherly face, and that the hands in the
delicate primrose gloves had put away something very sweet and precious.
She thought of another woman, whose dress never was too fine for little
wet cheeks to lie against, or loving little arms to press; whose face,
in spite of many lines and the gray hairs above it, was never sour or
unsympathetic when children's eyes turned towards it; and whose hands
never were too busy, too full or too nice to welcome and serve the
little sons and daughters who freely brought their small hopes and
fears, sins and sorrows, to her, who dealt out justice and mercy with
such wise love. "Ah, that's a mother!" thought Polly, as the memory
came warm into her heart, making her feel very rich, and pity Maud for
being so poor.

This it was that caused such sudden indignation at Fanny's dreadful
speech, and this it was that made quick-tempered Polly try to calm her
wrath before she used toward Fanny's mother the disrespectful tone she
so resented toward her own. As the swing came down after some dozen
quick journeys to and fro, Polly seemed to have found a smile somewhere
up aloft, for she looked toward Fan, saying pleasantly, as she paused
a little in her airy exercise, "I'm not mad now, shall I come and toss
with you?"

"No, I'll come and swing with you," answered Fanny, quick to feel the
generous spirit of her friend.

"You are an angel, and I'll never be so rude again," she added, as
Polly's arm came round her, and half the seat was gladly offered.

"No, I ain't; but if I ever get at all like one, it will be'mother's
preaching' that did it," said Polly, with a happy laugh.

"Good for you, Polly Peacemaker," cried Tom, quoting his father, and
giving them a grand push as the most appropriate way of expressing his
approbation of the sentiment.

Nothing more was said; but from that day there slowly crept into the
family more respect for grandma, more forbearance with her infirmities,
more interest in her little stories, and many a pleasant gossip did the
dear old lady enjoy with the children as they gathered round her fire,
solitary so long.




CHAPTER VII. GOOD-BY


"OH, dear! Must you really go home Saturday?" said Fan, some days after
what Tom called the "grand scrimmage."

"I really must; for I only came to stay a month and here I've been
nearly six weeks," answered Polly, feeling as if she had been absent a
year.

"Make it two months and stay over Christmas. Come, do, now," urged Tom,
heartily.

"You are very kind; but I would n't miss Christmas at home for anything.
Besides, mother says they can't possibly do without me."

"Neither can we. Can't you tease your mother, and make up your mind to
stay?" began Fan.

"Polly never teases. She says it's selfish; and I don't do it now
much," put in Maud, with a virtuous air.

"Don't you bother Polly. She'd rather go, and I don't wonder. Let's be
just as jolly as we can while she stays, and finish up with your party,
Fan," said Tom, in a tone that settled the matter.

Polly had expected to be very happy in getting ready for the party; but
when the time came, she was disappointed; for somehow that naughty thing
called envy took possession of her, and spoiled her pleasure. Before she
left home, she thought her new white muslin dress, with its fresh blue
ribbons, the most elegant and proper costume she could have; but
now, when she saw Fanny's pink silk, with a white tarlatan tunic, and
innumerable puffings, bows, and streamers, her own simple little
toilet lost all its charms in her eyes, and looked very babyish and
old-fashioned.

Even Maud was much better dressed than herself, and looked very splendid
in her cherry-colored and white suit, with a sash so big she could
hardly carry it, and little white boots with red buttons. They both
had necklaces and bracelets, ear-rings and brooches; but Polly had no
ornament, except the plain locket on a bit of blue velvet. Her sash was
only a wide ribbon, tied in a simple bow, and nothing but a blue snood
in the pretty curls. Her only comfort was the knowledge that the modest
tucker drawn up round the plump shoulders was real lace, and that her
bronze boots cost nine dollars.

Poor Polly, with all her efforts to be contented, and not to mind
looking unlike other people, found it hard work to keep her face bright
and her voice happy that night. No one dreamed what was going an under
the muslin frock, till grandma's wise old eyes spied out the little
shadow on Polly's spirits, and guessed the cause of it. When dressed,
the three girls went up to show themselves to the elders, who were in
grandma's room, where Tom was being helped into an agonizingly stiff
collar.

Maud pranced like a small peacock, and Fan made a splendid courtesy as
every one turned to survey them; but Polly stood still, and her eyes
went from face to face, with an anxious, wistful air, which seemed to
say, "I know I'm not right; but I hope I don't look very bad."

Grandma read the look in a minute; and when Fanny said, with a satisfied
smile, "How do we look?" she answered, drawing Polly toward her so
kindly.

"Very like the fashion-plates you got the patterns of your dresses from.
But this little costume suits me best."

"Do you really think I look nice?" and Polly's face brightened, for she
valued the old lady's opinion very much.

"Yes, my dear; you look just as I like to see a child of your age look.
What particularly pleases me is that you have kept your promise to your
mother, and have n't let anyone persuade you to wear borrowed finery.
Young things like you don't need any ornaments but those you wear
to-night, youth, health, intelligence, and modesty."

As she spoke, grandma gave a tender kiss that made Polly glow like a
rose, and for a minute she forgot that there were such things as pink
silk and coral ear-rings in the world. She only said, "Thank you,
ma'am," and heartily returned the kiss; but the words did her good, and
her plain dress looked charming all of a sudden.

"Polly's so pretty, it don't matter what she wears," observed Tom,
surveying her over his collar with an air of calm approval.

"She has n't got any bwetelles to her dwess, and I have," said Maud,
settling her ruffled bands over her shoulders, which looked like
cherry-colored wings on a stout little cherub.

"I did wish she'd just wear my blue set, ribbon is so very plain; but,
as Tom says, it don't much matter;" and Fanny gave an effective touch to
