activity, and courage, and they could no longer treat him as a boy. As
he became stronger he took to riding about the plantation; but not upon
Wildfire, for his horse was still with the troop, Colonel Stuart having
promised to see that the animal was well cared for, and that no one
should ride upon it but himself.

"I hope you like Jonas Pearson better than you used to do, Vincent,"
Mrs. Wingfield said a day or two before he started to rejoin his troop.

"I can't say I do, mother," he replied shortly. "The man is very civil
to me now--too civil, in fact; but I don't like him, and I don't believe
he is honest. I don't mean that he would cheat you, though he may do so
for anything I know; but he pretends to be a violent Secessionist, which
as he comes from Vermont is not natural, and I imagine he would sing a
different tune if the blue coats ever get to Richmond. Still I have
nothing particular to say against him, except that I don't like him and
I don't trust him. So long as everything goes on well for the
Confederacy I don't suppose it matters, but if we should ever get the
worst of it you will see that fellow will be mischievous.

"However, I hear that he has obeyed your orders, and that there has been
no flogging on the estate since I went away. In fact, as far as I can
see, he does not keep anything like such a sharp hand over the slaves as
he used to do; and in some of the fields the work seems to be done in a
very slovenly way. What his game is I don't know; but I have no doubt
whatever that he has some game in his mind."

"You are a most prejudiced boy," Mrs. Wingfield said, laughing. "First
of all the man is too strict, and you were furious about it; now you
think he's too lenient, and you at once suspect he has what you call a
game of some sort or other on. You are hard to please indeed."

Vincent smiled. "Well, as I told you once before, we shall see. I hope I
am wrong, and that Pearson is all that you believe him to be. I own that
I may be prejudiced against him; but nothing will persuade me that it
was not from him that Jackson learned that Dinah was here, and it was to
that we owe the visit of the sheriff and the searching the plantation
for Tony. However, whatever the man is at heart, he can, as far as I
see, do you no injury as long as things go on as they are, and I
sincerely trust he will never have an opportunity of doing so."

During the winter Vincent had made the acquaintance of many of the
Southern leaders. The town was the center of the movement, the heart of
the Confederacy. It was against it, as the capital of the Southern
States, that the efforts of the Northerns were principally directed, and
to it flocked the leading men from all parts of the country. Although
every Virginian family had some of its members at the front, and a
feeling of anxiety reigned everywhere, a semblance of gaiety was kept
up. The theater was opened, and parties and balls given, in order to
keep up the spirits of the people by the example of those of higher
rank.

These balls differed widely in appearance from those of eighteen months
before. The gentlemen were almost all in uniform, and already calicoes
and other cheap fabrics were worn by many of the ladies, as foreign
dress materials could no longer be purchased. Mrs. Wingfield made a
point of always attending with her daughters at these entertainments,
which to the young people afforded a cheerful break in the dullness and
monotony of their usual life; for, owing to the absence of almost all
the young men with the army, there had been a long cessation of the
pleasant interchange of visits, impromptu parties, and social gatherings
that had formed a feature in the life in Virginia.

The balls would have been but dull affairs had only the residents of
Richmond been present; but leave was granted as much as possible to
officers stationed with regiments within a railway run of the town, and
as these eagerly availed themselves of the change from the monotony of
camp life, the girls had no reason to complain of want of partners. Here
and at the receptions given by President Davis, Vincent met all the
leaders of the Confederacy, civil and military. Many of them had been
personal friends of the Wingfields before the Secession movement began,
and among them was General Magruder, who commanded the troops round
Richmond.

Early in the winter the general had called at the Orangery. "We are
going to make a call upon the patriotism of the planters of this
neighborhood, Mrs. Wingfield," he said during lunch time. "You see, our
armies are facing those of the Federals opposite Washington, and can
offer a firm front to any foe marching down from the North; but,
unfortunately they have the command of the sea, and there is nothing to
prevent their embarking an army on board ship and landing it in either
the James or the York Rivers, and in that case they might make a rush
upon Richmond before there would be time to bring down troops to our
aid. I am therefore proposing to erect a chain of works between the two
rivers, so as to be able to keep even a large army at bay until
reinforcements arrive; but to do this a large number of hands will be
required, and we are going to ask the proprietors of plantations to
place as many negroes as they can spare at our disposal."

"There can be no doubt as to the response your question will meet with,
general. At present we have scarce enough work for our slaves to do. I
intend to grow no tobacco next year, for it will only rot in the
warehouse, and a comparatively small number of hands are required to
raise corn crops. I have about a hundred and seventy working hands on
the Orangery, and shall be happy to place a hundred at your disposal for
as long a time as you may require them. If you want fifty more you can
of course have them. Everything else must at present give way to the
good of the cause."

"I thank you much, Mrs. Wingfield, for your offers, and will put your
name down the first on the list of contributors."

"You seem quite to have recovered now," he said to Vincent a few minutes
afterward.

"Yes; I am quite ashamed of staying here so long, general. But I feel
some pain at times; and as there is nothing doing at the front, and my
doctor says that it is of importance I should have rest as long as
possible, I have stayed on. Major Ashley has promised to recall me as
soon as there is a prospect of active work."

"I think it is quite likely that there will be active work here as soon
as anywhere else," the general said. "We know pretty well what is doing
at Washington, and though nothing has been decided upon, there is a
party in favor of a landing in force here; and if so, we shall have hot
work. What do you say? If you like I will get you a commission and
appoint you one of my aides-de-camp. Your knowledge of the country will
make you useful, and as Ashley has specially mentioned your name in one
of his despatches, you can have your commission by asking for it.

"If there is to be fighting round here, it will be of more interest to
you defending your own home than in taking part in general engagements
for the safety of the State. It will, too, enable you to be a good deal
at home; and although so far the slaves have behaved extremely well,
there is no saying exactly what may happen if the Northerners come among
us. You can rejoin your own corps afterward, you know, if nothing comes
of this."

Vincent was at first inclined to decline the offer, but his mother and
sisters were so pleased at having him near them that he finally accepted
with thanks, being principally influenced by the general's last
argument, that possibly there might be trouble with the slaves in the
event of a landing in the James Peninsula by the Northerners. A few days
later there came an official intimation that he had received a
commission in the cavalry, and had at General Magruder's request been
appointed to his staff, and he at once entered upon his new duties.

The fortress of Monroe, at the entrance of Hampton Roads, was still in
the hands of the Federals, and a large Federal fleet was assembled here,
and was only prevented from sailing up the James River by the Merrimac,
a steamer which the Confederates had plated with railway iron. They had
also constructed batteries upon some high bluffs on each side of the
river. In a short time 5,000 negroes were set to work erecting batteries
upon the York River at Yorktown and Gloucester Point, and upon a line of
works extending from Warwick upon the James River to Ship Point on the
York, through a line of wooded and swampy country intersected by streams
emptying themselves into one or other of the rivers.

This line was some thirty miles in length, and would require 25,000 men
to guard it; but Magruder hoped that there would be sufficient warning
of an attack to enable reinforcements to arrive in time to raise his own
command of about 10,000 men to that strength. The negroes worked
cheerfully, for they received a certain amount of pay from the State;
but the work was heavy and difficult, and different altogether to that
which they were accustomed to perform. The batteries by the sides of the
rivers made fair progress, but the advance of the long line of works
across the peninsula was but slow. Vincent had, upon receiving his
appointment, written at once to Major Ashley, sending his letter by Dan,
who was ordered to bring back Wildfire. Vincent stated that had he
consulted his personal feeling he should have preferred remaining in the
ranks of his old corps; but that as the fighting might be close to his
home, and there was no saying what might be the behavior of the slave
population in the event of a Northern invasion, he had, for the sake of
his mother and sisters, accepted the appointment, but as soon as the
danger was over he hoped to rejoin the corps and serve under his former
commander.

Dan, on his return with Wildfire, brought a letter from the major saying
that although he should have been glad to have had him with him, he
quite agreed with the decision at which he had, under the circumstances,
arrived. Vincent now took up his quarters at the camp formed a short
distance from the city, and much of his time was spent in riding to and
from the peninsula, seeing that the works were being carried out
according to the plan of the general, and reporting upon the manner in
which the contractors for the supply of food to the negroes at work
there performed their duties. Sometimes he was away for two or three
days upon this work; but he generally managed once or twice a week to
get home for a few hours.

The inhabitants of Richmond and its neighborhood were naturally greatly
interested in the progress of the works for their defense, and parties
were often organized to ride or drive to Yorktown, or to the batteries
on the James River, to watch the progress made. Upon one occasion
Vincent accompanied his mother and sisters, and a party of ladies and
gentlemen from the neighboring plantations, to Drury's Bluff, where an
entrenched position named Fort Darling had been erected, and
preparations made to sink vessels across the river, and close it against
the advance of the enemy's fleet should any misfortune happen to the
Merrimac.

Several other parties had been made up, and each brought provisions with
them. General Magruder and some of his officers received them upon their
arrival, and conducted them over the works. After this the whole party
sat down to a picnic meal on the ground, and no stranger could have
guessed that the merry party formed part of a population threatened with
invasion by a powerful foe. There were speeches and toasts, all of a
patriotic character, and General Magruder raised the enthusiasm to the
highest point by informing them that in a few days--the exact day was a
secret, but it would be very shortly--the Merrimac, or, as she had been
re-christened, the Virginia, would put out from Norfolk Harbor, and see
what she could do to clear Hampton Roads of the fleet that now
threatened them. As they were riding back to Richmond the general said
to Vincent:

"I will tell you a little more than I told the others, Wingfield. I
believe the Merrimac will go out the day after to-morrow. I wish I could
get away myself to see the affair; but, unfortunately, I cannot do so.
However, if you like to be present, I will give you three days' leave,
as you have been working very hard lately. You can start early
to-morrow, and can get down by train to Norfolk in the evening. I should
advise you to take your horse with you, and then you can ride in the
morning to some spot from which you will get a fair view of the Roads,
and be able to see what is going on."

"Thank you very much, sir," Vincent said. "I should like it immensely."

The next day Vincent went down to Norfolk. Arriving there, he found that
although there was a general expectation that the Merrimac would shortly
go out to try her strength with the enemy, nothing was known of the fact
that the next morning had been fixed for the encounter, the secret being
kept to the last lest some spy or adherent of the North might take the
news to the fleet. After putting up his horse Vincent went down to the
navy yard, off which the Merrimac was lying.

This ship had been sunk by the Federals when at the commencement of
hostilities they had evacuated Norfolk. Having been raised by the
Confederates, the ship was cut down, and a sort of roof covered with
iron was built over it, so that the vessel presented the appearance of a
huge sunken house. A ram was fixed to her bow, and she was armed with
ten guns. Her steam-power was very insufficient for her size, and she
could only move through the water at the rate of five knots an hour.

"She is an ugly-looking thing," a man observed to Vincent as he gazed at
the ship.

"Frightfully ugly," Vincent agreed. "She may be a formidable machine in
the way of fighting, but one can scarcely call her a ship."

"She is a floating-battery, and if they tried their best to turn out the
ugliest thing that ever floated they could not have succeeded better.
She is just like a Noah's ark sunk down to the eaves of her roof."

"Yes, she is a good deal like that," Vincent agreed. "The very look of
her ought to be enough to frighten the Federals, even if she did nothing
else."

"I expect it will not be long before she gives them a taste of her
quality," the man said. "She has got her coal and ammunition on board,
and there's nothing to prevent her going out this evening if she wants
to."

"It will be worth seeing when she does go out to fight the Northerners,"
Vincent said. "It will be a new experiment in warfare, and, if she turns
out a success, I suppose all the navies in the world will be taking to
cover themselves up with iron."

The next morning, which was the 8th of March--a date forever memorable
in naval annals--smoke was seen pouring out from the funnels of the
Merrimac, and there were signs of activity on board the Patrick Henry,
of six guns, and the Jamestown, Raleigh, Beaufort, and Teazer, little
craft carrying one gun each, and at eleven o'clock they all moved down
the inlet on which Norfolk is situated. The news that the Merrimac was
going out to attack the enemy had now spread, and the whole population
of Norfolk turned out and hastened down toward the mouth of the inlet on
horseback, in vehicles, or on foot, while Vincent rode to the batteries
on Sewell's Point, nearly facing Fort Monroe.

He left his horse at a farmhouse a quarter of a mile from the battery;
for Wildfire was always restless under fire, and it was probable that
the batteries would take a share in the affair. At one o'clock some of
the small Federal lookout launches were seen to be at work signaling, a
bustle could be observed prevailing among the large ships over by the
fortress, and it was evident that the Merrimac was visible to them as
she came down the inlet. The Cumberland and Congress men-of-war moved
out in that direction, and the Minnesota and the St. Lawrence, which
were at anchor, got under weigh, assisted by steam-tugs.

The Merrimac and the fleet of little gunboats were now visible from the
battery, advancing against the Cumberland and Congress. The former
opened fire upon her at a distance of a mile with her heavy pivot guns,
but the Merrimac, without replying, continued her slow and steady course
toward them. She first approached the Congress, and as she did so a puff
of smoke burst from the forward end of her pent-house, and the water
round the Congress was churned up by a hail of grape-shot. As they
passed each other both vessels fired a broadside. The officers in the
fort, provided with glasses, could see the effect of the Merrimac's fire
in the light patches that showed on the side of the Congress, but the
Merrimac appeared entirely uninjured. She now approached the Cumberland,
which poured several broadsides into her, but altogether without effect.
The Merrimac, without replying, steamed straight on and struck the
Cumberland with great force, knocking a large hole in her side, near the
water-line. Then backing off she opened fire upon her.

For half an hour the crew of the Cumberland fought with great bravery.
The ships lay about three hundred yards apart, and every shot from the
Merrimac told on the wooden vessel. The water was pouring in through the
breach. The shells of the Merrimac crushed through her side, and at one
time set her on fire; but the crew worked their guns until the vessel
sank beneath their feet. Some men succeeded in swimming to land, which
was not far distant, others were saved by small boats from the shore,
but nearly half of the crew of 400 men were either killed in action or
drowned.

The Merrimac now turned her attention to the Congress, which was left to
fight the battle alone, as the Minnesota had got aground, and the
Roanoake and St. Lawrence could not approach near enough to render them
assistance from their draught of water. The Merrimac poured broadside
after broadside into her, until the officer in command and many of the
crew were killed. The lieutenant who succeeded to the command, seeing
there was no prospect of help, and that resistance was hopeless, hauled
down the flag. A gunboat was sent alongside, with orders that the crew
should leave the Congress and come on board, as the ship was to be
burned. But the troops and artillery lining the shore now opened fire on
the little gunboat, which consequently hauled off. The Merrimac, after
firing several more shells into the Congress, moved away to attack the
Minnesota, and the survivors of the 200 men who composed the crew of the
Congress were conveyed to shore in small boats. The vessel was set on
fire either by her own crew or the shells of the Merrimac, and by
midnight blew up.

Owing to the shallowness of the water the Merrimac could not get near
enough to the Minnesota to use her own small guns to advantage, and the
gunboat was driven off by the heavy ten-inch gun of the Federal frigate,
and therefore at seven o'clock the Merrimac and her consorts returned to
Norfolk. The greatest delight was felt on shore at the success of the
engagement, and on riding back to Norfolk Vincent learned that the ram
would go out again next morning to engage the rest of the Federal fleet.

She herself had suffered somewhat in the fight. Her loss in men was only
two killed and eight wounded; but two of her guns had the muzzles shot
off, the armor was damaged in some places, and most serious of all she
had badly twisted her ram in running into the Cumberland. Still it
appeared that she was more than a match for the rest of the Federal
fleet, and that these must either fly or be destroyed.

As the general had given him three days' leave, Vincent was able to stay
to see the close of the affair, and early next morning again rode down
to Sewell's Point, as the Merrimac was to start at daybreak. At six
o'clock the ironclad came out from the river and made for the Minnesota,
which was still aground. The latter was seen to run up a signal, and the
spectators saw an object which they had not before perceived coming out
as if to meet the ram. The glasses were directed toward it, and a
general exclamation of surprise was heard.

"What is the thing? It looks like a raft with two round turrets upon it,
and a funnel." A moment's consideration, and the truth burst upon them.
It was the ship they had heard of as building at New York, and which had
been launched six weeks before. It was indeed the Monitor, which had
arrived during the night, just in time to save the rest of the Federal
fleet. She was the first regular ironclad ever built. She was a turret
ship, carrying two very heavy guns, and showing only between two and
three feet above the water.

The excitement upon both shores as these adversaries approached each
other was intense. They moved slowly, and not until they were within a
hundred yards distance did the Monitor open fire, the Merrimac replying
at once. The fire for a time was heavy and rapid, the distance between
the combatants varying from fifty to two hundred yards. The Monitor had
by far the greatest speed, and was much more easily turned than the
Confederate ram, and her guns were very much heavier, and the Merrimac
while still keeping up the fight made toward the mouth of the river.

Suddenly she turned and steamed directly at the Monitor, and before the
latter could get out of her way struck her on the side; but the ram was
bent and her weak engines were insufficient to propel her with the
necessary force. Consequently she inflicted no damage on the Monitor,
and the action continued, the turret-ship directing her fire at the iron
roof of the ram, while the latter pointed her guns especially at the
turret and pilot-house of the Monitor. At length, after a battle which
had lasted six hours, the Monitor withdrew, one of the plates of her
pilot-house being seriously damaged and her commander injured in the
eyes.

When her foe drew off the Merrimac steamed back to Norfolk. There were
no men killed in either battle, and each side claimed a victory; the
Federals upon the ground that they had driven off the Merrimac, the
Confederates because the Monitor had retreated from the fight. Each
vessel however held the strength of the other in respect, the Monitor
remaining as sentinel over the ships and transports at Fortress Monroe,
while the Merrimac at Norfolk continued to guard the entrance into the
James River.

As soon as the fight was over Vincent Wingfield, greatly pleased that he
had witnessed so strange and interesting a combat, rode back to Norfolk,
and the same evening reached Richmond, where his description of the
fight was received with the greatest interest and excitement.


CHAPTER VIII. McCLELLAN'S ADVANCE.

It was not until three weeks after the fight between the ironclads that
the great army under General McClellan arrived off Fortress Monroe, the
greater portion of the troops coming down the Potomac in steam
transports. Vast quantities of stores had been accumulated in and around
the fortress. Guns of a size never before used in war were lying on the
wharfs in readiness to be placed in batteries, while Hampton Roads were
crowded with transports and store vessels watched over by the Monitor
and the other war ships. McClellan's army was a large one, but not so
strong a force as he had intended to have taken with him, and as soon as
he arrived at Fortress Monroe he learned that he would not be able to
expect much assistance from the fleet. The Merrimac completely closed
the James River; and were the more powerful vessels of the fleet to move
up the York River, she would be able to sally out and destroy the rest
of the fleet and the transports.

As it was most important to clear the peninsula between the two rivers
before Magruder should receive strong reinforcements, a portion of the
troops were at once landed, and on the 4th of April 56,000 men and 100
guns disembarked and started on their march against Yorktown. As soon as
the news of the arrival of the Northern army at Fortress Monroe reached
Richmond fresh steps were taken for the defense of the city. Magruder
soon found that it would be impossible with the force at his command to
hold the line he had proposed, and a large body of negroes and troops
were set to work to throw up defenses between Yorktown and a point on
the Warwick River thirteen and a half miles away.

A portion of this line was covered by the Warwick Creek, which he dammed
up to make it unfordable, and erected batteries to guard the dams.
Across the intervening ground a weak earthwork with trenches was
constructed, there being no time to raise stronger works; but Magruder
relied chiefly upon the swampy and difficult nature of the country, and
the concealment afforded by the forest, which rendered it difficult for
the enemy to discover the weakness of the defenders.

He posted 6,000 men at Yorktown and Gloucester Point, and the remaining
5,000 troops under his command were scattered along the line of works to
the Warwick River. He knew that if McClellan pushed forward with all his
force he must be successful; but he knew also that if the enemy could
