the day. His long hose, one of which was of a deep maroon, the other
a bright yellow, came far up above the knee, then came a short pair
of trunks of similar colours divided in the middle. The tight-fitting
doublet was short and circled at the waist by a buff belt mounted in
silver, and was of the same colours as the hose and trunks. On his
head was a cap, peaked in front; this was of maroon, with a short
erect feather of yellow. The long-pointed shoes matched the rest of the
costume. There were three other suits similar in fashion, but different
in colour; two like the first were of cloth, the third was of white and
blue silk, to be worn on grand occasions.


"You look a very pretty figure, Walter," Geoffrey said, "and will be
able to hold your own among the young gallants of the court. If you lack
somewhat of courtly manners it will matter not at all, since you are
leaving so soon for the wars.

"The dress sets off your figure, which is fully two years in advance of
your age, seeing that hard work has widened you out and thickened your
muscles. I need not tell you, lad, not to be quarrelsome, for that was
never your way; but just at first your companions may try some jests
with you, as is always the manner of young men with newcomers, but take
them in a good spirit and be sure that, seeing the strength of arm and
skill which you showed yesterday and the day before, none will care to
push matters with you unduly."

One of the journeymen accompanied Walter to Westminster to carry up from
the boat the valise with his clothes and the armour which he had worn
in the sports. Sir Walter received the lad with much kindness and
introduced him to his future companions. They were five in number;
the eldest was a man of some thirty years old, a Hainaulter, who had
accompanied Sir Walter Manny to England at the time when the latter
first came over as a young squire in the suite of the Princess Philippa.
He was devotedly attached to the knight, his master, and although he
might several times have received the rank of knighthood for his bravery
in the field, he preferred remaining in his position as esquire and
faithful friend of his master.

The other four were between the ages of nineteen and twenty-one, and all
belonged to the families of the highest nobility of England, it being
deemed a distinguished honour to be received as a squire by the most
gallant knight at the court of England. Their duties were, as Walter
soon learned, almost nominal, these being discharged almost exclusively
by John Mervaux. Two of the young esquires, Richard Coningsby and Edward
Clifford, had fought in the melee, having been among the ten leaders
under Clarence Aylmer. They bore no malice for the defeat, but received
Walter with cordiality and kindness, as did the other young men. Walter
on his arrival acquainted the knight with Ralph's wish to follow him,
and requested permission for him to do so. This was readily granted,
Sir Walter Manny telling the lad that although esquires were supposed
to wait entirely upon themselves, to groom their horses, and keep their
armour and arms bright and in good order, yet, in point of fact, young
men of good families had the greater part of these duties performed for
them by a retainer who rode in the ranks of their master's following as
a man-at-arms.

"The other esquires have each one of their father's retainers with them,
and I am glad that you should be in the same position. After you have
taken your midday meal you had best go across to the Earl of Talbot's
and inquire for the Lady Vernon, who is still staying with him. She told
me at the king's ball last night that she wished to have speech with
you, and I promised to acquaint you with her desire. By the way, dost
know aught of riding?"

"I have learnt to sit on a horse, Sir Walter," the lad answered. "My
good friend Geoffrey, the armourer, advised that I should learn, and
frequently hired from the horse-dealer an animal for my use. I have
often backed half-broken horses which were brought up by graziers from
Kent and Sussex for use in the wars. Many of them abode at the hostels
at Southwark, and willingly enough granted me permission to ride their
horses until they were sold. Thus I have had a good deal of practice,
and that of a rough kind; and seeing that latterly the horses have, for
the most part, found it difficult to fling me when sitting barebacked
across them, I think I could keep my seat in the high-peaked saddles on
the most vicious, but I have had no practice at tilting, or at the ring,
or other knightly exercises."

"That matters not at all," the knight said. "All these knightly
exercises which you speak of are good in time of peace, for they give
proficiency and steadiness, but in time of war he who can sit firmly
in his saddle and wield sword and battle-axe lustily and skillfully is
equal to the best; but never fear, when this expedition is over, and we
have time for such things, I will see that you are instructed in them.
One who has achieved so much martial skill as you have done at so early
an age will have little difficulty in acquiring what may be termed the
pastime of chivalry."

Ralph arrived just as Walter was setting out. The latter presented
him to the knight, who spoke with praise of the gallantry which he had
displayed on the previous day, and then handed him over to John Mervaux,
with instructions to enroll him as a man-at-arms among his followers, to
inform him of his duties, and to place him with those who attended upon
the other esquires.

After seeing Ralph disposed of, Walter went across to the Earl of Talbot
and was again conducted to the presence of Dame Vernon.

"You have changed since we met last, young sir," she said with a smile,
"though it is but a month since. Then you were a 'prentice boy, now you
are an esquire of Sir Walter Manny, and on the highway to distinction.
That you will win it I am well assured, since one who risked his life to
rescue a woman and child whose very names were unknown to him is sure to
turn out a noble and valiant knight. I little thought when my daughter
called you her knight, that in so short a time you might become an
aspirant to that honour. I hope that you do not look askance at us,
now that you know I am in possession of the lands of your parents. Such
changes of land, you know, often occur, but now I know who you are, I
would that the estates bestowed upon Sir Jasper had belonged to some
other than you; however, I trust that you will hold no grudge against
us, and that you may win as fair an estate by the strength of your arm
and the king's favour."

"Assuredly I feel no grudge, madam," Walter replied, "and since the
lands were forfeited, am pleased that of all people they should have
gone to one so kind and so fair as yourself."

"What, learning to be a flatterer already!" Dame Vernon laughed. "You
are coming on fast, and I predict great things from you. And now, Edith,
lay aside that sampler you are pretending to be so busy upon and speak
to this knight of yours."

Edith laid down her work and came forward. She was no longer the
dignified little queen of the tournament, but a laughing, bright-faced
girl.

"I don't see that you are changed," she said, "except in your dress. You
speak softly and naturally, just as you used to do, and not a bit like
those little court fops, Uncle Talbot's pages. I am afraid you will
not want to be my knight any more, now that you are going to get great
honours at the war; for I heard my Uncle Talbot tell my lady mother that
he was sure you would gain great credit for yourself."

"I shall be always your knight," Walter said earnestly; "I told you I
should, and I never break my word. That is," he went on, colouring, "if
Dame Vernon makes no objection, as she well might."

"If I did not object before, Walter," she said smiling, "why should I do
so now?"

"It is different, my lady; before, it was somewhat of a jest, a sort
of childish play on the part of Mistress Edith, though so far as I was
concerned it was no play, but sober earnest.

"It needs no permission from me," Dame Vernon replied, "for you to wear
my daughter's colours. Any knight may proclaim any lady he chooses the
mistress of his heart, and a reigning beauty will often have a dozen
young knights who wear her colours. However, I am well content that one
who has done me such great service and who has shown such high promise
should be the first to wear the gage of my little daughter, and if in
after years your life fulfils the promise of your youth, and you remain
true to her gage, there is none among all the youths of the court whom
I would so gladly see at her feet. Remember," she said, as Walter was
about to speak, "her hand will not be at my disposal, but at that of the
king. His majesty is wont to bestow the hands of his wards upon those
who most distinguish themselves in the field. You have already attracted
his royal attention and commendation. Under Sir Walter Manny you will be
sure of opportunities of distinguishing yourself, and the king may well
be glad some day at once to reward your services and to repair a cruel
injustice by bestowing upon you the hand of the heiress of your father's
lands. If I mistake not, such a thought has even now crossed his
majesty's mind, unless I misinterpreted a glance which yesterday passed
between him and our sweet queen. I need not tell you to speak of your
hopes to none, but let them spur you to higher exertions and nobler
efforts. Loving my little Edith as I do, I naturally consider the prize
to be a high one. I have often been troubled by the thought that her
hand may be some day given to one by years or temper unsuited for
her, and it will be a pleasure to me henceforth to picture her future
connected with one who is, I am sure, by heart and nature fitted for
her. And now, farewell, young sir. May God protect you in the field, and
may you carry in the battle which awaits you the gage of my daughter as
fairly and successfully as you did in the mimic fray of yesterday!"



CHAPTER VIII: OFF TO THE WARS


Two days later Walter started with Sir Walter Manny, with a large number
of knights, squires, men-at-arms, and archers, for the Orwell. Walter
was mounted, as were the other squires and men-at-arms, and indeed
many of the archers. Ralph Smith, in the attire of a man-at-arms, rode
behind.

Walter was in the highest spirits. A brilliant career was open to him
under the most favourable circumstances; he had already distinguished
himself, and had gained the attention of the highest personages in the
realm, his immediate lord was one of the bravest and most chivalrous
knights in Europe, and he had to sustain and encourage him the hopes
that Lady Vernon had given him, of regaining some day the patrimony of
his father. It was a satisfaction to him that he was as well born as
those who surrounded him, and his purse was well lined as any in the
company. Although he had spent the largess which had been bestowed upon
him at the tournament in procuring clothes fitted for his rank, he was
yet abundantly supplied with money, for both Geoffrey Ward and Giles
Fletcher, having no children of their own and being both well-to-do men,
had insisted upon his accepting a sum which would enable him to make a
good appearance with the best.

A large number of squires followed the banner of Sir Walter Manny. The
records of the time show that the barons were generally accompanied in
the field by almost as many squires as men-at-arms. The former were men
of good family, sons of knights and nobles, aspirants for the honour of
knighthood, and sons of the smaller gentry. Many were there from pure
love of a life of excitement and adventure, others in fulfilment of the
feudal tenure by which all land was then held, each noble and landowner
being obliged to furnish so many knights, squires, men-at-arms, and
archers, in accordance with the size of his holding. The squires fought
in the field in the front rank of the men-at-arms, save those who, like
Walter, were attached to the person of their leader, and who in the
field fought behind him or bore his orders to the companies under his
banner.

In the field all drew pay, and it may be interesting in the present
day to know what were the rates for which our forefathers risked their
lives. They were as follows: each horse archer received 6 deniers, each
squire 12 deniers or 1 sol, each knight 2 sols, each knight banneret 4
sols. 20 sols went to the pound, and although the exact value of money
in those days relative to that which it bears at the present time is
doubtful, it may be placed at twelve times the present value. Therefore
each horse archer received an equivalent to 6s. a day, each squire 12s.,
each knight 24s., and each knight banneret 48s. per day.

Upon their arrival at the Orwell, where many troops from other parts
had been gathered, the expedition at once embarked on board the numerous
ships which had been collected. As that in which Sir Walter sailed also
carried several of his knights there was not room for all his young
esquires, and Walter and the three other juniors were told off into
another ship. She was a smaller vessel than most of those which composed
the expedition, and only carried twelve men-at-arms and as many archers,
together with the four young squires, and a knight, Sir John Powis, who
was in command of the whole.

"Your craft is but a small one," the knight said to the captain.

"She is small, but she is fast," the latter answered. "She would sail
round and round the best part of the fleet. I had her built according to
my own fancy. Small though she be, I warrant you she will be one of the
first to arrive at Hennebon, and the sooner the better say I, since I am
but paid by the trip, and would fain be back again at my regular work.
It pays better carrying merchants' goods between London and Holland than
taking his majesty's troops over to France."

"Your speed will not be of much avail," Sir John Powis said, "seeing
that the fleet will keep together."

"Yes, I know that is the order," the captain answered; "but accidents
happen sometimes, you know"--and his eye twinkled. "Vessels get
separated from fleets. If they happen to be slow ones so much the worse
for those on board; if they happen to be fast ones so much the better,
seeing that those they carry will arrive long before their comrades, and
may be enabled to gain credit and renown while the others are whistling
for a wind in mid-ocean. However, we shall see."

The next morning the fleet sailed from the Orwell. It contained 620
men-at-arms, among whom were many of the noblest and bravest of the
country, and 6000 picked archers in the pay of the king. The whole were
commanded by Sir Walter. The scene was a very gay one. The banners of
the nobles and knights floated from the lofty poops, and the sun shone
on bright armour and steel weapons. Walter, who had never seen the
sea before, was delighted. The wind was fair, and the vessels glided
smoothly along over the sea. At evening the knight and his four young
companions gathered in the little cabin, for it was in the first week in
March, and the night was cold.

"Will you please tell me, Sir John," Walter said to the knight, "the
merits of this quarrel in which we are going to fight? I know that we
are going in aid of the Countess of Montford; but why she is in a sore
strait I know not."

"The matter is a mixed one, Walter, and it requires a herald to tell you
all the subtleties of it. John III, Duke of Brittany, was present with
his liege lord, Phillip of Valois, in the last war with England, on the
border of the low country. When the English retired from before Tournay
Phillip dismissed his nobles. The Duke of Burgundy was taken ill, and
died at Caen, in Normandy, on the 30th of April, 1341. Arthur II, his
father, had been twice married. By his first wife he had three sons,
John, Guy, and Peter. John and Peter left no issue. Guy, who is also
dead, left a daughter, Joan. By his second wife, Jolande de Dieux, Duke
Arthur had one son, John, Count of Montford. Thus it happened, that
when Duke John died, his half-brother, the Count of Montford, and
Joan, daughter of his second brother Guy, were all that survived of
the family. These were the rival claimants for the vacant dukedom. In
England we have but one law of succession, which rules through the whole
land. In France it is different. There the law of succession depends
entirely upon the custom of the county, dukedom, or lordship, which is
further affected both by the form of grant by which the territory was
conveyed to its first feudal possessors and by the mode in which the
province had been acquired by the kings of France. This is important,
as upon these circumstances alone it depended whether the son or the
granddaughter of Arthur II should inherit the dukedom.

"Joan claimed the duchy as the daughter of the elder brother. The Salic
law of France, which barred females from the right of succession, and in
virtue of which Philip of Valois succeeded to the throne instead of King
Edward, certainly did not obtain in Brittany. Duke John regarded Joan as
his heiress, and married her to Charles of Blois, nephew of the King of
France, thus strengthening her in her position; and he also induced
the provincial parliament of Brittany to acknowledge her husband as his
successor in the dukedom. Altogether it would seem that right is upon
Joan's side; but, on the other hand, the Count of Montford is the son
of Jolande, a great heiress in Brittany. He is an active and energetic
noble. The Bretons love not too close a connection with France, and
assuredly prefer to be ruled by a duke whom they regard as one of
themselves rather than by Charles of Blois, nephew of the French
king. Directly Duke John was dead the Count of Montford claimed the
inheritance. Assuming the title of duke he rode to Nantes, where the
citizens did him homage, and then proceeded to Limoges with a large
train of men-at-arms, and there took possession of the immense treasures
which the late duke had accumulated in the course of a long and tranquil
reign. With these sinews of war at his command he turned to Nantes,
where he had left his wife the countess, who was a sister of the Count
of Flanders. He immediately invited the nobility of Brittany to a grand
banquet, but only one knight of any renown presented himself at the
feast, the rest all holding aloof. With the wealth of which he had
possessed himself he levied large forces and took the field. He first
marched against Brest, where the garrison, commanded by Walter de
Clisson, refused to acknowledge him. After three days' hard fighting the
place was taken. Rennes was next besieged, and presently surrendered.
Other towns fell into his hands, and so far as Brittany was concerned
all opposition, except in one or two fortresses, ceased. In the
meanwhile Charles of Blois sought assistance from his uncle the King
of France; the Count de Montford, therefore, crossed to England and
besought the aid of King Edward, and did homage to him as King of
France. Edward, on his part, promised to assist him. The fact that
Phillip was sure to espouse the opposite side was in itself sufficient
to decide him; besides which, the dukes of Brittany have always been in
a special way connected with England and bear the English title of Earls
of Richmond.

"Believing that his journey, which had been a secret one, was unknown to
the King of France, De Montford went boldly to Paris, where he had been
summoned by the king to an assembly of peers called to decide upon the
succession. He found, however, that Phillip had already obtained news
