when you are warm.'

With this characteristic close Nan retired from office, and the girls
went to enjoy one of the few rights allowed them.



Chapter 6. LAST WORDS

The next day was Sunday, and a goodly troop of young and old set forth
to church.--some driving, some walking, all enjoying the lovely weather
and the happy quietude which comes to refresh us when the work and worry
of the week are over. Daisy had a headache; and Aunt Jo remained at home
to keep her company, knowing very well that the worst ache was in the
tender heart struggling dutifully against the love that grew stronger as
the parting drew nearer.

'Daisy knows my wishes, and I trust her. You must keep an eye on Nat,
and let him clearly understand that there is to be no "lovering", or
I shall forbid the letter-writing. I hate to seem cruel, but it is too
soon for my dear girl to bind herself in any way,' said Mrs Meg, as she
rustled about in her best grey silk, while waiting for Demi, who always
escorted his pious mother to church as a peace-offering for crossing her
wishes in other things.

'I will, dear; I'm lying in wait for all three boys today, like an old
spider; and I will have a good talk with each. They know I understand
them, and they always open their hearts sooner or later. You look like a
nice, plump little Quakeress, Meg; and no one will believe that big
boy is your son,' added Mrs Jo, as Demi came in shining with Sunday
neatness, from his well-blacked boots to his smooth brown head.

'You flatter me, to soften my heart toward your boy. I know your ways,
Jo, and I don't give in. Be firm, and spare me a scene by and by. As for
John, as long as he is satisfied with his old mother, I don't care what
people think,' answered Mrs Meg, accepting with a smile the little posy
of sweet peas and mignonette Demi brought her.

Then, having buttoned her dove-coloured gloves with care, she took her
son's arm and went proudly away to the carriage, where Amy and Bess
waited, while Jo called after them, just as Marmee used to do:

'Girls, have you got nice pocket-handkerchiefs?' They all smiled at
the familiar words, and three white banners waved as they drove away,
leaving the spider to watch for her first fly. She did not wait long.
Daisy was lying down with a wet cheek on the little hymnbook out of
which she and Nat used to sing together; so Mrs Jo strolled about
the lawn, looking very like a wandering mushroom with her large buff
umbrella.

Dan had gone for a ten-mile stroll; and Nat was supposed to have
accompanied him, but presently came sneaking back, unable to tear
himself away from the Dovecote or lose a moment of nearness to his idol
that last day. Mrs Jo saw him at once, and beckoned him to a rustic seat
under the old elm, where they could have their confidences undisturbed,
and both keep an eye on a certain white-curtained window, half hidden in
vines.

'Nice and cool here. I'm not up to one of Dan's tramps today--it's so
warm, and he goes so like a steam-engine. He headed for the swamp where
his pet snakes used to live, and I begged to be excused,' said Nat,
fanning himself with his straw hat, though the day was not oppressive.

'I'm glad you did. Sit and rest with me, and have one of our good old
talks. We've both been so busy lately, I feel as if I didn't half know
your plans; and I want to,' answered Mrs Jo, feeling sure that though
they might start with Leipzig they would bring up at Plumfield.

'You are very kind, and there's nothing I'd like better. I don't realize
I'm going so far--suppose I shan't till I get afloat. It's a splendid
start, and I don't know how I can ever thank Mr Laurie for all he's
done, or you either,' added Nat, with a break in his voice; for he was a
tender-hearted fellow, and never forgot a kindness.

'You can thank us beautifully by being and doing all we hope and expect
of you, my dear. In the new life you are going to there will be a
thousand trials and temptations, and only your own wit and wisdom to
rely on. That will be the time to test the principles we have tried
to give you, and see how firm they are. Of course, you will make
mistakes--we all do; but don't let go of your conscience and drift along
blindly. Watch and pray, dear Nat; and while your hand gains skill, let
your head grow wiser, and keep your heart as innocent and warm as it is
now.'

'I'll try, Mother Bhaer, my very best to be a credit to you. I know I
shall improve in my music--can't help it there; but I never shall be
very wise, I'm afraid. As for my heart, you know, I leave it behind me
in good keeping.'

As he spoke, Nat's eyes were fixed on the window with a look of love and
longing that made his quiet face both manly and sad--plainly showing how
strong a hold this boyish affection had upon him.

'I want to speak of that; and I know you will forgive what seems hard,
because I do most heartily sympathize with you,' said Mrs Jo, glad to
have her say.

'Yes, do talk about Daisy! I think of nothing but leaving and losing
her. I have no hope--I suppose it is too much to ask; only I can't help
loving her, wherever I am!' cried Nat, with a mixture of defiance and
despair in his face that rather startled Mrs Jo.

'Listen to me and I'll try to give you both comfort and good advice. We
all know that Daisy is fond of you, but her mother objects, and being a
good girl she tries to obey. Young people think they never can change,
but they do in the most wonderful manner, and very few die of broken
hearts.' Mrs Jo smiled as she remembered another boy whom she had once
tried to comfort, and then went soberly on while Nat listened as if his
fate hung upon her lips.

'One of two things will happen. You will find someone else to love,
or, better still, be so busy and happy in your music that you will be
willing to wait for time to settle the matter for you both. Daisy will
perhaps forget when you are gone, and be glad you are only friends. At
any rate it is much wiser to have no promises made; then both are free,
and in a year or two may meet to laugh over the little romance nipped in
the bud.'

'Do you honestly think that?' asked Nat, looking at her so keenly that
the truth had to come; for all his heart was in those frank blue eyes of
his.

'No, I don't!' answered Mrs Jo. 'Then if you were in my place, what
would you do?' he added, with a tone of command never heard in his
gentle voice before.

'Bless me! the boy is in dead earnest, and I shall forget prudence
in sympathy I'm afraid,' thought Mrs Jo, surprised and pleased by the
unexpected manliness Nat showed.

'I'll tell you what I should do. I'd say to myself:

"I'll prove that my love is strong and faithful, and make Daisy's
mother proud to give her to me by being not only a good musician but an
excellent man, and so command respect and confidence. This I will try
for; and if I fail, I shall be the better for the effort, and find
comfort in the thought that I did my best for her sake."'

'That is what I meant to do. But I wanted a word of hope to give me
courage,' cried Nat, firing up as if the smouldering spark was set
ablaze by a breath of encouragement. 'Other fellows, poorer and stupider
than I, have done great things and come to honour. Why may not I, though
I'm nothing now? I know Mrs Brooke remembers what I came from, but my
father was honest though everything went wrong; and I have nothing to
be ashamed of though I was a charity boy. I never will be ashamed of my
people or myself, and I'll make other folks respect me if I can.'

'Good! that's the right spirit, Nat. Hold to it and make yourself a man.
No one will be quicker to see and admire the brave work than my sister
Meg. She does not despise your poverty or your past; but mothers are
very tender over their daughters, and we Marches, though we have been
poor, are, I confess, a little proud of our good family. We don't care
for money; but a long line of virtuous ancestors is something to desire
and to be proud of.'

'Well, the Blakes are a good lot. I looked 'em up, and not one was
ever in prison, hanged, or disgraced in any way. We used to be rich and
honoured years ago, but we've died out and got poor, and father was a
street musician rather than beg; and I'll be one again before I'll do
the mean things some men do and pass muster.'

Nat was so excited that Mrs Jo indulged in a laugh to calm him, and both
went on more quietly.

'I told my sister all that and it pleased her. I am sure if you do well
these next few years that she will relent and all be happily settled,
unless that wonderful change, which you don't believe possible, should
occur. Now, cheer up; don't be lackadaisical and blue. Say good-bye
cheerfully and bravely, show a manly front, and leave a pleasant memory
behind you. We all wish you well and hope much for you. Write to me
every week and I'll send a good, gossipy answer. Be careful what you
write to Daisy; don't gush or wail, for sister Meg will see the letters;
and you can help your cause very much by sending sensible, cheery
accounts of your life to us all.'

'I will; I will; it looks brighter and better already, and I won't lose
my one comfort by any fault of my own. Thank you so much, Mother Bhaer,
for taking my side. I felt so ungrateful and mean and crushed when I
thought you all considered me a sneak who had no business to love such
a precious girl as Daisy. No one said anything, but I knew how you felt,
and that Mr Laurie sent me off partly to get me out of the way. Oh dear,
life is pretty tough sometimes, isn't it?' And Nat took his head in both
hands as if it ached with the confusion of hopes and fears, passions and
plans that proved boyhood was past and manhood had begun.

'Very tough, but it is that very struggle with obstacles which does us
good. Things have been made easy for you in many ways, but no one can do
everything. You must paddle your own canoe now, and learn to avoid the
rapids and steer straight to the port you want to reach. I don't know
just what your temptations will be for you have no bad habits and seem
to love music so well, nothing can lure you from it. I only hope you
won't work too hard.'

'I feel as if I could work like a horse, I'm so eager to get on; but
I'll take care. Can't waste time being sick, and you've given me doses
enough to keep me all right, I guess.' Nat laughed as he remembered
the book of directions Mrs Jo had written for him to consult on all
occasions.

She immediately added some verbal ones on the subject of foreign messes,
and having mounted one of her pet hobbies, was in full gallop when Emil
was seen strolling about on the roof of the old house, that being his
favourite promenade; for there he could fancy himself walking the deck,
with only blue sky and fresh air about him.

'I want a word with the Commodore, and up there we shall be nice and
quiet. Go and play to Daisy: it will put her to sleep and do you both
good. Sit in the porch, so I can keep an eye on you as I promised'; and
with a motherly pat on the shoulder Mrs Jo left Nat to his delightful
task and briskly ascended to the house-top, not up the trellis as of old
but by means of the stairs inside.

Emerging on the platform she found Emil cutting his initials afresh in
the wood-work and singing 'Pull for the Shore', like the tuneful mariner
he was.

'Come aboard and make yourself at home, Aunty,' he said, with a playful
salute. 'I'm just leaving a P.P.C. in the old place, so when you fly up
here for refuge you'll remember me.'

'Ah, my dear, I'm not likely to forget you. It doesn't need E. B. H. cut
on all the trees and railings to remind me of my sailor boy'; and Mrs Jo
took the seat nearest the blue figure astride the balustrade, not quite
sure how to begin the little sermon she wanted to preach.

'Well, you don't pipe your eye and look squally when I sheer off as you
used to, and that's a comfort. I like to leave port in fair weather and
have a jolly send-off all round. Specially this time, for it will be a
year or more before we drop anchor here again,' answered Emil, pushing
his cap back, and glancing about him as if he loved old Plum and would
be sorry never to see it any more.

'You have salt water enough without my adding to it. I'm going to be
quite a Spartan mother, and send my sons to battle with no wailing, only
the command:

"With your shield or on it",' said Mrs Jo cheerfully, adding after a
pause: 'I often wish I could go too, and some day I will, when you are
captain and have a ship of your own--as I've no doubt you will before
long, with Uncle Herman to push you on.'

'When I do I'll christen her the Jolly Jo and take you as first mate.
It would be regular larks to have you aboard, and I'd be a proud man to
carry you round the world you've wanted to see so long and never could,'
answered Emil, caught at once by this splendid vision.

'I'll make my first voyage with you and enjoy myself immensely in spite
of seasickness and all the stormy winds that blow. I've always thought
I'd like to see a wreck, a nice safe one with all saved after great
danger and heroic deeds, while we clung like Mr Pillicoddy to main-top
jibs and lee scuppers.'

'No wrecks yet, ma'am, but we'll try to accommodate customers. Captain
says I'm a lucky dog and bring fair weather, so we'll save the dirty
weather for you if you want it,' laughed Emil, digging at the ship in
full sail which he was adding to his design.

'Thanks, I hope you will. This long voyage will give you new
experiences, and being an officer, you will have new duties and
responsibilities. Are you ready for them? You take everything so gaily,
I've been wondering if you realized that now you will have not only to
obey but to command also, and power is a dangerous thing. Be careful
that you don't abuse it or let it make a tyrant of you.'

'Right you are, ma'am. I've seen plenty of that, and have got my
bearings pretty well, I guess. I shan't have very wide swing with Peters
over me, but I'll see that the boys don't get abused when he's bowsed up
his jib. No right to speak before, but now I won't stand it.'

'That sounds mysteriously awful; could I ask what nautical torture
"bowsing jibs" is?' asked Mrs Jo, in a tone of deep interest.

'Getting drunk. Peters can hold more grog than any man I ever saw; he
keeps right side up, but is as savage as a norther, and makes things
lively all round. I've seen him knock a fellow down with a belaying pin,
and couldn't lend a hand. Better luck now, I hope.' And Emil frowned as
if he already trod the quarter-deck, lord of all he surveyed.

'Don't get into trouble, for even Uncle Herman's favour won't cover
insubordination, you know. You have proved yourself a good sailor; now
be a good officer, which is a harder thing, I fancy. It takes a fine
character to rule justly and kindly; you will have to put by your boyish
ways and remember your dignity. That will be excellent training for you,
Emil, and sober you down a bit. No more skylarking except here, so mind
your ways, and do honour to your buttons,' said Mrs Jo, tapping one
of the very bright brass ones that ornamented the new suit Emil was so
proud of.

'I'll do my best. I know my time for skirmshander (chaff) is over, and
I must steer a straighter course; but don't you fear, Jack ashore is a
very different craft from what he is with blue water under his keel. I
had a long talk with Uncle last night and got my orders; I won't forget
'em nor all I owe him. As for you, I'll name my first ship as I say, and
have your bust for the figurehead, see if I don't,' and Emil gave his
aunt a hearty kiss to seal the vow, which proceeding much amused Nat,
playing softly in the porch of the Dovecote.

'You do me proud, Captain. But, dear, I want to say one thing and then
I'm done; for you don't need much advice of mine after my good man has
spoken. I read somewhere that every inch of rope used in the British
Navy has a strand of red in it, so that wherever a bit of it is found
it is known. That is the text of my little sermon to you. Virtue, which
means honour, honesty, courage, and all that makes character, is the
red thread that marks a good man wherever he is. Keep that always and
everywhere, so that even if wrecked by misfortune, that sign shall still
be found and recognized. Yours is a rough life, and your mates not all
we could wish, but you can be a gentleman in the true sense of the word;
and no matter what happens to your body, keep your soul clean, your
heart true to those who love you, and do your duty to the end.'

As she spoke Emil had risen and stood listening with his cap off and a
grave, bright look as if taking orders from a superior officer; when she
ended, he answered briefly, but heartily:

'Please God, I will!'

'That's all; I have little fear for you, but one never knows when or how
the weak moment may come, and sometimes a chance word helps us, as so
many my dear mother spoke come back to me now for my own comfort and the
guidance of my boys,' said Mrs Jo, rising; for the words had been said
and no more were needed.

'I've stored 'em up and know where to find 'em when wanted. Often and
often in my watch I've seen old Plum, and heard you and Uncle talking
so plainly, I'd have sworn I was here. It is a rough life, Aunty, but
a wholesome one if a fellow loves it as I do, and has an anchor to
windward as I have. Don't worry about me, and I'll come home next year
with a chest of tea that will cheer your heart and give you ideas enough
for a dozen novels. Going below? All right, steady in the gangway! I'll
be along by the time you've got out the cake-box. Last chance for a good
old lunch ashore.'

Mrs Jo descended laughing, and Emil finished his ship whistling
cheerfully, neither dreaming when and where this little chat on the
house-top would return to the memory of one of them.

Dan was harder to catch, and not until evening did a quiet moment come
in that busy family; when, while the rest were roaming about, Mrs Jo sat
down to read in the study, and presently Dan looked in at the window.

'Come and rest after your long tramp; you must be tired,' she called,
with an inviting nod towards the big sofa where so many boys had
reposed--as much as that active animal ever does.

'Afraid I shall disturb you'; but Dan looked as if he wanted to stay his
restless feet somewhere.

'Not a bit; I'm always ready to talk, shouldn't be a woman if I were
not,' laughed Mrs Jo, as Dan swung himself in and sat down with an air
of contentment very pleasant to see.

'Last day is over, yet somehow I don't seem to hanker to be off.
Generally, I'm rather anxious to cut loose after a short stop. Odd,
