in the box, and he also knew the exact location of the switch."

"One would imagine the box too heavy to have been spirited away so
easily," said Tom Gray. "The weight of all that silver must have been
considerable."

"Yes, it did weigh heavily," replied Grace. "Still, we had a great many
bills, too. In spite of the weight the thief did make a successful get
away, and we owe Judge Putnam a heavy debt of gratitude for making good
our loss."

"'Look not mournfully into the past,'" quoted Hippy, "but rather turn
your attention to the important matter of refreshing the inner man."

"You fixed your attention on that matter years ago, Hippopotamus," said
Reddy, "and since then you've never turned it in any other direction."

"Which proves me to be a person of excellent judgment and unqualified
good taste," answered Hippy with a broad grin.

"More taste than judgment, I should say," remarked David.

"This conversation is becoming too personal," complained Hippy. "Excuse
me, Nora, use that Irish wit of yours and lay these slanderers low."

"I am neither a life preserver nor a repairer of reputations," replied
Nora cruelly. "Fight your own battles."

"All right, here goes," said Hippy. "Now Reddy Brooks and David Nesbit,
I said, that what you said, and formerly have said to have said, was
said, because you happened to have said something that I formerly was
said to have said that never should have been said. What I really
said--"

But what Hippy really did say was never revealed, for David and Reddy
laid violent hands upon their garrulous friend and, escorting him to the
kitchen door, shoved him outside and calmly locking the door, left him
to meditate in the back yard, until Nora suddenly remembering that she
had set the fudge on the steps to cool, opened the door in a hurry to
find Hippy seated upon the lower step, a piece of fudge in either hand,
looking the picture of content.

[Illustration: Hippy Sat With A Piece of Fudge in Either Hand]

The party broke up at eleven o'clock, and the hard task of saying
good-bye began. The boys were to leave early the next morning, so the
girls would not see them again until Easter.

"Don't forget to write," called Nora after Hippy, as he hurried down the
steps after the others, who had reached the gate.

"You'll hear from me as soon as we hit the knowledge shop," was the
reassuring answer.

At the corner the little party separated, Hippy, Reddy and Jessica going
in one direction, Anne and David in another, leaving Tom and Grace to
pursue their homeward way alone. As they turned into Putnam Square,
Grace gave a little exclamation, and seizing Tom by the arm, drew him
behind a statue of Israel Putnam at the entrance of the square.

"Marian Barber is coming this way with that horrid Henry Hammond," she
whispered. "I don't care to meet them. I have not spoken to him since
the house party, and Marian will be so angry if I cut him deliberately
when he is with her. I am sure they have not seen us. They were invited
to Miriam's to-night. We'll stand here until they pass."

The two young people stood in the shadow quietly waiting, unseen by the
approaching couple, who were completely absorbed in conversation.

"I tell you I can't do it," Grace heard Marian say impatiently. "It
doesn't belong to me, and I have no right to touch it."

Hammond's reply was inaudible, but it was evident that Marian's remark
had angered him, for he grasped her by the arm so savagely that she
cried out: "Don't hold my arm so tightly, Henry, you are hurting me. I
am not foolish to refuse to give it to you. Suppose you should lose it
all--"

They had passed the statue by this time, and Grace and Tom heard no more
of their conversation. There was a brief silence between them, then
Grace spoke.

"Tom, what do you suppose that means?"

"I don't know, Grace," was the answer. "It didn't sound very promising."

"I should say not," said Grace decidedly. "I feel sure that Henry
Hammond is a thoroughly unscrupulous person, and I shall not rest until
I find out what the conversation we overheard leads to."

"I believe you are right," said Tom, "and I'm only sorry I can't be here
to help ferret the thing out."

"I'll write and keep you posted as to my progress," promised Grace, as
she said good-bye to Tom at the Harlowe's door, a little later.

"Good-bye, Tom. Best wishes to Arnold. I'm sorry I didn't see him
again."

"Good-night, Grace, and good-bye," said Tom, and with a hearty handshake
they parted.

As Grace prepared for bed that night she turned Marian's words over and
over in her mind, but could arrive at no logical conclusion, and finally
dropped to sleep with the riddle still unsolved.




CHAPTER XIV

GRACE AND ANNE PLAN A STUDY CAMPAIGN


With the delights of the past holiday season still fresh in their
memories, the pupils of Oakdale High School went back to their studies
on the fourth of January, and in the course of a few days everything was
again in smooth running order.

Semi-annual examinations were but three weeks away, and that meant a
general brushing up in studies on the part of every pupil.

The senior class had, perhaps, less to do in the way of study than the
three lower classes. A few of the seniors already had enough credits to
insure graduation, although the majority expected the results of the
January examinations to place them securely among the number to be
graduated.

The members of the Phi Sigma Tau, with the exception of Anne, were among
the latter, and had settled down to a three weeks' grind, from which no
form of pleasure could beguile them.

As for Anne, she had carried five studies the entire time she had been
in High School and had never failed in even one examination. She might
have graduated a year earlier had she been so disposed.

Away down in her heart Anne cherished a faint hope that the way for a
college career would yet be opened to her. She had made up her mind to
try for a scholarship, and she prayed earnestly that before the close of
her senior year she might hit upon some plan that would furnish the
money for her support during her freshman year in college.

Grace was optimistic in regard to Anne's college career.

"You'll have some opportunity to earn money before the year is out, just
see if you don't," she said to Anne one day at recess, when the latter
had developed an unusual case of the blues. "If you just keep wishing
hard enough for a thing you are pretty sure to get it. That is, if it's
something that's good for you to have."

"I've been wishing for the same thing ever since I came to Oakdale, and
I haven't got it yet," replied Anne rather mournfully. "I've been
unusually short of money this year, too, because Mrs. Gray has been
away, and the money I received from her work was a great help."

"Poor little Anne," said Grace sympathetically. "I wish you didn't have
to worry over money. However, Mrs. Gray will be home in February, and
you'll have her work until June."

"But even so, I can't have the use of it myself," was Anne's response.
"I shall have to use it at home. We need every cent of it."

"Oh, dear," sighed Grace. "Why doesn't some one appear all of a sudden
and offer you a fine position at about fifty dollars a week."

"Yes," said Anne, laughing in spite of her blues. "That is what really
ought to happen, only the day for miracles is past."

"At any rate, I have always felt that you and I were going to college
together, and I believe we shall," predicted Grace.

"I hope so, but I doubt it," replied Anne wistfully. "By the way, Grace,
do you recite in any of Marian Barber's classes?"

"No," said Grace, "not this term. Why?"

"She is in my section in astronomy," answered Anne, "and lately she
fails every day in recitation. You know it's a one-term study, and she
will have to try an exam in it before long. I don't believe she'll pass,
and she told Nora at the beginning of the year that if she failed in one
study this year she wouldn't have enough credits to get through and
graduate."

"Oh, she'll pull through, I think," said Grace. "She is really brilliant
in mathematics, and always has kept up in other things."

"I know," persisted Anne, "but she has finished her mathematics' group,
and her studies this year are things she doesn't care for, and
consequently left them until the last. We wouldn't want a Phi Sigma Tau
to fail, you know."

"I should say not," was Grace's emphatic response. "What shall we do
about it?"

Anne pondered for a little. "We might take turns coaching her. We have
all passed in astronomy. I don't know how she is in her other studies,"
she said. "Do you suppose she'd be angry if we proposed it to her?"

"I don't know," said Grace doubtfully. "She hasn't been to the last two
Phi Sigma Tau meetings, and she is awfully cool to me. That's because I
don't approve of Henry Hammond. To tell you the truth, I believe he
absorbs her attention so completely that she doesn't have time for her
studies."

"It's a pity her mother is away just at the time when Marian needs her
most," Anne remarked.

"Yes," said Grace. "You know I asked her to come and stay with me, when
we came back from the judge's, but she refused rather sharply, and
practically told me that she was able to take care of herself."

Just then the gong sounded, and the girls had no further opportunity to
discuss the subject until school closed for the day, then while waiting
in the locker-room for Nora and Jessica, the talk was again renewed, and
after swearing Anne to secrecy, Grace imparted to her the conversation
between Marian and Henry Hammond that she and Tom had overheard on New
Year's Night.

"I was so uneasy about it that I went all around town the next day to
see what I could find out about him. I didn't get much satisfaction,
however. He claims to be a real estate agent, and Mr. Furlow in the
First National Bank says that he has interested a number of Oakdale
citizens in land in the west. He is well liked, and it's surprising the
way the business men have taken him up," concluded Grace.

"Perhaps what you heard him say to Marian was nothing of importance
after all," said Anne.

But Grace shook her head obstinately. "No, Anne," she answered, "my
intuitions never fail me. Henry Hammond is a rascal, and some day I
shall prove it. As for Marian we'd better have a meeting of the Phi
Sigma Tau to-morrow night and especially request her to be present. Then
we'll all turn in and offer to help her get ready for the exams. Here
come the girls now."

Nora, Jessica, Miriam and Eva Allen entered the senior locker-room
together.

"Where's Marian?" asked Grace.

"You'd never guess if we told you," exclaimed Nora. "I never was more
surprised in my life."

"Why? What's the matter?" asked Anne and Grace together.

"Who is the last person you'd expect to see her with?" asked Jessica.

"I don't know," said Grace. "Edna Wright?"

"Worse," was Nora's answer. "She's up in the study hall with Eleanor
Savelli."

"Eleanor Savelli?" echoed Grace. "Why she is Marian's pet aversion."

"Past history," said Miriam Nesbit. "They appear to be thicker than
thieves."

"I don't at all understand what ails her, but listen, girls, while I
tell you my idea," and Grace rapidly narrated her plan of action.

"I foresee trouble, but I'll be on hand," said Miriam.

"We'll all be there!" was the chorus.

"Remember, Eva," were Grace's parting words, "I rely on you to coax
Marian over to your house, then we'll surround her and make her accept
our services."

"All right," responded Eva. "I'll do my best. Be careful what you say
about Henry Hammond, or your mission may be in vain."




CHAPTER XV

THE PHI SIGMA TAUS MEET WITH A LOSS


After considerable coaxing, Eva finally wrung from Marian a promise to
visit her that evening. She arrived about eight o'clock, and Eva
tactfully producing a box of nut chocolates, a confection of which
Marian was very fond, the two girls seated themselves in the Allen's
cozy sitting room, with the box on a taboret between them.

Marian became more like her old self again, and the two girls were
laughing merrily over the antics of Eva's Angora kitten when the
doorbell rang, and Eva, looking rather conscious, went to the door.

At the sound of girlish voices, Marian rose, a look of intense annoyance
on her face, which deepened as the Phi Sigma Tau trooped into the room,
and laughingly surrounded her.

"How are you, Marian?" they cried. "You wouldn't come to us, so we
planned a little surprise."

"So I see," replied Marian stiffly. "I am sorry, but I really must go,
Eva. You should have told me that the girls were coming."

"Why, Marian Barber, what are you talking about?" asked Nora O'Malley in
pretended surprise. "Why should you run away from the members of your
own sorority?"

Marian did not answer, but half tried to free herself from the detaining
hands of her friends. For a moment her expression softened, then she
tossed her head and said, "Let me go, please."

"Marian," said Grace bluntly, "you have been acting very strangely
toward us since we came back from the house party, and we don't
understand it. You have stayed away from two sorority meetings and have
deliberately avoided all of us, with the exception of Eva. We feel badly
over it, because we have always liked you, and because you are a Phi
Sigma Tau."

"Yes, Marian," interrupted Jessica, "have you forgotten the solemn
initiation rites that were conducted at my house last year?"

"No," Marian admitted, smiling a little.

"Then listen, while Anne, who speaks more impressive English than the
rest of us, tells you why we have thus entrapped you and used Eva for a
bait. Speechify, Anne, and we will put in the applause at the proper
intervals."

"Marian," began Anne, "Grace has already told you how kindly our feeling
is for you, and the reason that we tried to see you to-night is because
of something that I spoke of to Grace yesterday. I had noticed that you
were having trouble in your astronomy recitations, and, of course, we
all know that you must pass in all your subjects, both now and in June,
in order to graduate; so I suggested that as the other girls have all
passed in astronomy, we might take turns in coaching you. An hour or so
of review every night from now until the exams, would put you in good
condition."

"Yes, Marian," interrupted Nora. "Anne and Jessica did that for me last
year in ancient history, and I never should have passed if they hadn't
helped me."
