"Well," demanded Lilly, "so the high and mighty Society has had a
meeting!  How did it go off?"

"_De_licious!" replied Rose, smacking her lips as at the recollection
of something very nice.  "But you mustn't ask any questions, Lilly.
Outsiders have nothing to do with the S. S. U. C.  Our proceedings
are strictly private."  She ran downstairs with Katy.

"I think you're real mean!" called Lilly after them.  Then she said
to herself, "They're just trying to tease.  I know it was stupid."




CHAPTER VII.  INJUSTICE.


Summer was always slow in getting to Hillsover, but at last she
arrived, and woods and hills suddenly put on new colors and became
beautiful.  The sober village shared in the glorifying process.
Vines budded on piazzas.  Wistaria purpled white-washed walls.  The
brown elm boughs which hung above the Common turned into trailing
garlands of fresh green.  Each walk revealed some change, or ended
in some delightful discovery, trilliums, dog-tooth violets, apple-
trees in blossom, or wild strawberries turning red.  The wood
flowers and mosses, even the birds and bird-songs, were new to our
Western girls.  Hillsover, in summer, was a great deal prettier than
Burnet, and Katy and Clover began to enjoy school very much indeed.

Toward the end of June, however, something took place which gave them
quite a different feeling,--something so disagreeable that I hate to
tell about it: but, as it really happened, I must.

It was on a Saturday morning.  They had just come upstairs, laughing,
and feeling very merry; for Clover had written a droll piece for the
S. S. U. C. meeting, and was telling Katy about it, when, just at the
head of the stairs, they met Rose Red.  She was evidently in trouble,
for she looked flushed and excited, and was under escort of Miss
Barnes, who marched before her with the air of a policeman.  As she
passed the girls, Rose opened her eyes very wide, and made a face
expressive of dismay.

"What's the matter?" whispered Clover.  Rose only made another grimace,
clawed with her fingers at Miss Barnes's back, and vanished down the
entry which led to Mrs. Florence's room.  They stood looking after her.

"Oh, dear!" sighed Clover, "I'm so afraid Rose is in a scrape."

They walked on toward Quaker Row.  In the wash-room was a knot of
girls, with their heads close together, whispering.  When they saw
Katy and Clover, they became silent, and gazed at them curiously.

"What has Rose Red gone to Mrs. Florence about?" asked Clover, too
anxious to notice the strange manner of the girls.  But at that moment
she caught sight of something which so amazed her that she forgot her
question.  It was nothing less than her own trunk, with "C. E. C." at
the end, being carried along the entry by two men.  Miss Jane followed
close behind, with her arms full of clothes and books.  Katy's well-
know scarlet pin-cushion topped the pile; in Miss Jane's hand were
Clover's comb and brush.

"Why, what does this mean?" gasped Clover, as she and Katy darted after
Miss Jane, who had turned into one of the rooms.  It was No. 1, at the
head of the row,--a room which no one had wanted, on account of its
smallness and lack of light.  The window looked out on a brick wall
not ten feet away; there was never a ray of sun to make it cheerful;
and Mrs. Nipson had converted it into a store-room for empty trunks.
The trunks were taken away now, and the bed was strewn with Katy's
and Clovers possessions.

"Miss Jane, what is the matter?  What are you moving our things for?"
exclaimed the girls in great excitement.

Miss Jane laid down her load of dress, and looked them sternly.

"You know the reason as well as I do," she said icily.

"No, I don't.  I haven't the least idea what you mean!" cried Katy.
"Oh, please be careful!" as Miss Jane flung a pair of boots on top of
Cousin Helen's vase, "you'll break it!  Dear, dear!  Clover, there's
your Cologne bottle tipped over, and all the Cologne spilt!  What does
it mean?  Is our room going to be painted, or what?"

"Your room," responded Miss Jane, "is for the future to be this,--No.
1.  Miss Benson and Miss James will take No. 6; and, it is to be hoped,
will conduct themselves more properly than you have done."

"Than we have done!" cried Katy, hardly believing her ears.

"Do not repeat my words in that rude way!" said Miss Jane, tartly.
"Yes, than you have done!"

"But what have we done?  There is some dreadful mistake!  Do tell us
what you mean, Miss Jane!  We have done nothing wrong, so far as I
know!"

"Indeed!" replied Miss Jane, sarcastically.  "Your ideas of right and
wrong must be peculiar!  I advise you to say no more on the subject,
but be thankful that Mrs. Florence keeps you in the school at all,
instead of dismissing you.  Nothing but the fact that your home is
at such a distance prevents her from doing so."

Katy felt as if all the blood in her body were turned to fire as she
heard these words, and met Miss Jane's eyes.  Her old, hasty temper,
which had seemed to die out during years of pain and patience, flashed
into sudden life, as a smouldering coal flashes, when you least expect
it, into flame.  She drew herself up to her full height, gave Miss Jane
a look of scorching indignation, and, with a rapid impulse, darted out
of the room and along the hall towards Mrs. Florence's door.  The girls
she met scattered from her path right and left.  She looked so tall
and moved so impetuously that she absolutely frightened them.

"Come in," said Mrs. Florence, in answer to her sharp, quivering knock.
Katy entered.  Rose was not there, and Mrs. Florence and Mrs. Nipson
sat together, side by side, in close consultation.

"Mrs. Florence," said Katy, too much excited to feel in the least
afraid, "will you please tell me why our things are being changed
to No. 1?"

Mrs. Florence flushed with anger.  She looked Katy all over for a
minute before she answered, then she said, in a sever voice,  "It
is done by my orders, and for good and sufficient reasons.  What
those reasons are, you know as well as I."

"No, I don't!" replied Katy, as angry as Mrs. Florence.  "I haven't
the least idea what they are, and I insist on knowing!"

"I cannot answer questions put in such an improper manner," said Mrs.
Florence, with a wave of the hand which meant that Katy was to go.
But Katy did not stir.

"I am sorry if my manner was improper," she said, trying to speak
quietly, "but I think I have a right to ask what this means.  If we
are accused of doing wrong, it is only fair to tell us what it is."

Mrs. Florence only waved her hand again; but Mrs. Nipson, who had been
twisting uneasily in her chair, said, "Excuse me, Mrs. Florence, but
perhaps it would better--would satisfy Miss Carr better--if you were
to be explicit."

"It does not seem to me that Miss Carr can be in need of any
explanation," replied Mrs. Florence.  "When a young lady writes
underhand notes to young gentlemen, and throws them from her window,
and they are discovered, she must naturally expect that persons of
correct ideas will be shocked and disgusted.  Your note to Mr.
Abernathy Searles, Miss Carr, was found by his mother while mending
his pocket, and was handed by her to me.  After this statement you
will hardly be surprised that I do not consider it best to permit
you to room longer on that side of the house.  I did not suppose I
had a girl in my school capable of such conduct."

For a moment Katy was too much stunned to speak.  She took hold of a
chair to steady herself, and her color changed so quickly from red to
pale and back again to red, that Mrs. Florence and Mrs. Nipson, who
sat watching her, might be pardoned for thinking that she looked
guilty.  As soon as she recovered her voice, she stammered out, "But
I didn't!  I never did!  I haven't written any note!  I wouldn't for
the world!  Oh, Mrs. Florence, please believe me!"

"I prefer to believe the evidence of my eyes," replied Mrs. Florence,
as she drew a paper from her pocket.  "Here is the note!  I suppose
you will hardly deny your own signature."

Katy seized the note.  It was written in a round, unformed hand, and
ran thus:--


"Dear Berry,--I saw you last night on the green.  I think you are
splendid.  All the nuns think so.  I look at you very often out of
my window.  If I let down a string, would you tie a cake to it, like
that kind which you threw to Mary Andrews last term?  Tie two cakes,
please; one for me and one for my room-mate.  The string will be at
the end of the Row.
            "Miss Carr."


In spite of her agitation, Katy could hardly keep back a smile as she
read this absurd production.  Mrs. Florence saw the smile, and her
tone was more severe than ever, as she said,--

"Give that back to me, if you please,  It will be my justification
with your father if he objects to your change of room."

"But, Mrs. Florence," cried Katy, "I never wrote that note.  It isn't
my handwriting; it isn't my--  Oh, surely you can't think so!  It's
too ridiculous."

"Go to your room at once," said Mrs. Florence, "and be thankful that
your punishment is such a mild one.  If your home were not so distant,
I should write to ask your father to remove you from the school;
instead of which, I merely put you on the other side of the entry,
out of reach of farther correspondence of this sort."

"But _I_ shall write him, and he will take us away immediately," cried
Katy, stung to the quick by this obstinate injustice.  "I will not
stay, neither shall Clover, where our word is disbelieved, and we are
treated like this.  Papa knows!  Papa will never doubt us a moment
when we tell him that this isn't true."

With these passionate words she left the room.  I do not think that
either Mrs. Florence or Mrs. Nipson felt very comfortable after she
was gone.

That was a dreadful afternoon.  The girls had no heart to arrange No.
1, or do any thing toward making it comfortable, but lay on the bed
in the midst of their belongings, crying, and receiving visits of
condolence from their friends.  The S. S. U. C. meeting was put off.
Katy was in no humor to act as president, or Clover to read her funny
poem.  Rose and Mary Silver sat by, kissing them at intervals, and
declaring that it was a shame, while the other members dropped in one
by one to re-echo the same sentiments.

"If it had been anybody else!" said Alice Gibbons; "but Katy of all
persons!  It is too much!"

"So I told Mrs. Florence," sobbed Rose Red.  "Oh, why was I born so
bad?  If I'd always been good, and a model to the rest of you, perhaps
she'd have believed me instead of scolding harder than ever."

The idea of Rose as a "model" made Clover smile in the midst of her
dolefulness.

"It's an outrageous thing," said Ellen Gray, "if Mrs. Florence only
knew it, you two have done more to keep the rest of us steady than
any girls in school."

"So they have," blubbered Rose, whose pretty face was quite swollen
with crying.  "I've been getting better and better every day since
they came."  She put her arms round Clover as she spoke, and sobbed
harder than ever.

It was in the midst of this excitement that Miss Jane saw fit to come
in and "inspect the room."  When she saw the crying girls and the
general confusion of every thing, she was very angry.

"I shall mark you both for disorder," she said.  "Get off the bed,
Miss Carr.  Hang your dresses up at once, Clover, and put your shoes
in the shoe-bag.  I never saw any thing so disgraceful.  All these
things must be in order when I return, fifteen minutes from now, or
I shall report you to Mrs. Florence."

"It's of no consequence what you do.  We are not going to stay,"
muttered Katy.  But soon she was ashamed of having said this.  Her
anger was melting, and grief taking its place.  "Oh, papa! papa!
Elsie! Elsie!" she whispered to herself, as she slowly hung up the
dresses; and, unseen by the girls, she hid her face in the folds of
Clover's gray alpaca, and shed some hot tears.  Till then she had
been too angry to cry.

This softer mood followed her all through the evening.  Clover and
Rose sat by, talking over the affair and keeping their wrath warm
with discussion.  Katy said hardly a word.  She felt too weary and
depressed to speak.

"Who could have written the note?" asked Clover again and again.  It
was impossible to guess.  It seemed absurd to suspect any of the older
girls; but then, as Rose suggested, the absurdity as well as the
signature might have been imitated to avoid detection.

"I know one thing" remarked Rose, "and that is that I should like to
kill Mrs. Searles.  Horrid old thing!--peeping and prying into pockets.
She has no business to be alive at all."

Rose's ferocious speeches always sounded specially comical when taken
in connection with her pink cheeks and her dimples.

"Shall you write to papa to-night, Katy?" asked Clover.

Katy shook her head.  She was too heavy-hearted to talk.  Big tears
rolled down unseen and fell upon the pillow.  After Rose was gone,
and the candle out, she cried herself to sleep.

Waking early in the dim dawn, she lay and thought it over, Clover
slumbering soundly beside her meanwhile.  "Morning brings counsel,"
says the old proverb.  In this case it seemed true.  Katy, to her
surprise, found a train of fresh thoughts filling her mind, which were
not there when she fell asleep.  She recalled her passionate words
and feelings of the day before.  Now that the mood had passed, they
seemed to her worse than the injury which provoked them.  Quick-
tempered and generous people often experience this.  It was easier
for Katy to forgive Mrs. Florence, because it was needful also that
she should forgive herself.

"I said I would write to papa to take us away," she thought  "Why
did I say that?  What good would it do?  It wouldn't make anybody
disbelieve this hateful story.  They'd only think I wanted to get
away because I was found out.  And papa would be so worried and
disappointed.  It has cost him a great deal to get us ready and send
us here, and he wants us to stay a year.  If we went home now, all
the money would be wasted.  And yet how horrid it is going to be
after this!  I don't feel as if I could ever bear to see Mrs.
Florence again.  I must write.

"But then," her thoughts flowed on, "home wouldn't seem like home if
we went away from school in disgrace, and knew that everybody here
was believing such things.  Suppose, instead, I were to write to
papa to come on and make things straight.  He'd find out the truth,
and force Mrs. Florence to see it.  It would be very expensive,
though; and I know he oughtn't to leave home again so soon. Oh,
dear!  How hard it is to know what to do!"

"What would Cousin Helen say?" she continued, going in imagination
to the sofa-side of the dear friend who was to her like a second
conscience.  She shut her eyes and invented a long talk,--her
questions, Cousin Helen's replies.  But, as everybody knows, it is
impossible to play croquet by yourself and be strictly impartial to
all the four balls.  Katy found that she was making Cousin Helen
play (that is, answer) as she herself wished, and not, as something
whispered, she would answer were she really there.

"It is just the 'Little Scholar' over again," she said, half aloud,
"I can't see.  I don't know how to act."  She remembered the dream
she once had, of a great beautiful Face and a helping hand.  "And
it was real," she murmured, "and just as real, and just as near,
now as then."

The result of this long meditation was that, when Clover woke up,
she found Katy leaning over, ready to kiss her for good morning,
and looking bright and determined.
