am sure of their friendship. Then," he added, his color slightly rising,
"I think I have found another friend," and he looked in the face of his
guide.

The grave face softened.

"Thank you, my lad," said Ralph. "You are right there, at least. You can
rely upon my friendship being sincere."

"Then I am right, am I not?" said Herbert, smiling brightly.

"I believe you are," said the guide, after a pause, "and I thank you for
teaching me a lesson."

"Man was made in the image of God," said Herbert. "If we doubt man, I
think it is the same as doubting God."

Ralph did not reply, but walked on in thoughtful silence.

"How far is it to Vernon?" asked Herbert, when they had emerged from the
woods.

"It is five miles farther. Can you walk so far?"

"Oh, yes; I have good stout legs. But suppose Mr. Holden should escape.
He might pursue us."

Ralph smiled.

"I think I shall find him in the same place when I return," he said.

"He will be very angry with you."

"Yes, I suppose so," said Ralph, indifferently.

"Are you not afraid he will have you arrested?"

"No, I care little. If I am fined, I will pay the fine, and that will be
the end of it."

"But you might be imprisoned?"

"If I see any danger of that, I shall be tempted to charge Abner Holden
with his attempt upon your life. Don't make yourself anxious about me,
my lad. I have little fear of what the law may do as far as my agency in
this affair is concerned."

Ralph seemed so entirely unconcerned that something of his confidence
was imparted to Herbert. Noting the erect mien and fearless glance of
his guide, every movement betokening strength, he could not help feeling
that Abner Holden would be rash to make such a man his enemy. He felt
safe in his protection, and his apprehensions of capture passed away.
So with lightened heart he walked the five dusty miles to the village of
Vernon, accompanied by Ralph.

It was a thrifty village, with neat and tasteful dwellings lining the
principal street. The railroad and manufactories had built it up rapidly
and given it an air of prosperity which was pleasant to see.

"We will go at once to the railway station," said Ralph. "You may catch
the next train, and it will be as well to leave this neighborhood as
soon as possible."

They were fortunate enough to reach the station fifteen minutes before
the eastern train departed.

Herbert bought a ticket for Columbus, fifty miles distant, and entered
the train.

"Good-by, Herbert," said Ralph, from the platform.

"Good-by," said Herbert. "Thank you for all your kindness to me. Shall I
not see you again?"

"I do not know," said Ralph, musing. "I have no wish nor intention of
going to New York at present, yet I have a feeling that we shall meet
again."

"I hope it may be so," said Herbert. "I shall be glad to see you again."

While he spoke the shrill sound of the railway whistle was heard, the
train started, and Herbert was fairly off on his journey.

Just as he was leaving the depot, a wagon drove hastily up to the
station, and Abner Holden jumped out. Herbert saw him as he looked from
the window, and for a moment he was apprehensive, but the train was
fairly on the way.

"Stop! stop!" vociferated Abner. "Stop, I say!" for he had also caught
sight of his bound boy on the way to freedom.

"You don't think they will stop the train for you, you fool!" said a man
standing by. "You ought to have come sooner if you wanted to go by this
train."

"I don't want to go by it," said Abner.

"What do you want, then?"

"My boy's run away, and I have just seen him aboard the train."

"Oh, that's it, is it? Your son?"

"No, I hope not. It's a young rascal that's bound to me."

"If he's a young rascal, I shouldn't think you'd want him back."

Turning away, for he saw that he had failed, his glance rested on Ralph.

Instantly his anger rose.

"It's your doings," said he, shaking his fist in impotent wrath at the
sturdy hunter, whom he would have attacked had he dared. "It's your
fault, and you shall pay for it if there's law in the land."

"What will the law say to your attempt to shoot the boy?" demanded
Ralph, coolly.

Abner turned pale, and realized that his best course was to keep quiet
about an affair which might seriously compromise himself.




CHAPTER XVII

NEW ACQUAINTANCES


Herbert stopped overnight at Columbus.

The first train eastward left Columbus at seven o'clock in the morning.
It was Herbert's intention to take this train, but unfortunately, as he
thought at the time, the clock at the hotel by which his movements were
guided was ten minutes too slow. The consequence was, that before he had
quite reached the depot he saw the cars going out at the other end. He
ran as fast as possible, hoping still to make up for lost time, but it
was in vain.

"You're too late, youngster," said a porter, who had been assisting to
stow away baggage. "You'll have to wait till the next train."

"When does the next train start?" asked our hero.

"Twelve o'clock."

"Then I shall have to wait till that time," Herbert concluded, with
regret.

Yet, as he directly afterwards thought, it could make no particular
difference, since he had no stated engagement to meet, and this
consideration enabled him to bear the inevitable delay with a better
grace.

"I suppose," he reflected, "I might as well go back to the hotel."

He turned to leave the building when a carriage drove hastily up to the
station. It was drawn by two horses, and driven by a negro in livery. A
lady put her head out of the window and inquired anxiously if the train
had started. She addressed this question to Herbert, who happened to be
nearest.

"Yes, madam," he answered, respectfully.

"I am so sorry," said the lady, in a tone of vexation and perplexity.
"It was very important that my father should take that train."

"There is another train that starts at twelve," said Herbert. "It will
make a difference of a few hours only."

"Yes," said the lady, "but you do not understand my difficulty. The few
hours' difference in time would be of small importance, but my father is
blind, and is, of course, for that reason, dependent upon the kindness
of others. A gentleman of our acquaintance was going by this train, who
would have taken charge of him and seen him safe to his destination. By
losing the train we lose his services."

"My dear," said an elderly gentleman, sitting on the opposite seat, "if
I can get somebody to see me on board, I think I can manage very well."

"On no account, father," was the hasty reply, "particularly under
present circumstances."

"Where is the gentleman going?" asked Herbert, with interest.

"To Philadelphia."

"I am going on to New York," said our hero. "I have been disappointed
like you. I expected to take the early train."

"Do you intend to go by the next train, then?" asked the lady.

"Yes, madam."

"Then, perhaps--I have a great mind to ask you to take charge of my
father."

"I shall be very glad to be of service to you," said Herbert. "There is
only one objection," he added, with some embarrassment.

"What is that?"

"Why," said Herbert, frankly, "I am obliged to be economical, and I was
thinking of buying a second-class ticket."

"Oh," said the lady, promptly, "there need be no difficulty about that.
If you will take the trouble to look after my father, we will gladly pay
for your ticket."

"I am afraid my services will not be worth so much," said Herbert,
modestly.

"You must leave us to estimate them. If you do what you have undertaken,
we shall consider the expense well incurred."

Herbert made no further objection. He felt, indeed, that it would be
quite a lift to him, in the present state of his finances, and besides
would be a very easy way of earning the money. He therefore signified
his thanks and his acceptance of the offer.

"When did you say the train starts?" asked the lady.

"At twelve."

"Nearly five hours. That will be too long to wait. I think, father, we
will go home."

"Yes, my dear, I think that will be best."

"Are you obliged to go home before starting?" the lady inquired,
addressing Herbert.

"No, madam, I have no home in Columbus. I passed last night at a hotel."

"Have you any particular plan for spending the next few hours?"

Herbert answered in the negative.

"Then will you not ride home with us? You will then be ready to start
with my father."

"I shall be happy to do so."

"I think that will be much the best plan. Pompey, open the carriage door
for the young gentleman."

Our hero was about to say that he could just as well open the door
for himself, but he reflected that it was best to adapt himself to the
customs of those he was with. He bowed, therefore, and waited till the
coachman had opened the door for him, and stepped into the carriage. The
lady signed to him to take a seat beside her, and the door was closed.

"Home, Pompey," said she, briefly.

The coachman ascended to his seat, and the spirited grays were soon
whirling the party rapidly homeward.

It was a new position for our hero, and he felt it to be so. His parents
had never been rich, and latterly had been very poor. Living in a small
country village, he had never even seen so elegant a carriage as that
in which he was now riding He sank back upon the luxuriously cushioned
seat, and he could not help thinking how pleasant it would be if he
could command so comfortable a conveyance whenever he wanted to ride
out. But another thought succeeded this. If he were blind, like the
gentleman whom he was to take charge of, it would be a very poor
compensation to ride in a luxurious carriage. After all, things were not
so unequal as they seemed at first sight.

"Since you are to be my father's traveling companion," said the lady,
"perhaps you will not object to telling us your name."

"Certainly," said our hero, "my name is Herbert Mason."

"Are you going from home for the first time?" inquired the lady.

"I have no home," said Herbert. "My father and mother are both dead."

"Excuse me," said the lady, gently. "I am sorry to have touched upon a
subject which must awaken sorrowful recollections. My father's name is
Carroll. Father, you have heard that your young escort is Mr. Herbert
Mason."

The old gentleman extended his hand, which Herbert took respectfully.

"I am afraid you will find me a troublesome charge," he said. "Since I
have become blind I have been compelled to tax the kindness of others."

"The journey will be pleasanter to me," said Herbert, politely, "than if
I were alone."

Mr. Carroll was evidently pleased with this remark, for he turned toward
Herbert with increased interest.

"You can imagine how much more so it will be to me," he said. "I have
not your resources for beguiling the tedium of the way. I would give all
my possessions gladly, for your young eyes. All journeys are alike to me
now, since, however interesting the scenery, it is a blank to me."

"That is indeed a privation, sir."

"Especially in the journey we are about to take. The Baltimore & Ohio
Railroad, as it is called, runs through a romantic and charming country,
and affords views at once bold and beautiful. Have you ever traveled
over the road?"

"No, sir."

"Then you will have all the pleasure of a first discovery. Before I
became blind, before, indeed, the railway was located, I became, as a
young man, familiar with this whole section of country, so that I
have, at least, the remembrance of it. I am obliged now to live upon my
memory."

"You say you have never been over this railroad," said the lady. "Have
you ever been to the East?"

"No, madam, I have always lived in the State of Ohio."

"And you are now going to Philadelphia?" she inquired.

"I am going to New York," said Herbert.

"Indeed! Is it on a visit?"

"No, madam, I am expecting to live there; that is, if I can make a
living."

"Are you dependent, then, upon your own exertions for support?"

"Yes, madam."

"You seem very young for such a responsibility."

"I am fourteen."

"I thought you a year older. My Oscar is fourteen, and I am afraid
he would make a poor hand at supporting himself. What do you think,
father?"

"I think you are right, my dear. Oscar has not been placed in
circumstances to develop his self-reliance."

"No; that probably has something to do with it. But, Herbert, if you
will permit me to call you so, do you not look forward to the future
with apprehension?"

"No, madam," said Herbert. "I am not afraid but that I shall be able
to get along somehow. I think I shall find friends, and I am willing to
work."

"That is the spirit that leads to success," said the old gentleman,
approvingly. "Work comes to willing hands. I think you will succeed."

"I hope so, sir."

Our hero was gratified to meet with so much sympathy from those whose
wealth placed them far above him in the social scale. But it was not
surprising, for Herbert had a fine appearance and gentlemanly manners,
marked, too, by a natural politeness which enabled him to appear better
than most boys of his age.




CHAPTER XVIII

A YOUNG ARISTOCRAT


After a drive of three miles, which was accomplished in a short time by
the spirited horses, the carriage entered, through an ornamental gate,
upon a smooth driveway, which led up to a handsome mansion, of large
size, with a veranda stretching along the entire front.

A boy, a little smaller than Herbert, ran out of the front door, and
opened the door of the carriage before Pompey had time to descend from
the box.

"What, grandpa, come back?" he said, in surprise.

"Yes, Oscar, we were too late for the train," said his mother. "I
brought you back a companion for a few hours. This is Herbert Mason,
whom I intrust to your care, depending upon you to see that he passes
his time pleasantly."

Oscar looked at Herbert inquisitively.

Herbert offered his hand, saying, "I am glad to make your acquaintance,
Oscar."

"How long are you going to stay?" asked Oscar, as his mother and
grandfather went into the house.

"I must return in time to take the twelve o'clock train."

"Is grandpa going, too?"

"Yes."

"And are you going to take care of him?"

"I believe so."

"I wouldn't want to.'

"Why not?"

"Oh, it's an awful bore to be tied to a blind man."

"You'd find it more of a bore to be blind yourself," said Herbert.

"Yes, I suppose I should. Grandpa wants me to go to walk with him
sometimes, but I don't like it."

"If I had a grandfather who was blind, I think I should be willing."

"Wait till you have one, and you'll see how it is then."

"I suppose he needs somebody."

"Oh, well, he can take one of the servants, then. It's their business to
work."

"Where do you live?" he asked, after a pause.

"I am going to live in New York."

"Are you? I should like to go there."

"Perhaps you wouldn't want to go as I am going."

"What, alone? Yes, I should rather go that way. Then I could do as I
pleased. Now it's 'Oscar, do this,' and 'You mustn't do that,' all the
time."

"That isn't what I mean exactly. I've got to earn my own living after I
get there, and I don't know anybody in the city."

