he crept up like a phantom behind him, and drove his hunting knife with
such swift silence that his victim gave only a spasmodic quiver and
start, and was dead.

Waukko placed him in the position he was occupying at the time he first
caught sight of him, and then left his companions to learn the truth for
themselves, while he crept back to learn that his prisoner had given his
captor the slip.

Fred Munson was terrified when he found he was standing by the dead
form of his friend Thompson, a couple of nights before, and so, in the
present instance, a certain awe came over him, as it naturally does when
a person stands in the presence of death. But, for all that, the boy
was heartily glad, and he had wisdom enough to improve the splendid
opportunity that thus came to him, and for which he had hardly dared to
pray.

"I don't see what a dead man can want of a gun," he muttered, as he
moved rather timidly toward the figure, "and, therefore, it will not be
thieving for me to take it."

There was a little involuntary shuddering when he grasped the barrel and
sought to draw the weapon from its resting-place. The inanimate warrior
seemed to clutch it, as though unwilling to let it go, and the feeling
that he was struggling with a dead man was anything but comfortable.
Fred persevered, however, and speedily had the satisfaction of feeling
that the rifle was in his possession.

The weapon was heavy for one of his size, but it was a thousand times
preferable to nothing.

He stood "hefting" it, as the expression goes, and turning it over in
his hand, when he heard the report of a second gun, this time so close
that he started, thinking it had been aimed at him.

Such was not the case; but at that moment there came an overpowering
conviction that he was doing a most foolhardy thing in remaining so
conspicuously in view, when the red-skins were liable to return at
any moment and wreak their vengeance upon him for the robbery, to say
nothing of the death, of their comrade, which might be attributed to
him. So he hurriedly and quietly withdrew into the outer darkness.



CHAPTER XVIII. ALONE IN THE RAVINE

Fred Munson felt that he had been extremely fortunate, not only in
securing a good, substantial supper, but in getting a rifle. With it
he could guard against danger and starvation. In that country, and
especially among those mountains, was quite an abundance of game, and he
had learned how to aim a gun too well to prevent his throwing any shots
away.

By this time the night was well advanced, and he concluded that the
wisest thing he could do was to hunt up some place where he could sleep
until morning. This did not seem to be difficult in a country so cut up
and broken by rocks, and he moved away from the camp-fire with a sense
of deep gratitude for the extraordinary good fortune that had followed
him from the time Lone Wolf had withdrawn him from the main party.

"Now, if I could only get a horse," he said to himself, "I would be set
up in business. I could find the way back to New Boston in a day or two,
shooting what game I want, and keeping out of the way of all Indians. I
wonder what has become of Sut Simpson? I expected he would be somewhere
around here before this. It would be very handy to come across him just
now and have him help me home. And there's Mickey Rooney. He went off on
one of the best horses; and if he could pick me up and take me along,
it wouldn't need much time for us to get back home. Ah, if I only had
Hurricane here," he sighed. "How we would go back through that ravine,
leaving behind us the best horses in the country; but there's no use of
thinking of that. Hurricane is at home, and so he can't be here, and I
must trust to Providence to get back. I have something now that is of
more use than a horse. If I miss with one charge, I can--"

He stopped suddenly in amazement, for at that juncture he recalled a
piece of great stupidity which he had committed. He had secured the
rifle, and yet he had left without one thought of the indispensable
ammunition that was required to make the weapon of any use. He did not
know whether the gun in his hand was loaded or not, in which latter case
it was of no more account than a piece of wood.

"Well, if that don't beat everything," he muttered, at a loss to
understand how he could have committed such an oversight. "I never once
thought of it till this minute, and now it's too late!"

The reflection of his great need inclined him to return to the camp-fire
and incur the risk involved in the effort to repair the blunder that he
had committed.

"_That_ Indian cannot hurt me, and I don't suppose that any of the
others have come back. It won't take me long to get what I want; and I
will do it, too."

He was but a short distance from the place, and, having decided upon the
proper course, he moved rapidly back upon the path he had just trod, and
in a few minutes was beside the rock, which was becoming familiar in a
certain sense. Mindful of the danger to which one was always exposed
in that section, Fred peered around the rock with the same silence
and caution as before. The result was a disappointment. The Kiowa had
disappeared.

"Now it can't be that he was only pretending he was asleep all the
time," thought the puzzled lad. "And yet, if he wasn't, how was it he
managed to get away?"

A few minutes' reflection convinced Fred that it was impossible that
there should have been any such thing as he had imagined at first. The
more reasonable theory was that some of the Kiowas had returned and
taken the body of their comrade away, fearful, perhaps, that some of
the Apaches might put in an appearance again and rob him of his scalp.
However, whatever the explanation was, Fred saw that his expedition was
a failure. There was nothing to be gained by remaining where he was,
while there was unmistakable risk of being detected by some of the
copper-colored prowlers.

He noticed that the camp-fire bore very much the same appearance as when
he last saw it, and the probabilities were that the Kiowas were some
distance away at that very time; but the young fugitive had already run
enough risk, without incurring any more, and he resolved to spend an
hour or two in getting out of the neighborhood altogether.

There was little choice of direction, but it was natural that he should
prefer the back-trail, and, clambering down into the ravine again, he
turned his face to the southward, directly through the ravine that he
had traversed during the day upon the back of Waukko's mustang.

"I can tell when I reach the place where Lone Wolf and his men left us,"
he said to himself. "That will take me a good while, but when I do find
it, the trail will be so much larger and plainer that there will be no
trouble about following it, but it will take me several days to do it,
and it is going to be hard work. I need all the time possible, so I
guess it will be best to keep going all night."

There was not so much amusement in this as he fancied, but he kept it up
bravely for some two or three hours, during which he made good headway.
The walking was comparatively easy in the ravine, which was one of those
openings encountered at intervals among the mountains in the West, and
which are known under the name of passes. In many places it would be
utterly out of the question for parties to force their way through the
chains but for these avenues, which nature has kindly furnished.

The moonlight was just sufficient to make the boy feel uneasy. He could
discern objects, although indistinctly, nearly a hundred yards away, and
where the character of the gorge was continually shifting to a certain
extent there was abundant play for the imagination.

He had been walking but a short time when he abruptly halted, under the
impression that he had seen an Indian run across the gorge directly in
front of him. This caused a wilder throbbing of his heart, and another
examination of his gun, which was loaded, as he had assured himself some
time before, and ready at any time to do him one good turn, if no more.

"He wouldn't have skipped over in that style if he had known I was so
near," was the reflection of the boy, as he sheltered himself in the
shadow of the rocks and looked and listened. "How did he know but what
I might have picked him off? What was to hinder me? If he did n't know I
was here, why, it ain't likely that he would loaf along the side of the
ravine."

By such a course of reasoning, he was not long in convincing himself
that the way was open for his advance. He hurried by on tiptoe, and drew
a long breath of relief when certain that he had passed the dangerous
spot. But he was only a short distance beyond when his hair fairly arose
on end, for he became certain that he heard the groan of a man among the
boulders over his head.

"I wonder what the matter is there?" he whispered, peering upward in the
gloom and shadow. "It may be some white man that the Indians have left
for dead, and that still has some life in his body, or it may be an
Indian himself who has met with an accident--helloa!"--

Just then it sounded again, and a cold shiver of terror crept over him
from head to foot, as he was able to locate the precise point from which
it came. The frightful groaning did not stop as suddenly as before, but
rose and sank, with a sound like the wail of some suffering human being.

As Fred stood trembling and listening, his shuddering fear collapsed;
for the sound which had transfixed him with such dread, he now
recognized as the whistling of the wind, which, slight in itself,
was still manipulated in some peculiar fashion by a nook in the rocks
overhead.

"That does sound odd enough to scare a person," he muttered, as he
resumed his walk. "It must be a regular trumpet-blast when the wind is
high, for there isn't much now."

The two incidents resulting so harmlessly, Fred was inspired with
greater confidence, and advanced at a more rapid walk along the ravine,
suffering no check until he had gone fully a mile further. Just then,
while striding along with increasing courage, he came to a place where
the side of the ravine was perpendicular for two or three hundred feet.

He was close to this, so as to use the protection of the shadow, and was
dreaming of no danger, when a rattling of gravel and debris caused him
to look up, and he saw an immense mass of rock, that had become loosened
in some way, descending straight for his head.



CHAPTER XIX. THE MYSTERIOUS PURSUER

Young Munson made a sudden bound outward, and, just as he did so, a mass
of rock weighing fully a dozen tons, fell upon the precise spot where
he had stood, missing him so narrowly that the blast of wind, or rather
concussion of the air, was plainly felt. The boulder broke into several
pieces, its momentum being so terrific that the ground for several feet
around was jarred as if by an earthquake.

The lad was overcome for a moment or two, for he realized how narrow his
escape was from a terrible and instantaneous death.

"That was a little closer than I ever want to come again," he exclaimed.
"It seems to me that a person is always likely to get killed, no matter
where he is or what he is doing. I don't suppose that anybody threw that
down at me," he continued, in a half-doubting voice, as he stepped a few
paces back and again peered into the gloom.

If it had been during the day-time, he might have suspected that
some scamp had managed to pry the mass loose, and to send it crashing
downward straight for his head. But as the case stood, such a thing
could not have taken place.

Fred continued his flight until nearly midnight, by which time his
fatigue became so great that he began to hunt a place in which to spend
the remainder of the night. He had not yet seen any wild animals, and
was hopeful that he would suffer no disturbance from them. The single
charge of his rifle was to precious to be thrown away upon any such game
as that.

The lad was in the very act of leaving the ravine, when his step was
arrested by a sound too distinct to be mistaken. It was not imagination
this time, and he paused to identify it. The sound was faint and of
the nature of a jarring or murmur. He suspected that it was caused by
horses' hoofs, and he listened but a few minutes when he became certain
that such was the fact.

"There must be a big lot of them," he thought, as he listened to the
sound growing plainer and plainer every minute. "I wonder if Lone Wolf
and his men have not done what they started to do and are going round
home again?"

Judging from the clamping hoofs, such might have been the case. At all
events, there was every reason for believing that a party of horsemen
were in the ravine and that they were headed in his direction.

Fred made up his mind to wait where he was until they passed by. He
had no fear of being seen, when the opportunity for hiding was all that
could be desired, and, lying flat upon his face, he awaited the result.

Nearer and nearer came the tramp, tramp, the noise of hoofs mingling
in a dull thud that sounded oddly in the stillness of the night to the
watching and listening lad.

"Here they come," he muttered, before he saw them; but the words were
hardly out of his mouth when a shadowy figure came into view, instantly
followed by a score of others, all mingling and blending in one
indistinguishable mass.

The forms of animals and riders were plainly discernible, but they came
in too promiscuous fashion to be counted, and they were gone almost as
soon as they were seen. Fred was confident that thirty warriors galloped
by him in the stillness of the night.

"I believe it was Lone Wolf and some of his men," he muttered, as he
clambered down from his place among the rocks. Having been thoroughly
awakened by what he had seen, he determined to walk an hour or more
longer, for he felt that the best time for him to journey was during the
protecting darkness of night.

"There ain't anybody to make me get up early," he reasoned, "and when I
go to sleep I can stick to it as long as I want to. It seems to me that
if I walk all I can tonight, and keep at it the most of tomorrow,
I ought to be somewhere near the place where we came in among these
mountains. Then a day or two's tramping over the back trail will take me
pretty nearly to New Boston--that is, if nobody gobbles me up. I've got
a rough road before me, but God has guided me thus far, and I'll trust
him clean through. I've had some wonderful escapes to tell about--"

He was too wide awake and too much on the alert to forget precisely
where he was, or to fail to take in whatever should occur of an alarming
nature. That which now startled him and suddenly cut short his musings
was the sound of a horse's hoofs, close behind him.

Fred had been duped by his own fears and imaginings so many times
that he could not be served so again, and, as he was not apprehending
anything of the kind at that moment, there was no possibility of escape
from the reality of the sound. He halted and turned his head like
lightning, grasping his rifle in his nervous, determined way as he
peered back into the gloom, whispering to himself:

"That must be Lone Wolf or some of the warriors coming back to look for
me."

This was rather vague theorizing, however. Look and stare as much as he
chose, he could detect nothing that resembled man or animal. He shrank
to one side and waited several minutes, in the hope that the thing would
explain itself. But it did not, and, after waiting some time, he resumed
his journey along the ravine, keeping close to the shadow on the right
side, and using eyes and ears to guard against the insidious approach of
any kind of foe.

Sometimes, under such circumstances, when a sound has very nearly or
quite died out In the stillness, there seems to come a peculiar eddy or
turn of wind, or that which causes the sound, passes for an instant at a
point which is so situated as to impel the waves of air directly to
the ear of the listener. Fred did not exactly understand how this thing
could happen, but he had known of something of the kind, and he was
gradually bringing himself to explain the thing in that fashion, when
his theory was upset by such a sudden, violent rattling of hoofs, so
close behind him, that he leaped to one side, fearful of being trampled
upon.

"That's a pretty way to come upon a fellow!" he gasped, whirling
about with the purpose of shooting the red-skin for his startling
introduction.

But neither rider nor horseman was visible.

The watcher could scarcely believe the evidence of his own senses.
It seemed to him that the Apache, as he believed him to be, must have
turned abruptly aside, into some opening in the side of the ravine, but
he could not remember having seen any place that would admit of such
