
This time the mother grew as frightened as her son. There was nothing to
be done with a man like this, and she made all haste to fill the sacks
with ducats, so as to get rid of Stan as soon as possible. But on his
side Stan was trembling like an aspen, as he could not lift even one
sack from the ground. So he stood still and looked at them.

'What are you standing there for?' asked the dragon.

'Oh, I was standing here because it has just occurred to me that I
should like to stay in your service for another year. I am ashamed that
when I get home they should see I have brought back so little. I know
that they will cry out, "Just look at Stan Bolovan, who in one year has
grown as weak as a dragon."'

Here a shriek of dismay was heard both from the dragon and his mother,
who declared they would give him seven or even seven times seven the
number of sacks if he would only go away.

'I'll tell you what!' said Stan at last. 'I see you don't want me to
stay, and I should be very sorry to make myself disagreeable. I will
go at once, but only on condition that you shall carry the money home
yourself, so that I may not be put to shame before my friends.'

The words were hardly out of his mouth before the dragon had snatched up
the sacks and piled them on his back. Then he and Stan set forth.

The way, though really not far, was yet too long for Stan, but at length
he heard his children's voices, and stopped short. He did not wish the
dragon to know where he lived, lest some day he should come to take back
his treasure. Was there nothing he could say to get rid of the monster?
Suddenly an idea came into Stan's head, and he turned round.

'I hardly know what to do,' said he. 'I have a hundred children, and I
am afraid they may do you harm, as they are always ready for a fight.
However, I will do my best to protect you.'

A hundred children! That was indeed no joke! The dragon let fall the
sacks from terror, and then picked them up again. But the children, who
had had nothing to eat since their father had left them, came rushing
towards him, waving knives in their right hands and forks in their left,
and crying, 'Give us dragon's flesh; we will have dragon's flesh.'

At this dreadful sight the dragon waited no longer: he flung down his
sacks where he stood and took flight as fast as he could, so terrified
at the fate that awaited him that from that day he has never dared to
show his face in the world again.

(Adapted from Rumanische Marchen.)




THE TWO FROGS

Once upon a time in the country of Japan there lived two frogs, one of
whom made his home in a ditch near the town of Osaka, on the sea coast,
while the other dwelt in a clear little stream which ran through the
city of Kioto. At such a great distance apart, they had never even heard
of each other; but, funnily enough, the idea came into both their heads
at once that they should like to see a little of the world, and the
frog who lived at Kioto wanted to visit Osaka, and the frog who lived at
Osaka wished to go to Kioto, where the great Mikado had his palace.

So one fine morning in the spring they both set out along the road that
led from Kioto to Osaka, one from one end and the other from the other.
The journey was more tiring than they expected, for they did not know
much about travelling, and half way between the two towns there arose a
mountain which had to be climbed. It took them a long time and a great
many hops to reach the top, but there they were at last, and what was
the surprise of each to see another frog before him! They looked at each
other for a moment without speaking, and then fell into conversation,
explaining the cause of their meeting so far from their homes. It was
delightful to find that they both felt the same wish--to learn a little
more of their native country--and as there was no sort of hurry they
stretched themselves out in a cool, damp place, and agreed that they
would have a good rest before they parted to go their ways.

'What a pity we are not bigger,' said the Osaka frog; 'for then we could
see both towns from here, and tell if it is worth our while going on.'

'Oh, that is easily managed,' returned the Kioto frog. 'We have only got
to stand up on our hind legs, and hold on to each other, and then we can
each look at the town he is travelling to.'

This idea pleased the Osaka frog so much that he at once jumped up and
put his front paws on the shoulders of his friend, who had risen also.
There they both stood, stretching themselves as high as they could, and
holding each other tightly, so that they might not fall down. The Kioto
frog turned his nose towards Osaka, and the Osaka frog turned his nose
towards Kioto; but the foolish things forgot that when they stood up
their great eyes lay in the backs of their heads, and that though their
noses might point to the places to which they wanted to go their eyes
beheld the places from which they had come.

'Dear me!' cried the Osaka frog, 'Kioto is exactly like Osaka. It is
certainly not worth such a long journey. I shall go home!'

'If I had had any idea that Osaka was only a copy of Kioto I should
never have travelled all this way,' exclaimed the frog from Kioto, and
as he spoke he took his hands from his friend's shoulders, and they both
fell down on the grass. Then they took a polite farewell of each other,
and set off for home again, and to the end of their lives they believed
that Osaka and Kioto, which are as different to look at as two towns can
be, were as like as two peas.

(Japanische Marchen.)




THE STORY OF A GAZELLE

Once upon a time there lived a man who wasted all his money, and grew
so poor that his only food was a few grains of corn, which he scratched
like a fowl from out of a dust-heap.

One day he was scratching as usual among a dust-heap in the street,
hoping to find something for breakfast, when his eye fell upon a small
silver coin, called an eighth, which he greedily snatched up. 'Now I can
have a proper meal,' he thought, and after drinking some water at a well
he lay down and slept so long that it was sunrise before he woke again.
Then he jumped up and returned to the dust-heap. 'For who knows,' he
said to himself, 'whether I may not have some good luck again.'

As he was walking down the road, he saw a man coming towards him,
carrying a cage made of twigs. 'Hi! you fellow!' called he, 'what have
you got inside there?'

'Gazelles,' replied the man.

'Bring them here, for I should like to see them.'

As he spoke, some men who were standing by began to laugh, saying to the
man with the cage: 'You had better take care how you bargain with him,
for he has nothing at all except what he picks up from a dust-heap, and
if he can't feed himself, will he be able to feed a gazelle?'

But the man with the cage made answer: 'Since I started from my home in
the country, fifty people at the least have called me to show them
my gazelles, and was there one among them who cared to buy? It is the
custom for a trader in merchandise to be summoned hither and thither,
and who knows where one may find a buyer?' And he took up his cage and
went towards the scratcher of dust-heaps, and the men went with him.

'What do you ask for your gazelles?' said the beggar. 'Will you let me
have one for an eighth?'

And the man with the cage took out a gazelle, and held it out, saying,
'Take this one, master!'

And the beggar took it and carried it to the dust-heap, where he
scratched carefully till he found a few grains of corn, which he divided
with his gazelle. This he did night and morning, till five days went by.

Then, as he slept, the gazelle woke him, saying, 'Master.'

And the man answered, 'How is it that I see a wonder?'

'What wonder?' asked the gazelle.

'Why, that you, a gazelle, should be able to speak, for, from the
beginning, my father and mother and all the people that are in the world
have never told me of a talking gazelle.'

'Never mind that,' said the gazelle, 'but listen to what I say! First,
I took you for my master. Second, you gave for me all you had in the
world. I cannot run away from you, but give me, I pray you, leave to go
every morning and seek food for myself, and every evening I will come
back to you. What you find in the dust-heaps is not enough for both of
us.'

'Go, then,' answered the master; and the gazelle went.

When the sun had set, the gazelle came back, and the poor man was very
glad, and they lay down and slept side by side.

In the morning it said to him, 'I am going away to feed.'

And the man replied, 'Go, my son,' but he felt very lonely without
his gazelle, and set out sooner than usual for the dust-heap where he
generally found most corn. And glad he was when the evening came, and he
could return home. He lay on the grass chewing tobacco, when the gazelle
trotted up.

'Good evening, my master; how have you fared all day? I have been
resting in the shade in a place where there is sweet grass when I am
hungry, and fresh water when I am thirsty, and a soft breeze to fan me
in the heat. It is far away in the forest, and no one knows of it but
me, and to-morrow I shall go again.'

So for five days the gazelle set off at daybreak for this cool spot, but
on the fifth day it came to a place where the grass was bitter, and it
did not like it, and scratched, hoping to tear away the bad blades. But,
instead, it saw something lying in the earth, which turned out to be a
diamond, very large and bright. 'Oh, ho!' said the gazelle to itself,
'perhaps now I can do something for my master who bought me with all the
money he had; but I must be careful or they will say he has stolen it.
I had better take it myself to some great rich man, and see what it will
do for me.'

Directly the gazelle had come to this conclusion, it picked up the
diamond in its mouth, and went on and on and on through the forest, but
found no place where a rich man was likely to dwell. For two more days
it ran, from dawn to dark, till at last early one morning it caught
sight of a large town, which gave it fresh courage.

The people were standing about the streets doing their marketing, when
the gazelle bounded past, the diamond flashing as it ran. They called
after it, but it took no notice till it reached the palace, where the
sultan was sitting, enjoying the cool air. And the gazelle galloped up
to him, and laid the diamond at his feet.

The sultan looked first at the diamond and next at the gazelle; then he
ordered his attendants to bring cushions and a carpet, that the gazelle
might rest itself after its long journey. And he likewise ordered milk
to be brought, and rice, that it might eat and drink and be refreshed.

And when the gazelle was rested, the sultan said to it: 'Give me the
news you have come with.'

And the gazelle answered: 'I am come with this diamond, which is
a pledge from my master the Sultan Darai. He has heard you have a
daughter, and sends you this small token, and begs you will give her to
him to wife.'

And the sultan said: 'I am content. The wife is his wife, the family is
his family, the slave is his slave. Let him come to me empty-handed, I
am content.'

When the sultan had ended, the gazelle rose, and said: 'Master,
farewell; I go back to our town, and in eight days, or it may be in
eleven days, we shall arrive as your guests.'

And the sultan answered: 'So let it be.'

All this time the poor man far away had been mourning and weeping for
his gazelle, which he thought had run away from him for ever.

And when it came in at the door he rushed to embrace it with such joy
that he would not allow it a chance to speak.

'Be still, master, and don't cry,' said the gazelle at last; 'let us
sleep now, and in the morning, when I go, follow me.'

With the first ray of dawn they got up and went into the forest, and on
the fifth day, as they were resting near a stream, the gazelle gave
its master a sound beating, and then bade him stay where he was till it
returned. And the gazelle ran off, and about ten o'clock it came near
the sultan's palace, where the road was all lined with soldiers who were
there to do honour to Sultan Darai. And directly they caught sight of
the gazelle in the distance one of the soldiers ran on and said, 'Sultan
Darai is coming: I have seen the gazelle.'

Then the sultan rose up, and called his whole court to follow him,
and went out to meet the gazelle, who, bounding up to him, gave him
greeting. The sultan answered politely, and inquired where it had left
its master, whom it had promised to bring back.

'Alas!' replied the gazelle, 'he is lying in the forest, for on our way
here we were met by robbers, who, after beating and robbing him, took
away all his clothes. And he is now hiding under a bush, lest a passing
stranger might see him.'

The sultan, on hearing what had happened to his future son-in-law,
turned his horse and rode to the palace, and bade a groom to harness
the best horse in the stable and order a woman slave to bring a bag of
clothes, such as a man might want, out of the chest; and he chose out
a tunic and a turban and a sash for the waist, and fetched himself a
gold-hilted sword, and a dagger and a pair of sandals, and a stick of
sweet-smelling wood.

'Now,' said he to the gazelle, 'take these things with the soldiers to
the sultan, that he may be able to come.'

And the gazelle answered: 'Can I take those soldiers to go and put my
master to shame as he lies there naked? I am enough by myself, my lord.'

'How will you be enough,' asked the sultan, 'to manage this horse and
all these clothes?'

'Oh, that is easily done,' replied the gazelle. 'Fasten the horse to my
neck and tie the clothes to the back of the horse, and be sure they are
fixed firmly, as I shall go faster than he does.'

Everything was carried out as the gazelle had ordered, and when all was
ready it said to the sultan: 'Farewell, my lord, I am going.'

'Farewell, gazelle,' answered the sultan; 'when shall we see you again?'

'To-morrow about five,' replied the gazelle, and, giving a tug to the
horse's rein, they set off at a gallop.

The sultan watched them till they were out of sight: then he said to his
attendants, 'That gazelle comes from gentle hands, from the house of a
sultan, and that is what makes it so different from other gazelles.' And
in the eyes of the sultan the gazelle became a person of consequence.

Meanwhile the gazelle ran on till it came to the place where its master
was seated, and his heart laughed when he saw the gazelle.

And the gazelle said to him, 'Get up, my master, and bathe in the
stream!' and when the man had bathed it said again, 'Now rub yourself
well with earth, and rub your teeth well with sand to make them bright
and shining.' And when this was done it said, 'The sun has gone down
behind the hills; it is time for us to go': so it went and brought the
clothes from the back of the horse, and the man put them on and was well
pleased.

'Master!' said the gazelle when the man was ready, 'be sure that where
we are going you keep silence, except for giving greetings and asking
for news. Leave all the talking to me. I have provided you with a wife,
and have made her presents of clothes and turbans and rare and precious
things, so it is needless for you to speak.'

'Very good, I will be silent,' replied the man as he mounted the horse.
'You have given all this; it is you who are the master, and I who am the
slave, and I will obey you in all things.'

'So they went their way, and they went and went till the gazelle saw in
the distance the palace of the sultan. Then it said, 'Master, that is
the house we are going to, and you are not a poor man any longer: even
your name is new.'

'What IS my name, eh, my father?' asked the man.

'Sultan Darai,' said the gazelle.

Very soon some soldiers came to meet them, while others ran off to tell
the sultan of their approach. And the sultan set off at once, and the
viziers and the emirs, and the judges, and the rich men of the city, all
followed him.

Directly the gazelle saw them coming, it said to its master: 'Your
father-in-law is coming to meet you; that is he in the middle, wearing a
mantle of sky-blue. Get off your horse and go to greet him.'

And Sultan Darai leapt from his horse, and so did the other sultan, and
they gave their hands to one another and kissed each other, and went
together into the palace.

The next morning the gazelle went to the rooms of the sultan, and said
to him: 'My lord, we want you to marry us our wife, for the soul of
Sultan Darai is eager.'

'The wife is ready, so call the priest,' answered he, and when the
ceremony was over a cannon was fired and music was played, and within
the palace there was feasting.

'Master,' said the gazelle the following morning, 'I am setting out on
a journey, and I shall not be back for seven days, and perhaps not then.
But be careful not to leave the house till I come.'

And the master answered, 'I will not leave the house.'

And it went to the sultan of the country and said to him: 'My lord,
Sultan Darai has sent me to his town to get the house in order. It will
take me seven days, and if I am not back in seven days he will not leave
the palace till I return.'

'Very good,' said the sultan.

And it went and it went through the forest and wilderness, till it
arrived at a town full of fine houses. At the end of the chief road was
a great house, beautiful exceedingly, built of sapphire and turquoise
and marbles. 'That,' thought the gazelle, 'is the house for my master,
and I will call up my courage and go and look at the people who are
in it, if any people there are. For in this town have I as yet seen no
people. If I die, I die, and if I live, I live. Here can I think of no
plan, so if anything is to kill me, it will kill me.'

Then it knocked twice at the door, and cried 'Open,' but no one
answered. And it cried again, and a voice replied:

'Who are you that are crying "Open"?'

And the gazelle said, 'It is I, great mistress, your grandchild.'

'If you are my grandchild,' returned the voice, 'go back whence you
came. Don't come and die here, and bring me to my death as well.'

'Open, mistress, I entreat, I have something to say to you.'

