oak-tree, with the simple words carved on it, "Jacob Armitage."

Edward had, every day, expected that Oswald Partridge would have called
upon him, as he had promised to do, before the week was out; but Oswald
had not made his appearance, much to Edward's surprise. A month passed
away; Edward's arm was now quite well, and still Oswald came not. One
morning, Humphrey and Edward were conversing upon many points--the
principal of which was upon Edward going to Lymington, for they were
now in want of flour and meal, when Edward thought of what old Jacob
had told him relative to the money that he would find in his chest. He
went into Jacob's room and opened the chest, at the bottom of which,
under the clothes, he found a leather bag, which he brought out to
Humphrey; on opening it, they were much surprised to find in it more
than sixty gold pieces, besides a great deal of silver coin.

"Surely this is a great sum of money," observed Humphrey. "I don't know
what is the price of things; but it appears to me, that it ought to
last us a long while."

"I think so too," replied Edward. "I wish Oswald Partridge would come,
for I want to ask him many questions. I don't know the price of flour,
or anything else we have to purchase, nor do I know what I ought to be
paid for venison. I don't like to go to Lymington till I see him for
that reason. If he does not come soon, I shall ride over and see what
is the matter."

Edward then replaced the money in the chest, and he and Humphrey then
went out to the farmyard to go on with their work.

It was not until six weeks after the death of old Jacob that Oswald
Partridge made his appearance.

"How is the old man, sir?" was his first question.

"He was buried a few days after you left," replied Edward.

"I expected as much," said the forester. "Peace be with him--he was a
good man. And how is your arm?"

"Nearly well," replied Edward. "Now sit down, Oswald, for I have a
great deal to say to you; and first, let me ask you what has detained
you from coming here according to your promise?"

"Simply, and in few words--murder."

"Murder!" exclaimed Edward.

"Yes, deliberate murder, sir; in short, they have beheaded King
Charles, our sovereign."

"Have they dared to do it?"

"They have," replied Oswald. "We in the forest know little that is
going on; but when I saw you last, I heard that he was then in London,
and was to be tried."

"Tried!" exclaimed Edward. "How could they try a king? by the laws of
our country, a man must be tried by his equals; and where were his
equals?"

"Majesty becomes naught, I suppose," replied Oswald; "but still it is
as I say. Two days after you left, the intendant hastened up to London,
and, from what I have understood, he was strongly opposed to the deed,
and did all he could to prevent it; but it was of no use. When he left,
he gave me strict injunctions not to go away from the cottage for an
hour, as his daughter was left alone; and as I promised, I could not
come to you; but, nevertheless, Patience received letters from him, and
told me what I tell you."

"You have not dined, Oswald?" said Edward.

"No, that I have not."

"Alice, dear, get some dinner, will you? And Oswald, while you dine,
excuse me if I leave you for a while. Your intelligence has so
astounded me that I can listen to nothing else till I have had a little
while to commune with myself and subdue my feelings."

Edward was indeed in a state of mind which required calming down. He
quitted the cottage and walked out for some distance into the forest,
in deep thought.

"Murdered at last!" exclaimed he. "Yes, well may it be called murder,
and no one to save him--not a blow struck in his defense--not an arm
raised. How much gallant blood has been shed in vain! Spirit of my
fathers, didst thou leave none of thy mettle and thy honour behind
thee; or has all England become craven? Well, the time will come, and
if I can no longer hope to fight for my king, at all events I can fight
against those who have murdered him."

Such were Edward's thoughts as he wandered through the forest, and more
than an hour elapsed before his impetuous blood could return to its
usual flow; at last, his mind having partially resumed its wonted
calmness, he returned to the cottage and listened to the details which
Oswald now gave to him of what he had heard.

When Oswald had finished, Edward asked him whether the intendant had
returned.

"Yes, or I should not have been here," replied Oswald. "He came back
yesterday, looking most disconsolate and grave, and I hear that he
returns to London in a few days. Indeed, he told me so himself, for I
requested permission to come over to see your grandfather. He said that
I might go, but must return soon, as he must go back to London. I
believe, from what Miss Patience told me, and what I have seen myself,
that he is sincerely amazed and vexed at what has taken place; and so,
indeed, are many more, who, although opposed to the king's method of
government, never had an idea that things should have turned out as
they have done. I have a message from him to you, which is, that he
begs you will come to see him, that he may thank you for the
preservation of his child."

"I will take his thanks from you, Oswald: that will do as well as if he
gave them me in person."

"Yes, perhaps so; but I have another message from another party, which
is--the young lady herself. She desires me to tell you that she will
never be happy till she has seen you, and thanked you for your courage
and kindness; and that you have no right to put her under such an
obligation, and not give her an opportunity of expressing what she
feels. Now, Mr. Edward, I am certain that she is earnest in what she
says, and she made me promise that I would persuade you to come. I
could not refuse her, for she is a dear little creature; as her father
will go to London in a few days, you may ride over and see her without
any fear of being affronted by any offers which he may make to you."

"Well," replied Edward, "I have no great objection to see her again,
for she was very kind to me; and as you say that the intendant will not
be there, I perhaps may come. But now I must talk to you about other
matters."

Edward then put many questions to Oswald relative to the value of
various articles, and to the best method of disposing of his venison.

Oswald answered all his questions, and Edward took down notes and
directions on paper.

Oswald remained with them for two days, and then bade them farewell,
exacting a promise from Edward that he would come to the ranger's
cottage as soon as he could. "Should the intendant come back before he
is expected I will come over and let you know; but I think, from what I
heard him say he expected to be at least a month in London."

Edward promised that Oswald should see him in less than ten days, and
Oswald set out on his journey.

"Humphrey," said Edward, as soon as Oswald was gone, "I have made up my
mind to go to Lymington to-morrow We must have some flour, and many
other articles, which Alice says she can no longer do without."

"Why should we not both go, Edward?" replied Humphrey.

"No, not this time," replied Edward. "I have to find out many things
and many people, and I had rather go by myself; besides, I can not
allow my sisters to be left alone. I do not consider there is any
danger, I admit; but should any thing happen to them, I should never
forgive myself. Still, it is necessary that you should go to Lymington
with me some time or another, that you may know where to purchase and
sell, if required. What I propose is, that I will ask Oswald to come
and stay here a couple of days. We will then leave him in charge of our
sisters, and go to Lymington together."

"You are right, Edward, that will be the best plan."

As Humphrey made this remark, Oswald re-entered the cottage.

"I will tell you why I have returned, Mr. Edward," said Oswald. "It is
of no consequence whether I return now or to-morrow. It is now early,
and as you intend going to Lymington, it occurred to me that I had
better go with you. I can then show you all you want, which will be
much better than going by yourself."

"Thank you, Oswald, I am much obliged to you," said Edward.

"Humphrey, we will get the cart out immediately, or we shall be late.
Will you get it, Humphrey, for I must go for some money, and speak to
Alice."

Humphrey went immediately to put the pony in the cart, when Edward said,

"Oswald, you must not call me Mr. Edward, even when we are alone: if
you do you will be calling me so before other people, and, therefore,
recollect in future, it must be plain Edward."

"Since you wish it, certainly," replied Oswald; "indeed it would be
better, for a slip of the tongue before other people might create
suspicion."

The pony and cart were soon at the door, and Edward having received
further instructions from Alice, set off for Lymington, accompanied by
Oswald.




CHAPTER XI.


"Would you have found your way to Lymington?" said Oswald, as the pony
trotted along.

"Yes; I think so," replied Edward; "but I must have first gone to
Arnwood. Indeed, had I been alone I should have done so; but we have
made a much shorter cut."

"I did not think that you would have liked to have seen the ruins of
Arnwood," replied Oswald.

"Not a day passes without my thinking of them," replied Edward. "I
should like to see them. I should like to see if any one has taken
possession of the property, for they say it is confiscated."

"I heard that it was to be, but not that it was yet," said Oswald; "but
we shall know more when we get to Lymington. I have not seen it for
more than a year. I hardly think that any one will recognize you."

"I should think not; but I care little if they do. Indeed, who is thee
to know me?"

"Well, my introduction of you will save some surmises, probably; and I
shall not take you among those who may be inclined to ask questions.
See, there is the steeple; we have not more than a quarter of an hour's
drive."

As soon as they arrived at Lymington, Oswald directed the way to a
small hostelry to which the keepers and verderers usually resorted. In
fact, the landlord was the party who took all the venison off their
hands, and disposed of it. They drove into the yard, and, giving the
pony and cart in charge of the hostler, went into the inn, where they
found the landlord, and one or two other people, who were drinking.

"Well, Master Andrew, how fare you?" said Oswald.

"Let me see," said the corpulent landlord, throwing back his head, and
putting out his stomach, as he peered at Oswald. "Why, Oswald
Partridge, as I am a born man. Where have you been this many a day!"

"In the forest, Master Andrew, where there are no few chops and
changes."

"Yes, you have a sort of Parliamentary keeper, I'm told; and who is
this with you?"

"The grandson of an old friend of yours, now dead, poor old Jacob
Armitage."

"Jacob dead, poor fellow! As true as flint was Jacob Armitage, as I'm a
born man! And so he is dead! Well, we all owe Heaven a death. Foresters
and landlords, as well as kings, all must die!"

"I have brought Edward Armitage over here to introduce him to you,
Master Andrew. Now that the old man is dead, you must look to him for
forest meat."

"Oh, well, well, it is scarce now. I have not had any for some time.
Old Jacob brought me the last. You are not one of the Parliamentary
foresters, then, I presume?" continued the landlord, turning to Edward.

"No," replied Edward, "I kill no venison for Roundheads."

"Right, my sapling; right and well said. The Armitages were all good
men and true, and followed the fortunes of the Beverleys; but there are
no Beverleys to follow now. Cut off--root and branch--more's the pity.
That was a sad business. But come in; we must not talk here, for walls
have ears, they say, and one never knows who one dares to speak before
now."

Oswald and Edward then entered with the landlord, and arrangements were
made between Master Andrew and the latter for a regular supply of
venison during the season, at a certain price; but as it would now be
dangerous to bring it into the town, it was agreed that when there was
any ready, Edward should come to Lymington and give notice, and the
landlord would send out people to bring it in during the night. This
bargain concluded, they took a glass with the landlord, and then went
into the town to make the necessary purchases. Oswald took Edward to
all the shops where the articles he required were to be purchased; some
they carried away with them; others, which were too heavy, they left,
to be called for with the cart as they went away. Among other articles,
Edward required powder and lead, and they went to a gunsmith's where it
was to be procured. While making his purchases, Edward perceived a
sword, which he thought he had seen before, hanging up against the wall
among other weapons.

"What sword is that?" said he, to the man who was measuring out the
powder.

"It's not my sword, exactly," replied the man; "and yet I can not
return it to its owner or to the family. It was brought me to be
cleaned by one of Colonel Beverley's people, and before it was called
for the house was burned, and every soul perished. It was one of the
colonel's swords, I am sure, as there is E. B. on a silver plate
engraved on it. I have a bill owing me for work done at Arnwood, and I
have no chance of its being paid now; so, whether I am to sell the
sword, or what to do, I hardly know."

Edward remained silent for some little while, for he could not trust
himself to speak; at last he replied: "To be candid with you, I am, and
all my family have been, followers of the Beverley family, and I should
be sorry if the colonel's sword was to fall into any other hands. I
think, therefore, if I pay the bill which is due, you may safely let me
hold the sword as a security for the money, with the express
understanding that if it is ever claimed by the Beverley family I am to
give it up."

"Certainly," said Oswald; "nothing can be fairer or more clearly put."

"I think so, too, young man," replied the shopkeeper. "Of course you
will leave your name and address?"

"Yes; and my friend here will vouch for its being correct," replied
Edward.

The shopkeeper then produced the account, which Edward paid; and giving
on the paper the name of Edward Armitage, he took possession of the
sword. He then paid for the powder and lead, which Oswald took charge
of, and, hardly able to conceal his joy, hastened out of the shop.

"Oswald," cried Edward, "I would not part with it for thousands of
pounds. I never will part with it but with my life."

"I believe so," replied Oswald; "and I believe more, that it will never
be disgraced in your hands; but do not talk so loud, for there are
listeners and spies everywhere. Is there any thing else that you
require?"

"No, I think not; the fact is, that this sword has put every thing out
of my head. If there was anything else, I have forgotten it. Let us go
back to the inn, and we will harness the pony, and call for the flour
and oatmeal."

When they arrived at the inn, Oswald went out to the yard to get the
cart ready, while Edward went into the landlord's room to make
inquiries as to the quantity of venison he would be able to take off
his hands at a time. Oswald had taken the sword from Edward, and had
put it in the cart while he was fastening the harness, when a man came
up to the cart and looked earnestly at the sword. He then examined it,
and said to Oswald,

"Why that was Colonel Beverley's, my old master's sword. I knowed it
again directly. I took it to Phillips, the gun maker, to be cleaned."

"Indeed!" replied Oswald; "I pray, what may be your name?"

"Benjamin White," replied the man; "I served at Arnwood till the night
it was burned down; and I have been here ever since."

"And what are you doing now?"

"I'm tapster at the 'Commonwealth,' in Fish-street--not much of a
place."

"Well, well, you stand by the pony, and look that nobody takes any
thing out of the cart, while I go in for some parcels."

"Yes, to be sure I will; but, I say, forester, how came you by that
sword?'

"I will tell you when I come out again," replied Oswald.

Oswald then went in to Edward, and told him what had occurred.

"He will certainly know you, sir, and you must not come out till I can
get him away," said he.

"You are right, Oswald; but before he goes, ask him what became of my
aunt, and where she was buried; and also ask him where the other
servants are--perhaps they are at Lymington as well as he."

"I will find it all out," replied Oswald, who then left Edward, and
returned to the landlord and recommenced conversation.

Oswald on his return, told Benjamin in what manner the sword had been
procured from the shopman, by the grandson of old Armitage.

"I never knew that he had one," replied Benjamin; "nor did I know that
old Jacob was dead."

"What became of all the women who were at Arnwood?" inquired Oswald.

"Why, Agatha married one of the troopers, and went away to London."

"And the others?"

"Why, cook went home to her friends, who live about ten miles from
here, and I have never heard of her since."

"But there were three of them," said Oswald.

"Oh, yes; there was Phoebe," relied Benjamin, looking rather confused.
"She married a trooper--the jilt!--and went off to London when Agatha
did. If I'd have thought that she would have done so, I would not have
earned her away from Arnwood behind me, on a pillion, as I did; she
might have been burned with the poor children, for all as I cared."

"Was not the old lady killed?"

"Yes; that is to say, she killed herself, rather than not kill
Southwold."

"Where was she buried?"

"In the church-yard at St. Faith's, by the mayor and the corporation;
for there was not money enough found upon her person to pay the
expenses of her burial."

"And so you are tapster at the Commonwealth. Is it a good inn?"

"Can't say much for it. I shan't stay longer than I can help, I can
tell you."

"Well, but you must have an easy place, if you can stay away as long as
you do now."

"Won't I be mobbed when I go back! but that's always the case, make
haste or not, so it's all one. However, I do think I must be agoing
now, so good-by, Mr. Forester; and tell Jacob Armitage's grandson that
I shall be glad to see him, for old Jacob's sake; and it's hard, but
I'll find him something to drink when he calls."

"I will: I shall see him to-morrow." replied Oswald, getting into the
cart; "so good-by, Benjamin," much to the satisfaction of Oswald, who
thought that he would never go.

They went away at a rapid pace to make up for lost time, and soon
disappeared around the corner of the street. Oswald then got out again,
summoned Edward, and having called for the flour and other heavy
articles, they set off on their return.

During the drive, Oswald made known to Edward the information which he
