
"Indeed you must not, Lawry," added Miss Fanny. "I am afraid you
will both be sick if you work so hard."

"We can easily pump her out ourselves," said Ethan.

"You needn't say a word, Ethan," added Fanny Jane.

"I suppose we shall have to submit," replied Lawry, laughing. "We
can't oppose the ladies."

"Just as you say, Lawry," said Ethan.

"You shall have the men to-morrow, boys. Now you must go to bed, and
not think of the steamer till morning," continued Mr. Sherwood.

As the wind seemed to be subsiding, the boys went into the house;
and though it was not quite dark, they "turned in," tired enough to
sleep without rocking. Ben was at his supper, in no pleasant frame of
mind. He was dissatisfied with himself, and with his brother, who had
succeeded in his undertaking contrary to his prophecy. He was envious
and jealous of Lawry. Now that his father was away, he thought he
ought to be the chief person about the house, being the oldest boy.

"I'm not going to stay at home, and be a nobody," said he angrily.

"We don't wish you to be a nobody," replied his mother.

"Yes, you do; Lawry is everybody, and I'm nobody."

"You've been drinking, Benjamin."

"What if I have! I'm not going to stay here, and play second fiddle
to a little boy."

"What are you talking about, Benjamin? Lawry has not interfered with
you. He will treat you kindly and respectfully, as he treats
everybody."

"He don't mind any more what I say than he does the grunting of the
pigs."

"What do you want him to do?"

"I want him to pay some attention to what I say," snarled Ben. "I
suppose he thinks that steamboat belongs to him."

"Certainly he does," replied Mrs. Wilford.

"I don't."

"Don't you? Whom does it belong to, then?"

"I'm not a fool, mother; I know a thing or two as well as some
others. Lawry is not of age."

"Neither are you."

"I know that, but I'm older than he is."

"You are old enough to behave better."

"How do you expect me to be anybody here, when I have to knock under
to my younger brother? I say the steamer don't belong to Lawry any
more than she does to me. I have just as much right in her as he has."

"What do you mean by talking so, Benjamin? You know that Mr.
Sherwood gave the steamer to Lawry, and the bill of sale is in
Lawry's name."

"I don't care for that! she's just as much mine as she is his, and
he'll find that out when she gets to running. Lawry's a minor, and
can't hold any property; you know that just as well as I do."

"What if he is? I think he will be permitted to hold the steamboat,
and run her."

"I don't think so. I was talking with Taylor, who holds the mortgage
on this place, and he don't think so," added Ben, in a tone of triumph.

"What did he say?"

"Well, he means to attach the steamboat on the note he holds against
father."

"He will not do that!" replied Mrs. Wilford.

"He says so, anyhow."

"He will foreclose the mortgage on the place if he wants to get his
money."

"The place will not sell for enough to pay his note, and he knows
it. No matter about him--the steamboat belongs to father, just as
much as the ferry-boat does; and I think I ought to have something to
say about her."

"If you want to do anything for the family, why can't you run the
ferry-boat, Benjamin?"

"And let Lawry run the steamboat? Not if I know myself!" replied
Ben, with savage emphasis. "He may run the ferry-boat, and I'll run
the steamer."

"That would be neither fair nor right. The steamer belongs to Lawry,
and I will never consent that he shall be turned out of her."

"I don't want to turn him out of her. I'll take charge of her, and
he may go pilot; that's all he's good for."

"You mean that you'll be captain?"

"That's what I mean."

"I don't think Lawry will want any one to be captain over him.

"If I don't run that steamer, nobody shall!" said Ben angrily, as he
rose and left the house.

"Good evening, Mrs. Wilford," said Mr. Sherwood. "Has Lawry gone to
bed?"

"Yes, an hour ago."

"Is he asleep?"

"I suppose he is."

"All right, then."

"What in the world are you going to do with such a crowd of men, Mr.
Sherwood?"

"I'm going to help the boys finish their job. Ethan told me they had
stopped the leak, and it only remained to pump out the steamer. I am
going to do this job; and I have men enough to finish it in a couple
of hours."

"I should think you had," added Mrs. Wilford.

"I have gathered together all the men I could find. Don't say a word
to the boys, if you please. I intend to surprise them. They will find
the steamer free of water in the morning."

"You are very kind, Mr. Sherwood, to take so much trouble."

"The boys have worked so well that they deserve encouragement. May I
take the ferry-boat to convey my men up to the steamer?"

"Certainly, sir."

Mr. Sherwood encouraged the men to work well by the promise of extra
pay; and the laborers seemed to regard the occasion as a grand
frolic. They exerted themselves to the utmost, and the buckets flew
along the lines, while the pumps rolled out the water in a continuous
flow. As the steamer, relieved of the weight that pressed her down,
rose on the surface of the lake, it was only necessary to lift the
water from below and pour it upon the deck, from which it would run
off itself.

The job did not last long before such a strong force; and in two
hours the work of the bailers was done. Ethan had fully described the
method by which the hole in the hull of the _Woodville_ had been
stopped; but Mr. Sherwood had some doubts in regard to the strength
of the material, and he went below to examine the place. Lawry and
his fellow laborer had had no opportunity to test the strength and
fitness of the work they had done, while the boat was full of water.

On examination, Mr. Sherwood found several small jets of water
streaming through the seams between the planks, outside of the canvas
carpet, which he stopped with packing from the engineer's storeroom.
The braces which the boys had put over the hole kept the oilcloth in
position, and when the packing had been driven into the open seams
with a chisel and mallet, hardly any water came in around the
aperture. The boys were warmly commended by their partial friend for
the skill they had displayed in stopping the leak; and some of the
men, who were familiar with vessels, that the steamer would not
leak ten strokes an hour.

It was therefore safe to leave her; and Mr. Sherwood was satisfied that
the boys would not find the water up to the bottom of the cabin floor
in the morning. He carefully examined every part of the steamer to
assure himself that everything was right before he left her. The
pumps were tried again, just before they embarked for home, but they
yielded only a few strokes of water.

The party returned to the landing, and Mr. Sherwood cautioned the
men not to make any noise as they passed the cottage, fearful that
the boys might be awakened and the delightful surprise in store for
them spoiled. But Lawry and Ethan, worn out by the fatigue and
excitement of the day, slept like logs, and the discharge of a
battery of artillery under their chamber window would hardly have
aroused them from their slumbers. The men went to their several
homes, and all was quiet at the ferry.




CHAPTER XII

FROM DESPONDENCY TO REJOICING


Ben Wilford made his way to the deck of the steamer, and in the
darkness stumbled against the cables, with which the boat was
anchored. He was bent on mischief, and he unstoppered the cables,
permitting them to run out and sink to the bottom of the lake. The
wind was blowing, still pretty fresh, from the west, and the steamer,
now loosened from her moorings, began to drift toward the middle of
the lake.

"They'll find I'm not a nobody," whined he. "She'll go down in the
deep water this time."

The drunken villain then stumbled about the deck till he found the
lines which kept the hogsheads in place under the guards. Groaning,
crying, and swearing, he untied and threw the ropes overboard. Some
of the casks, relieved of the pressure on them by the removal of the
water from the interior of the hull, came out from their places and
floated off. Ben rolled into the wherry again, and with the boat-hook
hauled the others out. Satisfied that he had done his work, and that
the _Woodville_ would soon go down in the middle of the lake, he
pulled as rapidly as his intoxicated condition would permit toward
the ferry-landing.

"They'll find I'm not a nobody," he repeated, as he rowed to the
shore. "They can't raise her now; and they'll never see her again."

Intoxicated as he was, he had not lost his sense of caution. He knew
that he had done a mean and wicked action, which it might be
necessary for him to conceal. As he approached the landing, he wiped
his eyes, and choked down the emotions that agitated him. He tried to
make no noise, but his movements were very uncertain; he tumbled over
the thwarts, and rattled the oars, so that, if those in the cottage
had not slept like rocks, they must have heard him. He reeled up to
the house, took off his shoes, and crept upstairs to his room. He
made noise enough to wake his mother; but Lawry and Ethan were not
disturbed.

The wretch had accomplished his work. He was satisfied, as he laid
his boozy head upon the pillow, that the _Woodville_ was even
then at the bottom of the lake, with a hundred feet of water rolling
over her. It was two o'clock in the morning; but the vile tipple he
had drank, and the deed he had done, so excited him that he could not
sleep. He tossed on his bed till the day dawned, and the blessed
light streamed in at the window of the attic.

"Four o'clock!" shouted Lawry, as the timepiece in the kitchen
struck the hour. "All hands ahoy, Ethan!"

His enthusiastic fellow laborer needed no second call, and leaped
out of bed. Ben was still awake, and the lapse of the hours had in
some measure sobered him.

"It's a fine day, Ethan," said Lawry.

"Glad of that. How long do you suppose it will take to pump her out?"

"All day, I think; but we are to have four men to help us. I was
considering that matter when I went to sleep last night," replied
Lawry. "I was thinking whether we could not rig a barrel under the
derrick so as to get along a little faster than the pumps will do it.

"Perhaps we can; we will see."

"Where is your steamer?" asked Ben, rising in bed.

"We anchored her near the Goblins," replied Lawry.

"She isn't there now," added Ben.

"How do you know?" demanded the pilot.

"I've been sick, and couldn't sleep; so I got up and went outdoors.
She isn't where you left her, and I couldn't see anything of her
anywhere."

"Couldn't see her!" exclaimed Ethan.

"I knew very well she wouldn't stay on top of the water. Casks
wouldn't keep her up," said Ben maliciously.

Lawry rushed out of the room to the other end of the house, the
attic window of which commanded a full view of the lake. As his
brother had declared, the _Woodville_ was not at her anchorage
where they had left her; neither was she to be seen, whichever way he
looked.

"She is gone!" cried he, returning to his chamber.

"Of course she is gone," added Ben.

"I don't understand it."

"She has gone to the bottom, of course, where I told you she would
go. You were a fool to leave her out there in the deep water. She has
gone down where you will never see her again."

"It was impossible for her to sink with all those casks under her
guards," said Ethan.

"I guess you will find she has sunk. I told you she would. If you
had only minded what I told you, she would have been all right, Lawry."

Both of the boys seemed to be paralyzed at the discovery, and made
no reply to Ben. They could not realize that all the hard labor they
had performed was lost. It was hard and cruel, and each reproached
himself because they had not passed the night on board of the
steamer, as they had purposed to do.

"Well, it's no use to stand here like logs," said Lawry, "If she has
sunk, we will find out where she is."

"I reckon you'll never see her again, Lawry. Those old casks leaked,
I suppose, and when they were full of water the steamer went down
again; or else they broke loose from her when the wind blew so hard."

"It didn't blow much when we went to bed. What time did you come
home, Ben?"

"I don't know what time it was," he answered evasively.

"Come, Ethan, let's go and find out what the matter is," continued
Lawry, as he led the way downstairs.

Mrs. Wilford was not up, but she was awake, and was anticipating
with great satisfaction the pleasure of the surprise which awaited
the boys, when they discovered that the steamer had been freed from
water. They left the house, and went down to the ferry. The
_Woodville_ certainly was not where they had left her; not even
the top of her smokestack could be seen peering above the water to
inform them that she still existed.

"Well, Lawry, we may as well go out to the place where we left her.
If she has sunk, we may be able to see her," said Ethan.

They got into the boat; but one of the oars was gone. Ben had lost
it overboard when he landed, and it had floated off. There was
another pair in the woodshed of the house, and Lawry went up for
them. As he entered the shed, he met his mother, who had just risen,
and gone out for wood to kindle the fire. The poor boy looked so sad
and disconsolate that his long face attracted her attention.

"What's the matter, Lawry?" she asked.

"The steamer has sunk again," replied the son.

"Sunk again!" exclaimed his mother.

"She is not to be seen, and Ben says she has gone down."

"Ben says so?"

