excitement and pain at her mother's words brimming to her eyes. "Oh,
mother!" she said, with a sudden wail, "will you never, never understand
Nora?"

"I understand her quite well," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, her voice
assuming an unwonted note of softness; "and because I do understand Nora
so well," she added--and now she patted the girl's slender arm--"I want
her to have this great advantage, for there is much that is good in you,
Nora. But you are undisciplined, my dear; wild, unkempt. Little did I
think in the old days that a daughter of mine should have to have
such things said to her. Our more stately, more sober ways will be
a revelation to you, Nora. To your brother Terence they will come as
second nature; but you, my dear, will have to be warned beforehand.
I warn you now that your Uncle George will not understand the wild
excitement which you seem to consider the height of good breeding at
O'Shanaghgan."

"Mother, mother," said Nora, "don't say anything against O'Shanaghgan."

"Am I doing so?" said the poor lady. She stood for a moment and looked
around her. Nora stopped also and when she saw her mother's eyes travel
to the rambling old house, to the neglected lawn, the avenue overgrown
with weeds, it seemed to her that a stab of the cruelest pain was
penetrating her heart.

"Mother sees all the ugliness; she is determined to," thought Nora; "but
I see all the beauty. Oh! the dear, dear old place, it shan't go if Nora
can save it." Then, with a great effort, she controlled herself.

"How am I to go?" she said. "Where is the money to come from?"

"You need not question me on that point," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan. "I
will provide the means."

"Oh, mother!" said Nora; "no, I would rather stay." But then she
remembered all that this involved; she knew quite well that her mother
had rifled the jewel-case; but as she had done so over and over again
just for Terence's mere pleasure, might she not do so once more to save
the old place?

"Very well," she said demurely; "I won't ask any questions."

"You had better not, for I have not the slightest idea of replying to
them," answered Mrs. O'Shanaghgan. "I shall write to your uncle to-day.
You cannot go next week, however."

"Oh! why not? He said Tuesday; he would meet me at Holyhead on Tuesday."

"I will try and provide a fit escort for you to England; But you cannot
go next Tuesday; your wardrobe forbids it," answered Mrs. O'Shanaghgan.

"My wardrobe! Oh, mother, I really need not bother about clothes!"

"You may not bother about them, Nora; but I intend to," replied Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan. "I must buy you some suitable dress."

"But how will you do it?"

"I have not been away from Castle O'Shanaghgan for a long time," said
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, "and it will be a nice change for me. I shall take
you to Dublin, and get you what things are necessary. I will then see
you off on board the steamer."

"But would not father be best?"

"Your father can come with us or not, just as he pleases; but I am the
person who will see to your wardrobe for your English visit," replied
her mother.

Nora, excited, bewildered, charmed, had little or nothing to oppose
to this plan. After all, her mother was coming out in a new light. How
indifferent she had been about Nora's dress in the past! For Terence
were the fashionable coats and the immaculate neckties and the nice
gloves and the patent-leather boots. For Nora! Now and then an old dress
of her mother's was cut down to fit the girl; but as a rule she wore
anything she could lay hands on, made anyhow. It is true she was never
grotesque like Biddy Murphy; but up to the present dress had scarcely
entered at all as a factor into her life.

The next few days passed in a whirl of bewildered excitement. Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan received, as she expected, by return of post, seventy
pounds from the Dublin jeweler for her lovely diamond cross. This man
was rapidly making his fortune out of poor Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, and he
knew that he had secured a splendid bargain for himself when he bought
the cross.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan, therefore, with a full purse, could give directions
to her household during her brief absence, and altogether was much
brightened and excited at the thought of Nora's visit. She had written
herself to her brother, saying that she would be very glad to spare her
daughter, and giving him one or two hints with regard to Nora's manners
and bringing up.

"The Irish have quite different ideas, my dear brother," she wrote,
"with regard to etiquette to those which were instilled into us; but you
will bear patiently with my little wild Irish girl, for she has a very
true heart, and is also, I think you will admit, nice-looking."

Mr. Hartrick, who read between the lines of his sister's letter, wrote
to say that business would bring him to Holyhead on the following
Tuesday week also, and, therefore, it would be quite convenient for him
to meet Nora on that day.

The evening before she was to depart arrived at last. The Squire had
spent a busy day. From the moment when Nora had told him that her mother
had provided funds, and that she was to go to England, he had scarcely
reverted to the matter. In truth, with that curious Irish phase in his
character which is more or less the inheritance of every member of his
country, he contrived to put away the disagreeable subject even from his
thoughts. He was busy, very busy, attending to his farm and riding round
his establishment. He was still hoping against hope that some money
would come in his way long before the three months were up, when the
mortgagee would foreclose on his property. He was not at all unhappy,
and used to enter his house singing lustily or whistling loudly. Nora
sometimes wondered if he also forgot how soon she was going to leave
him. His first call when he entered the house had always been "Light
o' the Morning, where are you? Come here, asthore; the old dad has
returned," or some such expression. It came to the excited girl's heart
with a pang how he would miss her when she was no longer there; how he
would call for her in vain, and feel bewildered for a moment, and then
remember that she was far away.

"But I shan't be long away," she thought; "and when I come back and
save him and the old place, oh, how glad he will be! He will indeed then
think me his Light o' the Morning, for I shall have saved him and the
old home."

But the last evening came, and Nora considered whether she ought to
recall the fact that she was going away, perhaps for a couple of months,
to her father. He came in as usual, sat down heavily on the nearest
settee, and stretched out his long legs.

"I wonder if I am getting old?" he said. "I declare I feel a bit tired.
Come along here, Nora, and cheer me up. What news have you this evening,
little woman?"

"Oh, father! don't you know?"

"Well, your eyes look bright enough. What is it, girleen?"

"I am going away to Dublin to-morrow."

"You? Bless you! so you are," said the Squire, with a hearty laugh.
"Upon my soul I forgot all about it. Well, and you are going to have a
good time, and you'll forget the old dad--eh?--you'll forget all about
the old dad?"

"Father, father, you know better," said Nora--she flung her arms round
his neck and laid her soft cheek against his--"as if I could ever forget
you for a single moment," she said.

"I know it, a-colleen; I know it, heart's asthore. Of course you won't.
I am right glad you are going; it will be a nice change for you. And
what about the bits of duds--eh?--and the pretty trinkets? Why, you'll
be going into grand society; you'll be holding your little head like a
queen. Don't you forget, my pet, that you're Irish through and through,
and that you come of a long line of brave ancestors. The women of your
house never stooped to a shabby action, Nora; and never one of them
sacrificed her honor for gold or anything else; and the men were brave,
girleen, very brave, and had never fear in one of them. You remember
that, and keep yourself upright and brave and proud, and come back to
the old dad with as pure and loving a heart as you have now."

"Oh, father, of course, of course. But you will miss me? you will miss
me?"

"Bedad! I expect I shall," said the Squire; "but I am not going to fret,
so don't you imagine it."

"Have you," said Nora in a low whisper--"have you done anything
about-about the mortgage?"

"Oh, you be aisy," said the Squire, giving her a playful poke; "and if
you can't be aisy, be as aisy as you can," he continued, referring to
the old well-known saying. "Things will come right enough. Why, the
matter is weeks off yet. It was only yesterday I heard from an old
friend, Larry M'Dermott, who has been in Australia, and has made a fine
pile. He is back again, and I am thinking of seeing him and settling
up matters with him. Don't you have an uneasy thought in your head, my
child. I'll write to you when the thing is fixed up, as fixed it will
be by all that's likely in a week or fortnight from now. But look here,
Norrie, you'll want something to keep in your pocket when you are away.
I had best give you a five-pound note."

"No, no," said Nora. "I wouldn't touch it; I don't want it."

"Why not? Is it too proud you are?"

"No; mother is helping me to this visit. I don't know how she has got
money. I suppose in the old way."

"Poor soul!" said the Squire. "To tell you the truth, Norrie, I can't
bear to look at that jewel-case of hers. I believe, upon my word, that
it is nearly empty. She is very generous, is your mother. She's a very
fine woman, and I am desperate proud of her. When M'Dermott helps me to
tide over this pinch I'll have all those jewels back again by hook or by
crook. Your mother shan't suffer in the long run, and I'll do a lot to
the old place--the old house wants papering and painting. We'll dance a
merry jig at O'Shanaghgan at your wedding, my little girl; and now don't
keep me, for I have got to go out to meet Murphy. He said he would look
around about this hour."

Nora left her father, and wandered out into the soft summer gloaming.
She went down the avenue, and leaned for a time over the gate. The white
gate was sadly in need of paint, but it was not hanging off its hinges
as the gate was which led to the estate of Cronane. Nora put her feet on
the last rung, leaned her arms on the top one, and swayed softly, as
she thought of all that was about to happen, and the glorious adventures
which would in all probability be hers during the next few weeks. As she
thought, and forgot herself in dreams of the future, a low voice calling
her name caused her to start. A man with shaggy hair and wild, bright
eyes had come up to the other side of the gate.

"Why, then, Miss Nora, how are ye this evening?" he said. He pulled his
forelock as he spoke.

Nora felt a sudden coldness come over all her rosy dreams; but she was
too Irish and too like her ancestors to feel any fear, although she
could not help remembering that she was nearly half a mile away from the
house, and that there was not a soul anywhere within call.

"Good-evening, Andy," she said. "I must be going home now."

"No, you won't just yet," he answered. He came up and laid his dirty
hand on her white sleeve.

"No, don't touch me," said Nora proudly. She sprang off the gate, and
stood a foot or two away. "Don't come in," she continued; "stay where
you are. If you have anything to say, say it there."

"Bedad! it's a fine young lady that it is," said the man. "It aint
afeared, is it?"

"Afraid!" said Nora. "What do you take me for?"

"Sure, then, I take yez for what you are," said the man--"as fine and
purty a slip of a girleen as ever dwelt in the old Castle; but be yez
twice as purty, and be yez twice as fine, Andy Neil is not the man to
forget his word, his sworn word, his oath taken to the powers above and
the powers below, that if his bit of a roof is taken off his head, why,
them as does it shall suffer. It's for you to know that, Miss Nora. I
would have drowned yez in the deep pool and nobody would ever be the
wiser, but I thought better of that; and I could here--yes, even now--I
could choke yez round your pretty soft neck and nobody would be any the
wiser, and I'd think no more of it than I'd think of crushing a fly. I
won't do it; no I won't, Miss Nora; but there's _thim_ as will have to
suffer if Andy Neil is turned out of his hut. You spake for me, Miss
Nora; you spake up for me, girleen. Why, the Squire, you're the light of
his eyes; you spake up, and say, 'Lave poor Andy in his little hut;
lave poor Andy with a roof over him. Don't mind the bit of a rint.' Why,
then, Miss Nora, how can I pay the rint? Look at my arrum, dear." As the
man spoke he thrust out his arm, pushing up his ragged shirt sleeve. The
arm was almost like that of a skeleton's; the skin was starting over the
bones.

"Oh, it is dreadful!" said Nora, all the pity in her heart welling
up into her eyes. "I am truly, truly sorry for you, Andy, I would do
anything in my power. It is just this: you know father?"

"Squire? Yes, I guess I know Squire," said the man.

"You know," continued Nora, "that when he takes what you might call
the bit between his teeth nothing will move him. He is set against you,
Andy. Oh, Andy! I don't believe he will listen."

"He had betther," said the man, his voice dropping to a low growl;
"he had betther, and I say so plain. There's that in me would stick at
nothing, and you had best know it, Miss Nora."

"Can you not go away, Andy?"

"I--and what for?"

"But can you?"

"I could, but I won't."

"I don't believe father will yield. I will send you some money from
England if you will promise to go away."

"Aye; but I don't want it. I want to stay on. Where would my old bones
lie when I died if I am not in my own counthry? I'm not going to leave
my counthry for nobody. The cot where I was born shall see me die; and
if the roof is took off, why, I'll put it back again. I'll defy him
and his new-fangled ways and his English wife to the death. You'll see
mischief if you don't put things right, Miss Nora. It all rests with
yez, alannah."

"I am awfully sorry for you, Andy; but I don't believe you would
seriously injure father, for you know what the consequences would be."

"Aye; but when a man like me is sore put to it he don't think of
consequences. It's just the burning wish to avenge his wrongs; that's
what he feels, and that's what I feel, Miss Nora, and so you had best
take warning."

"Well, I am going away to-morrow," said the girl. "My father is in great
trouble, and wants money very badly himself, and I am going to England."

"To be out of the way when the ruin comes. I know," said the man, with a
loud laugh.

"No; you are utterly mistaken. Andy, don't you remember when I was a
little girl how you used to let me ride on your shoulder, and once you
asked me for a tiny bit of my hair, that time when it was all in curls,
and I gave you just the end of one of my curls, and you said you would
keep it to your dying day? Would you be cruel to Nora now, and just when
her heart is heavy?"

"Your heart heavy? You, one of the quality--'taint likely," said the
man.

"It is true; my heart is very heavy. I am so anxious about father; you
won't make me more anxious--will you? You won't do anything--anything
wrong--while I am away? Will you make me a promise that you will let me
go with an easy mind?"

"You ask your father to give me three months' longer grace, and then
we'll see."

"I will speak to him," said Nora very slowly. "I am sorry, because he
is worried about other things, and he does not take it kindly when I
interfere in what he considers his own province; but I'll do my best. I
cannot stay another moment now, Andy. Good-by."

She waved her hand to him, and ran down the avenue, looking like a white
wraith as she disappeared into the darkness.




CHAPTER XII.


A FEATHER-BED HOUSE.

Before she went to sleep that night Nora wrote a tiny note to her
father:

"DEAREST DAD:

"For the sake of your Light o' the Morning, leave poor Andy Neil in his
little cottage until I come back again from England. Do, dear dad; this
is the last wish of Nora before she goes away.

"YOUR COLLEEN."

She thought and thought, and felt that she could not have expressed
herself better. Fear would never influence the Squire; but he would do a
good deal for Nora. She laid the letter just where she knew he would see
it when he entered his ramshackle study on the following day; and the
next morning, with her arms clasped round his neck and her kisses on his
cheeks, she gave him one hearty hug, one fervent "God bless you, dad,"
and rushed after her mother.

The outside car was ready at the door. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan was already
mounted. Nora sprang up, and they were rattling off into the world, "to
seek my fortune," thought the girl, "or rather the fortune of him I love
best."

The Squire, with his grizzled locks and his deep-set eyes, stood in the
porch to watch Nora and her mother as they drove away.

"I'll be back in a twinkling, father; never you fret," called out his
daughter, and then a turn in the road hid him from view.

"Why, Nora, what are you crying for?" said her mother, who turned round
