
We are very hungry indeed because of having to fly all day, and we
think it is not stealing when you are starving to death.  We are
afraid to ask you for fear you should say 'No', because of course
you know about angels, but you would not think we were angels.  We
will only take the nessessities of life, and no pudding or pie, to
show you it is not grediness but true starvation that makes us make
your larder stand and deliver.  But we are not highwaymen by trade.


'Cut it short,' said the others with one accord.  And Anthea
hastily added:

Our intentions are quite honourable if you only knew.  And here is
half-a-crown to show we are sinseer and grateful.  Thank you for
your kind hospitality.
                              FROM Us FOUR.


The half-crown was wrapped in this letter, and all the children
felt that when the clergyman had read it he would understand
everything, as well as anyone could who had not seen the wings.

'Now,' said Cyril,"of course there's some risk; we'd better fly
straight down the other side of the tower and then flutter low
across the churchyard and in through the shrubbery.  There doesn't
seem to be anyone about.  But you never know.  The window looks out
into the shrubbery.  It is embowered in foliage, like a window in
a story.  I'll go in and get the things.  Robert and Anthea can
take them as I hand them out through the window; and Jane can keep
watch - her eyes are sharp - and whistle if she sees anyone about.
Shut up, Robert! she can whistle quite well enough for that,
anyway.  It ought not to be a very good whistle - it'll sound more
natural and birdlike.  Now then - off we go!'

I cannot pretend that stealing is right.  I can only say that on
this occasion it did not look like stealing to the hungry four, but
appeared in the light of a fair and reasonable business
transaction.  They had never happened to learn that a tongue -
hardly cut into - a chicken and a half, a loaf of bread, and a
syphon of soda-water cannot be bought in shops for half-a-crown.
These were the necessaries of life, which Cyril handed out of the
larder window when, quite unobserved and without hindrance or
adventure, he had led the others to that happy spot.  He felt that
to refrain from jam, apple turnovers, cake, and mixed candied peel
was a really heroic act - and I agree with him.  He was also proud
of not taking the custard pudding - and there I think he was wrong
- because if he had taken it there would have been a difficulty
about returning the dish; no one, however starving, has a right to
steal china pie-dishes with little pink flowers on them.  The
soda-water syphon was different.  They could not do without
something to drink, and as the maker's name was on it they felt
sure it would be returned to him wherever they might leave it.  If
they had time they would take it back themselves.  The man appeared
to live in Rochester, which would not be much out of their way
home.

Everything was carried up to the top of the tower, and laid down on
a sheet of kitchen paper which Cyril had found on the top shelf of
the larder.  As he unfolded it, Anthea said, 'I don't think THAT'S
a necessity of life.'

'Yes, it is,' said he.  'We must put the things down somewhere to
cut them up; and I heard father say the other day people got
diseases from germans in rain-water.  Now there must be lots of
rain-water here - and when it dries up the germans are left, and
they'd get into the things, and we should all die of scarlet
fever.'

'What are germans?'

'Little waggly things you see with microscopes,' said Cyril, with
a scientific air.  'They give you every illness you can think of!
I'm sure the paper was a necessary, just as much as the bread and
meat and water.  Now then!  Oh, my eyes, I am hungry!'

I do not wish to describe the picnic party on the top of the tower.
You can imagine well enough what it is like to carve a chicken and
a tongue with a knife that has only one blade - and that snapped
off short about half-way down.  But it was done.  Eating with your
fingers is greasy and difficult - and paper dishes soon get to look
very spotty and horrid.  But one thing you CAN'T imagine, and that
is how soda-water behaves when you try to drink it straight out of
a syphon - especially a quite full one.  But if imagination will
not help you, experience will, and you can easily try it for
yourself if you can get a grown-up to give you the syphon.  If you
want to have a really thorough experience, put the tube in your
mouth and press the handle very suddenly and very hard.  You had
better do it when you are alone - and out of doors is best for this
experiment.

However you eat them, tongue and chicken and new bread are very
good things, and no one minds being sprinkled a little with
soda-water on a really fine hot day.  So that everyone enjoyed the
dinner very much indeed, and everyone ate as much as it possibly
could: first, because it was extremely hungry; and secondly,
because, as I said, tongue and chicken and new bread are very nice.

Now, I daresay you will have noticed that if you have to wait for
your dinner till long after the proper time, and then eat a great
deal more dinner than usual, and sit in the hot sun on the top of
a church-tower - or even anywhere else - you become soon and
strangely sleepy.  Now Anthea and Jane and Cyril and Robert were
very like you in many ways, and when they had eaten all they could,
and drunk all there was, they became sleepy, strangely and soon -
especially Anthea, because she had got up so early.

One by one they left off talking and leaned back, and before it was
a quarter of an hour after dinner they had all curled round and
tucked themselves up under their large soft warm wings and were
fast asleep.  And the sun was sinking slowly in the west.  (I must
say it was in the west, because it is usual in books to say so, for
fear careless people should think it was setting in the east.  In
point of fact, it was not exactly in the west either - but that's
near enough.) The sun, I repeat, was sinking slowly in the west,
and the children slept warmly and happily on - for wings are cosier
than eiderdown quilts to sleep under.  The shadow of the
church-tower fell across the churchyard, and across the Vicarage,
and across the field beyond; and presently there were no more
shadows, and the sun had set, and the wings were gone.  And still
the children slept.  But not for long.  Twilight is very beautiful,
but it is chilly; and you know, however sleepy you are, you wake up
soon enough if your brother or sister happens to be up first and
pulls your blankets off you.  The four wingless children shivered
and woke.  And there they were - on the top of a church-tower in
the dusky twilight, with blue stars coming out by ones and twos and
tens and twenties over their heads - miles away from home, with
three-and-three-halfpence in their pockets, and a doubtful act
about the necessities of life to be accounted for if anyone found
them with the soda-water syphon.

They looked at each other.  Cyril spoke first, picking up the
syphon:

'We'd better get along down and get rid of this beastly thing.
It's dark enough to leave it on the clergyman's doorstep, I should
think.  Come on.'

There was a little turret at the corner of the tower, and the
little turret had a door in it.  They had noticed this when they
were eating, but had not explored it, as you would have done in
their place.  Because, of course, when you have wings, and can
explore the whole sky, doors seem hardly worth exploring.

Now they turned towards it.

'Of course,' said Cyril, 'this is the way down.'

It was.  But the door was locked on the inside!

And the world was growing darker and darker.  And they were miles
from home.  And there was the soda-water syphon.

I shall not tell you whether anyone cried, nor if so, how many
cried, nor who cried.  You will be better employed in making up
your minds what you would have done if you had been in their place.



CHAPTER 5
NO WINGS


Whether anyone cried or not, there was certainly an interval during
which none of the party was quite itself.  When they grew calmer,
Anthea put her handkerchief in her pocket and her arm round Jane,
and said:

'It can't be for more than one night.  We can signal with our
handkerchiefs in the morning.  They'll be dry then.  And someone
will come up and let us out -'

'And find the syphon,' said Cyril gloomily; 'and we shall be sent
to prison for stealing -'

'You said it wasn't stealing.  You said you were sure it wasn't.'

'I'm not sure NOW,' said Cyril shortly.

'Let's throw the beastly thing slap away among the trees,' said
Robert, 'then no one can do anything to us.'

'Oh yes' - Cyril's laugh was not a lighthearted one - 'and hit some
chap on the head, and be murderers as well as - as the other
thing.'

'But we can't stay up here all night,' said Jane; 'and I want my
tea.'

'You CAN'T want your tea,' said Robert; 'you've only just had your
dinner.'

'But I do want it,' she said; 'especially when you begin talking
about stopping up here all night.  Oh, Panther - I want to go home!
I want to go home!'

'Hush, hush,' Anthea said.  'Don't, dear.  It'll be all right,
somehow.  Don't, don't -'

'Let her cry,' said Robert desperately; 'if she howls loud enough,
someone may hear and come and let us out.'

'And see the soda-water thing,' said Anthea swiftly.  'Robert,
don't be a brute.  Oh, Jane, do try to be a man!  It's just the
same for all of us.'

Jane did try to 'be a man' - and reduced her howls to sniffs.

There was a pause.  Then Cyril said slowly, 'Look here.  We must
risk that syphon.  I'll button it up inside my jacket - perhaps no
one will notice it.  You others keep well in front of me.  There
are lights in the clergyman's house.  They've not gone to bed yet.
We must just yell as loud as ever we can.  Now all scream when I
say three.  Robert, you do the yell like the railway engine, and
I'll do the coo-ee like father's.  The girls can do as they please.
One, two, three!'

A fourfold yell rent the silent peace of the evening, and a maid at
one of the Vicarage windows paused with her hand on the blind-cord.

'One, two, three!'  Another yell, piercing and complex, startled
the owls and starlings to a flutter of feathers in the belfry
below.  The maid fled from the Vicarage window and ran down the
Vicarage stairs and into the Vicarage kitchen, and fainted as soon
as she had explained to the man-servant and the cook and the cook's
cousin that she had seen a ghost.  It was quite untrue, of course,
but I suppose the girl's nerves were a little upset by the yelling.

'One, two, three!'  The Vicar was on his doorstep by this time, and
there was no mistaking the yell that greeted him.

'Goodness me,' he said to his wife, 'my dear, someone's being
murdered in the church!  Give me my hat and a thick stick, and tell
Andrew to come after me.  I expect it's the lunatic who stole the
tongue.'

The children had seen the flash of light when the Vicar opened his
front door.  They had seen his dark form on the doorstep, and they
had paused for breath, and also to see what he would do.

When he turned back for his hat, Cyril said hastily:

'He thinks he only fancied he heard something.  You don't half
yell!  Now!  One, two, three!'

It was certainly a whole yell this time, and the Vicar's wife flung
her arms round her husband and screamed a feeble echo of it.

'You shan't go!' she said, 'not alone.  Jessie!' - the maid
unfainted and came out of the kitchen - 'send Andrew at once.
There's a dangerous lunatic in the church, and he must go
immediately and catch it.'

'I expect he WILL catch it too,' said Jessie to herself as she went
through the kitchen door.  'Here, Andrew,' she said, there's
someone screaming like mad in the church, and the missus says
you're to go along and catch it.'

'Not alone, I don't,' said Andrew in low firm tones.  To his master
he merely said, 'Yes, sir.'

'You heard those screams?'

'I did think I noticed a sort of something,' said Andrew.

'Well, come on, then,' said the Vicar.  'My dear, I MUST go!' He
pushed her gently into the sitting-room, banged the door, and
rushed out, dragging Andrew by the arm.

A volley of yells greeted them.  As it died into silence Andrew
shouted, 'Hullo, you there!  Did you call?'

'Yes,' shouted four far-away voices.

'They seem to be in the air,' said the Vicar.  'Very remarkable.'

'Where are you?' shouted Andrew: and Cyril replied in his deepest
voice, very slow and loud:

'CHURCH!  TOWER!  TOP!'

'Come down, then!' said Andrew; and the same voice replied:

'CAN'T!  DOOR LOCKED!'

'My goodness!' said the Vicar.  'Andrew, fetch the stable lantern.
Perhaps it would be as well to fetch another man from the village.'

'With the rest of the gang about, very likely.  No, sir; if this
'ere ain't a trap - well, may I never!  There's cook's cousin at
the back door now.  He's a keeper, sir, and used to dealing with
vicious characters.  And he's got his gun, sir.'

'Hullo there!' shouted Cyril from the church-tower; 'come up and
let us out.'

'We're a-coming,' said Andrew.  'I'm a-going to get a policeman and
a gun.'

'Andrew, Andrew,' said the Vicar, 'that's not the truth.'

'It's near enough, sir, for the likes of them.'

So Andrew fetched the lantern and the cook's cousin; and the
Vicar's wife begged them all to be very careful.

They went across the churchyard - it was quite dark now - and as
they went they talked.  The Vicar was certain a lunatic was on the
church-tower - the one who had written the mad letter, and taken
the cold tongue and things.  Andrew thought it was a 'trap'; the
cook's cousin alone was calm.  'Great cry, little wool,' said he;
'dangerous chaps is quieter.'  He was not at all afraid.  But then
he had a gun.  That was why he was asked to lead the way up the
worn steep dark steps of the church-tower.  He did lead the way,
with the lantern in one hand and the gun in the other.  Andrew went
next.  He pretended afterwards that this was because he was braver
than his master, but really it was because he thought of traps, and
he did not like the idea of being behind the others for fear
someone should come soffly up behind him and catch hold of his legs
in the dark.  They went on and on, and round and round the little
corkscrew staircase - then through the bell-ringers' loft, where
the bell-ropes hung with soft furry ends like giant caterpillars -
then up another stair into the belfry, where the big quiet bells
are - and then on, up a ladder with broad steps - and then up a
little stone stair.  And at the top of that there was a little
door.  And the door was bolted on the stair side.

The cook's cousin, who was a gamekeeper, kicked at the door, and
said:

'Hullo, you there!'

The children were holding on to each other on the other side of the
door, and trembling with anxiousness - and very hoarse with their
howls.  They could hardly speak, but Cyril managed to reply
huskily:

'Hullo, you there!'

'How did you get up there?'
