use of our toes became necessary to a further advance. I availed myself
of a sort of comb of the mountain, which stood against the wall like
a buttress, and which the wind and solar radiation, joined to the
steepness of the smooth rock, had kept almost entirely free from snow.
Up this I made my way rapidly. Our cautious method of advancing in
the outset had spared my strength; and, with the exception of a slight
disposition to headache, I felt no remains of yesterday's illness. In a
few minutes we reached a point where the buttress was overhanging, and
there was no other way of surmounting the difficulty than by passing
around one side of it, which was the face of a vertical precipice of
several hundred feet."

Parfleche is the name given to buffalo hide. The Indian women prepare it
by scraping and drying. It is exceedingly tough and hard, and receives
its name from the circumstance that it cannot be pierced by arrows or
spears.

The entire dress of Fremont and his party, on their ascent to the "top
of America," consisted of a blue flannel shirt, free and open at the
neck, the collar turning down over a black silk handkerchief tied
loosely, blue cloth pantaloons, a slouched broad brimmed hat, and
moccasins as above described. It was well adapted to climbing, quite
light, and at the same time warm, and every way comfortable.

"Putting hands and feet in the crevices between the blocks, I succeeded
in getting over it, and when I reached the top, found my companions in a
small valley below. Descending to them, we continued climbing, and in a
short time reached the crest. I sprang upon the summit and another step
would have precipitated me into an immense snow field five hundred feet
below. To the edge of this field was a sheer icy precipice; and then,
with a gradual fall, the field sloped off for about a mile, until it
struck the foot of another lower ridge. I stood on a narrow crest about
three feet in width, with an inclination of about 20 degrees N. 51
degrees E. As soon as I had gratified the first feelings of curiosity I
descended, and each man ascended in turn, for I would only allow one
at a time to mount the unstable and precarious slab, which it seemed a
breath would hurl into the abyss below. We mounted the barometer in
the snow of the summit, and, fixing a ramrod in a crevice, unfurled the
national flag, to wave in the breeze, where never flag waved before.
During our morning's ascent, we met no sign of animal life, except a
small bird having the appearance of a sparrow. A stillness the most
profound, and a terrible solitude forced themselves constantly on the
mind as the great features of the place. Here, on the summit, where
the stillness was absolute, unbroken by any sound, and the solitude
complete, we thought ourselves beyond the region of animated life; but
while we were sitting on the rock, a solitary bee (bombus terrestris,
the humble bee) came winging his flight from the eastern valley, and lit
on the knee of one of the men.

"Around us the whole scene had one main striking feature, which was that
of terrible convulsion. Parallel to its length, the ridge was split
into chasms and fissures, between which rose the thin, lofty walls,
terminated with slender minarets and columns, which are correctly
represented in the view from the camp on Island Lake. According to the
barometer, the little crest of the wall on which we stood was three
thousand five hundred and seventy feet above that place, and two
thousand seven hundred and eighty feet above the little lakes at the
bottom, immediately at our feet.

"Our camp at the Two Hills (an astronomical station) bore south 30 east,
which, with a bearing afterward obtained from a fixed position, enabled
us to locate the peak. The bearing of the Trois Tetons was north 50
degrees west, and the direction of the central ridge of the Wind River
Mountains south 39 degrees east. The summit rock was gneiss. Sienite
and feldspar succeeded in our descent to the snow line, where we found
a felspathic granite. I had remarked that the noise produced by the
explosion of our pistols had the usual degree of loudness, but was not
in the least prolonged, expiring almost instantaneously. Having now made
what observations our means afforded, we proceeded to descend. We had
accomplished an object of laudable ambition, and beyond the strict
order of our instructions. We had climbed the loftiest peak of the Rocky
Mountains and looked down upon the snow a thousand feet below, and,
standing where human foot had never stood before, felt the exultation of
first explorers. It was about two o'clock when we left the summit; and
when we reached the bottom the sun had already sunk behind the wall, and
the day was drawing to a close. It would have been pleasant to linger
here and on the summit longer; but we hurried away as rapidly as the
ground would permit, for it was an object to regain our party as soon as
possible, not knowing what accident the next hour might bring forth."

This mountain which bears the name of Fremont's Peak, in honor of the
great Pathfinder, was found to be 13,570 feet above the Gulf of Mexico.

The object of the expedition was accomplished and preparations were made
for the return to the states. No accident worth the mention had befallen
the explorers, and the Blackfeet, from whom so much was feared, did not
molest them. It may have been that when their scouts reconnoitred the
camp, they found the barricades so strong and the garrison so watchful
that they decided it would be too costly to make an attack upon them.
It is not impossible that some one or more of them recognized the daring
mountaineer who more than once years before had given their warriors
such severe defeat and punishment. If such was the truth, we cannot but
respect the discretion they showed.

Fort Laramie was reached in the month of September 1842. There as Kit
Carson's labors were ended, he bade his commander and friends goodbye
and started for New Mexico. Fremont and his men reached the states in
safety and thus ended his first exploring expedition.



CHAPTER XXI.


 Carson Starts for the States--The Encampment of Captain Cook and his
 Dragoons--Carson Undertakes a Delicate and Dangerous Mission--The
 Perilous Journey--Return of Carson and the Mexican Boy--Encounter with
 Four Utah Indians--Arrival at Bent's Fort.

Early in the year 1843, Kit Carson married his second wife and shortly
after agreed to accompany an expedition of Bent & St. Vrain's wagons to
the States. When part way across the plains, they struck the old Santa
Fe trail and came upon an encampment of Captain Cook with four companies
of United States Dragoons.

They were engaged in escorting a train of Mexican wagons to the boundary
line between New Mexico and the United States. The train was a very
valuable one and an escort of a hundred men were hired to accompany it
through the Indian country.

The situation of this train was an alarming one. It was the duty of
Captain Cook and his soldiers to guard it as far as the fording of the
Arkansas, at that time the boundary line between the two countries.
There was good reason for believing that a strong band of Texan rangers
were waiting beyond, with the intention of attacking and plundering the
train. Indeed the Mexican who had it in charge had received information
that left no possible doubt of the fact.

His face lighted up when he recognized Kit Carson. Hardly waiting until
they had greeted each other, he offered him a liberal reward if he
would ride post haste to Santa Fe and deliver a letter to the Governor,
containing an urgent request to send a strong force to escort the train
thither.

Carson unhesitatingly accepted the offer and with his usual promptness
started almost immediately on his delicate and dangerous business. The
journey was one of several hundred miles through a country swarming with
Indians, and all the skill, cunning and vigilance of the great scout
would be required to succeed. But he never faltered in the face of
peril.

A veteran mountaineer agreed to keep him company, but, when Bent's Fort
was reached he refused to go further, and Carson, as he had often done
before in critical situations, went on alone.

The news which he heard at the fort was of a startling nature. The Utah
Indians were hostile and his long journey led him directly through their
country. He could not censure his friend for declining to go further,
nor could he blame others whom he asked to accompany him, when they
shook their heads. Mr. Bent understood the peculiar danger in which Kit
would be placed, and though he was splendidly mounted, he loaned him a
magnificent steed which he led, ready to mount whenever the necessity
should arise for doing so.

That journey was one of the most remarkable of the many made by Kit
Carson. It would have been less so, had he possessed a companion of
experience, for they could have counselled together, and one would have
kept watch while the other slept. As it was, Carson was compelled to
scan every portion of the plain before him, on the constant lookout for
Indians, who would have spared no effort to circumvent and slay him, had
they known of his presence in their country. He was so placed, indeed,
that only by the most consummate skill could he hope to run the
continuous gauntlet, hundreds of miles in length.

He had gone but a short distance when he detected the trails of his
enemies, showing they were numerous and liable to be encountered at
any moment. When night came, he picketed his horses and lay down on the
prairie or in some grove, ready to leap to his feet, bound upon one of
his steeds and gallop away on a dead run. Where the hunter has no friend
to mount guard, he is often compelled to depend upon his horses, who
frequently prove the best kind of sentinels. They are quick to detect
the approach of strangers, and a slight neigh or stamp of the foot is
enough to give the saving warning.

A large portion of the country over which he rode, was a treeless plain
and the keen blue eyes of the matchless mountaineer were kept on a
continual strain. A moving speck in the distant horizon, the faint
column of thin smoke rising from the far off grove, or a faint yellow
dust against the blue sky, could only mean one thing--the presence of
enemies, for he was in a region which contained not a single friend.

One afternoon Carson discovered an Indian village directly ahead of him
and on the trail which he was following. He instantly withdrew beyond
sight of any who might be on guard, and, hunting a sparse grove of
timber, kept within it until dark; then he made a long circuit, and came
back to the trail far beyond it. He travelled a long distance that night
and by daylight was in no danger of detection.

By using such extreme caution and watchfulness, he succeeded in passing
the entire distance without exchanging a hostile shot with anyone. He
reached Taos, where he waited as agreed upon, until his message could
be sent to the Governor at Santa Fe. While in Taos he learned that
one hundred men had been sent out to meet the caravan and the Governor
himself was about ready to follow with six hundred more. It may be
stated in this place that the smaller company, while looking for the
train was attacked by the Texan rangers and with a single exception
every man was killed; but venturing into American territory, the rangers
were disarmed by Captain Cook and his dragoons, and the wealthy wagon
train, with its valuable cargo reached its destination in safety.

Having accomplished his mission, Carson set out on his return to Bent's
Fort. This time he took a Mexican boy with him. The mountaineer had
become strongly attached to the youth, who was a noble, high minded lad,
the fit companion of the prince among plainsmen.

Two days out from Taos, both were surprised to find themselves
confronted by four Utah Indians on the war path. They appeared
so suddenly, that the two friends were given little time to make
preparation; but, as some distance separated the parties, Kit and the
lad hastily consulted over what was best to do.

"It is you whom they are seeking," said the youth, "and your life is
worth a great deal more than mine; you have a swift horse; mount him
and dash off; perhaps they will spare me, but you cannot help me by
staying."

"Your offer is a kind one," said Carson much touched by the words of his
young friend; "but nothing in the world would induce me to leave you.
We will stick together and if we must die, why let's each take a warrior
with us."

The leading warrior sauntered toward the couple, while they were hastily
consulting together, after the manner of one who felt he was master of
the situation. A broad grin stretched across his painted face, as he
extended one hand to salute Carson, while he reached for his rifle with
the other. Just as his fingers were closing around the weapon of the
mountaineer, the latter struck him a violent blow in the face, which
sent him staggering several paces backward. The other Utahs instantly
ran forward to the help of their comrade.

When they were within a few rods, Carson brought his gun to his shoulder
and peremptorily ordered them to halt. They hesitated, as if uncertain
what to do, when he told them that if they advanced another step or made
any hostile demonstration, both he and his companion would fire. They
would be sure of hitting two of the warriors, when it would become
something like an even fight, with two on each side, and with the
prospect that the red men might suffer still further.

But the Indians were not to be bluffed in such an easy fashion. They
brandished their guns, shook powder in the pans and talked boastingly of
what they meant to do. They were double the number of their enemies and
they would teach them how brave Utah warriors were.

Neither Carson nor the lad was disturbed by these demonstrations, which
meant to intimidate them. The mountaineer whispered to his brave young
companion to keep on his guard against any sudden rush or demonstration.
But the lad scarcely needed the warning. He was as alert and vigilant
as his friend. Had the red men attempted anything hostile, the two would
have fired instantly and then drawn their pistols and been ready for the
others.

The Utahs finally saw it was useless to attempt to bluff the man and
boy, and they rode away without offering them the least harm. Carson and
his young companion instantly resumed their journey, still watchful
and alert; but they reached Bent's Fort without molestation, and the
dangerous venture was over.



CHAPTER XXII.


 Kit Carson Hears Surprising News--He Visits Fremont--Is Re-engaged as
 Guide--Fremont's Account of his Visit to Salt Lake.

Kit Carson was astonished on reaching Bent's Fort to learn that
Lieutenant Fremont had gone by on his second exploring expedition but a
few days before. Carson felt a strong attachment for his old leader
and galloped nearly a hundred miles to overtake him. Fremont gave
the mountaineer most cordial greeting and insisted so strongly on his
accompanying him that Carson could not refuse.

The object of Fremont's second exploration was to connect the survey of
the previous year with those of Commander Wilkes on the Pacific coast.
The first objective point was the Great Salt Lake of Utah, of which very
little was known at that time.

Carson was sent back to the fort to procure a number of mules. He did as
directed and rejoined Fremont at St. Vrain's Fort. The region traversed
by these explorers is so well known today that it is hard to realize
what a terra incognita it was but a short time since. Perhaps it will
be most instructive at this point to quote the words of the great
Pathfinder himself. The party arrived on the 21st of August on the
Bear River, one of the principal tributaries of Great Salt Lake. The
narrative of Fremont proceeds:

"We were now entering a region, which for us possessed a strange and
extraordinary interest. We were upon the waters of the famous lake which
forms a salient point among the remarkable geographical features of the
country, and around which the vague and superstitious accounts of
the trappers had thrown a delightful obscurity, which we anticipated
pleasure in dispelling, but which, in the meantime, left a crowded field
for the exercise of our imagination.

"In our occasional conversations with the few old hunters who had
visited the region, it had been a subject of frequent speculation; and
the wonders which they related were not the less agreeable because they
were highly exaggerated and impossible.

"Hitherto this lake had been seen only by trappers, who were wandering
through the country in search of new beaver streams, caring very little
for geography; its islands had never been visited; and none were to
be found who had entirely made the circuit of its shores, and no
instrumental observations, or geographical survey of any description,
had ever been made anywhere in the neighboring region. It was generally
supposed that it had no visible outlet; but, among the trappers,
including those in my own camp, were many who believed that somewhere
on its surface was a terrible whirlpool, through which its waters found
their way to the ocean by some subterranean communication. All these
things had been made a frequent subject of discussion in our desultory
conversations around the fires at night; and my own mind had become
tolerably well filled with their indefinite pictures, and insensibly
colored with their romantic descriptions, which, in the pleasure
of excitement, I was well disposed to believe, and half expected to
realize.

"In about six miles' travel from our encampment we reached one of the
points in our journey to which we had always looked forward with great
interest--the famous Beer Springs, which, on account of the effervescing
gas and acid taste, had received their name from the voyageurs and
trappers of the country, who, in the midst of their rude and hard lives,
are fond of finding some fancied resemblance to the luxuries they rarely
have the good fortune to enjoy.

"Although somewhat disappointed in the expectations which various
descriptions had led me to form of unusual beauty of situation and
scenery, I found it altogether a place of very great interest; and a
traveller for the first time in a volcanic region remains in a constant
excitement, and at every step is arrested by something remarkable and
new. There is a confusion of interesting objects gathered together in
a small space. Around the place of encampment the Beer Springs were
numerous but, as far as we could ascertain, were entirely confined to
that locality in the bottom. In the bed of the river in front, for
a space of several hundred yards, they were very abundant; the
effervescing gas rising up and agitating the water in countless bubbling
