reply a paddler held up a large bunch of fish.

"Just as I thought. Like enough there are a dozen of them there,"
said Peter.

On reaching the shore the men sprang out, taking their fish with
them. The canoe was fastened by its head-rope to the bushes, and the
Indians moved a short distance inland.

"There is their smoke," Peter said, indicating a point some thirty
feet from the lake, but so slight was it that, even when it was
pointed out to him, Harold could hardly make out the light mist
rising from among the bushes. Presently he looked round for the
Seneca, but the Indian had disappeared.

"He's gone scouting," Peter said in answer to Harold's question. "Ef
there are only four of them it would be an easy job, but I expect
there's more of the red varmints there."

In ten minutes the Seneca returned as noiselessly as he had gone. He
opened his hand and all the fingers twice; the third time he showed
only three fingers.

"Thirteen," Peter said. "Too many of them even for a sudden
onslaught."

The Indian said a few words to Peter; the latter nodded, and Deer
Tail again quietly stole away.

"He's going to steal the boat," Peter said. "It's a risky job, for
where it lies it can be seen by 'em as they sit. Now, you and me must
be ready with our shooting irons to cover him, if need be. Ef he's
found out before he gets the boat he'll take to the woods and lead
them away from us; but ef he's fairly in the boat, then we must do
our best for him. Ef the wust comes to the wust, I reckon we can hold
these bushes agin 'em for some time; but in the end I don't disguise
from ye, youngster, they'll beat us."

Harold now sat intently watching the canoe. It seemed an age to him
before he saw a hand emerge from the bushes and take hold of the
head-rope. The motion given to the canoe was so slight as to be
almost imperceptible; it seemed as if it was only drifting gently
before the slight breeze which was creeping over the surface of the
lake. Half its length had disappeared from the open space, when an
Indian appeared by the edge of the water. He looked at the canoe,
looked over the lake, and withdrew again. The hand had disappeared in
the bushes on his approach. The movement of the canoe, slight as it
was, had caught his eye, but, satisfied that it was caused only by
the wind, he had returned to his fire again. The hand appeared again
through the bushes, and the canoe was drawn along until hidden from
the sight of those sitting by the fire. Again the watchful Indian
appeared, but the boat was lying quietly by the bushes at the full
length of its head-rope. He stooped down to see that this was
securely fastened and again retired. Harold held his breath,
expecting that every moment the presence of the Seneca would be
discovered. Scarcely had the Indian disappeared than the Seneca
crawled out from the bushes. With a sweep of his knife he cut the
rope of the canoe and noiselessly entered it, and as he did so gave a
shove with his foot, which sent it dancing along the shore toward the
spot where Harold and his companion were hidden. Then he seized the
paddle, and in half a dozen strokes brought it within reach of them.
Harold and Peter stepped into it; as they did so there was a sudden
shout. The Indian had again strolled down to look at the canoe, whose
movements, slight as they had been, had appeared suspicious to him.
He now, to his astonishment, saw it at the point with two white men
and an Indian on board. He had left his gun behind him and, uttering
his war-cry, bounded back for it.

"Round the p'int, quick!" Peter exclaimed. "They'll riddle us in the
open."

Two strokes took the canoe round the projecting point of bushes, and
she then darted along the shore, driven by the greatest efforts of
which the three paddlers were capable. Had the shore been open the
Indians would have gained upon them, but they were unable to force
their way through the thick bushes at anything like the rate at which
the canoe was flying over the water. The first start was upward of a
hundred yards, and this was increased by fifty before the Indians,
arriving at the point, opened fire. The distance was beyond anything
like an accurate range with Indian guns. Several bullets struck the
water round the canoe.

"Now steer out," Peter said as the firing suddenly ceased. "They're
making a _detour_ among the bushes, and 'll come down ahead of us if
we keep near the shore."

Two or three more shots were fired, but without effect, and the canoe
soon left the shore far behind.

"Now," Peter said, "I think we're safe. It's not likely they've
another canoe anywhere near on this side, as most of 'em would have
gone with the expedition. Ef the firing has been heard it will not
attract much attention, being on this side, and I see nothing in the
way of a boat out in the lake. Still, these redskins' eyes can see
'most any distance. Now, chief," he went on to the Indian in his
native language, "the young un and I'll lie down at the bottom of the
boat; do you paddle quietly and easily, as ef you were fishing. The
canoe with a single Indian in it will excite no suspicion, and even
ef you see other canoes, you had better keep on in that way unless
you see that any of 'em are intending to overhaul you."

The chief nodded assent. Peter and Harold stretched themselves at
full length in the canoe, and the Indian paddled quietly and steadily
on. For an hour not a word was spoken in the canoe. Harold several
times dozed off to sleep. At last the Seneca spoke:

"Many boats out on water--American army."

Harold was about to raise his head to look out when Peter exclaimed:
"Lie close, Harold! Ef a head were shown now it would be wuss than ef
we had sat up all the time. We know there are Injun canoes with the
flats, and they may be watching us now. We may be a long way off, but
there's no saying how far a redskin's eyes can carry. Can you see
where they are going to, chief?" he asked the Seneca. "Are they
heading for Isle-aux-Noix, as we heard 'em say they were going to
do?"

The Seneca nodded.

"Going to island."

"Then," Peter said, "the sooner we're across the lake the better."

The Seneca again spoke, and after a consultation with Peter laid in
his paddle.

"What is he doing now?" Harold asked.

"Our course lies pretty near the same way as theirs," Peter said.
"The island is but a short distance from the shore, near the mouth of
the Sorrel, so where we're going would take us right across their
line. We fooled them yesterday, but are not likely to do it again
to-day. So the chief has stopped paddling and makes as if he were
fishing. I doubt whether it will succeed, for he would hardly be
fishing so far out. But we'll soon see. It's better so than to turn
and paddle in any other direction, as that would be sure to excite
their suspicions."

The fleet of boats had already passed the spot where the canoe would
have crossed had she been going directly across the lake when she was
first seen, and was therefore now ahead of it. The great flotilla
kept on as if the canoe with its single occupant in its rear had not
excited suspicion. The Seneca, however, knew that sharp eyes must be
upon him. The manner in which the canoe had baffled pursuit the day
before must have inflicted a severe blow upon the pride of the
Indians, and although, having driven them off the lake, they could
have no reason for suspecting that their foes could have obtained a
fresh canoe, the Seneca knew that their vigilance would not sleep for
a moment. Therefore, although bending over the side of the canoe as
if watching his lines, his eyes were never off the boats.

"There are canoes making for the shore both ways," he said at last.
"It is time that my white brother should take the paddle."

Peter and Harold at once sat up in the boat and looked round the
lake, which at this point was about ten miles wide. The canoe was
four miles from the eastern side; the flotilla was a mile further up
the lake and the same distance nearer to the western shore. Four or
five canoes were detaching themselves from the flotilla, apparently
rowing direct for the shore. It would have been easy for the canoe to
have regained the eastern side long before she could have been cut
off, but here they might find the Chippewas. The Indians whose boat
they had taken would assuredly follow along the shores of the lake in
hopes that something might occur to drive them back. Besides, had
they landed there, they would be unable to carry in time the news of
the approaching attack upon St. John's. For the same reason it was
important to land up the lake near the Canadian end.

Peter rapidly took in the situation. He saw that it was possible, and
only just possible, to reach the shore at a point opposite to that at
which they now were before the hostile canoes could cut them off from
it. If they headed them there they would be obliged to run down to
the other end of the lake before effecting a landing, while he could
not calculate on being able to beat all the canoes, most of which
carried four paddlers, who would strain every nerve to retrieve their
failure of the previous day.

Not a word was spoken as the boat darted through the water. Harold,
unaccustomed to judge distances, could form no idea whether the
distant canoes would or would not intercept them. At present both
seemed to him to be running toward the shore on nearly parallel
courses, and the shorter distance that the Indians would have to row
seemed to place them far ahead. The courses, however, were not
parallel, as the Indians were gradually turning their canoes to
intercept the course of that which they were pursuing. As the minutes
went by and the boats converged more and more toward the same point,
Harold saw how close the race would be. After twenty minutes' hard
paddling the boats were within a quarter of a mile of each other, and
the courses which they were respectively taking seemed likely to
bring them together at about a quarter of a mile from the shore.
There were three Indian canoes, and these kept well together. So
close did the race appear that Harold expected every moment to see
Peter sweep the head of the canoe round and make a stern chase of it
by running down the lake. This Peter had no intention of doing. The
canoes, he saw, traveled as fast as his own and could each spare a
man to fire occasionally, while he and his companions would be
obliged to continue paddling. Better accustomed to judge distances
than Harold, he was sure, at the speed at which they were going, he
would be able to pass somewhat ahead of his foes.

"Row all you know, Harold," he said. "Now, chief, send her along."

Harold had been rowing to the utmost of his strength, but he felt by
the way the canoe quivered at every stroke that his companions were
only now putting out their extreme strength. The boat seemed to fly
through the water, and he began to think for the first time that the
canoe would pass ahead of their pursuers. The latter were clearly
also conscious of the fact, for they now turned their boats' heads
more toward the shore, so that the spot where the lines would meet
would be close to the shore itself. The canoes were now within two
hundred yards of each other. The Indians were nearer to the shore,
but the oblique line that they were following would give them about
an equal distance to row to the point for which both were making.
Harold could not see that there was the slightest difference in the
rate at which they were traveling. It seemed to him that the four
canoes would all arrive precisely at the same moment at the land,
which was now some five or six hundred yards distant.

Another two minutes' paddling, and when the canoes were but seventy
or eighty yards apart, Peter, with a sweep with his paddle, turned
the boat's head nearly half round and made obliquely for the shore,
so throwing his pursuers almost astern of him. The shore was but
three hundred yards distant; they were but fifty ahead of their
pursuers. The latter gave a loud yell at seeing the change in the
position in the chase. They had, of course, foreseen the possibility
of such a movement, but had been powerless to prevent it. But they
were prepared, for on the instant one man in each canoe dropped his
paddle and, standing up, fired. It is a difficult thing to take aim
when standing in a canoe dancing under the vigorous strokes of three
paddlers. It was the more difficult since the canoes were at the
moment sweeping round to follow the movement of the chase. The three
balls whistled closely round the canoe, but no one was hit.

The loss of three paddlers for even so short a time checked the pace
of the canoes. The Indians saw that they could not hope to overtake
their foes, whose canoe was now but a few lengths from shore. They
dropped their paddles, and each man seized his rifle. Another moment,
and the nine pieces would have poured their fire into the canoe about
fifty yards ahead of them, when from the bushes on the shore three
puffs of smoke shot out, and three of the Indians fell, one of them
upsetting his boat in his fall. A yell of surprise and dismay broke
from them, the guns were thrown down, the paddles grasped again, and
the heads of the canoes turned from the shore. The Indians in the
overturned boat did not wait to right it, but scrambled into the
other canoes, and both were soon paddling at the top of their speed
from the shore, not without further damage, for the guns in the
bushes again spoke out, and Peter and the Seneca added their fire the
instant they leaped from the boat to shore, and another of the
Indians was seen to fall. Harold was too breathless when he reached
the bank to be able to fire. He raised his gun, but his hands
trembled with the exertion that he had undergone, and the beating of
his heart and his short, panting breath rendered it impossible for
him to take a steady aim. A minute later Jake burst his way through
the bushes.

"Ah, Massa Harold!" he exclaimed. "Bress de Lord dat we was here!
What a fright you hab giben me, to be sure! We hab been watching you
for a long time. Ephraim and de redskin dey say dey saw little spot
far out on lake, behind all dose boats; den dey say other boats set
off in chase. For a long time Jake see nothing about dat, but at last
he see dem. Den we hurry along de shore, so as to get near de place
to where de boats row; ebery moment me tink dat dey catch you up.
Ephraim say no, bery close thing, but he tink you come along first,
but dat we must shoot when dey come close. We stand watch for some
time, den Ephraim say dat you no able to get to dat point. You hab to
turn along de shore, so we change our place and run along, and sure
'nough de boat's head turns, and you come along in front of us. Den
we all shoot, and the redskins dey tumble over."

"Well, Jake, it is fortunate indeed that you were on the spot, for
they could scarcely have missed all of us. Besides, even if we had
got to shore safely, they would have followed us, and the odds
against us would have been heavy."

"That ar war a close shave, Peter," Ephraim said; "an all-fired close
shave I call it."

"It war, Ephraim, and no mistake."

"Why didn't yer head down along the lake?"

"Because I got news that the colonists air going to attack St. John's
to-morrow, and I want to get to the fort in time to put 'em on their
guard. Besides, both sides of the lake are sure to be full of hostile
Injuns. Those canoes paddled as fast as we did, and in the long run
might have worn us out."

"Did you have a fight on the lake two nights ago? Me and the redskin
thought we heard firing."

"We had a skirmish with 'em," Peter said; "a pretty sharp shave it
war, too, but we managed to slip away from them. Altogether we've had
some mighty close work, I can tell yer, and I thought more than once
as we were going to be wiped out."

While they were speaking the men had already started at a steady pace
through the woods, away from the lake, having first drawn up the
canoe and carefully concealed it.

It was late at night when they reached Fort St. John. A message was
at once dispatched to a party of the Senecas who were at their
village, about sixteen miles away. They arrived in the morning and,
together with a portion of the garrison, moved out and took their
place in the wooded and marshy ground between the fort and the river.
Scouts were sent along the Sorrel, and these returned about one
o'clock, saying that a large number of boats were coming down the
lake from Isle-aux-Noix. It had been determined to allow the
colonists to land without resistance, as the commander of the fort
felt no doubt of his ability, with the assistance of his Indian
allies, to repulse their attack. Some twelve hundred men were landed,
and these at once began to advance toward the fort, lead by their two
generals, Schuyler and Montgomery. Scarcely had they entered the
swamp, when from every bush a fire was opened upon them. The invaders
were staggered, but pushed forward, in a weak and undecided way, as
far as a creek which intercepted their path. In vain General
Montgomery endeavored to encourage them to advance. They wavered and
soon began to fall back, and in an hour from the time of their
landing they were again gathered on the bank of the river. Here they
threw up a breastwork, and, as his numbers were greatly inferior, the
British officer in command thought it unadvisable to attack them.
After nightfall the colonists took to their boats and returned to
Isle-aux-Noix, their loss in this their first attempt at the invasion
of Canada being nine men.

A day or two later the Indians again attempted to induce General
Carleton to permit them to cross the frontier and carry the war into
the American settlements, and upon the general's renewed refusal they
left the camp in anger and remained from that time altogether aloof
from the contest.

St. John's was now left with only its own small garrison. Captain
Wilson was ordered to fall back with his company to Montreal, it
being considered that the garrison of St. John's was sufficient to
defend that place for a considerable time. As soon as the Indians had
marched away, having sent word to the colonists that they should take
no further part in the fight, Montgomery--who was now in command,
Schuyler having fallen sick--landed the whole of the force and
invested the fort. An American officer, Ethan Allen, had been sent
with a party to try to raise the colonists in rebellion in the
neighborhood of Chamblee. He had with him 30 Americans and was joined
by 80 Canadians. Dazzled by the success which had attended the
surprise of Ticonderoga, he thought to repeat the stroke by the
conquest of Montreal. He crossed the river in the night about three
miles below the city. Peter and some other scouts, who had been
watching his movements, crossed higher up and brought the news, and
36 men of the Twenty-sixth Regiment, Captain Wilson's company, and
200 or 300 loyal Canadians, the whole under the command of Major
Campbell, attacked Ethan Allen. He was speedily routed and, with 38
of his men, taken prisoner. The siege of St. John's made but little
progress. The place was well provisioned, and the Americans encamped
in the low, swampy ground around it suffered much from ill health.
The men were mutinous and insolent, the officers incapable and
disobedient. So far the invasion of Canada, of which such great
things had been hoped by the Americans, appeared likely to turn out a
complete failure.




CHAPTER VIII.


QUEBEC.

General Carleton, seeing that Montgomery's whole force was retained
idle before St. John's, began to hope that the winter would come to
his assistance before the invaders had made any serious progress.
Unfortunately he had not reckoned on the utter incapacity of the officer
in command of Fort Chamblee. Major Stopford of the Seventh Regiment had
160 men and a few artillerymen, and the fort was strong and well
provided with provisions. American spies had found the inhabitants
around the place favorable to the Americans. Major Brown was sent down
by Montgomery with a small detachment, and, being joined by the
inhabitants, sat down before the fort. They had only two six-pounders,
and could have effected nothing had the fort been commanded by a man of
bravery and resources. Such was not the character of its commander, who,
after a siege of only a day and a half, surrendered the place with all
its stores, which were of inestimable value to the invaders, who were
upon the edge of giving up the siege of the fort; their ammunition being
entirely exhausted; but the six tons of gunpowder, the seventeen cannon,
mortars, and muskets which fell into their hands enabled them to carry
on the siege of St. John's with renewed vigor. There was no excuse
whatever for the conduct of Major Stopford in allowing these stores to
fall into the hands of the Americans; as, even had he not possessed the
courage to defend the fort, he might, before surrendering, have thrown
the whole of the ammunition into the river, upon which there was a safe
sally-port, where he could have carried on the operation entirely
unmolested by the enemy. The colors of the Seventh Regiment were
captured and sent to Congress as the first trophy of the war.
