"I shan't need to sell them now," he said. "We'll use a part of them
ourselves, and what we can't use I will give away."

He carefully stored away the money in his coat pocket, and for the sake
of security buttoned it tight. It was a new thing for him to be the
custodian of so much treasure. As Halbert Davis usually spent the latter
part of the afternoon in promenading the streets, sporting his kids and
swinging his jaunty cane, it was not surprising that Robert encountered
him again.

"So, you've been berrying again?" he said, stopping short.

"Yes," said Robert, briefly.

"You haven't got the boat repaired, I suppose."

"Not yet."

"It's lucky for you this is berrying season."

"Why?"

"Because you'd probably have to go to the poorhouse," said Halbert,
insolently.

"I don't know about that," said Robert, coolly. "I rather think I could
buy you out, Halbert Davis, watch, gloves, cane and all."

"What do you mean?" demanded Halbert, haughtily. "You seem to forget
that you are a beggar, or next to it."

Robert set down his pails, and, opening his coat, drew out a handful of
bills.

"Does that look like going to the almshouse?" he said.

"They're not yours," returned Halbert, considerably astonished, for,
though he did not know the denomination of the bills, it was evident
that there was a considerable amount of money.

"It belongs to me, every dollar of it," returned Robert.

"I don't believe it. Where did you get it? Picking berries, I suppose,"
he added, with a sneer.

"It makes no difference to you where I got it," said our hero, returning
the money to his pocket. "I shan't go to the almshouse till this I is
all gone."

"He must have stolen it," muttered Halbert, looking after Robert with
disappointment and chagrin. It was certainly very vexatious that, in
spite of all his attempts to humble and ruin our hero, he seemed more
prosperous than ever.




CHAPTER XVIII.


A VISIT TO THE LAWYER.

Mrs. Rushton was braiding straw when Robert entered with his berries.

"Couldn't you sell your berries, Robert?" she asked.

"I haven't tried yet, mother."

"The berrying season won't last much longer," said his mother,
despondently.

"Don't borrow trouble, mother. I am sure we shall get along well."

"You feel more confidence than I do."

"I just met Halbert Davis in the street."

"Have you made up with him?"

"It is for him to make up with me."

"I am afraid you are too high-spirited, Robert. Did Halbert speak to
you?"

"Oh, yes," said Robert, laughing. "He takes a great interest in my
affairs. He predicts that we shall come to the poorhouse yet."

"He may be right."

"Now, mother, don't be so desponding. We've got enough money to pay our
expenses for more than a year, even if we both stop work."

"What can you mean, Robert?" said his mother, looking up in surprise.
"You must be crazy."

"Does that look like going to the poorhouse?" asked Robert, drawing out
his money.

Mrs. Rushton uttered an exclamation of surprise.

"Whose money is that, Robert?"

"Mine!"

"You haven't done anything wrong?"

"No, mother; I thought you knew me too well for that. I see you are
anxious to hear how I obtained it, so I'll tell you all about it."

He sat down, and in brief words told his mother the story of the train
and its peril, how he had rescued it, and, lastly, of the generous gift
which he had so unexpectedly received. The mother's heart was touched,
and she forgot all her forebodings.

"My son, I am proud of you," she said, her eyes moist. "You have done a
noble deed, and you deserve the reward. But what a risk you ran!"

"I know it, mother, but we won't think of that, now that it is over. How
much, money do you think I have here?"

"Two or three hundred dollars."

"Six hundred and thirty-five! So you see, mother, we needn't go to the
poorhouse just yet. Now, how much better off should I have been if I had
kept my place in the factory? It would have taken me more than two years
to earn as much money as this. But that isn't all. I have been the means
of saving a great many lives, for the train was sure to be thrown down
the embankment. I shall remember that all my life."

"We have reason to be grateful to Heaven that you have been the means of
doing so much good, Robert, while, at the same time, you have benefited
yourself."

"That is true, mother."

"I shall be afraid to have so much money in the house. If it were known,
we might be robbed."

"I will leave it with Mr. Paine until I get a chance to put it in a
savings bank. He has a safe in his office. At the same time I will carry
him some berries as a present. It won't be much, but I should like to do
it on account of his kindness about the boat. I will offer now to bear
the expense of its repair."

After washing his hands and adjusting his clothes a little, for Robert,
though no fop like Halbert, was not regardless of appearances,
especially as he thought Hester might see him, he set out for the
lawyer's office.

"Excuse my bringing in my berries," said Robert, as he entered the
office, "but I want to ask your acceptance of them."

Many persons, under the supposition that Robert was too poor to afford a
gift, would have declined it, or offered to pay for it, thinking they
were acting kindly and considerately. But Mr. Paine knew that Robert
would be mortified by such an offer, and he answered:

"Thank you, Robert; I will accept your gift with thanks on one
condition."

"What is it, Mr. Paine?" inquired our hero, a little puzzled.

"That you will take tea with us to-morrow evening, and help us do
justice to them."

"Thank you," said Robert, not a little pleased at the invitation, "but I
shouldn't like to leave my mother at home alone."

"Oh, we must have your mother, too. Hester will call this evening, and
invite her."

"Then," said Robert, "I can answer for myself, and I think for her, that
we should both be very happy to come."

The lawyer's social position made such an invitation particularly
gratifying to Robert. Besides, he was led to value it more on account of
the persistent efforts of Halbert to injure him in the general
estimation. Then, too, it was pleasant to think that he was to sit down
to the same table with Hester, as her father's guest, and to receive a
call from her at his own house. Nothing that Mr. Paine could have done
would have afforded him an equal amount of gratification.

"There is one other matter I wanted to speak to you about, Mr. Paine,"
he said. "Will you take care of some money for me until I get a chance
to deposit it in the savings bank?"

"Certainly, Robert," was the reply, but the lawyer's manner showed some
surprise. He knew the circumstances of the Rushtons, and he had not
supposed they had any money on hand. "How much is it?"

"Six hundred and thirty-five dollars," answered Robert, producing it.
"Will you count it, and see if it is all right?"

"Is this your money?" asked the lawyer, laying down his pen and gazing
at Robert in astonishment.

"Yes, sir," said Robert, enjoying his surprise. "I will tell you how I
got it."

So the story was told, with a modest reserve as to his own courage, but
still showing, without his intending it, how nobly he had behaved.

"Give me your hand, Robert," said Mr. Paine, cordially. "You have shown
yourself a hero. We shall be proud of your company to tea to-morrow
evening."

Robert flushed with gratification at the high compliment conveyed in
these words.

What did he care then for Halbert Davis and his petty malice! He had the
approval of his own conscience, the good opinion of those whom he most
respected and a provision against want sufficient to avert all present
anxiety.

"There is one thing more, Mr. Paine," he added. "It's about the boat
Will was kind enough to lend me."

"Have you seen the carpenter about repairing it?"

"Yes, sir, and he will attend to it as soon as he can spare the time.
But that was not what I wanted to say. I think I ought to bear the
expense of repairing it. I would have spoken about it at first, but then
I had no money, and didn't know when I should have any. Will you be kind
enough to take as much of my money as will be needed to pay Mr. Plane's
bill when it comes in?"

"Certainly not, Robert. It was not your fault that the boat was
injured."

"It wouldn't have happened if I had not borrowed it. It isn't right that
the expense should fall on you."

"Don't trouble yourself about that, Robert. I am able and willing to pay
it. It is very honorable in you to make the offer, and I like you the
better for having made it. Won't you need any of this money for present
expenses?"

"Perhaps I had better take the thirty-five dollars. Mother may be in
want of something."

Robert received back the sum named, and returned home, much pleased with
his interview.

About seven o'clock, sitting at the window of the little cottage, he saw
Hester Paine opening the front gate. He sprang to his feet and opened
the door.

"Good-evening, Robert," she said. "Is your mother at home?"

"Yes, Hester. Won't you come in?"

"Thank you, Robert. Father has been telling me what a hero you were, and
it made me feel proud that you were a friend of mine."

Robert's face lighted with pleasure.

"You compliment me more than I deserve," he answered, modestly; "but it
gives me great pleasure to know that you think well of me."

"I am sure that there is no boy in Millville that would have dared to do
such a thing. Good-evening, Mrs. Rushton. Are you not proud of your
son?"

"He is a good son to me," said Mrs. Rushton, with a glance of affection.

"It is such a splendid thing he did. He will be quite a hero. Indeed, he
is one already. I've got a New York paper giving an account of the
whole thing. I brought it over, thinking you might like to read it."

She displayed a copy of a great city daily, in which full justice was
done to Robert's bravery. Our hero listened with modest pleasure while
it was being read.

"I don't deserve all that," he said.

"You must let us judge of that," said Hester. "But I have come this
evening, Mrs. Rushton, to ask you to take tea with us to-morrow evening,
you and Robert. You will come, won't you?"

Mrs. Rushton was pleased with this mark of attention, and after a slight
demur, accepted.

I do not intend to give an account of the next evening, and how Robert,
in particular, enjoyed it. That can be imagined, as well as Halbert's
chagrin when he heard of the attention his rival was receiving in a
quarter where he himself so earnestly desired to stand well. I must pass
on to a communication received by Mrs. Rushton, a communication of a
very unexpected character, which had an important effect upon the
fortunes of our hero.




CHAPTER XIX.


THE MESSAGE FROM THE SEA.

It was not often that Mrs. Rushton received a letter. Neither she nor
her husband had possessed many relatives, and such as either had were
occupied with their own families, and little communication passed
between them and Captain Rushton's family. Robert, therefore, seldom
called at the post office. One day, however, as he stepped in by a
neighbor's request to inquire for letters for the latter, the postmaster
said, "There's a letter for your mother, Robert."

"Is there?" said our hero, surprised, "When did it come?"

"Yesterday. I was going to ask some one to carry it round to her, as you
don't often call here."

He handed the letter to Robert, who surveyed it with curiosity. It was
postmarked "Boston," and addressed in a bold business hand to "Mrs.
Captain Rushton, Millville."

"Who can be writing to mother from Boston?" thought Robert.

The size of the letter also excited his curiosity. There were two stamps
upon it, and it appeared bulky. Robert hurried home, and rushed into the
kitchen where his mother was at work.

"Here's a letter for you, mother," he said.

"A letter for me!" repeated Mrs. Rushton.

"From Boston."

"I don't know who would be likely to write me from there. Open it for
me, Robert."

He tore open the envelope. It contained two inclosures--one a letter in
the same handwriting as the address; the other a large sheet of foolscap
rumpled up, and appearing once to have been rolled up, was written in
pencil. Mrs. Rushton had no sooner looked at the latter than she
exclaimed, in agitation: "Robert, it is your father's handwriting. Read
it to me, I am too agitated to make it out."

Robert was equally excited. Was his father still alive, or was this
letter a communication from the dead?

"First let me read the other," he said. "It will explain about this."

His mother sank back into a chair too weak with agitation to stand,
while her son rapidly read the following letter:

                             "BOSTON, August 15, 1853.

  MRS. RUSHTON, DEAR MADAM: The fate
  of our ship _Norman_, which left this port now
  more than two years since, under the command
  of your husband, has until now been veiled
  in uncertainty. We had given up all hopes
  of obtaining any light upon the circumstances
  of its loss, when by a singular chance information
  was brought us yesterday. The ship
  _Argo_, while in the South Pacific, picked up
  a bottle floating upon the surface of the water.
  On opening it, it was found to contain two
  communications, one addressed to us, the other
  to you, the latter to be forwarded to you by
  us. Ours contains the particulars of the loss
  of the _Norman_, and doubtless your own letter
  also contains the same particulars. There
  is a bare possibility that your husband is still
  alive, but as so long a period has passed since
  the letters were written it would not be well
  to place too much confidence in such a hope.
  But even if Captain Rushton is dead, it will be
  a sad satisfaction to you to receive from him
  this last communication, and learn the particulars
  of his loss. We lose no time in forwarding
  to you the letter referred to, and remain,
  with much sympathy, yours respectfully,

                              WINSLOW & CO."

Mrs. Rushton listened to this letter with eager and painful interest,
her hands clasped, and her eyes fixed upon Robert.

"Now read your father's letter," she said, in a low tone.

Robert unfolded the sheet, and his eyes filled with tears as he gazed
upon the well-known handwriting of the father whose loss he had so long
lamented. This letter, too, we transcribe:

                             "November 7, 1851.

  MY DEAR WIFE AND SON: Whether these
  lines will ever meet your eyes I know not.
  Whether I will be permitted again to look upon
  your dear faces, I also am ignorant. The good
  ship _Norman_, in which I sailed from Boston
  not quite three months ago, is burned to the water's
  edge, and I find myself, with five of the
  sailors, afloat on the vast sea at the mercy of
  the elements, and with a limited supply of food.
  The chances are against our ever seeing land.
  Hundreds of miles away from any known
  shores, our only hope of safety is in attracting
  the attention of some vessel. In the broad pathways
  of the ocean such a chance is doubtful.
  Fortunately I have a few sheets of paper
  and a pencil with me, and I write these
  lines, knowing well how improbable it is that
  you will ever read them. Yet it is a satisfaction
  to do what I can to let you know the
  position in which I stand.

  But for the revengeful and malignant disposition
  of one man I should still be walking
  the deck of the _Norman_ as its captain.
  But to my story: My first mate was a man
  named Haley--Benjamin Haley--whose name
