The Project Gutenberg eBook, All Saints' Day and Other Sermons, by Charles
Kingsley, Edited by Rev. W. Harrison


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: All Saints' Day and Other Sermons

Author: Charles Kingsley

Release Date: November 17, 2003  [eBook #10116]

Language: English

Chatacter set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL SAINTS' DAY AND OTHER
SERMONS***


Credit



Transcribed by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk




ALL SAINTS' DAY AND OTHER SERMONS




      "Inheriting the zeal
And from the sanctity of elder times
Not deviating;--a priest, the like of whom
If multiplied, and in their stations set,
Would o'er the bosom of a joyful land
Spread true religion, and her genuine fruits."
The excursion--Book vi.



PREFATORY NOTE {1}



The following Sermons could not be arranged according to any proper 
sequence.  Those, however, which refer to doctrine and the Church Seasons 
will mostly be found at the beginning of the volume, whilst those which 
deal with practical subjects are placed at the close.

A few of the Sermons have already appeared in "Good Words;" but by far 
the greater number were never prepared by their author for the press.  
They were written out very roughly--sometimes at an hour's notice, as 
occasion demanded--and were only intended for delivery from the pulpit.

The original MSS. have been adhered to as closely as possible.

It is thought that many to whom the late Rector of Eversley was dear will 
welcome the publication of these earnest words, and find them helpful in 
the Christian life.

"Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth:  Yea, saith 
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do 
follow them."



SERMON I.  ALL SAINTS' DAY



Westminster Abbey.  November 1, 1874.

Revelation vii. 9-12.  "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, 
which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and 
tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white 
robes, and palms in their hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, 
Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.  
And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and 
the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and 
worshipped God, saying, Amen:  Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and 
thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever 
and ever.  Amen."

To-day is All Saints' Day.  On this day we commemorate--and, as far as 
our dull minds will let us, contemplate--the saints; the holy ones of 
God; the pure and the triumphant--be they who they may, or whence they 
may, or where they may.  We are not bidden to define and limit their 
number.  We are expressly told that they are a great multitude, which no 
man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues; 
and most blessed news that is for all who love God and man.  We are not 
told, again--and I beg you all to mark this well--that this great 
multitude consists merely of those who, according to the popular notion, 
have "gone to heaven," as it is called, simply because they have not gone 
to hell.  Not so, not so!  The great multitude whom we commemorate on All 
Saints' Day, are SAINTS.  They are the holy ones, the heroes and heroines 
of mankind, the elect, the aristocracy of grace.  These are they who have 
kept themselves unspotted from the world.  They are the pure who have 
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, which 
is the spirit of self-sacrifice.  They are those who carry the palm-
branch of triumph, who have come out of great tribulation, who have 
dared, and fought, and suffered for God, and truth, and right.  Nay, 
there are those among them, and many, thank God--weak women, too, among 
them--who have resisted unto blood, striving against sin.

And who are easy-going folk like you and me, that we should arrogate to 
ourselves a place in that grand company?  Not so!  What we should do on 
All Saints' Day is to place ourselves, with all humility, if but for an 
hour, where we can look afar off upon our betters, and see what they are 
like, and what they do.

And what are they like, those blessed beings of whom the text speaks?  
The Gospel for this day describes them to us; and we may look on that 
description as complete, for He who gives it is none other than our Lord 
Himself.  "Blessed are the poor in spirit; for their's is the kingdom of 
heaven.  Blessed are they that mourn:  for they shall be comforted.  
Blessed are the meek:  for they shall inherit the earth.  Blessed are 
they who hunger and thirst after righteousness:  for they shall be 
filled.  Blessed are the merciful:  for they shall obtain mercy.  Blessed 
are the pure in heart:  for they shall see God.  Blessed are the peace-
makers:  for they shall be called the children of God.  Blessed are they 
which are persecuted for righteousness' sake:  for their's is the kingdom 
of heaven.  Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.  
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad:  for great is your reward in heaven."

This is what they are like; and what we, I fear, too many of us, are not 
like.  But in proportion as we grow like them, by the grace of God, just 
so far shall we enter into the communion of saints, and understand the 
bliss of that everlasting All Saints' Day which St John saw in heaven.

And what do they do, those blessed beings?  Whatever else they do, or do 
not do, this we are told they do--they worship.  They satisfy, it would 
seem, in perfection, that mysterious instinct of devotion--that inborn 
craving to look upward and adore, which, let false philosophy say what it 
will, proves the most benighted idolater to be a man, and not a brute--a 
spirit, and not a merely natural thing.

They have worshipped, and so are blest.  They have hungered and thirsted 
after righteousness, and now they are filled.  They have longed for, 
toiled for, it may be died for, the true, the beautiful, and the good; 
and now they can gaze upward at the perfect reality of that which they 
saw on earth, only as in a glass darkly, dimly, and afar; and can 
contemplate the utterly free, the utterly beautiful, and the utterly good 
in the character of God and the face of Jesus Christ.  They entered while 
on earth into the mystery and the glory of self-sacrifice; and now they 
find their bliss in gazing on the one perfect and eternal sacrifice, and 
rejoicing in the thought that it is the cause and ground of the whole 
universe, even the Lamb slain before the foundation of the world.

I say not that all things are clear to them.  How can they be to any 
finite and created being?  They, and indeed angels and archangels, must 
walk for ever by faith, and not by sight.  But if there be mysteries in 
the universe still hidden from them, they know who has opened the sealed 
book of God's secret counsels, even the Lamb who is the Lion, and the 
Lion who is the Lamb; and therefore, if all things are not clear to them, 
all things at least are bright, for they can trust that Lamb and His 
self-sacrifice.  In Him, and through Him, light will conquer darkness, 
justice injustice, truth ignorance, order disorder, love hate, till God 
be all in all, and pain and sorrow and evil shall have been exterminated 
out of a world for which Christ stooped to die.  Therefore they worship; 
and the very act of worship--understand it well--is that great reward in 
heaven which our Lord promised them.  Adoration is their very bliss and 
life.  It must be so.  For what keener, what nobler enjoyment for 
rational and moral beings, than satisfaction with, and admiration of, a 
Being better than themselves?  Therefore they worship; and their worship 
finds a natural vent in words most fit though few, but all expressing 
utter trust and utter satisfaction in the worthiness of God.  Therefore 
they worship; and by worship enter into communion and harmony not only 
with each other, not only with angels and archangels, but with all the 
powers of nature, the four beings which are around the throne, and with 
every creature which is in heaven and in earth, and under the earth, and 
in the sea.  For them, likewise, St John heard saying, "Blessing and 
glory, and honour, and power, be unto Him that sitteth on the throne, and 
to the Lamb for ever and ever."

And why?  I think, with all humility, that the key to all these hymns--
whether of angels or of men, or of mere natural things--is the first hymn 
of all; the hymn which shows that, however grateful to God for what He 
has done for them those are whom the Lamb has redeemed by His blood to 
God, out of every kindred, and nation, and tongue; yet, nevertheless, the 
hymn of hymns is that which speaks not of gratitude, but of absolute 
moral admiration--the hymn which glorifies God, not for that which He is 
to man, not for that which He is to the universe, but for that which He 
is absolutely and in Himself--that which He was before all worlds, and 
would be still, though the whole universe, all created things, and time, 
and space, and matter, and every created spirit likewise, should be 
annihilated for ever.  And what is that?

"Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come."

Ah! what a Gospel lies within those words!  A Gospel?  Ay, if you will 
receive it, the root of all other possible Gospels, and good news for all 
created beings.  What a Gospel! and what an everlasting fount of comfort!  
Surely of those words it is true, "blessed are they who, going through 
the vale of misery, find therein a well, and the pools are filled with 
water."  Know you not what I mean?  Happier, perhaps, are you--the young 
at least among you--if you do not know.  But some of you must know too 
well.  It is to them I speak.  Were you never not merely puzzled--all 
thinking men are that--but crushed and sickened at moments by the mystery 
of evil?  Sickened by the follies, the failures, the ferocities, the 
foulnesses of mankind, for ages upon ages past?  Sickened by the sins of 
the unholy many--sickened, alas! by the imperfections even of the holiest 
few?  And have you never cried in your hearts with longing, almost with 
impatience, Surely, surely, there is an ideal Holy One somewhere, or else 
how could have arisen in my mind the conception, however faint, of an 
ideal holiness?  But where, oh where?  Not in the world around, strewed 
with unholiness.  Not in myself--unholy too, without and within--seeming 
to myself sometimes the very worst company of all the bad company I meet, 
because it is the only bad company from which I cannot escape.  Oh, is 
there a Holy One, whom I may contemplate with utter delight? and if so, 
where is He?  Oh, that I might behold, if but for a moment, His perfect 
beauty, even though, as in the fable of Semele of old, the lightning of 
His glance were death.  Nay, more, has it not happened to some here--to 
clergyman, lawyer, physician, perhaps, alas! to some pure-minded, noble-
hearted woman--to be brought in contact perforce with that which truly 
sickens them--with some case of human folly, baseness, foulness--which, 
however much their soul revolts from it, they must handle, they must toil 
over many weeks and months, in hope that that which is crooked may be 
made somewhat straight, till their whole soul was distempered, all but 
degraded, by the continual sight of sin, till their eyes seemed full of 
nothing but the dance of death, and their ears of the gibbering of 
madmen, and their nostrils with the odours of the charnel house, and they 
longed for one breath of pure air, one gleam of pure light, one strain of 
pure music, to wash their spirits clean from those foul elements into 
which their duty had thrust them down perforce?

And then, oh then, has there not come to such an one--I know that it has 
come--that for which his spirit was athirst, the very breath of pure air, 
the very gleam of pure light, the very strain of pure music, for it is 
the very music of the spheres, in those same words, "Holy, holy, holy, 
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come;" and he has 
answered, with a flush of keenest joy, Yes.  Whatever else is unholy, 
there is an Holy One, spotless and undefiled, serene and self-contained.  
Whatever else I cannot trust, there is One whom I can trust utterly.  
Whatever else I am dissatisfied with, there is One whom I can contemplate 
with utter satisfaction, and bathe my stained soul in that eternal fount 
of purity.  And who is He?  Who save the Cause and Maker, and Ruler of 
all things, past, present, and to come?  Ah, Gospel of all gospels, that 
God Himself, the Almighty God, is the eternal and unchangeable 
realisation of all that I and all mankind, in our purest and our noblest 
moments, have ever dreamed concerning the true, the beautiful, and the 
good.  Even though He slay me, the unholy, yet will I trust in Him.  For 
He is Holy, Holy, Holy, and can do nothing to me, or any creature, save 
what He OUGHT.  For He has created all things, and for His pleasure they 
are and were created.

Whosoever has entered, though but for a moment, however faintly, 
partially, stupidly, into that thought of thoughts, has entered in so far 
into the communion of the elect; and has had his share in the everlasting 
All Saints' Day which is in heaven.  He has been, though but for a 
moment, in harmony with the polity of the Living God, the heavenly 
Jerusalem; and with an innumerable company of angels, and the church of 
the first-born who are written in heaven; and with the spirits of just 
men made perfect, and with all past, present, and to come, in this and in 
all other worlds, of whom it is written, "Blessed are the poor in spirit:  
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  Blessed are they who hunger and 
thirst after righteousness:  for they shall be filled.  Blessed are the 
pure in heart:  for they shall see God.  Blessed are they who are 
persecuted for righteousness' sake:  for their's is the kingdom of 
heaven."  Great indeed is their reward, for it is no less than the very 
beatific vision to contemplate and adore.  That supreme moral beauty, of 
which all earthly beauty, all nature, all art, all poetry, all music, are 
but phantoms and parables, hints and hopes, dim reflected rays of the 
clear light of that everlasting day, of which it is written--that "the 
city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it:  for 
the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof."



SERMON II.  PREPARATION FOR ADVENT



Westminster Abbey.  November 15, 1874.

Amos iv. 12.  "Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel."

We read to-day, for the first lesson, parts of the prophecy of Amos.  
They are somewhat difficult, here and there, to understand; but 
nevertheless Amos is perhaps the grandest of the Hebrew prophets, next to 
Isaiah.  Rough and homely as his words are, there is a strength, a 
majesty, and a terrible earnestness in them, which it is good to listen 
to; and specially good now that Advent draws near, and we have to think 
of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and what His coming means.  
"Prepare to meet thy God," says Amos in the text.  Perhaps he will tell 
us how to meet our God.

Amos is specially the poor man's prophet, for he was a poor man himself; 
not a courtier like Isaiah, or a priest like Jeremiah, or a sage like 
Daniel; but a herdsman and a gatherer of sycamore fruit in Tekoa, near 
Bethlehem, where Amos was born.  Yet to this poor man, looking after 
sheep and cattle on the downs, and pondering on the wrongs and misery 
around, the word of the Lord came, and he knew that God had spoken to 
him, and that he must go and speak to men, at the risk of his life, what 
God had bidden, against all the nations round and their kings, and 
against the king and nobles and priests of Israel, and the king and 
nobles and priests of Judah, and tell them that the day of the Lord is at 
hand, and that they must prepare to meet their God.  And he said what he 
felt he must say with a noble freedom, with a true independence such as 
the grace of God alone can give.  Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, who was 
worshipping (absurd as it may seem to us) God and the golden calf at the 
same time in King Jeroboam's court, complained loudly, it would seem, of 
Amos's plain speaking.  How uncourteous to prophesy that Jeroboam should 
die by the sword, and Israel be carried captive out of their own land!  
Let him go home into his own land of Judah, and prophesy there; but not 
prophesy at Bethel, for it was the king's chapel and the king's court.  
Amos went, I presume, in fear of his life.  But he left noble words 
behind him.  "I was no prophet," he said to Amaziah, "nor a prophet's 
son, but a herdsman, and a gatherer of wild figs.  And the Lord took me 
as I followed the flock, and said, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel."  
And then he turned on that smooth court-priest Amaziah, and pronounced 
against him, in the name of the Lord, a curse too terrible to be repeated 
here.

Now what was the secret of this inspired herdsman's strength?  What 
helped him to face priests, nobles, and kings?  What did he believe?  
What did he preach?  He believed and preached the kingdom of God and His 
righteousness; the simple but infinite difference between right and 
wrong; and the certain doom of wrong, if wrong was persisted in.  He 
believed in the kingdom of God.  He told the kings and the people of all 
the nations round, that they had committed cruel and outrageous sins, not 
against the Jews merely, but against each other.  In the case of Moab, 
the culminating crime was an insult to the dead.  He had burned the bones 
of the king of Edom into lime.  In the case of Ammon, it was brutal 
cruelty to captive women; but in the cases of Gaza, of Tyre, and of Edom, 
it was slave-making and slave-trading invasions of Palestine.  "Thus 
saith the Lord:  For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four, I will 
not turn away the punishment thereof; because they carried away captive 
the whole captivity, to deliver them up to Edom.  But I will send a fire 
upon the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces thereof."

Yes.  Slave-hunting and slave-trading wars--that was and is an iniquity 
which the just and merciful Ruler of the earth would not, and will not, 
pardon.  And honour to those who, as in Africa of late, put down those 
foul deeds, wheresoever they are done; who, at the risk of their own 
lives, dare free the captives from their chains; and who, if interfered 
with in their pious work, dare execute on armed murderers and manstealers 
the vengeance of a righteous God.  For the Lord God was their King, and 
