Project Gutenberg's Deuteronomical Books of the Bible, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Deuteronomical Books of the Bible
       Apocrypha

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: June 12, 2008 [EBook #124]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEUTERONOMICAL BOOKS OF THE BIBLE ***




Produced by Robert Kraft









Project Gutenberg Etext of Deuterocanonical Books of the Bible,
also known as the Apocrypha, please remember that these are not
not in their final form until the last day of the stated month.
In this particular case, there has been some discussion on this
as we had no titles received with these books:  and uncertainty
was also evident about what order to present them in.



Encoded under the direction of Robert Kraft for distribution through
the Center for Computer Analysis of Texts, (CCAT), at the University
of Pennsylvania.  Robert Kraft <kraft@ccat.sas.upenn.edu>


Bob Kraft, who produced these Etexts has been VERY kind in this
and has allowed us to present them as we choose.  However, I am
short of time at the moment, and therefore am leaving them as I
had them, other than placing his suggested titles in each book,
as they appear to be more complete that what I used as I had no
titles to begin with and had to expand from abbreviations. I am
also including two suggested tables of contents, and ask that a
reader feel free to reorder their own copies as desired; please
do not repost modified copies in the name of Project Gutenberg,
as we hope to have new editions out of our own.  However, it is
always the primary goal of Project Gutenberg to get these books
out on time in a manner that is 99.9% accurate, which I hope we
will have accomplished by the end of the month.


The Project Gutenberg Etext of Deuterocanonical Books of the Bible
also known as the Apocrypha  [Book titles added as there were none
in the files we received.  One typo of Ezra to Esdr was changed as
were some of the marginations.  The books were each received as an
Etext file, and have been put here into one single file for utilty
and they are placed in an order suggested by one of our advisors--
we would be happy to post indices of other suggested orderings and
other commentaries.]


***

Here is the suggested table of contents of Bob Kraft:

[I have written out the numerals and the words "Book of" etc., for a
certain amount of internal consistency with our two previous Project
Gutenberg releases of the King James Bible which did not include the
books listed below.  The tables of contents I received for this were
inconsistent in this; I am not a Biblical scholar, and am just doing
the best I can; my sincere apologies for any errors, which with your
assistance, will be corrected by month's end.  There are also Etexts
to be made of even more Apocryphal materials, if you can help us get
them into our Electronic Public Library.   Thanks,  Michael S. Hart]


Not meant to be a complete listing of of all the books not included
in various editions of the Bible:  with your help, perhaps we can
find more.




The Books Presented Below Use These Titles


  The First Book of Esdras
  The Second Book of Esdras Esdras [sometimes Fourth Book of Ezra]
  The Book of Tobit
  The Book of Judith
  The Rest of the Chapters of the Book of Esther
  The Wisdom of Solomon
  The Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach, or Ecclesiasticus
  The Book of Baruch
  The Epistle of Jeremy [sometimes Chapter Six of Baruch]
  The Song of the Three Holy Children
  The Prayer of Azariah  [missing in one table of contents]
  The History of Susanna [in Daniel]
  The History of the Destruction of Bel and the Dragon
  The Prayer of Manasses King of Judah
  The First Book of the Maccabees
  The Second Book of the Maccabees




Here is the table of contents in the order presented below:

  The First Book of Esdras
  The Second Book of Esdras Esdras [sometimes Fourth Book of Ezra]
  The Greek Additions to Esther
  The First Book of the Maccabees
  The Second Book of the Maccabees
  The Book of Tobit
  The Book of Judith
  The Wisdom of Solomon
  The Book of Sirach (or Ecclesiasticus)
  The Book of Baruch
  The Epistle (or letter) of Jeremiah
  The Book of Susanna (in Daniel)
  The Prayer of Azariah
  The Prayer of Manasseh
  Bel and the Dragon (in Daniel)




The First Book of Esdras



1 Esdr 1:1
And Josias held the feast of the passover in Jerusalem unto his Lord,
and offered the passover the fourteenth day of the first month;

1 Esdr 1:2
Having set the priests according to their daily courses, being arrayed
in long garments, in the temple of the Lord.

1 Esdr 1:3
And he spake unto the Levites, the holy ministers of Israel, that they
should hallow themselves unto the Lord, to set the holy ark of the
Lord in the house that king Solomon the son of David had built:

1 Esdr 1:4
And said, Ye shall no more bear the ark upon your shoulders: now
therefore serve the Lord your God, and minister unto his people
Israel, and prepare you after your families and kindreds,

1 Esdr 1:5
According as David the king of Israel prescribed, and according to
the magnificence of Solomon his son: and standing in the temple
according to the several dignity of the families of you the Levites,
who minister in the presence of your brethren the children of Israel,

1 Esdr 1:6
Offer the passover in order, and make ready the sacrifices for your
brethren, and keep the passover according to the commandment of the
Lord, which was given unto Moses.

1 Esdr 1:7
And unto the people that was found there Josias gave thirty thousand
lambs and kids, and three thousand calves: these things were given
of the king's allowance, according as he promised, to the people,
to the priests, and to the Levites.

1 Esdr 1:8
And Helkias, Zacharias, and Syelus, the governors of the temple, gave
to the priests for the passover two thousand and six hundred sheep,
and three hundred calves.

1 Esdr 1:9
And Jeconias, and Samaias, and Nathanael his brother, and Assabias,
and Ochiel, and Joram, captains over thousands, gave to the Levites
for the passover five thousand sheep, and seven hundred calves.

1 Esdr 1:10
And when these things were done, the priests and Levites, having the
unleavened bread, stood in very comely order according to the kindreds,

1 Esdr 1:11
And according to the several dignities of the fathers, before the
people, to offer to the Lord, as it is written in the book of Moses:
and thus did they in the morning.

1 Esdr 1:12
And they roasted the passover with fire, as appertaineth: as for the
sacrifices, they sod them in brass pots and pans with a good savour,

1 Esdr 1:13
And set them before all the people: and afterward they prepared for
themselves, and for the priests their brethren, the sons of Aaron.

1 Esdr 1:14
For the priests offered the fat until night: and the Levites prepared
for themselves, and the priests their brethren, the sons of Aaron.

1 Esdr 1:15
The holy singers also, the sons of Asaph, were in their order, according
to the appointment of David, to wit, Asaph, Zacharias, and Jeduthun,
who was of the king's retinue.

1 Esdr 1:16
Moreover the porters were at every gate; it was not lawful for any to
go from his ordinary service: for their brethren the Levites prepared
for them.

1 Esdr 1:17
Thus were the things that belonged to the sacrifices of the Lord
accomplished in that day, that they might hold the passover,

1 Esdr 1:18
And offer sacrifices upon the altar of the Lord, according to the
commandment of king Josias.

1 Esdr 1:19
So the children of Israel which were present held the passover at
that time, and the feast of sweet bread seven days.

1 Esdr 1:20
And such a passover was not kept in Israel since the time of the
prophet Samuel.

1 Esdr 1:21
Yea, all the kings of Israel held not such a passover as Josias, and
the priests, and the Levites, and the Jews, held with all Israel
that were found dwelling at Jerusalem.

1 Esdr 1:22
In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josias was this passover kept.

1 Esdr 1:23
And the works or Josias were upright before his Lord with an heart
full of godliness.

1 Esdr 1:24
As for the things that came to pass in his time, they were written
in former times, concerning those that sinned, and did wickedly against
the Lord above all people and kingdoms, and how they grieved him
exceedingly, so that the words of the Lord rose up against Israel.

1 Esdr 1:25
Now after all these acts of Josias it came to pass, that Pharaoh
the king of Egypt came to raise war at Carchamis upon Euphrates:
and Josias went out against him.

1 Esdr 1:26
But the king of Egypt sent to him, saying, What have I to do with
thee, O king of Judea?

1 Esdr 1:27
I am not sent out from the Lord God against thee; for my war is upon
Euphrates: and now the Lord is with me, yea, the Lord is with me
hasting me forward: depart from me, and be not against the Lord.

1 Esdr 1:28
Howbeit Josias did not turn back his chariot from him, but undertook
to fight with him, not regarding the words of the prophet Jeremy
spoken by the mouth of the Lord:

1 Esdr 1:29
But joined battle with him in the plain of Magiddo, and the princes
came against king Josias.

1 Esdr 1:30
Then said the king unto his servants, Carry me away out of the battle;
for I am very weak. And immediately his servants took him away out
of the battle.

1 Esdr 1:31
Then gat he up upon his second chariot; and being brought back to
Jerusalem died, and was buried in his father's sepulchre.

1 Esdr 1:32
And in all Jewry they mourned for Josias, yea, Jeremy the prophet
lamented for Josias, and the chief men with the women made lamentation
for him unto this day: and this was given out for an ordinance
to be done continually in all the nation of Israel.

1 Esdr 1:33
These things are written in the book of the stories of the kings of
Judah, and every one of the acts that Josias did, and his glory,
and his understanding in the law of the Lord, and the things that
he had done before, and the things now recited, are reported in
the book of the kings of Israel and Judea.

1 Esdr 1:34
And the people took Joachaz the son of Josias, and made him king
instead of Josias his father, when he was twenty and three years old.

1 Esdr 1:35
And he reigned in Judea and in Jerusalem three months: and then the
king of Egypt deposed him from reigning in Jerusalem.

1 Esdr 1:36
And he set a tax upon the land of an hundred talents of silver and
one talent of gold.

1 Esdr 1:37
The king of Egypt also made king Joacim his brother king of Judea
and Jerusalem.

1 Esdr 1:38
And he bound Joacim and the nobles: but Zaraces his brother he
apprehended, and brought him out of Egypt.

1 Esdr 1:39
Five and twenty years old was Joacim when he was made king in the land
of Judea and Jerusalem; and he did evil before the Lord.

1 Esdr 1:40
Wherefore against him Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon came up,
and bound him with a chain of brass, and carried him into Babylon.

1 Esdr 1:41
Nabuchodonosor also took of the holy vessels of the Lord, and carried
them away, and set them in his own temple at Babylon.

1 Esdr 1:42
But those things that are recorded of him, and of his uncleaness and
impiety, are written in the chronicles of the kings.

1 Esdr 1:43
And Joacim his son reigned in his stead: he was made king being
eighteen years old;

1 Esdr 1:44
And reigned but three months and ten days in Jerusalem; and did
evil before the Lord.

1 Esdr 1:45
So after a year Nabuchodonosor sent and caused him to be brought into
Babylon with the holy vessels of the Lord;

1 Esdr 1:46
And made Zedechias king of Judea and Jerusalem, when he was one and
twenty years old; and he reigned eleven years:

1 Esdr 1:47
And he did evil also in the sight of the Lord, and cared not for the
words that were spoken unto him by the prophet Jeremy from the mouth
of the Lord.

1 Esdr 1:48
And after that king Nabuchodonosor had made him to swear by the name
of the Lord, he forswore himself, and rebelled; and hardening his neck,
his heart, he transgressed the laws of the Lord God of Israel.

1 Esdr 1:49
The governors also of the people and of the priests did many things
against the laws, and passed all the pollutions of all nations,
and defiled the temple of the Lord, which was sanctified in Jerusalem.

1 Esdr 1:50
Nevertheless the God of their fathers sent by his messenger to call
them back, because he spared them and his tabernacle also.

1 Esdr 1:51
But they had his messengers in derision; and, look, when the Lord
spake unto them, they made a sport of his prophets:

1 Esdr 1:52
So far forth, that he, being wroth with his people for their great
ungodliness, commanded the kings of the Chaldees to come up against them;

1 Esdr 1:53
Who slew their young men with the sword, yea, even within the compass
of their holy temple, and spared neither young man nor maid, old man
nor child, among them; for he delivered all into their hands.

1 Esdr 1:54
And they took all the holy vessels of the Lord, both great and small,
with the vessels of the ark of God, and the king's treasures, and
carried them away into Babylon.

1 Esdr 1:55
As for the house of the Lord, they burnt it, and brake down the walls
of Jerusalem, and set fire upon her towers:

1 Esdr 1:56
And as for her glorious things, they never ceased till they had consumed
and brought them all to nought: and the people that were not slain with
the sword he carried unto Babylon:

1 Esdr 1:57
Who became servants to him and his children, till the Persians reigned,
to fulfil the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremy:

1 Esdr 1:58
Until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths, the whole time of her
desolation shall she rest, until the full term of seventy years.

1 Esdr 2:1
In the first year of Cyrus king of the Persians, that the word of the
Lord might be accomplished, that he had promised by the mouth of Jeremy;

1 Esdr 2:2
The Lord raised up the spirit of Cyrus the king of the Persians, and
he made proclamation through all his kingdom, and also by writing,

1 Esdr 2:3
Saying, Thus saith Cyrus king of the Persians; The Lord of Israel, the
most high Lord, hath made me king of the whole world,

1 Esdr 2:4
And commanded me to build him an house at Jerusalem in Jewry.

1 Esdr 2:5
If therefore there be any of you that are of his people, let the Lord,
even his Lord, be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem that is in
Judea, and build the house of the Lord of Israel: for he is the Lord
that dwelleth in Jerusalem.

1 Esdr 2:6
Whosoever then dwell in the places about, let them help him, those, I
say, that are his neighbours, with gold, and with silver,

1 Esdr 2:7
With gifts, with horses, and with cattle, and other things, which have
been set forth by vow, for the temple of the Lord at Jerusalem.

1 Esdr 2:8
Then the chief of the families of Judea and of the tribe of Benjamin
stood up; the priests also, and the Levites, and all they whose mind
the Lord had moved to go up, and to build an house for the Lord at
Jerusalem,

1 Esdr 2:9
And they that dwelt round about them, and helped them in all things
with silver and gold, with horses and cattle, and with very many free
gifts of a great number whose minds were stirred up thereto.

1 Esdr 2:10
King Cyrus also brought forth the holy vessels, which Nabuchodonosor
had carried away from Jerusalem, and had set up in his temple of idols.

1 Esdr 2:11
Now when Cyrus king of the Persians had brought them forth, he
delivered them to Mithridates his treasurer:

1 Esdr 2:12
And by him they were delivered to Sanabassar the governor of Judea.

1 Esdr 2:13
And this was the number of them; A thousand golden cups, and a thousand
of silver, censers of silver twenty nine, vials of gold thirty, and of
silver two thousand four hundred and ten, and a thousand other vessels.

1 Esdr 2:14
So all the vessels of gold and of silver, which were carried away,
were five thousand four hundred threescore and nine.

1 Esdr 2:15
These were brought back by Sanabassar, together with them of the
captivity, from Babylon to Jerusalem.

1 Esdr 2:16
But in the time of Artexerxes king of the Persians Belemus, and
Mithridates, and Tabellius, and Rathumus, and Beeltethmus, and
Semellius the secretary, with others that were in commission
with them, dwelling in Samaria and other places, wrote unto him
against them that dwelt in Judea and Jerusalem these letters
following;

1 Esdr 2:17
To king Artexerxes our lord, Thy servants, Rathumus the storywriter,
and Semellius the scribe, and the rest of their council, and the
judges that are in Celosyria and Phenice.

1 Esdr 2:18
Be it now known to the lord king, that the Jews that are up from you
to us, being come into Jerusalem, that rebellious and wicked city,
do build the marketplaces, and repair the walls of it and do lay
the foundation of the temple.

1 Esdr 2:19
Now if this city and the walls thereof be made up again, they will
not only refuse to give tribute, but also rebel against kings.

1 Esdr 2:20
And forasmuch as the things pertaining to the temple are now
in hand, we think it meet not to neglect such a matter,

1 Esdr 2:21
But to speak unto our lord the king, to the intent that, if
it be thy pleasure it may be sought out in the books of thy
fathers:

1 Esdr 2:22
And thou shalt find in the chronicles what is written concerning
these things, and shalt understand that that city was rebellious,
troubling both kings and cities:

1 Esdr 2:23
And that the Jews were rebellious, and raised always wars therein;
for the which cause even this city was made desolate.

1 Esdr 2:24
Wherefore now we do declare unto thee, O lord the king, that
if this city be built again, and the walls thereof set up anew,
thou shalt from henceforth have no passage into Celosyria and
Phenice.

1 Esdr 2:25
Then the king wrote back again to Rathumus the storywriter,
to Beeltethmus, to Semellius the scribe, and to the rest that
were in commission, and dwellers in Samaria and Syria and
Phenice, after this manner;

1 Esdr 2:26
I have read the epistle which ye have sent unto me: therefore
I commanded to make diligent search, and it hath been found that
that city was from the beginning practising against kings;

1 Esdr 2:27
And the men therein were given to rebellion and war: and that
mighty kings and fierce were in Jerusalem, who reigned and exacted
tributes in Celosyria and Phenice.

1 Esdr 2:28
Now therefore I have commanded to hinder those men from building the
city, and heed to be taken that there be no more done in it;

1 Esdr 2:29
And that those wicked workers proceed no further to the annoyance
of kings,

1 Esdr 2:30
Then king Artexerxes his letters being read, Rathumus, and Semellius
the scribe, and the rest that were in commission with them, removing
in haste toward Jerusalem with a troop of horsemen and a multitude of
people in battle array, began to hinder the builders; and the building
of the temple in Jerusalem ceased until the second year of the reign
of Darius king of the Persians.

1 Esdr 3:1
Now when Darius reigned, he made a great feast unto all his subjects,
and unto all his household, and unto all the princes of Media and
Persia,

1 Esdr 3:2
And to all the governors and captains and lieutenants that were under
him, from India unto Ethiopia, of an hundred twenty and seven provinces.

1 Esdr 3:3
And when they had eaten and drunken, and being satisfied were gone
home, then Darius the king went into his bedchamber, and slept, and
soon after awaked.

1 Esdr 3:4
Then three young men, that were of the guard that kept the king's
body, spake one to another;

1 Esdr 3:5
Let every one of us speak a sentence: he that shall overcome, and
whose sentence shall seem wiser than the others, unto him shall the
king Darius give great gifts, and great things in token of victory:

1 Esdr 3:6
As, to be clothed in purple, to drink in gold, and to sleep upon
gold, and a chariot with bridles of gold, and an headtire of fine
linen, and a chain about his neck:

1 Esdr 3:7
And he shall sit next to Darius because of his wisdom, and shall be
called Darius his cousin.

1 Esdr 3:8
And then every one wrote his sentence, sealed it, and laid it
under king Darius his pillow;

1 Esdr 3:9
And said that, when the king is risen, some will give him the
writings; and of whose side the king and the three princes of
Persia shall judge that his sentence is the wisest, to him shall
the victory be given, as was appointed.

1 Esdr 3:10
The first wrote, Wine is the strongest.

1 Esdr 3:11
The second wrote, The king is strongest.

1 Esdr 3:12
The third wrote, Women are strongest: but above all things Truth
beareth away the victory.

1 Esdr 3:13
Now when the king was risen up, they took their writings, and
delivered them unto him, and so he read them:

1 Esdr 3:14
And sending forth he called all the princes of Persia and Media,
and the governors, and the captains, and the lieutenants,
and the chief officers;

1 Esdr 3:15
And sat him down in the royal seat of judgment; and the writings
were read before them.

1 Esdr 3:16
And he said, Call the young men, and they shall declare their
own sentences. So they were called, and came in.

1 Esdr 3:17
And he said unto them, Declare unto us your mind concerning the
writings. Then began the first, who had spoken of the strength of
wine;

1 Esdr 3:18
And he said thus, O ye men, how exceeding strong is wine! it causeth
all men to err that drink it:

1 Esdr 3:19
It maketh the mind of the king and of the fatherless child to be
all one; of the bondman and of the freeman, of the poor man and of
the rich:

1 Esdr 3:20
It turneth also every thought into jollity and mirth, so that a man
remembereth neither sorrow nor debt:

1 Esdr 3:21
And it maketh every heart rich, so that a man remembereth neither
king nor governor; and it maketh to speak all things by talents:

1 Esdr 3:22
And when they are in their cups, they forget their love both to
friends and brethren, and a little after draw out swords:

1 Esdr 3:23
But when they are from the wine, they remember not what they have done.

1 Esdr 3:24
O ye men, is not wine the strongest, that enforceth to do thus? And
when he had so spoken, he held his peace.

1 Esdr 4:1
Then the second, that had spoken of the strength of the king, began
to say,

1 Esdr 4:2
O ye men, do not men excel in strength that bear rule over sea and
land and all things in them?

1 Esdr 4:3
But yet the king is more mighty: for he is lord of all these things,
and hath dominion over them; and whatsoever he commandeth them they do.

1 Esdr 4:4
If he bid them make war the one against the other, they do it: if he
send them out against the enemies, they go, and break down mountains
walls and towers.

1 Esdr 4:5
They slay and are slain, and transgress not the king's commandment:
if they get the victory, they bring all to the king, as well the spoil,
as all things else.

1 Esdr 4:6
Likewise for those that are no soldiers, and have not to do
with wars, but use husbundry, when they have reaped again that
which they had sown, they bring it to the king, and compel one
another to pay tribute unto the king.

1 Esdr 4:7
And yet he is but one man: if he command to kill, they kill;
if he command to spare, they spare;

1 Esdr 4:8
If he command to smite, they smite; if he command to make desolate,
they make desolate; if he command to build, they build;

1 Esdr 4:9
If he command to cut down, they cut down; if he command to plant,
they plant.

1 Esdr 4:10
So all his people and his armies obey him: furthermore he lieth down,
he eateth and drinketh, and taketh his rest:

1 Esdr 4:11
And these keep watch round about him, neither may any one depart, and
do his own business, neither disobey they him in any thing.

1 Esdr 4:12
O ye men, how should not the king be mightiest, when in such sort
he is obeyed? And he held his tongue.

1 Esdr 4:13
Then the third, who had spoken of women, and of the truth, (this was
Zorobabel) began to speak.

1 Esdr 4:14
O ye men, it is not the great king, nor the multitude of men,
neither is it wine, that excelleth; who is it then that ruleth
them, or hath the lordship over them? are they not women?

1 Esdr 4:15
Women have borne the king and all the people that bear rule by sea
and land.

1 Esdr 4:16
Even of them came they: and they nourished them up that planted the
vineyards, from whence the wine cometh.

1 Esdr 4:17
These also make garments for men; these bring glory unto men;
and without women cannot men be.

1 Esdr 4:18
Yea, and if men have gathered together gold and silver, or any other
goodly thing, do they not love a woman which is comely in favour
and beauty?

1 Esdr 4:19
And letting all those things go, do they not gape, and even
with open mouth fix their eyes fast on her; and have not all men
more desire unto her than unto silver or gold, or any goodly
thing whatsoever?

1 Esdr 4:20
A man leaveth his own father that brought him up, and his own
country, and cleaveth unto his wife.

1 Esdr 4:21
He sticketh not to spend his life with his wife, and remembereth
neither father, nor mother, nor country.

1 Esdr 4:22
By this also ye must know that women have dominion over you:
do ye not labour and toil, and give and bring all to the woman?

1 Esdr 4:23
Yea, a man taketh his sword, and goeth his way to rob and to
steal, to sail upon the sea and upon rivers;

1 Esdr 4:24
And looketh upon a lion, and goeth in the darkness; and when
he hath stolen, spoiled, and robbed, he bringeth it to his love.

1 Esdr 4:25
Wherefore a man loveth his wife better than father or mother.

1 Esdr 4:26
Yea, many there be that have run out of their wits for women,
and become servants for their sakes.

1 Esdr 4:27
Many also have perished, have erred, and sinned, for women.

1 Esdr 4:28
And now do ye not believe me? is not the king great in his power? do
not all regions fear to touch him?

1 Esdr 4:29
Yet did I see him and Apame the king's concubine, the daughter of
the admirable Bartacus, sitting at the right hand of the king,

1 Esdr 4:30
And taking the crown from the king's head, and setting it upon her
own head; she also struck the king with her left hand.

1 Esdr 4:31
And yet for all this the king gaped and gazed upon her with
open mouth: if she laughed upon him, he laughed also: but if she
took any displeasure at him, the king was fain to flatter, that
she might be reconciled to him again.

1 Esdr 4:32
O ye men, how can it be but women should be strong, seeing they
do thus?

1 Esdr 4:33
Then the king and the princes looked one upon another: so he
began to speak of the truth.

1 Esdr 4:34
O ye men, are not women strong? great is the earth, high is
the heaven, swift is the sun in his course, for he compasseth
the heavens round about, and fetcheth his course again to his
own place in one day.

1 Esdr 4:35
Is he not great that maketh these things? therefore great is
the truth, and stronger than all things.

1 Esdr 4:36
All the earth crieth upon the truth, and the heaven blesseth
it: all works shake and tremble at it, and with it is no
unrighteous thing.

1 Esdr 4:37
Wine is wicked, the king is wicked, women are wicked, all the
children of men are wicked, and such are all their wicked works;
and there is no truth in them; in their unrighteousness also
they shall perish.

1 Esdr 4:38
As for the truth, it endureth, and is always strong; it liveth and
conquereth for evermore.

1 Esdr 4:39
With her there is no accepting of persons or rewards; but she
doeth the things that are just, and refraineth from all unjust
and wicked things; and all men do well like of her works.

1 Esdr 4:40
Neither in her judgment is any unrighteousness; and she is the
strength, kingdom, power, and majesty, of all ages. Blessed
be the God of truth.

1 Esdr 4:41
And with that he held his peace. And all the people then shouted,
and said, Great is Truth, and mighty above all things.

1 Esdr 4:42
Then said the king unto him, Ask what thou wilt more than is appointed
in the writing, and we will give it thee, because thou art found
wisest; and thou shalt sit next me, and shalt be called my cousin.

1 Esdr 4:43
Then said he unto the king, Remember thy vow, which thou hast
vowed to build Jerusalem, in the day when thou camest to thy
kingdom,

1 Esdr 4:44
And to send away all the vessels that were taken away out of Jerusalem,
which Cyrus set apart, when he vowed to destroy Babylon, and to send
them again thither.

1 Esdr 4:45
Thou also hast vowed to build up the temple, which the Edomites
burned when Judea was made desolate by the Chaldees.

1 Esdr 4:46
And now, O lord the king, this is that which I require, and
which I desire of thee, and this is the princely liberality
proceeding from thyself: I desire therefore that thou make good
the vow, the performance whereof with thine own mouth thou hast
vowed to the King of heaven.

1 Esdr 4:47
Then Darius the king stood up, and kissed him, and wrote letters
for him unto all the treasurers and lieutenants and captains and
governors, that they should safely convey on their way both him,
and all those that go up with him to build Jerusalem.

1 Esdr 4:48
He wrote letters also unto the lieutenants that were in Celosyria
and Phenice, and unto them in Libanus, that they should bring cedar
wood from Libanus unto Jerusalem, and that they should build the
city with him.

1 Esdr 4:49
Moreover he wrote for all the Jews that went out of his realm
up into Jewry, concerning their freedom, that no officer, no
ruler, no lieutenant, nor treasurer, should forcibly enter into
their doors;

1 Esdr 4:50
And that all the country which they hold should be free without
tribute; and that the Edomites should give over the villages
of the Jews which then they held:

1 Esdr 4:51
Yea, that there should be yearly given twenty talents to the
building of the temple, until the time that it were built;

1 Esdr 4:52
And other ten talents yearly, to maintain the burnt offerings
upon the altar every day, as they had a commandment to offer
seventeen:

1 Esdr 4:53
And that all they that went from Babylon to build the city should
have free liberty, as well they as their posterity, and all the
priests that went away.

1 Esdr 4:54
He wrote also concerning the charges, and the priests' vestments
wherein they minister;

1 Esdr 4:55
And likewise for the charges of the Levites, to be given them until
the day that the house were finished, and Jerusalem builded up.
