The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jesus of History, by T. R. Glover

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Jesus of History

Author: T. R. Glover

Release Date: August 31, 2004 [EBook #13335]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JESUS OF HISTORY ***




Contributed by Jonathon Love






THE JESUS OF HISTORY

FOREWORD

I regard it as a high privilege to be associated with this volume.
Many who know and value Mr Glover's work on The Conflict of
Religions in the Early Roman Empire must have wistfully desired to
secure from his graphic pen just such a book as is here given to the
world. He possesses the rare power of reverently handling familiar
truths or facts in such manner as to make them seem to be almost
new. There are few gifts more precious than this at a time when our
familiarity with the greatest and most sacred of all narratives is a
chief hindrance to our ready appreciation of its living power. I
believe that no one will read Mr Glover's chapters, and especially
his description of the parable-teaching given by our Lord, without a
sense of having been introduced to a whole series of fresh and
fruitful thoughts. He has expanded for us, with the force, the
clearness, and the power of vivid illustration which we have learned
to expect from him, the meaning of a sentence in the earlier volume
I have alluded to, where he insists that, "Jesus of Nazareth does
stand in the centre of human history, that He has brought God and
man into a new relation, that He is the present concern of every one
of us and that there is more in Him than we have yet accounted
for."[1]

In accordance with its title, the single theme of the book is "The
Jesus of History," but the student or exponent of dogmatic theology
will find abundant material in its pages.

I commend it confidently, both to single students and to those who
nowadays, in happily increasing numbers, meet together for common
study; and I congratulate those who belong to the Student Christian
Movement upon this notable addition to the books published in
connection with their far-reaching work.

  RANDALL CANTUAR
        LAMBETH
  Advent Sunday, 1916





PREFACE

This book has grown out of lectures upon the historical Jesus given
in a good many cities of India during the winter 1915-16. Recast and
developed, the lectures were taken down in shorthand in Calcutta;
they were revised in Madras; and most of them were wholly
re-written, where and when in six following months leisure was
available, in places so far apart as Colombo, Maymyo, Rangoon,
Kodaikanal, Simla, and Poona. The reader will not expect a heavy
apparatus of references to books which were generally out of reach.

Here and there are incorporated passages (rehandled) from articles
that have appeared in The Constructive Quarterly, The Nation, The
Expositor, and elsewhere.

Those who themselves have tried to draw the likeness attempted in
this book will best understand, and perhaps most readily forgive,
failures and mistakes, or even worse, in my drawing. The aim of the
book, as of the lectures, is, after all, not to achieve a final
presentment of the historical Jesus, but to suggest lines of study
that will deepen our interest in him and our love of him.

    T. R. G.
POONA, August 1916





THE JESUS OF HISTORY

CONTENTS

             CHAPTER I
  THE STUDY OF THE GOSPELS
    Modern study of religion
    Historicity of Jesus
    The gospels as historical sources
    Canons for the study of a historical figure
    A caution against antiquarianism here

              CHAPTER II
  CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH
    References in Gospels
    Utilisation of the parables to reconstruct the domestic life
    Nature. The city. The talk of the market

              CHAPTER III
  THE MAN AND HIS MIND
    Words and looks, as recorded in the gospels
    Playfulness of speech
    Movements of feeling
    Habits of thought: e.g. Quickness. Feeling for fact.
            Sympathy. Imagination
    His use of the Old Testament

              CHAPTER IV
  THE TEACHER AND THE DISCIPLES
    THE BACKGROUND
      Hardness of the human life in those times
      Uncertainness as to God's plans for the nation--specially
            as to His purposes for the Messiah
      Uncertainty as to the immortality of the soul, and its destinies
      Re-action of all this upon life
    THE PROBLEM BEFORE THE TEACHER
      To induce people to try to re-think God
      To secure the re-thinking of life from its foundations in view
            of the new knowledge
    THE TEACHER AND THE DISCIPLES
      His personality, and his genius for friendship
      The disciples--the type he prefers
      Intimacy, the real secret of his method
      His ways of speech
      His seriousness
      The transformation of the disciples

              CHAPTER V
  THE TEACHING OF JESUS UPON GOD
    JESUS' OWN GOD-CONSCIOUSNESS
      The Nearness of God
      God's knowledge and power
      God's throne
      Jesus emphasizes mostly God's interest in the individual--the
            love of God
    THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD
      The discovery of God
      Parables of the treasure finder and the pearl merchant
      Faith in God
      Prayer
      Life on the basis of God

              CHAPTER VI
  JESUS AND MAN
    Jesus' sympathy with men and their troubles
    His feelings for the suffering and distressed
    His feeling for women and children
    His emphasis on tenderness and forgiveness
    The characteristics which he values in men
    The value of the individual soul
    Jesus and the wasted life
    Zacchaeus. The woman with the alabaster box. The penitent thief

              CHAPTER VII
  JESUS' TEACHING UPON SIN
    The problem of sin
    John the Baptist on sin
    Jesus' psychology of sin more serious
    The outstanding types of sin which, according to Jesus,
            involve for a man the utmost risk:
      (a) Want of tenderness
      (b) The impure imagination
      (c) Indifference to truth
      (d) Indecision
    Jesus' view of sin as deduced from this teaching
    Implication of a serious view of redemption

              CHAPTER VIII
  THE CHOICE OF THE CROSS
    What the cross meant to him
    HIS REFERENCES TO THE GOSPEL AND ITS RESULTS
      The kingdom of heaven
      The call for followers
      His announcement of purpose in his life and death
      What he means by redemption
    FACTORS IN HIS CHOICE OF THE CROSS
      His sense of human need
      His realization of God
      His recognition of his own relation to God
      His prayer life
    VERIFICATION FROM THE EVENT
      The Resurrection
      The new life of the disciples
      The taking away of the sin of the world
    RE-EXAMINATION OF HIS CHOICE OF THE CROSS
      As it bears on the problem of pain
        and of sin
        and on God
      How a man is to understand Jesus Christ

              CHAPTER IX
  THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE
    THE ROMAN EMPIRE
      One rule of many races
      General peace and free intercourse the world over
      Fusion of cultures, traditions, religions
      "The marriage of East and West"
    THE OLD RELIGION
      (1) Its strength:
        in its ancient tradition
        in its splendour of art, architecture and ceremony
        in its oracles, healings and theophanies
        in its adaptability in absorbing all cults and creeds
      (2) Its weakness:
        No deep sense of truth
        No association with morality
        Polytheism
        The fear of the grave
      (3) Its defence:
        Plutarch--the Stoics--Neo-Platonism--the Eclectics
    THE VICTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH
      (1) Its characteristics
      (2) Persecuted because it refused to compromise
      (3) The Christian "out-lived" the pagan
                                  "out died" him
                                  "out-thought him"

              CHAPTER X
  JESUS IN CHRISTIAN THOUGHT
    The impulse to determine who he is, and his relation to God
    The records of Christian experience
    The Study of the personality of Jesus Christ
      (a) The Gospels
      (b) Christological theory a guide to experience
      (c) The new experience of the Reformation period
    Knowledge gained by the experiment comes before explanation
  JESUS TO BE KNOWN BY WHAT HE DOES
    The forgiveness of sin, and the theories to explain it
    Is a Theology of Redemption possible which shall not be
            mainly metaphor or simile?
  THE PROBLEM OF THE INCARNATION
    The approach is to be "a posterioria"
      In fact, God and man are only known to us in and by Jesus
      Only in Christ is the love of God as taught in N.T. tenable
    To know Jesus in what he can do, is antecedent to theory about him

              APPENDIX
  Suggestions for study circle discussions





THE JESUS OF HISTORY



CHAPTER I

THE STUDY OF THE GOSPELS

If one thing more than another marks modern thought, it is a new
insistence on fact. In every sphere of study there is a growing
emphasis on verification. Where a generation ago a case seemed to be
closed, to-day in the light of new facts it is reopened. Matters
that to our grandfathers were trivialities, to be summarily
dismissed, are seriously studied. Again and again we find the most
fruitful avenues opened to us by questions that another age might
have laughed out of a hearing; to-day they suggest investigation of
facts insufficiently known, and of the difficult connexions between
them. In psychology and in medicine the results of this new tendency
are evident in all sorts of ways--new methods in the treatment of
the sick, new inquiries as to the origin of diseases and the
possibilities of their prevention, attempts to get at the relations
between the soul and body, and a very new open-mindedness as to the
spiritual nature and its working and experiences. In other fields of
learning it is the same.

To the modern student of man and his history the old easy way of
excluding religion as an absurdity, the light prediction of its
speedy, or at least its eventual, disappearance from the field of
human life, and other dogmatisms of the like kind, are almost
unintelligible. We realize that religion in some form is a natural
working of the human spirit, and, whatever place we give to religion
in the conduct of our own lives, as students of history we reckon
with the religious instinct as a factor of the highest import, and
we give to religious systems and organizations--above all, to
religious teachers and leaders--a more sympathetic and a profounder
study. Carlyle's lecture on Muhammad, in his course on "Heroes and
Hero Worship," may be taken as a landmark for English people in this
new treatment history.

The Christian Church, whether we like it or not, has been a force of
unparalleled power in human affairs; and prophecies that it will no
longer be so, and allegations that by now it has ceased to be so,
are not much made by cautious thinkers. There is evidence that the
influence of the Christian Church, so far from ebbing, is
rising--evidence more obvious when we reflect that the influence of
such a movement is not to be quickly guessed from the number of its
actual adherents. A century and a quarter of Christian missions in
India have resulted in so many converts--a million and a quarter is
no slight outcome; but that is a small part of the story. All over
India the old religious systems are being subjected to a new study
by their own adherents; their weak points are being felt; there are
reform movements, new apologetics, compromises, defences--all sorts
of indications of ferment and transition. There can be little
question that while many things go to the making of an age, the
prime impulse to all this intellectual, religious, and moral
upheaval was the faith of Christian missionaries that Jesus Christ
would bring about what we actually see. They believed--and they were
laughed at for their belief--that Jesus Christ was still a real
power, permanent and destined to hold a larger place in the affairs
of men; and we see that they were right. Jesus remains the very
heart and soul of the Christian movement, still controlling men,
still capturing men--against their wills very often--changing men's
lives and using them for ends they never dreamed of. So much is
plain to the candid observer, whatever the explanation.

We find further, another fact of even more significance to the
historian who will treat human experience with seriousness and
sympathy. The cynical view that delusion and error in a real world
have peculiar power in human affairs, may be dismissed; no serious
student of history could hold it.

For those who believe, as we all do at heart, that the world is
rational, that real effects follow real causes, and conversely that
behind great movements lie great forces, the fact must weigh
enormously that wherever the Christian Church, or a section of it,
or a single Christian, has put upon Jesus Christ a higher
emphasis--above all where everything has been centred in Jesus
Christ--there has been an increase of power for Church, or
community, or man. Where new value has been found in Jesus Christ,
the Church has risen in power, in energy, in appeal, in victory.

Paul of Tarsus progressively found more in Christ, expected more of
him, trusted him more; and his faith was justified. If Paul was
wrong, how did he capture the Christian Church for his ideas? If he
was wrong, how is it that when Luther caught his meaning,
re-interpreted him and laid the same emphasis on Jesus Christ with
his "Nos nihil sumus, Christus solus est omnia"[2], once more the
hearts of men were won by the higher doctrine of Christ's person and
power, and a new era followed the new emphasis? How is it that, when
John Wesley made the same discovery, and once more staked all on
faith in Christ, again the Church felt the pulse of new life?
