Project Gutenberg's The Hindu-Yogi Science Of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Hindu-Yogi Science Of Breath

Author: Yogi Ramacharaka

Release Date: September 9, 2004 [EBook #13402]
Last updated: March 2, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HINDU-YOGI SCIENCE OF BREATH ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Keith M. Eckrich, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreaders Team






THE HINDU-YOGI Science _of_ Breath




A Complete Manual of THE ORIENTAL BREATHING PHILOSOPHY of Physical,
Mental, Psychic and Spiritual Development.


By YOGI RAMACHARAKA





INDEX.

CHAPTER                                            Page

   I. Salaam                                          1

  II. "Breath Is Life"                                3

 III. The Exoteric Theory of Breath                  11

  IV. The Esoteric Theory of Breath                  16

   V. The Nervous System                             20

  VI. Nostril Breathing vs. Mouth Breathing          23

 VII. The Four Methods of Respiration                27

VIII. How to Acquire the Yogi Complete Breath        33

  IX. Physiological Effect of the Complete Breath    36

   X. A Few Bits of Yogi Lore                        40

  XI. The Seven Yogi Developing Exercises            43

 XII. Seven Minor Yogi Exercises                     48

XIII. Vibration and Yogi Rhythmic Breathing          51

 XIV. Phenomena of Yogi Psychic Breathing            55

  XV. More Phenomena of Yogi Psychic Breathing       61

 XVI. Yogi Spiritual Breathing                       69




CHAPTER I.


SALAAM.

The Western student is apt to be somewhat confused in his ideas
regarding the Yogis and their philosophy and practice. Travelers to
India have written great tales about the hordes of fakirs, mendicants
and mountebanks who infest the great roads of India and the streets of
its cities, and who impudently claim the title "Yogi." The Western
student is scarcely to be blamed for thinking of the typical Yogi as
an emaciated, fanatical, dirty, ignorant Hindu, who either sits in a
fixed posture until his body becomes ossified, or else holds his arm
up in the air until it becomes stiff and withered and forever after
remains in that position, or perhaps clenches his fist and holds it
tight until his fingernails grow through the palms of his hands. That
these people exist is true, but their claim to the title "Yogi" seems
as absurd to the true Yogi as does the claim to the title "Doctor" on
the part of the man who pares one's corns seem to the eminent surgeon,
or as does the title of "Professor," as assumed by the street corner
vendor of worm medicine, seem to the President of Harvard or Yale.

There have been for ages past in India and other Oriental countries
men who devoted their time and attention to the development of Man,
physically, mentally and spiritually. The experience of generations of
earnest seekers has been handed down for centuries from teacher to
pupil, and gradually a definite Yogi science was built up. To these
investigations and teachings was finally applied the term "Yogi," from
the Sanscrit word "Yug," meaning "to join." From the same source comes
the English word "yoke," with a similar meaning. Its use in connection
with these teachings is difficult to trace, different authorities
giving different explanations, but probably the most ingenious is that
which holds that it is intended as the Hindu equivalent for the idea
conveyed by the English phrase, "getting into harness," or "yoking
up," as the Yogi undoubtedly "gets into harness" in his work of
controlling the body and mind by the Will.

Yoga is divided into several branches, ranging from that which teaches
the control of the body, to that which teaches the attainment of the
highest spiritual development. In the work we will not go into the
higher phases of the subject, except when the "Science of Breath"
touches upon the same. The "Science of Breath" touches Yoga at many
points, and although chiefly concerned with the development and
control of the physical, has also its psychic side, and even enters
the field of spiritual development.

In India there are great schools of Yoga, comprising thousands of the
leading minds of that great country. The Yoga philosophy is the rule
of life for many people. The pure Yogi teachings, however, are given
only to the few, the masses being satisfied with the crumbs which fall
from the tables of the educated classes, the Oriental custom in this
respect being opposed to that of the Western world. But Western ideas
are beginning to have their effect even in the Orient, and teachings
which were once given only to the few are now freely offered to any
who are ready to receive them. The East and the West are growing
closer together, and both are profiting by the close contact, each
influencing the other.

The Hindu Yogis have always paid great attention to the Science of
Breath, for reasons which will be apparent to the student who reads
this book. Many Western writers have touched upon this phase of the
Yogi teachings, but we believe that it has been reserved for the
writer of this work to give to the Western student, in concise form
and simple language, the underlying principles of the Yogi Science of
Breath, together with many of the favorite Yogi breathing exercises
and methods. We have given the Western idea as well as the Oriental,
showing how one dovetails into the other. We have used the ordinary
English terms, almost entirely, avoiding the Sanscrit terms, so
confusing to the average Western reader.

The first part of the book is devoted to the physical phase of the
Science of Breath; then the psychic and mental sides are considered,
and finally the spiritual side is touched upon.

We may be pardoned if we express ourselves as pleased with our success
in condensing so much Yogi lore into so few pages, and by the use of
words and terms which may be understood by anyone. Our only fear is
that its very simplicity may cause some to pass it by as unworthy of
attention, while they pass on their way searching for something
"deep," mysterious and non-understandable. However, the Western mind
is eminently practical, and we know that it is only a question of a
short time before it will recognize the practicability of this work.

We greet our students, with our most profound salaam, and bid them be
seated for their first lessons in the Yogi Science of Breath.




CHAPTER II.


"BREATH IS LIFE."

Life is absolutely dependent upon the act of breathing. "Breath is
Life."

Differ as they may upon details of theory and terminology, the
Oriental and the Occidental agree upon these fundamental principles.

To breathe is to live, and without breath there is no life. Not only
are the higher animals dependent upon breath for life and health, but
even the lower forms of animal life must breathe to live, and plant
life is likewise dependent upon the air for continued existence.

The infant draws in a long, deep breath, retains it for a moment to
extract from it its life-giving properties, and then exhales it in a
long wail, and lo! its life upon earth has begun. The old man gives a
faint gasp, ceases to breathe, and life is over. From the first faint
breath of the infant to the last gasp of the dying man, it is one long
story of continued breathing. Life is but a series of breaths.

Breathing may be considered the most important of all of the functions
of the body, for, indeed, all the other functions depend upon it. Man
may exist some time without eating; a shorter time without drinking;
but without breathing his existence may be measured by a few minutes.

And not only is Man dependent upon Breath for life, but he is largely
dependent upon correct habits of breathing for continued vitality and
freedom from disease. An intelligent control of our breathing power
will lengthen our days upon earth by giving us increased vitality and
powers of resistance, and, on the other hand, unintelligent and
careless breathing will tend to shorten our days, by decreasing our
vitality and laying us open to disease.

Man in his normal state had no need of instruction in breathing. Like
the lower animal and the child, he breathed naturally and properly, as
nature intended him to do, but civilization has changed him in this
and other respects. He has contracted improper methods and attitudes
of walking, standing and sitting, which have robbed him of his
birthright of natural and correct breathing. He has paid a high price
for civilization. The savage, to-day, breathes naturally, unless he
has been contaminated by the habits of civilized man.

The percentage of civilized men who breathe correctly is quite small,
and the result is shown in contracted chests and stooping shoulders,
and the terrible increase in diseases of the respiratory organs,
including that dread monster, Consumption, "the white scourge."
Eminent authorities have stated that one generation of correct
breathers would regenerate the race, and disease would be so rare as
to be looked upon as a curiosity. Whether looked at from the
standpoint of the Oriental or Occidental, the connection between
correct breathing and health is readily seen and explained.

The Occidental teachings show that the physical health depends very
materially upon correct breathing. The Oriental teachers not only
admit that their Occidental brothers are right, but say that in
addition to the physical benefit derived from correct habits of
breathing, Man's mental power, happiness, self-control,
clear-sightedness, morals, and even his spiritual growth may be
increased by an understanding of the "Science of Breath." Whole
schools of Oriental Philosophy have been founded upon this science,
and this knowledge when grasped by the Western races, and by them put
to the practical use which is their strong point, will work wonders
among them. The theory of the East, wedded to the practice of the
West, will produce worthy offspring.

This work will take up the Yogi "Science of Breath," which includes
not only all that is known to the Western physiologist and hygienist,
but the occult side of the subject as well. It not only points out the
way to physical health along the lines of what Western scientists have
termed "deep breathing," etc., but also goes into the less known
phases of the subject, and shows how the Hindu Yogi controls his body,
increasing his mental capacity, and develops the spiritual side of his
nature by the "Science of Breath."

The Yogi practices exercises by which he attains control of his body,
and is enabled to send to any organ or part an increased flow of vital
force or "prana," thereby strengthening and invigorating the part or
organ. He knows all that his Western scientific brother knows about
the physiological effect of correct breathing, but he also knows that
the air contains more than oxygen and hydrogen and nitrogen, and that
something more is accomplished than the mere oxygenating of the blood.
He knows something about "prana," of which his Western brother is
ignorant, and he is fully aware of the nature and manner of handling
that great principle of energy, and is fully informed as to its effect
upon the human body and mind. He knows that by rhythmical breathing
one may bring himself into harmonious vibration with nature, and aid
in the unfoldment of his latent powers. He knows that by controlled
breathing he may not only cure disease in himself and others, but also
practically do away with fear and worry and the baser emotions.

To teach these things is the object of this work. We will give in a
few chapters concise explanations and instructions, which might be
extended into volumes. We hope to awaken the minds of the Western
world to the value of the Yogi "Science of Breath."




CHAPTER III.


THE EXOTERIC THEORY OF BREATH.

In this chapter we will give you briefly the theories of the Western
scientific world regarding the functions of the respiratory organs,
and the part in the human economy played by the breath. In subsequent
chapters we will give the additional theories and ascertained facts of
the Oriental school of thought and research. The Oriental accepts the
theories and facts of his Western brothers (which have been known to
him for centuries) and adds thereto much that the latter do not now
accept, but which they will in due time "discover" and which, after
renaming, they will present to the world as a great truth.

Before taking up the Western idea, it will perhaps be better to give a
hasty general idea of the Organs of Respiration.

The Organs of Respiration consist of the lungs and the air passages
leading to them. The lungs are two in number, and occupy the pleural
chamber of the thorax, one en each side of the median line, being
