The Project Gutenberg EBook of The National Preacher, Vol. 2 No. 7 Dec.
1827, by Aaron W. Leland and Elihu W. Baldwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The National Preacher, Vol. 2 No. 7 Dec. 1827
       Or Original Monthly Sermons from Living Ministers, Sermons XXVI. and
       XXVII.
       

Author: Aaron W. Leland and Elihu W. Baldwin

Release Date: October 21, 2004 [EBook #13824]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONAL PREACHER ***




Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




SER. XXVI. REV. DR. LELAND.
SER. XXVII. REV. MR. BALDWIN

Vol. 2 No. 7 Dec. 1827.

THE
NATIONAL PREACHER:
OR
_ORIGINAL MONTHLY SERMONS_

EDITED BY
REV. AUSTIN DICKINSON,
NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

POSTAGE--_One Cent and a half_, not over 100 miles; _Two Cents and a
half_, any distance over 100.


TO THE REVEREND CLERGY:--

The undersigned proposes to commence another Periodical, of original
plan and character, provided that adequate pledges of supplies shall be
furnished. The Work to bear the following title, or something similar,
viz.:

=THE AMERICAN PASTOR'S JOURNAL:=

OR

_Original Sketches of real Characters, Conversations, and striking
Facts. Furnished chiefly by Clergymen._

The following imperfect sketch of topics to be embraced, may serve to
illustrate the plan:--1. Instances of very early piety.--2. Striking
results of Parental faithfulness, or unfaithfulness; of filial respect,
or disrespect.--3. Cases of individuals raised from deep obscurity, or
wickedness, to eminent usefulness.--4. Remarkable cases of
conviction.--5. Cases of great hardness of heart, from resisting
convictions.--6. Distinctly marked cases of submission and conversion to
God.--7. Cases of awful relapse into sin.--8. Cases of strong temptation
and trial.--9. Cases of strong faith and confidence in God.--10.
Peculiarly manifest interpositions of Providence, in mercy or
judgment.--11. Instances of the wrath of man being made to praise
God.--12. Cases illustrative of the influence of piety on the
intellectual powers.--13. Instances of extraordinary beneficence or
covetousness.--14. Death-bed scenes, of the Christian, the backslider,
the infidel, the universalist, the profane man, or the worldling.

It is conceived that the very existence of such a Periodical might be
the means of leading Clergymen, in their pastoral intercourse, to be
more observant of character, more discriminating in their views of human
nature, and more disposed to record and rescue from oblivion striking
conversations and facts. No species of knowledge can be more interesting
or more useful, than that thus drawn from real life;--especially from
portions of life most intimately connected with spiritual and eternal
realities. If it is all-important that masters in surgery and medicine
record, for mutual improvement, and for the benefit of mankind, striking
cases which occur in their practice; it cannot, surely, be less
important, that those who watch for the life of souls, should preserve
similar records. It would seem as though, from the daily intercourse of
several thousand Clergymen, such materials, of the character
contemplated, might be furnished, as, if well condensed and judiciously
arranged in an elegant Periodical, would not fail to be read with
intense and general interest. And who can tell, but that God, who is
rich in wisdom, may thus employ the simplest means for collecting,
condensing, and reflecting rays of sacred truth, in the form of
practical results, which may carry conviction and saving instruction to
uncounted millions--not merely in our own land, but in more populous
countries, where the importance of experimental religion is not
appreciated?

But, for rendering such a work pre-eminently useful, or even commencing
it, there must be union of effort. As it is intended to consist wholly
of original matter, and that of a specific character, such as no genius
can originate, it is obvious that it cannot be commenced, without being
furnished with numerous pledges of supplies. And it will be important to
have a considerable number of communications on hand, at the
commencement, as well as afterwards, that due regard may be had to order
in the arrangement of subjects, and an interesting variety be presented
in every Number.

It will not be necessary to publish the names of writers, nor of
individuals alluded to in communications; though in many cases it may be
desirable and expedient. But, in every case, the name of the writer, or
some respectable reference for attesting the accuracy of statements,
must be furnished to the Editor; as he must be responsible to the public
for the correctness of whatever may appear in the work. He will moreover
think it his duty to present Contributors a generous compensation.

MINISTERS, of different Christian denominations, willing to aid in
executing the design, are affectionately requested _to write as soon as
practicable_--either furnishing matter for publication, or stating
definitely, _when and how much aid may be expected_. If the work is ably
supported by the co-operation of Clergymen, the Editor does not hesitate
to say, that he will at least circulate thousands and tens of thousands
of copies gratuitously, and thus afford Contributors the best of all
rewards--the opportunity of doing extensive good.

That the blessing of God Almighty may crown the enterprise, is the
humble prayer of His servant,

AUSTIN DICKINSON.




=CONTRIBUTORS.=


Upwards of fifty Clergymen, of five Christian denominations, and
belonging to sixteen different States, most of whom are well known to
the public as Authors, have encouraged the Editor to expect from them
Sermons for the Preacher.


       *       *       *       *       *

=TO THE ENTERPRISING.=


Persons having expressed a disposition to circulate this Work, provided
postage could be avoided; we would say to such, that for _ten_ or more
Subscribers, _who pay at one time_ in advance, or on first receiving
Numbers, a deduction from the price of One Dollar a year may be made,
equal to the annual postage. And in such cases money may be forwarded
without being post-paid. Experience shows, there is no mode of
conveyance safer than the Mail.

[_Ordinary Terms, other leaf_.]

