The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Things Which Remain, by Daniel A. Goodsell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Things Which Remain
       An Address To Young Ministers

Author: Daniel A. Goodsell

Release Date: May 18, 2005 [EBook #15861]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THINGS WHICH REMAIN ***




Produced by Justin Kerk, Thomas Hutchinson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.










The Things Which Remain

_An Address To Young Ministers_


By

DANIEL A. GOODSELL


A Bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church




_CINCINNATI: JENNINGS & PYE_
_NEW YORK: EATON & MAINS_

_Copyright, 1904, by_
JENNINGS AND PYE




PREFACE


This little book contains the larger part of an address I have delivered
at several Annual Conferences on the occasion of the admission of
probationary ministers into full membership. At the suggestion of some
who have heard it when delivered and whose assurance that it would be
useful in print I am bound to respect, I have consented to its
publication.

Matter not directly relating to the theme, but of sufficient importance
to accompany it in addressing an Annual Conference, is here omitted,
that all possible space might be given to the discussion of the
question, "How much Christian doctrine will still remain, though much of
the most radical criticism be accepted?"




Preface


It will be understood that concessions made for the sake of the argument
by no means represent my own views of that which must be ultimately
yielded to the critical spirit.

Already some opinions which threatened the authority of Gospels and
Epistles, and which have had wide acceptance, have been modified or
withdrawn. My aim in this address was not to scout criticism, from which
much of the highest value to faith is to come, but to steady the
wavering young minister; to sustain his preaching power by helping him
to a definite message, and to encourage him to a slow and guarded
acceptance of critical opinions destructive of "the faith once delivered
to the saints."

CHATTANOOGA, TENN., December, 1903.






The Things Which Remain




The followers of Him who said "I am the Truth" can never afford to hold
or propagate that which is false. No man can preach with power unless he
strongly believes. Teaching force depends on Faith.

[Sidenote: Doing and Knowing.]

[Sidenote: The Divine Call.]

[Sidenote: Conditions of the Call.]

Thus far our ministry has had teaching power because it has been founded
on and inspired by a Christian experience. Our Church has always
emphasized that essential Christian statement, "If ye do ye shall know."
At every ordination we have demanded of every candidate a declaration of
his persuasion that he was "called according to the will of our Lord
Jesus Christ" to the particular office to which he was then to be
advanced. By this we do not mean a mediate call through the order of the
Church or the judgment of the Bishop, but an immediate call by the Holy
Spirit from Christ Himself. This call is antedated by that personal
surrender to Jesus Christ; that blessed acceptance by Him of the
self-surrendered; that witnessing Spirit as to sonship which brings the
consciousness of pardon, renewal, and justification known as "a
religious experience."

[Sidenote: Evidence of the Call.]

Those who possess this know something. Whereas they were "once blind,
now they see." They know they have "passed from darkness to light"
through the changed love which now controls. However the persuasion
reached them, it is a persuasion; not merely a hope. It is a conclusion
borne in upon them by satisfactory evidence, and is a lasting certainty
while the faith which brought it abides in its original measure.

Thus to-day we have a pulpit substantially in doctrine and force what
our pulpit always has been. Even in some cases where doubt has entered,
it would appear that this Christian experience has steadied the wavering
head by the full and regular impulses of the believing heart.

[Sidenote: New Problems in Theology.]

[Sidenote: The Modern Skeptical Temper.]

It is, however, to be admitted that the years to which we have come
