The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Otterbein Hymnal, by Edmund S. Lorenz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Otterbein Hymnal
       For Use in Public and Social Worship

Author: Edmund S. Lorenz

Release Date: August 6, 2005 [EBook #16455]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OTTERBEIN HYMNAL ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Stephen Hutcheson
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





THE

OTTERBEIN HYMNAL

FOR USE IN

PUBLIC and SOCIAL WORSHIP.


PREPARED BY

EDMUND S. LORENZ.


DAYTON, OHIO:

UNITED BRETHREN PUBLISHING HOUSE,

1892.


The General Conference of the Church of the United Brethren in Christ,
at its session in May, 1886, ordered,--

"That a small hymnal, adapted to general church purposes, be published
soon."

_ADVISORY COMMITTEE_

MUSICAL.

SAMUEL E. KUMLER.
CALVIN H. LYON.
MRS. A.R. SHAUCK.
JUDGE JOHN A. SHAUCK

LITERARY.

PROF. J.P. LANDIS, D.D., PH.D.


COPYRIGHT, 1886, BY W.J. SHUEY, AGENT.




Introduction


The General Conference of 1889 ordered the publication of a hymnal
that should be fully adapted to the needs of our church. In compliance
with these instructions, the publishing agent, Rev. W.J. Shuey, arranged
for its issue. Rev. E.S. Lorenz, well and favorably known throughout the
Church, was asked to edit it, and, with the assistance of a thoroughly
competent committee, has accomplished his task. I have carefully examined
it in every part, and cannot see where any improvement can be made. It
is pre-eminently a United Brethren Hymn-Book, providing as it does for
every phase of our characteristic church life. It combines the solidity
and stateliness of the standard hymns of the ages, with the life and
sprightliness of the modern gospel song. The most recent songs are here
for the young people, while the older members of the Church will hail
with delight the reappearance of old songs dear to the hearts of many
of us, because they are precious and good, and because our mothers
sang them. Meeting every need of the public service, revival and social
meetings, the Sunday-school, and the family, I can most cheerfully
recommend this collection of hymns to our people, and trust that it
will speedily be permitted to bring its help and blessing into every
United Brethren church in our broad land, and beyond the seas, and that
it will prove one of the many tender ties that unite our widely scattered
members.

                                A. WEAVER,
                                _Senior Bishop._
DAYTON, OHIO, April 9, 1890.




PREFACE.


To he useful, a hymnal must express the peculiar type of Christian
life characterizing the denomination it is to serve. The Church of
the United Brethren in Christ emphasizes the necessity of Christian
experience--experimental religion, the fathers would have phrased
it--and recognises revival effort as the characteristic phase of its
church activity; hence, its hymnal must furnish ample expression for
its full and varied Christian experience and large facilities for
revival work. In attempting to do this, the other phases of church
life, which it has in common with other denominations, have not been
forgotten or ignored, and it is hoped this collection of hymns and
songs will be found as full and symmetrical as the church life it
seeks to express.

In order to meet the needs of the many stages of literary and musical
culture, hymns and tunes of the highest artistic merit stand side by
side with songs whose practical value and spiritual purpose must atone
for lack of literary and musical grace.

Doubtless many favorites will be missed from these pages, but the body
of popular sacred songs is so large and rich that it was impossible to
include everything desirable in so small a volume.

To the many brethren, whose number makes personal mention impossible, who
kindly responded to a call for suggestions and advice, the thanks of the
editor are due. While all could not be accepted, they have been very
helpful, and have had large influence in giving character to the book.
The valuable assistance furnished by the Advisory Committee deserves
most kindly and hearty recognition. The owners of the many valuable
copyright songs, in connection with which their names severally appear,
will accept thanks for the kindness which so greatly enriches these pages.

That this volume will prove an effective instrument in the hands of
the workers of the Church of the United Brethren in Christ for the
accomplishment of great and lasting good, and bring to many hearts
the same comfort and joy which its preparation brought to that of the
editor, is his earnest hope and prayer. E.S.L.

DAYTON OHIO, April 15, 1890.
(Otterbein Hymnal.)





TABLE OF CONTENTS


WORSHIP:                         NOS.
  General Praise                 1-29
  Sanctuary                     30-42
  Sabbath Day                   43-51
  Morning and Evening           52-61
HOLY SCRIPTURES                 62-71
GOD, BEING AND ATTRIBUTES       72-93
CHRIST:
  Incarnation and Birth        91-103
  Life and Character          104-116
  Suffering and Death         117-140
  Resurrection and Ascension  141-153
  Exaltation and Reign        154-163
HOLY SPIRIT                   164-177
MAN'S LOST ESTATE:
  Man a Sinner                178-185
  Atonement Provided          186-201
  Invitation                  202-225
  Warning                     226-231
  Repentance                  232-241
THE CHRISTIAN LIFE:
  Conversion                  242-255
  Consecration                256-285
  Love and Praise to Christ   286-329
  Graces and Privileges       330-354
  Faith and Trust             355-378
  Affliction                  379-383
  Prayer                      384-399
  Christian Activity          400-422
  Christian Warfare           423-433
THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH:
  Security and Success        434-444
  Missions                    445-459
  Ministry                    460-465
  Church Fellowship           466-473
  Ordinances                  474-483
THE LIFE BEYOND:
  Death                       484-505
  Judgment                    506-509
  Eternity and Heaven         510-531
MISCELLANEOUS                 532-548




THE OTTERBEIN HYMNAL.


1     Gloria Patri.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, and to the
     Holy Ghost,
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world  without end,
     world without end.
                                        Amen.


2     Gloria Patri.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.
                                        Amen.


3     Old Hundred. L.M.

_Psalm 100._     (1)

Before Jehovah's awful throne,
  Ye nations, bow with sacred joy;
Know that the Lord is God alone;
  He can create, and he destroy.

2 His sovereign power, without our aid,
  Made us of clay, and formed us men;
And when like wandering sheep we strayed,
  He brought us to his fold again.

3 We are his people, we his care--
  Our souls, and all our mortal frame;
What lasting honors shall we rear,
  Almighty Maker, to thy name?

4 We'll crowd thy gates with thankful songs,
  High as the heavens our voices raise;
And earth, with her ten thousand tongues,
  Shall fill thy courts with sounding praise.

5 Wide as the world is thy command;
  Vast as eternity thy love;
Firm as a rock thy truth shall stand,
  When rolling years shall cease to move.

     Isaac Watts.


4     Old Hundred. L.M.

_All Men Invited to Praise God._     (3)

From all that dwell below the skies
Let the Creator's praise arise;
Let the Redeemer's name be sung,
Through every land, by every tongue.

2 Eternal are thy mercies, Lord;
Eternal truth attends thy word;
Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore,
Till suns shall rise and set no more.

3 Your lofty themes, ye mortals, bring,
In songs of praise divinely sing:
The great salvation loud proclaim,
And shout for joy the Savior's name.

4 In every land begin the song;
To every land the strains belong;
In cheerful sounds all voices raise,
And till the world with loudest praise.

     Isaac Watts, 1713.


5     Old Hundred. L.M.

_Psalm 103._     (6)

Awake, my soul, awake my tongue,
My God demands the grateful song;
Let all my inmost powers record
The wondrous mercy of the Lord.

2 Divinely free his mercy flows,
Forgives my sins, allays my woes,
And bids approaching death remove,
And crowns me with indulgent love.

3 His mercy, with unchanging rays,
Forever shines, while time decays;
And children's children shall record
The truth and goodness of the Lord.

4 While all his works his praise proclaim
And men and angels bless his name,
Oh, let my heart, my life, my tongue
Attend, and join the blissful song!

     Anne Steele, 1760.


6     Old Hundred. L.M.

_Doxology._

Praise God, from whom all blessings flow;
Praise him, all creatures here below;
Praise him above, ye heavenly host;
Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

     Thos. Ken.


7     Lord of All Being. L.M.

_Omnipresence._     (17)

Lord of all being! throned afar,
Thy glory flames from sun and star;
Center and soul of ev'ry sphere,
Yet to each loving heart how near!

2 Sun of our life! thy quick'ning ray
Sheds on our path the glow of day;
Star of our hope! thy softened light
Cheers the long watches of the night.

3 Our midnight is thy smile withdrawn;
Our noontide is thy gracious dawn;
Our rainbow arch thy mercy's sign;
All, save the clouds of sin, are thine.

4 Grant us thy truth to make us free,
And kindling hearts that burnt for thee,
Till all thy living altars claim
One holy light, one heavenly flame.

     Oliver Wendell Holmes, 1848.


8     Duke Street. L.M.

_The Majesty of God._     (7)

Come, oh, my soul, in sacred lays,
Attempt thy great Creator's praise;
But oh! what tongue can speak his fame?
What mortal verse can reach the theme?

2 Enthroned amidst the radiant spheres,
He glory like a garment wears;
To form a robe of light divine,
Ten thousand suns around him shine.

3 In all our Master's grand designs,
Omnipotence with wisdom shines;
His works, through all this wondrous frame,
Bear the great impress of his name.

4 Raised on Devotion's lofty wing,
Do thou, my soul! his glories sing;
And let his praise employ thy tongue,
Till listening worlds applaud the song.

     Thomas Blacklock, 1754.


9     Rockingham. L.M.

_Life-long Praise._     (12)

God of my life! through all my days
My grateful powers shall sound my praise;
The song shall wake with opening light,
And warble to the silent night.

2 When anxious cares would break my rest,
And griefs would tear my throbbing breast,
Thy tuneful praises, raised on high,
Shall check the murmur and the sigh.

3 When death o'er nature shall prevail,
And all its powers of language fail,
Joy thro' my swimming eyes shall break,
And mean the thanks I cannot speak.

4 Soon shall I learn th' exalted strains,
Which echo o'er the heavenly plains,
And emulate, with joy unknown,
The growing seraphs round thy throne.

     Philip Doddridge, 1740.


10     Rockingham. L.M.

_Psalm 106._     (15)

Oh, render thanks to God above,
The fountain of eternal love;
Whose mercy firm, through ages past,
Hath stood, and shall forever last.

2 Who can his mighty deeds express,
Not only vast--but numberless?
What mortal eloquence can raise
His tribute of immortal praise?

3 Extend to me that favor, Lord,
Thou to thy chosen dost afford;
When thou return'st to set them free.
Let thy salvation visit me.

     Tate-Brady.


11     Rockingham. L.M.

_God Revealed in Christ._     (600)

Now to the Lord, a noble song!
Awake, my soul! awake, my tongue,
Hosanna to th' eternal name,
And all his boundless love proclaim.

2 See where it shines in Jesus' face,--
The brightest image of his grace!
God, in the person of his Son,
Has all his mightiest works outdone.

3 Grace!--'tis a sweet, a charming theme;
My thoughts rejoice at Jesus' name:
Ye angels! dwell upon the sound;
Ye heavens! reflect it to the ground.

4 Oh! may I live to reach the place,
Where he unveils his lovely face,
Where all his beauties you behold,
And sing his name to harps of gold.

     Isaac Watts, 1707.


12     Rockingham. L.M.

_Unceasing Praise._     (13)

My God! my King! thy various praise
Shall fill the remnant of my days;
Thy grace employ my humble tongue,
Till death and glory raise the song.

2 The wings of every hour shall bear
Some thankful tribute to thine ear;
And every setting sun shall see
New works of duty, done for thee.

3 But who can speak thy wondrous deeds?
Thy greatness all our thoughts exceeds;
Vast and unsearchable thy ways--
Vast and immortal be thy praise.

     Isaac Watts, 1719.


13     Otterbein. L.M.

_Psalm 95._     (4)

Oh, come, loud anthems let us sing,
Loud thanks to our Almighty King!
For we our voices high should raise,
When our salvation's Rock we praise.

2 Into his presence let us haste,
To thank him for his favors past;
To him address, in joyful songs,
The praise that to his name belongs.

3 Oh, let us to his courts repair,
And bow with adoration there;
Down on our knees, devoutly, all
Before the Lord, our Maker, fall.

     Nahum Tate, 1696.


14     Park Street. L.M.

_Joining in Praise._     (75)

Sweet is the work, my God! my King!
To praise thy name, give thanks and sing;
To show thy love by morning light,
And talk of all thy truth at night.

2 Sweet is the day of sacred rest;
No mortal care shall seize my breast;
O may my heart in tune be found,
Like David's harp of solemn sound.

3 My heart shall triumph in the Lord,
And bless his works, and bless his word;
Thy works of grace, how bright they shine!
How deep thy counsels! how divine!

     Isaac Watts.


15     Harvey's Chant. C. M.

_The Goodness of God in His Works._     (26)

Hail! great Creator, wise and good!
  To thee our songs we raise;
Nature, through all her various scenes,
  Invites us to thy praise.

2 At morning, noon, and evening mild,
  Fresh wonders strike our view;
And, while we gaze, our hearts exult
  With transports ever new.

3 Thy glory beams in every star,
  Which gilds the gloom of night;
And decks the smiling face of morn
  With rays of cheerful light.

4 And while, in all thy wondrous ways,
  Thy varied love we see;
Oh, may our hearts, great God, be led
  Through all thy works to thee.

     Anon. 1795.


16     Harvey's Chant. C.M.

_Praise at all Times._     (27)

My soul shall praise thee, O my God
  Through all my mortal days,
And in eternity prolong
  Thy vast, thy boundless praise.

2 In every smiling, happy hour,
  Be this my sweet employ;
Thy praise refines my earthly bliss,
  And heightens all my joy.

3 When anxious grief and gloomy care
  Afflict my throbbing breast,
My tongue shall learn to speak thy praise,
  And lull each pain to rest.

4 Nor shall my tongue alone proclaim
  The honors of my God;
My life, with all its active powers,
  Shall spread thy praise abroad.

5 And when these lips shall cease to move,
  When death shall close these eyes,
My soul shall then to nobler heights
  Of joy and transport rise.

     O. Heigenbotham.


17     Harvey's Chant. C.M.

_Psalm 66._     (24)

Lift up to God the voice of praise,
  Whose breath our souls inspired;
Loud, and more loud the anthem raise,
  With grateful ardor fired.

2 Lift up to God the voice of praise,
  Whose goodness, passing thought,
Loads every minute as it flies,
  With benefits unsought.

3 Lift up to God the voice of praise
