The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Small Catechism of Martin Luther
by Martin Luther, translated by Robert E. Smith.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Small Catechism of Martin Luther

Author: Martin Luther

Translator: Robert E. Smith

Release Date: March 1999 [EBook #1670]
[Most recently updated December 31, 2004]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SMALL CATECHISM ***


Luther's Little Instruction Book:
The Small Catechism of Martin Luther

Translation by Robert E. Smith From the German text, printed in:
Triglot Concordia: The Symbolical Books of the Ev. Lutheran Church.
St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1921, pp. 538-559.

Note: This version of the Small Catechism is under continuous
revision. Please check your source for this file from time to time to
obtain updated versions of this text.

Fort Wayne, Indiana: Project Wittenberg, 2004

I. The Ten Commandments
The Simple Way a Father Should Present Them to His Household

The First Commandment

You must not have other gods. (Exodus 20:3)

What does this mean?

We must fear, love, and trust God more than anything else.

The Second Commandment

You must not misuse your God's name. (Exodus 20:7)

What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that we will not use His name to curse,
swear, cast a spell, lie or deceive, but will use it to call upon Him,
pray to Him, praise Him and thank Him in all times of trouble.

The Third Commandment

You must keep the Sabbath holy. (Exodus 20:8)

What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that we will not look down on preaching
or God's Word, but consider it holy, listen to it willingly, and learn
it.

The Fourth Commandment

You must honor your father and mother. [So that things will go well for
you and you will live long on earth]. (Exodus 20:12)

What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that we will neither look down on our
parents or superiors nor irritate them, but will honor them, serve
them, obey them, love them and value them.

The Fifth Commandment

You must not kill. (Exodus 20:13)

What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that we will neither harm nor hurt our
neighbor's body, but help him and care for him when he is ill.

The Sixth Commandment

You must not commit adultery. (Exodus 20:14)

What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that our words and actions will be clean
and decent and so that everyone will love and honor their spouses.

The Seventh Commandment

You must not steal. (Exodus 20:15)

