The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Faith of Islam, by Edward Sell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Faith of Islam

Author: Edward Sell

Release Date: February 24, 2007 [EBook #20660]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAITH OF ISLAM ***




Produced by Michael Ciesielski, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)





Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text. Original page numbers are shown as {99}.

THE

FAITH OF ISLAM:

BY

THE REV. EDWARD SELL,
FELLOW OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MADRAS.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRUeBNER & CO., LONDON. ADDISON & CO., MADRAS. 1880.

_All rights reserved._

       *       *       *       *       *


MADRAS:
PRINTED BY ADDISON AND CO., MOUNT ROAD.

       *       *       *       *       *


PREFACE.

The following pages embody a study of Islam during a residence of fifteen
years in India, the greater part of which time I have been in daily
intercourse with Musalmans. I have given in the footnotes the authorities
from which I quote. I was not able to procure in Madras a copy of the
Arabic edition of Ibn Khaldoun's great work, but the French translation by
Baron M. de Slane, to which I so frequently refer, is thoroughly reliable.
The quotations from the Quran are made from Rodwell's translation. The
original has been consulted when necessary.

A few slight and occasional errors in transliteration have occurred, such
as Sulat for Salat, Munkar for Munkir, &c., but in no case is the meaning
affected.

In some words, such as Khalif, Khalifate, and Omar, I have retained the
anglicised form instead of using the more correct terms, Khalifa, Khilafat,
'Umr. The letter Q has been used to distinguish the Kaf-i-Karashat from the
Kaf-i-Tazi.

E. S.

      MADRAS,
  _December 1st, 1880._

{v}

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

Introduction. ... PAGE ix

CHAPTER I.

THE FOUNDATIONS OF ISLAM.

The Quran--Its revelation--Miraculous nature--Arrangement of Quran--Osman's
recension. The Sunnat--The authority of Sunnat--Tradition--Bid'at or
innovation--Shia'h Traditions. Ijma'--Ijtihad--Four orthodox Imams, Hanifa,
Malik, Shafa'i and Hanbal. Qias--Established by the early
Mujtahidin--Sterility of Islam ... PAGE 1

Note to Chapter I. Ijtihad ... PAGE 32

CHAPTER II.

EXEGESIS OF THE QURAN AND THE TRADITIONS.

Inspiration--The seven readings--Work of a Commentator--Words and Sentences
of the Quran--Use of the words--Deductions of arguments from the
Quran--Divisions of the Quran--Abrogation--Creation of the Quran--Hadis or
Tradition--Collections of Traditions--Classification of Traditions ... PAGE
37

CHAPTER III.

THE SECTS OF ISLAM.

The Shia'hs--The Imamat--Kharigites--Nur-i-Muhammadi--Imam--Isma,ilians and
Imamites--Ghair-i-Mahdis--Da,iri--Mahmudiah--Khalifate--Sufiism--Persian
Poetry--Darwishes--Omar Khayyam--Wahhabis--their rise--spread in
India--doctrines and influence ... PAGE 73

Note to Chapter III. Wahhabiism ... PAGE 114

{vi}

CHAPTER IV.

THE CREED OF ISLAM

Iman--God--Attributes of God--Discussions on the nature of God--The rise of
the Mutazilites--The Sifatians--Mushabihites--Names of God--Creation of the
Quran. Angels--Recording Angels--Harut and Marut--Munkir and Nakir--Jinn.
The Books--Abrogation--Tahrif. The Prophets--Rank and inspiration of
prophets--Nabi and Rasul--Sinlessness of prophets--The
Anbiya-ulul-'Azm--Miracles of prophets--The Mi'raj. The Resurrection and
the last day--The Trumpets--Descent of the
books--Balances--Bridge--Al-A'raf--Al-Barzakh--Intercession of
Muhammad--Heaven--Hell. The Predestination of good and
evil--Jabrians--Qadrians--Ash'arians--Free-will--Apostacy ... PAGE 116

Note to Chapter IV. Muslim Philosophy ... PAGE 181

CHAPTER V.

THE PRACTICAL DUTIES OF ISLAM.

Farz, wajib, sunnat, mustahab and mubah actions--Haram or unlawful acts.
Tashahhud. Salat--Wazu--Ghusl--Tayammum--Namaz--Farz, sunnat, witr and nafl
rak'ats--Appointed hours of prayer--Friday Namaz and sermon--Namaz on a
journey and in time of war--Namaz in Ramazan, during an eclipse and in time
of drought--Funeral service--Its ritual and prayers. Fasting--Its time and
nature. Zakat--Nisab--Proportion of property to be given as
alms--Recipients of the Zakat. The Hajj--Farz, sunnat, wajib and mustahab
duties connected with the Hajj--Time for the Hajj--Arrival of the Haji at
Mecca--Tawaf--Ceremonies of the Hajj--Conclusion of the Hajj--Formal nature
of Islam ... PAGE 187

Note to Chapter V. Fatva on the Namaz ... PAGE 233

{vii}

CHAPTER VI.

THE FEASTS AND FASTS OF ISLAM.

Muharram--'Ashur Khana--Marsiya--Waqi'a Khan--'Alams--Ceremonies of the
'Ashura--Fatihas for 'Ali, for Hasan and Husain--Akhir-i-char Shamba--Bara
Wafat--Jashn-i-milad-i-Sharif--Asar-i-Sharif--Shab Barat--Ramazan and
'Id-ul-Fitr--'Itikaf--Sadqa--Sermon on the 'Id-ul-Fitr--Baqr-'Id or
'Id-uz-Zuha--Sermon on the 'Id-uz-Zuha--The Qurban or Sacrifice--Festival
of Madar--Festival of Salar Mas'ud Ghazi--Festival of Khaja Khizr--Feast of
Pir Dastgir Sahib--Festival of Qadir Wali Sahib ... PAGE 237

Index of Technical Terms ... PAGE 265

{ix}

       *       *       *       *       *


INTRODUCTION.

It is necessary to enter into some explanation as regards the contents of
this work. It does not fall in with its plan to enter into an account
either of the life of Muhammad or of the wide and rapid spread of the
system founded by him. The first has been done by able writers in England,
France and Germany. I could add nothing new to this portion of the subject,
nor throw new light upon it. The political growth of Muslim nations has
also been set forth in various ways.

It seems to me that the more important study at this time is that of the
religious system which has grown out of the Prophet's teaching, and of its
effect upon the individual and the community. What the Church in her
missionary enterprise has to deal with, what European Governments in the
political world have to do with is Islam as it is, and as it now influences
those who rule and those who are ruled under it.

I have, therefore, tried to show from authentic sources, and from a
practical knowledge of it, what the Faith of Islam really is, and how it
influences men and nations in the present day. I think that recent Fatvas
delivered by the 'Ulama in Constantinople show how firmly a Muslim State is
bound in the fetters of an unchangeable Law, whilst the present practice of
orthodox Muslims all the world {x} over is a constant carrying out of the
precepts given in the Quran and the Sunnat, and an illustration of the
principles I have shown to belong to Islam. On this subject it is not too
much to say that there is, except amongst Oriental scholars, much
misconception.

Again, much that is written on Islam is written either in ignorant
prejudice, or from an ideal standpoint. To understand it aright, one should
know its literature and live amongst its people. I have tried faithfully to
prove every statement I have made; and if, now and again, I have quoted
European authors, it is only by way of illustration. I rest my case
entirely upon Musalman authorities themselves. Still more, I have
ascertained from living witnesses that the principles I have tried to show
as existing in Islam, are really at work now and are as potent as at any
previous period.

I have thus traced up from the very foundations the rise and development of
the system, seeking wherever possible to link the past with the present. In
order not to interfere with this unity of plan, I have had to leave many
subjects untouched, such as those connected with the civil law, with
slavery, divorce, jihad or religious wars, &c. A good digest of Muhammadan
Law[1] will give all necessary information on these points. The basis of
the Law which determines these questions is what I have described in my
first chapter. Ijtihad, for example, rules quite as effectually in a
question of domestic {xi} economy or political jurisprudence as on points
of dogma. It was not, therefore, necessary for me to go into details on
these points.

When I have drawn any conclusion from data which Muhammadan literature, and
the present practice of Muslims have afforded me, I have striven to give
what seems to me a just and right one. Still, I gladly take this
opportunity of stating that I have found many Muslims better than their
creed, men with whom it is a pleasure to associate, and whom I respect for
many virtues and esteem as friends. I judge the system, not any individual
in it.

In India, there are a number of enlightened Muhammadans, ornaments to
native society, useful servants of the State, men who show a laudable zeal
in all social reforms, so far as is consistent with a reputation for
orthodoxy. Their number is far too few, and they do not, in many cases,
represent orthodox Islam, nor do I believe their counterpart would be found
amongst the 'Ulama of a Muslim State. The fact is that the wave of
scepticism which has passed over Europe has not left the East untouched.
Hindu and Muslim alike have felt its influence, but to judge of either the
one system or the other from the very liberal utterances of a few men who
expound their views before English audiences is to yield oneself up to
delusion on the subject.

Islam in India has also felt the influence of contact with other races and
creeds, though, theologically speaking, the Iman and the Din, the faith and
the practice, are unchanged, and remain as I have {xii} described them in
chapters four and five. If Islam in India has lost some of its original
fierceness, it has also adopted many superstitious practices, such as those
against which the Wahhabis protest. The great mass of the Musalman people
are quite as superstitious, if not more so, than their heathen neighbours.
Still the manliness, the suavity of manner, the deep learning, after an
oriental fashion, of many Indian Musalmans render them a very attractive
people. It is true there is a darker side--much bigotry, pride of race,
scorn of other creeds, and, speaking generally, a tendency to inertness. It
is thus that in Bengal, Madras and perhaps in other places, they have
fallen far behind the Hindus in educational status, and in the number of
appointments they hold in the Government service. Indeed, this subject is a
serious one and deserves the special attention of the Indian Government. In
Bengal the proportion of Musalmans to Hindus in the upper ranks of the
Uncovenanted Civil Service in 1871 was 77 to 341. In the year 1880 it had
declined to 53 to 451. The state of affairs in Madras is equally bad. Yet
an intelligent Muslim, as a rule, makes a good official.

Looking at the subject from a wider stand-point, I think the Church has
hardly yet realised how great a barrier this system of Islam is to her
onward march in the East. Surely special men with special training are
required for such an enterprise as that of encountering Islam in its own
strongholds. No better pioneers of the Christian {xiii} faith could be
found in the East than men won from the Crescent to the Cross.

All who are engaged in such an enterprise will perhaps find some help in
this volume, and I am not without hope that it may also throw some light on
the political questions of the day.

{1}

       *       *       *       *       *


THE FAITH OF ISLAM.

CHAPTER I.

THE FOUNDATIONS OF ISLAM.

The creed of Islam, "La-ilaha-il-lal-lahu wa Muhammad-ur-Rasul-Ullah,"
(There is no deity but God, and Muhammad is the Apostle of God) is very
short, but the system itself is a very dogmatic one. Such statements as:
"The Quran is an all-embracing and sufficient code, regulating everything,"
"The Quran contains the _entire_ code of Islam--that is, it is not a book
of religious precepts merely, but it governs all that a Muslim does," "The
Quran contains the whole religion of Muhammad," "The Quran which contains
the whole Gospel of Islam" are not simply misleading, they are erroneous.
So far from the Quran alone being the _sole_ rule of faith and practice to
Muslims, there is not one single sect amongst them whose faith and practice
is based on it alone. No one among them disputes its authority or casts any
doubt upon its genuineness. Its voice is supreme in all that it concerns,
but its exegesis, the whole system of legal jurisprudence and of
theological science, is largely founded on the Traditions. Amongst the
orthodox Musalmans, the foundations of the Faith are four in number, the
Quran, Sunnat, Ijma' and Qias. The fact that all the sects do not agree
with the orthodox--the Sunnis--in this matter illustrates another important
fact in Islam--the want of unity amongst its followers. {2}

1. THE QURAN.--The question of the inspiration will be fully discussed, and
an account of the laws of the exegesis of the Quran will be given in the
next chapter. It is sufficient now to state that this book is held in the
highest veneration by Muslims of every sect. When being read it is kept on
a stand elevated above the floor, and no one must read or touch it without
first making a legal ablution.[2] It is not translated unless there is the
most urgent necessity, and even then the Arabic text is printed with the
translation. It is said that God chose the sacred month of Ramazan in which
to give all the revelations which in the form of books have been vouchsafed
to mankind. Thus on the first night of that month the books of Abraham came
down from heaven; on the sixth the books of Moses; on the thirteenth the
Injil, or Gospel, and on the twenty-seventh the Quran. On that night, the
Laylut-ul-Qadr, or "night of power," the whole Quran is said to have
descended to the lowest of the seven heavens, from whence it was brought
piecemeal to Muhammad as occasion required.[3] "Verily we have caused it
(the Quran) to descend on the night of power." (Sura xcvii. 1.) That night
is called the blessed night, the night better than a thousand months, the
night when angels came down by the permission of their Lord, the night
which bringeth peace and blessings till the rosy dawn. Twice on that night
in the solitude of the cave of Hira the voice called, twice though pressed
sore "as if a fearful weight had been laid upon him," the prophet struggled
{3} against its influence. The third time he heard the words:--

 "Recite thou, in the name of thy Lord who created--
  Created man from clots of blood." (Sura xcvi. 5.)
