The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sermons on the Card and Other Discourses, by
Hugh Latimer, Edited by Henry Morley


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Sermons on the Card and Other Discourses


Author: Hugh Latimer

Release Date: April 22, 2005  [eBook #2458]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SERMONS ON THE CARD AND OTHER
DISCOURSES***






Transcribed from the 1883 Cassell & Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk.





SERMONS ON THE CARD AND OTHER DISCOURSES
by Hugh Latimer


INTRODUCTION.


Hugh Latimer, a farmer's son, was born about the year 1491, at
Thurcaston, in Leicestershire.  He was an only son, with six sisters, who
were all well cared for at home.  He was a boy of fourteen when sent to
Clare College, Cambridge.  When about twenty-four years old, he had
obtained a college fellowship, had taken the degree of Master of Arts,
and was ordained Priest of the Roman Church at Lincoln.  In 1524, at the
age of about thirty, he proceeded to the degree of B.D., and on the
occasion of his doing so he argued publicly for the Pope's authority
against opinions of Melancthon.  Thomas Bilney went afterwards to
Latimer's rooms, gave him his own reasons for good-will to the teaching
of Melancthon, and explained to him his faith as a Reformer in a way that
secured Latimer's attention.  Latimer's free, vigorous mind, admitted the
new reasonings, and in his after-life he looked always upon "little
Bilney" as the man who had first opened his eyes.

With homely earnestness Latimer began soon to express his new
convictions.  His zeal and purity of life had caused him to be trusted by
the University as a maintainer of old ways; he had been appointed cross-
bearer to the University, and elected one of the twelve preachers
annually appointed in obedience to a bull of Pope Alexander VI.  Now
Latimer walked and worked with Bilney, visiting the sick and the
prisoners, and reasoning together of the needs of Christendom.  The
Bishop of the diocese presently forbade Latimer's preaching in any of the
pulpits of the University.  Robert Barnes, prior of the Augustinian
Friars at Cambridge, a man stirred to the depths by the new movement of
thought, then invited Latimer to preach in the church of the
Augustinians.  Latimer was next summoned before Wolsey, whom he satisfied
so well that Wolsey overruled the Bishop's inhibition, and Latimer again
became a free preacher in Cambridge.

The influence of Latimer's preaching became every year greater; and in
December, 1529, he gave occasion to new controversy in the University by
his two Sermons on the Card, delivered in St. Edward's Church, on the
Sunday before Christmas, 1529.  Card-playing was in those days an
amusement especially favoured at Christmas time.  Latimer does not
express disapproval, though the Reformers generally were opposed to it.
The early statutes of St. John's College, Cambridge, forbade playing with
dice or cards by members of the college at any time except Christmas, but
excluded undergraduates even from the Christmas privilege.  In these
sermons Latimer used the card-playing of the season for illustrations of
spiritual truth drawn from the trump card in triumph, and the rules of
the game of primero.  His homely parables enforced views of religious
duty more in accordance with the mind of the Reformers than of those who
held by the old ways.  The Prior of the Dominicans at Cambridge tried to
answer Latimer's sermon on the cards with an antagonistic sermon on the
dice: the orthodox Christian was to win by a throw of cinque and
quatre--the cinque, five texts to be quoted against Luther; and the
quatre the four great doctors of the Church.  Latimer replied with
vigour; others ranged themselves on one side or the other, and there was
general battle in the University; but the King's Almoner soon intervened
with a letter commanding silence on both sides till the King's pleasure
was further declared.  The King's good-will to Latimer was due, as the
letter indicated, to the understanding that Latimer "favoured the King's
cause" in the question of divorce from Katherine of Arragon.

In March, 1530, Latimer was called to preach before Henry VIII., at
Windsor.  The King then made Latimer his chaplain, and in the following
year gave him the rectory of West Kington, in Wiltshire.  The new rector,
soon accused of heresy, was summoned before the Bishop of London and
before Convocation; was excommunicated and imprisoned, and absolved by
special request of the King.  When Cranmer became Archbishop of
Canterbury, Latimer returned into royal favour, and preached before the
King on Wednesdays in Lent.  In 1535, when an Italian nominee of the
Pope's was deprived of the Bishopric of Worcester, Latimer was made his
successor; but resigned in 1539, when the King, having virtually made
himself Pope, dictated to a tractable parliament enforcement of old
doctrines by an Act for Abolishing Diversity of Opinion.  From that time
until the death of Henry VIII. Latimer was in disgrace.

The accession of Edward VI. brought him again to the front, and the
Sermon on the Plough, in this volume, is a famous example of his use of
his power under Edward VI., as the greatest preacher of his time, in
forwarding the Reformation of the Church, and of the lives of those who
professed and called themselves Christians.  The rest of his story will
be associated in another volume of this Library with a collection of his
later sermons.

H. M.




SERMONS ON THE CARD.


THE TENOR AND EFFECT OF CERTAIN SERMONS MADE BY MASTER LATIMER IN
CAMBRIDGE, ABOUT THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 1529.


_Tu quis es_?  Which words are as much to say in English, "Who art thou?"
These be the words of the Pharisees, which were sent by the Jews unto St.
John Baptist in the wilderness, to have knowledge of him who he was:
which words they spake unto him of an evil intent, thinking that he would
have taken on him to be Christ, and so they would have had him done with
their good wills, because they knew that he was more carnal, and given to
their laws, than Christ indeed should be, as they perceived by their old
prophecies; and also, because they marvelled much of his great doctrine,
preaching, and baptizing, they were in doubt whether he was Christ or
not: wherefore they said unto him, "Who art thou?"  Then answered St.
John, and confessed that he was not Christ.

Now here is to be noted the great and prudent answer of St. John Baptist
unto the Pharisees, that when they required of him who he was, he would
not directly answer of himself what he was himself, but he said he was
not Christ: by the which saying he thought to put the Jews and Pharisees
out of their false opinion and belief towards him, in that they would
have had him to exercise the office of Christ; and so declared further
unto them of Christ, saying, "He is in the midst of you and amongst you,
whom ye know not, whose latchet of his shoe I am not worthy to unloose,
or undo."  By this you may perceive that St. John spake much in the laud
and praise of Christ his Master, professing himself to be in no wise like
unto him.  So likewise it shall be necessary unto all men and women of
this world, not to ascribe unto themselves any goodness of themselves,
but all unto our Lord God, as shall appear hereafter, when this question
aforesaid, "Who art thou?" shall be moved unto them: not as the Pharisees
did unto St. John, of an evil purpose, but of a good and simple mind, as
may appear hereafter.

Now then, according to the preacher's mind, let every man and woman, of a
good and simple mind, contrary to the Pharisees' intent, ask this
question, "Who art thou?"  This question must be moved to themselves,
what they be of themselves, on this fashion: "What art thou of thy only
and natural generation between father and mother, when thou camest into
this world?  What substance, what virtue, what goodness art thou of, by
thyself?"  Which question if thou rehearse oftentimes unto thyself, thou
shalt well perceive and understand how thou shalt make answer unto it;
which must be made on this wise: I am of myself, and by myself, coming
from my natural father and mother, the child of the ire and indignation
of God, the true inheritor of hell, a lump of sin, and working nothing of
myself but all towards hell, except I have better help of another than I
have of myself.  Now we may see in what state we enter into this world,
that we be of ourselves the true and just inheritors of hell, the
children of the ire and indignation of Christ, working all towards hell,
whereby we deserve of ourselves perpetual damnation, by the right
judgment of God, and the true claim of ourselves; which unthrifty state
that we be born unto is come unto us for our own deserts, as proveth well
this example following:

Let it be admitted for the probation of this, that it might please the
king's grace now being to accept into his favour a mean man, of a simple
degree and birth, not born to any possession; whom the king's grace
favoureth, not because this person hath of himself deserved any such
favour, but that the king casteth this favour unto him of his own mere
motion and fantasy: and for because the king's grace will more declare
his favour unto him, he giveth unto this said man a thousand pounds in
lands, to him and his heirs, on this condition, that he shall take upon
him to be the chief captain and defender of his town of Calais, and to be
true and faithful to him in the custody of the same, against the
Frenchmen especially, above all other enemies.

This man taketh on him this charge, promising his fidelity thereunto.  It
chanceth in process of time, that by the singular acquaintance and
frequent familiarity of this captain with the Frenchmen, these Frenchmen
give unto the said captain of Calais a great sum of money, so that he
will but be content and agreeable that they may enter into the said town
of Calais by force of arms; and so thereby possess the same unto the
crown of France.  Upon this agreement the Frenchmen do invade the said
town of Calais, alonely by the negligence of this captain.

Now the king's grace, hearing of this invasion, cometh with a great
puissance to defend this his said town, and so by good policy of war
overcometh the said Frenchmen, and entereth again into his said town of
Calais.  Then he, being desirous to know how these enemies of his came
thither, maketh profound search and inquiry by whom this treason was
conspired.  By this search it was known and found his own captain to be
the very author and the beginner of the betraying of it.  The king,
seeing the great infidelity of this person, dischargeth this man of his
office, and taketh from him and from his heirs this thousand pounds of
possessions.  Think you not that the king doth use justice unto him, and
all his posterity and heirs?  Yes, truly: the said captain cannot deny
himself but that he had true justice, considering how unfaithfully he
behaved him to his prince, contrary to his own fidelity and promise.  So
likewise it was of our first father Adam.  He had given unto him the
spirit of science and knowledge, to work all goodness therewith: this
said spirit was not given alonely unto him, but unto all his heirs and
posterity.  He had also delivered him the town of Calais; that is to say,
paradise in earth, the most strong and fairest town in the world, to be
in his custody.  He nevertheless, by the instigation of these Frenchmen,
that is to say, the temptation of the fiend, did obey unto their desire;
and so he brake his promise and fidelity, the commandment of the
everlasting King his master, in eating of the apple by him inhibited.

Now then the King, seeing this great treason in his captain, deposed him
of the thousand pounds of possessions, that is to say, from everlasting
life in glory, and all his heirs and posterity: for likewise as he had
the spirit of science and knowledge, for him and his heirs; so in like
manner, when he lost the same, his heirs also lost it by him and in him.
So now this example proveth, that by our father Adam we had once in him
the very inheritance of everlasting joy; and by him, and in him, again we
lost the same.

The heirs of the captain of Calais could not by any manner of claim ask
of the king the right and title of their father in the thousand pounds of
possessions, by reason the king might answer and say unto them, that
although their father deserved not of himself to enjoy so great
possessions, yet he deserved by himself to lose them, and greater,
committing so high treason, as he did, against his prince's commandments;
whereby he had no wrong to lose his title, but was unworthy to have the
same, and had therein true justice.  Let not you think, which be his
heirs, that if he had justice to lose his possessions, you have wrong to
lose the same.  In the same manner it may be answered unto all men and
women now being, that if our father Adam had true justice to be excluded
from his possession of everlasting glory in paradise, let us not think
the contrary that be his heirs, but that we have no wrong in losing also
the same; yea, we have true justice and right.  Then in what miserable
estate we be, that of the right and just title of our own deserts have
lost the everlasting joy, and claim of ourselves to be true inheritors of
hell!  For he that committeth deadly sin willingly, bindeth himself to be
inheritor of everlasting pain: and so did our forefather Adam willingly
eat of the apple forbidden.  Wherefore he was cast out of the everlasting
joy in paradise into this corrupt world, amongst all vileness, whereby of
himself he was not worthy to do any thing laudable or pleasant to God,
evermore bound to corrupt affections and beastly appetites, transformed
into the most uncleanest and variablest nature that was made under
heaven; of whose seed and disposition all the world is lineally
descended, insomuch that this evil nature is so fused and shed from one
into another, that at this day there is no man nor woman living that can
of themselves wash away this abominable vileness: and so we must needs
grant of ourselves to be in like displeasure unto God, as our forefather
Adam was.  By reason hereof as I said, we be of ourselves the very
children of the indignation and vengeance of God, the true inheritors of
hell, and working all towards hell: which is the answer to this question,
made to every man and woman, by themselves, "Who art thou?"

And now, the world standing in this damnable state, cometh in the
occasion of the incarnation of Christ.  The Father in heaven, perceiving
the frail nature of man, that he, by himself and of himself, could do
nothing for himself, by his prudent wisdom sent down the second person in
Trinity, his Son Jesus Christ, to declare unto man his pleasure and
commandment: and so, at the Father's will, Christ took on him human
nature, being willing to deliver man out of this miserable way, and was
content to suffer cruel passion in shedding his blood for all mankind;
and so left behind for our safeguard laws and ordinances, to keep us
always in the right path unto everlasting life, as the evangelists, the
sacraments, the commandments, and so forth: which, if we do keep and
observe according to our profession, we shall answer better unto this
question, "Who art thou?" than we did before.  For before thou didst
enter into the sacrament of baptism, thou wert but a natural man, a
natural woman; as I might say, a man, a woman: but after thou takest on
thee Christ's religion, thou hast a longer name; for then thou art a
christian man, a christian woman.  Now then, seeing thou art a christian
man, what shall be thy answer of this question, "Who art thou?"

The answer of this question is, when I ask it unto myself, I must say
that I am a christian man, a christian woman, the child of everlasting
joy, through the merits of the bitter passion of Christ.  This is a
joyful answer.  Here we may see how much we be bound and in danger unto
God, that hath revived us from death to life, and saved us that were
damned: which great benefit we cannot well consider, unless we do
remember what we were of ourselves before we meddled with him or his
laws; and the more we know our feeble nature, and set less by it, the
more we shall conceive and know in our hearts what God hath done for us;
and the more we know what God hath done for us, the less we shall set by
ourselves, and the more we shall love and please God: so that in no
condition we shall either know ourselves or God, except we do utterly
confess ourselves to be mere vileness and corruption.  Well, now it is
come unto this point, that we be christian men, christian women, I pray
you what doth Christ require of a christian man, or of a christian woman?
Christ requireth nothing else of a christian man or woman, but that they
will observe his rule: for likewise as he is a good Augustine friar that
keepeth well St. Augustine's rule, so is he a good christian man that
keepeth well Christ's rule.

Now then, what is Christ's rule?  Christ's rule consisteth in many
things, as in the commandments, and the works of mercy, and so forth.  And
for because I cannot declare Christ's rule unto you at one time, as it
ought to be done, I will apply myself according to your custom at this
time of Christmas: I will, as I said, declare unto you Christ's rule, but
that shall be in Christ's cards.  And whereas you are wont to celebrate
Christmas in playing at cards, I intend, by God's grace, to deal unto you
Christ's cards, wherein you shall perceive Christ's rule.  The game that
we will play at shall be called the triumph, which, if it be well played
at, he that dealeth shall win; the players shall likewise win; and the
standers and lookers upon shall do the same; insomuch that there is no
man that is willing to play at this triumph with these cards, but they
shall be all winners, and no losers.

Let therefore every christian man and woman play at these cards, that
they may have and obtain the triumph: you must mark also that the triumph
must apply to fetch home unto him all the other cards, whatsoever suit
they be of.  Now then, take ye this first card, which must appear and be
shewed unto you as followeth: you have heard what was spoken to men of
the old law, "Thou shalt not kill; whosoever shall kill shall be in
danger of judgment: but I say unto you" of the new law, saith Christ,
"that whosoever is angry with his neighbour, shall be in danger of
judgment; and whosoever shall say unto his neighbour, 'Raca,' that is to
say, brainless," or any other like word of rebuking, "shall be in danger
of council; and whosoever shall say unto his neighbour, 'Fool,' shall be
in danger of hell-fire."  This card was made and spoken by Christ, as
appeareth in the fifth chapter of St. Matthew.

Now it must be noted, that whosoever shall play with this card, must
first, before they play with it, know the strength and virtue of the
same: wherefore you must well note and mark terms, how they be spoken,
and to what purpose.  Let us therefore read it once or twice, that we may
be the better acquainted with it.

Now behold and see, this card is divided into four parts: the first part
is one of the commandments that was given unto Moses in the old law,
before the coming of Christ; which commandment we of the new law be bound
to observe and keep, and it is one of our commandments.  The other three
