Project Gutenberg's Key to the Science of Theology, by Parley P. Pratt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Key to the Science of Theology

Author: Parley P. Pratt

Release Date: March 3, 2011 [EBook #35470]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KEY TO THE SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project,
http://bencrowder.net/books/mtp. Volunteers: Benjamin
Bytheway, Hilton Campbell, Ben Crowder, Meridith Crowder,
Cameron Dixon, Tod Robbins, David Van Leeuwen.





Frontispiece.

  Fly--fly--these thoughts on the lightning car,
  With the speed of light to the realms afar!
  Mount--mount the car with the horse of fire;
  Outstrip the wind, he will never tire,
  Let the wild bird scream as he lags behind,
  And the hurricane a champion find.
  Search the darkest spot where mortals dwell:
  With a voice of thunder the tidings tell,
  Proclaim the dawn of a brighter day,
  When the _King of kings_ shall his sceptre sway.
  Bid pain, and anguish, and sorrow cease,
  And open the way for the _Prince of Peace_.
  He will conquer death, bid mourning flee,
  And give to the nations a _Jubilee_.




KEY
TO THE
SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY:

DESIGNED AS

An Introduction

TO THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF SPIRITUAL PHILOSOPHY; RELIGION; LAW AND
GOVERNMENT; AS DELIVERED BY THE ANCIENTS, AND AS RESTORED IN THIS AGE,
FOR THE FINAL DEVELOPMENT OF UNIVERSAL PEACE, TRUTH AND KNOWLEDGE.


BY PARLEY P. PRATT.


    O Truth divine! what treasures unrevealed,
    In thine exhaustless fountains are concealed!
    Words multiplied; how powerless to tell,
    The infinitude with which our bosoms swell.


Liverpool:
F. D. RICHARDS, 15, WILTON STREET.

London:
L.D SAINTS' BOOK DEPOT, 35, JEWIN ST., CITY,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


1855.




ENTERED AT STATIONERS' HALL.


J. Sadler, Printer, 1, Moorfields, Liverpool.




CONTENTS.


Preface

CHAPTER I.

  Theology--its definition--historical illustrations

CHAPTER II.

  Decline and loss of this science among the Jews

CHAPTER III.

  Progress, decline and final loss of the science of Theology among
  the Gentiles--foreshadowings of its restoration for the ushering in
  of the Millennium

CHAPTER IV.

  Rise, progress, decline and loss of the science of Theology on the
  Western Hemisphere, as brought to light by the late discovery of
  Ancient American Records

CHAPTER V.

  Keys of the mysteries of the Godhead

CHAPTER VI.

  Origin of the Universe

CHAPTER VII.

  Destiny of the Universe

CHAPTER VIII.

  Key of Knowledge, Power and Government

CHAPTER IX.

  Revival, or restoration of the science of Theology, in the present
  age

CHAPTER X.

  Keys of initiation in practical Theology

CHAPTER XI.

  Philosophy of Miracles

CHAPTER XII.

  Angels and Spirits

CHAPTER XIII.

  Dreams

CHAPTER XIV.

  The world of Spirits

CHAPTER XV.

  Resurrection, its times and degrees--first, second and third
  heavens; or, the Telestial, Terrestrial and Celestial kingdoms

CHAPTER XVI.

  Further remarks on man's physical and intellectual
  progress--Philosophy of will, as originating, directing and
  controlling all voluntary animal motion--astounding facts, in
  relation to the speed, or velocity of motion, as attainable by
  physical man--intercommunication of the inhabitants of different and
  distant planets

CHAPTER XVII.

  Laws of marriage and procreation




PREFACE.


The present is an age of progress, of change, of rapid advance, and of
wonderful revolutions.

The very foundations of society--social, political, commercial, moral
and religious, seem to be shaken as with a mighty earthquake, from
centre to circumference. All things tremble; creation groans; the
world is in travail, and pains to be delivered.

A new era has dawned upon our planet, and is advancing with
accelerated force--with giant strides.

The rail-roads and the steam-boats, with their progressive
improvements in speed, safety and convenience, are extending and
multiplying the means of travel, of trade, of association, and
intercommunication between countries whose inhabitants have been
comparatively unknown to, or estranged from, each other.

But, as if even these means were too slow for the God-like
aspirations, the mighty throes of human thought, and its struggles for
light and expansion, man seizes the lightning, tames and subdues it,
and makes it the bearer of his thoughts and despatches. While these
things are in progress by one portion of mankind, another learns to
seize and control a sunbeam, in a manner subservient to the progress
of the fine arts: and by which means a man performs in a minute, the
work which a short time since would have employed the most active
years of a lifetime.

While every science, every art is being developed; while the mind is
awakened to new thought; while the windows of heaven are opened, as it
were, and the profound depths of human intellect are stirred--moved
from the foundation on all other subjects, religious knowledge seems
at a stand still.

The _creeds_ of the Fathers seem to have been cast in the mould of
other ages, to be adapted to a more narrow sphere of intellectual
development, and to be composed of material too much resembling cast
iron; or, at least, not sufficiently elastic to expand with the
expansion of mind, to grow with the growth, and advance with the
progressive principles of the age.

For these reasons, perhaps more than any other, the master spirits of
the age are breaking loose from the old moorings, and withdrawing from
established and venerated systems, by which means society is
distracted, divided, broken up, thrown, as it were, into a chaos of
confused, disorganized individualization, without a standard or
rallying point, without a nucleus by which to concentrate or
re-organise this chaotic mass, these atoms of thought.

One thing is certain--according to ancient prophecy, and agreeable to
the general expectation of this and other ages, the day approaches
which will flood the earth with the pure principles of religious
knowledge; a day when none will have to teach his neighbour, saying,
Know ye the Lord; for all persons shall know Him, from the least to
the greatest.

It should be a matter of serious thought and investigation--without
respect to party, sect, or creed, whether there should not, in the
very nature of present circumstances, and future Millennial hopes, be
an entire remodelling, or re-organization of religious society, upon
the broad basis of revealed knowledge, tangible fact, and
philosophical, scientific and spiritual Truth--a universal
"_standard_," of immutable Truth, instead of numberless systems
founded on uncertainty, opinion, mere human impression, or conjecture.

Can anything short of such a standard unite society, enlighten the
world, establish real peace, brotherhood and fellowship, and put a
final end to all religious ignorance, superstition, jargon, or
discord? Is not a difference of opinion, or a disagreement on any
given subject, a proof positive of existing ignorance, or want of
light or information, on the part of the parties disagreeing? If so,
the present age is certainly in the dark, or, in a great measure,
ignorant on religious subjects. A knowledge of the Truth can alone
bring the desired union, and bid discord cease. If the Scriptures be
true, it is not religious _opinion_ which will cover the earth, and
universally pervade every bosom, but it is, a KNOWLEDGE, "The
knowledge of God." "_God is Truth_." To _know_ Him, is to know the
Truth.

The present Volume aims to embody, in a concise and somewhat original
manner and style, a general view of the Science of Theology, as
gathered from revelation, history, prophecy, reason and analogy.

If the Work proves an introductory key to some of the first principles
of the divine science of which it treats; if it serves to open the
eyes of any of his fellowmen, on the facts of the past, the present,
and the future; if it leads to investigation and inquiry, and calls
public attention to the greater and more particular truths which have
been, or are about to be, revealed as a standard by which to unite the
people of all nations and of all religions upon the rock, the sure
foundation of divine, eternal, uncreated, infinite and exhaustless
Truth, it will have accomplished the end aimed at by

                                              THE AUTHOR.




Key to Theology.


CHAPTER I.

THEOLOGY--ITS DEFINITION--HISTORICAL ILLUSTRATIONS.


   Eternal Science! who would fathom thee
   Must launch his bark upon a shoreless sea.
   Thy knowledge yet shall overwhelm the earth,
   Thy truth to immortality to give birth;
   Thy dawn shall kindle to eternal day,
   And man, immortal, still shall own thy sway.

First. THEOLOGY is the science of communication, or of correspondence,
between God, angels, spirits, and men, by means of visions, dreams,
interpretations, conversations, inspirations, or the spirit of
prophecy and revelation.

Second. It is the science by which worlds are organized, sustained,
and directed, and the elements controlled.

Third. It is the science of knowledge, and the key and power thereof,
by which the heavens are opened, and lawful access is obtained to the
treasures of wisdom and intelligence--inexhaustible, infinite,
embracing the past, the present, and the future.

Fourth. It is the science of life--endless and eternal, by which the
living are changed or translated, and the dead raised.

Fifth. It is the science of _faith_, reformation, and remission of
sins, whereby a fallen race of mortals may be justified, cleansed, and
restored to the communion and fellowship of that Holy Spirit which is
the light of the world, and of every intelligence therein.

Sixth. It is the science of spiritual gifts, by which the blind see,
the deaf hear, the lame walk, the sick are healed, and demons are
expelled from the human system.

Seventh. It is the science of all other sciences and useful arts,
being in fact the very fountain from which they emanate. It includes
philosophy, astronomy, history, mathematics, geography, languages, the
science of letters; and blends the knowledge of all matters of fact,
in every branch of art, or of research. It includes, also, all the
scientific discoveries and inventions--agriculture, the mechanical
arts, architecture, shipbuilding, the properties and applications of
the mariner's compass, navigation, and music. All that is useful,
great, and good; all that is calculated to sustain, comfort, instruct,
edify, purify, refine, or exalt intelligences; originated by this
science, and this science alone, all other sciences being but branches
growing out of _this--root_.

Some of the facts stated in the foregoing, are beautifully illustrated
in Theological history, of which the following is an imperfect
summary--

God spake, and the worlds were framed by His word.

He spake, darkness dispersed, and light prevailed.

He commanded, and the elements--water and earth, separated, and
assumed their proper bounds.

He commanded, and the earth brought forth vegetable and animal life in
countless variety.

He commanded, and man, male and female, took upon them a tabernacle of
flesh, and prepared to multiply and perpetuate their species in the
new creation.

"The Lord God planted a garden," and thus introduced agriculture.

"He made coats of skins," hence the tailor's art.

The Lord God commanded and gave pattern for Noah's Ark, thus
introducing the art of shipbuilding.

He revealed the patterns for the Tabernacle in the wilderness, with
all its arrangements and furniture; and afterwards developed the
entire plan and all the designs of that most stupendous of all works
of art--the great Temple of Solomon, with all its furniture; thus
developing and improving the art of architecture.

The Lord God wrote with His own finger on the "tables of stone," on
Mount Sinai; thus showing that the science of letters was cultivated
and used by the highest Intelligence of the eternal heavens.

The Lord God has revealed by Ezekiel the Prophet, a plan for the
survey and division of Palestine to the Twelve Tribes of Israel, on
their return to the land of their fathers; also for laying out the new
city of Jerusalem, with its squares, blocks, public grounds, and
suburbs, and its temple.

Thus Theology includes the surveyor's art, and the planning of cities,
as well as temples, and shows that these arts are cultivated in
heaven, and that the very highest Intelligence of the Heaven of
heavens, stoops, or condescends, to grace these arts by His own
particular attention and example.

In the Revelation of John the Apostle, on the Isle of Patmos, we have
a specimen, a masterpiece, a climax of all that is great and grand in
design, and splendid and glorious in execution, in cities, thrones,
palaces, streets, pavements, outgrounds, gates, walks, squares,
fountains, rivulets, gardens, fruits, groves, specimens of dress,
poetry, song, music, marriage, bridal dress, feasting, books,
literature, public worship, prophesying, prayer, and praise, as
existing in and around the palaces of the New Jerusalem, the capital
of heaven, the seat of government of the Eternal King.

The very gates of the city are numbered and named, together with the
particular names of the precious stones forming the foundations
thereof; the gold which composed the pavement of the streets--all are
portrayed in the description.

And what is still more marvellous, all this surpassing grandeur of
design, and stupendous wisdom and display in execution, were explored,
comprehended, and described by a poor, illiterate fisherman, by the
aid of the science and arts of Theology.

Having reviewed some of the works of the great Head--the President or
First Teacher in the school of Theology, we will still continue the
historic illustrations of this wonderful science, as developed and
exemplified by the most eminent students and professors of the same.

By this science Adam obtained from his Father, the promise of the
eternal dominion over the planet on which he was placed.

By this science Enoch overcame death, and ascended to a higher sphere
of immortality and eternal life, without even being separated from his
fleshly tabernacle.

By this science Noah foretold the flood, prepared to meet the event,
and, with his family, survived the same, and became the greatest
landed proprietor since Adam.

By the perversion and unlawful use of this science king Nimrod built
the stupendous Tower of Babel, but was frustrated, and his works were
destroyed before their completion.

By this science various tongues and languages were instituted, and
colonies--the germs of nations, planted beyond the seas and in all the
earth.

By this science Abraham escaped the idolatry and priestcraft of the
Egyptians, and of the world around him; obtained a good land secured
to him and his seed by an immutable oath, covenant, and an
everlasting, unchangeable title.

By this science he conversed with angels, and was favoured with a
personal interview with the Great Head and Founder of the science, who
became his guest, and, after eating and drinking with him, blessed him
and his wife, promised them an heir in their old age, and finally, on
parting, told him His design on Sodom and its neighbourhood.

By this science Lot escaped the flames of Sodom, the knowledge being
communicated by two angels.

By this science Isaac and Jacob also obtained promises, and conversed
with angels.

By it Joseph was exalted from a dungeon to a palace, for the
salvation, from famine, of a nation and of his father's house.

By this science Moses performed his wonders in Egypt, in the Red Sea,
and in the wilderness.

By the perversion and unlawful use of this science the magicians of
Egypt withstood Moses for a time, and performed their enchantments.

By this science Joshua controlled the motions of the earth, and
lengthened out the day by a simple command.

By this science the walls of Jericho were levelled with the earth, and
the city was taken.

By this science the Jordan river was divided, while a nation crossed
dry shod, to take possession of the promised land.

By this science Elijah controlled the heavens, that it rained not for
three years and six months in Palestine. And by it he called forth and
restored rain.

By it he overthrew the priests of Baal, and the kingdom of Ahab; put
an end to the royal family of this idolatrous king; and placed Jehu on
the throne.

By it he rose, like Enoch, to a higher sphere, without returning to
dust.

By this science Samuel prophesied, raised up a mighty king and nation,
and afterwards dethroned Saul, and exalted an obscure shepherd boy to
the throne of Israel.

By this science Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and others,
foretold the fate of Babylon, Egypt, Tyre, Jerusalem, and other cities
and nations; and the exact career and final doom of Nebuchadnezzar,
Belteshazzar, Cyrus, and other great and important personages, who
were destined in turn to influence and decide the fate of nations.

By this science the furnace of fire was overcome, and the months of
lions were closed, that no harm should befall the holy men of God.

By this science Zachariah, Elizabeth, John the Baptist, Simeon, Anna,
Joseph, Mary, the wise men from the east, and the shepherds of Judea,
enjoyed visions, communion with angels, and the spirit of prophecy, so
as to understand and welcome with joy the events of the birth and
approaching ministry of Jesus Christ, when, as yet, all those not
versed in this science, were in darkness on the subject, and as liable
to reject the Saviour as to receive him.

Dreams and visions, enjoyed by means of this science, led and
protected the Son of God in all his career of mortal life.

Finally--By this same power a mighty angel descended, shook the earth,
frightened the Roman guards, rolled away the great stone, broke the
seal of the tomb, and called to life the sleeping body of Jesus
Christ.

By this power the risen Jesus, eating, drinking, and conversing with
his disciples, after his resurrection, commissioned and instructed
them in the same science, ordained them to act in the same, and to
impart its power to others, in all the world, with signs following
them that believed.

By this science he ascended to the Father, and lives for ever in the
flesh, to shed forth the gifts and powers of the same science,
according to his own will, and the will of his Father, to reign
henceforth until he descends to the earth, conquers death in a last
great conflict, and puts all enemies under his feet.

By this same power his Apostles, being clothed with the full powers of
the same on the day of Pentecost, ministered the powers and knowledge
of this science to others, both Jew and Gentile, insomuch that the
sick were healed, the blind saw, the dumb spake, the deaf heard, the
lame walked, devils were cast out, and the dead were raised, while
everywhere, dreams, visions, the ministering of angels, and the gift
of prophecy were enjoyed.


