Project Gutenberg's Chimes of Mission Bells, by Maria Antonia Field

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Chimes of Mission Bells

Author: Maria Antonia Field

Posting Date: March 19, 2009 [EBook #6894]
Release Date: November, 2004

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHIMES OF MISSION BELLS ***




Produced by David Schwan







CHIMES OF MISSION BELLS

An Historical Sketch of California and Her Missions


By Maria Antonia Field




                      To the Revered Memory of
                      Junipero Serra

                      And of
                      My Great Grandparents
                      Esteban and Catalina Munras

                      This Book Is
                      Affectionately Dedicated



Acknowledgment of Gratitude

In producing this book I wish to thank my Mother, who wrote for me in
modern notation the music of the hymns of the Mission Fathers which are
contained in this work, and gave me much welcome information; also Rev.
Raymond M. Mestres, my zealous parish Priest, successor and compatriot
of Junipero Serra and the Mission Padres, for valuable data, and for
allowing me access to the early archives of San Carlos Mission and of
the Mission Church of Monterey.

Maria Antonia Field Monterey, California, June 1, 1914



Contents


Translation of the Names of the Missions

Tribute to Junipero Serra and the Mission Padres

Chapter I Junipero Serra, Leader of the Heroic Band of Spanish
Missionaries of California. His Coming to San Fernando, Mexico, Thence
to California

Chapter II Brief Sketch of the Conquest of California and of the
Founding of the Missions. Hospitality of the Missions. Care and
Benevolence of the Missionaries Toward the Indians

Chapter III More About San Carlos Mission and Monterey

Chapter IV California Under Spanish Rule

Chapter V California Passes from Spanish to Mexican Rule. Secularization
of the Missions

Chapter VI California Passes from Mexican to American Rule

Chapter VII Mission Anecdotes and Hymns

Chapter VIII Retrospection of the Work of the Spanish Missionaries,
Explorers and Settlers and their place in California's Appreciation

Chapter IX Rev. Raymond M. Mestres Writes Historical Drama "Fray
Junipero"

Appendix A Letter of Junipero Serra. The Meaning of California Missions.
Dances of Early California Times




Preface


In presenting this modest volume to the public, I wish to call the
attention of my readers to the following facts. Firstly, my humble work
is a work of love--love simple and unalloyed for the venerable Spanish
Missionaries of California and for the noble sons and daughters of Spain
who gave such a glorious beginning and impetus to our state. Being a
direct descendant of pioneer Spaniards of Monterey, I take a particular
interest in California's early history and development and as my family
were staunch friends of the Missionary Fathers and in a position to
know the state of affairs of those times, and to family tradition I
have added authentic knowledge from reading the earliest archives of
San Carlos Mission, as well as other historical references, I feel I can
fearlessly vouch for the truthfulness of my little work. Secondly--while
fully appreciating the sympathy and interest of many charming and
intellectual characters who grace California to-day, it must be admitted
that there is a sadly ignorant or misinformed number who scarcely
seem to know who Spaniards and their descendants are, judging from the
promiscuous way the term "Spanish" is used, and what is the result of
this among many? Prejudice, and absurd misunderstanding of the golden
days of Spanish California as well as of the Spanish race and character.
It is far from being my wish to offend, but I wish to present correct
historical facts. Thirdly--there is no pretense to consider this brief
sketch a complete or detailed history, but only a truthful outline of
the heroic and chivalrous Mission days.

Maria Antonia Field.




Translation of the Names of the Missions.


1. San Diego.--A Spanish form of Saint James, who is the Patron Saint of
Spain.

2. San Carlos.--Saint Charles. Mission San Carlos and the Royal Chapel
of Monterey were so named in honor of Saint Charles the Patron Saint of
King Carlos III under whose reign the mission was founded.

3. San Antonio De Padua.--St. Anthony of Padua.

4. San Gabriel.--St. Gabriel (the Angel of the Annunciation.).

5. San Luis Obispo.--Saint Louis, Bishop.

6. Nuestra Senora de Los Dolores.--Our Lady of Sorrows.

7. San Juan Capistrano.--St. John Capistrano.

8. Santa Clara.--Saint Clara.

9. San Buenaventura.--Saint Bonaventure.

10. Santa Barbara.--Saint Barbara (whose feast is commemorated on
December 4, the date of the foundation of the Mission.)

11. Purisima Concepcion.--Most Pure Conception (of the Blessed Virgin
Mary). This feast is celebrated on December 8, the day on which this
mission was founded.

12. Nuestra Senora De La Soledad.--Our Lady of Solitude. (In the
Catholic Church the Blessed Virgin Mary is venerated under this title to
commemorate her solitude from the time of our Saviour's death until His
Resurrection).

13. Santa Cruz.--Holy Cross (so named in honor of Our Saviour's
Passion).

14. San Jose.--Saint Joseph.

15. San Juan Bautista.--Saint John, Baptist (whose feast occurs on June
24, the day this mission was founded).

16. San Miguel.--Saint Michael.

17. San Fernando, Rey De Espana.--Saint Ferdinand, King of Spain.

18. San Luis, Rey De Francia.--Saint Louis, King of France.

19. Santa Ynez.--Saint Agnes.

20. San Rafael.--Saint Raphael.

21. San Francisco Solano.--Saint Francis Solano.




CHIMES OF MISSION BELLS

Tribute to Junipero Serra and the Mission Padres.

By Maria Antonia Field.

Read at the Crowning of the Serra Statue, Monterey, Nov. 23, 1913.



     The fickle world ofttimes applauds the rise
     Of men whose laurels are but vainly won,
     Whose deeds their names could not immortalize
     For their soul-toils were wrought for transient ends;
     But heroes of the Cross, they truly great
     Shall live, their halo shall no hand of fate

     Have power to rob, albeit oblivious years
     May veil the radiance of their glorious works,
     Or slight their excellence, their light appears
     But brighter, statelier in its splendor calm,
     Or like the flowers that sleep through winter's snow
     To bloom more fair, their lives' pure beams shall glow

     With greater brilliance and sweetly gleam
     As lodestars in the firmament of worth;
     Such is the memory whose holy stream
     Of noblest virtue, valor, truth and Faith,
     Illumes our path and stirs our souls today,
     Immortal Serra by whose tomb we pray!

     What peerless aureole wreathes his saintly brow?
     What stately monument doth bear his name?
     Let this admiring thousands tell us now!
     Let youthful lips pronounce his name with love!
     Let California proudly sing his praise!
     Let scions of fair Spain their voices raise,

     And tell of him to whom so much we owe,
     Tell of his interceding power with God,
     His strong and lofty soul his children know,
     His prayers where Carmel's River flows so clear;
     O this his aureole, this his monument,
     The lasting kind which ne'er will know descent.

     Another lesson must the worldly learn,
     From him who sought nor praise nor fame;
     His birth, ten score agone, and still we turn
     To him in reverence, his name is sweet
     As vernal bloom, his life shows forth God's might,
     Through him this soil received Faith's warm sunlight!

     This beauteous land was strange, unknown and wild,
     Spite all its treasures, lordly trees and flowers;
     For tribes with pagan rites its wastes defiled,
     Till came Spain's noble band of godly men,
     Explorers true and zealous priests who gave
     Their lives' best years, forgotten souls to save!

     'Tis just we venerate each hallowed stone
     Which rears the wond'rous "Temples of the West";
     The tears, the toils, the nightly vigils lone;
     The pilgrim-journeys of Saint Francis' sons,
     The rescued souls by lustral waters cleansed,
     The wealth of hospitality dispensed.

     All this and more if but their walls could speak,
     Would tell this day; and we in whose veins flows
     The fervent blood of Spain, to us each streak
     Of light which doth reveal a picture true
     Of gentle friar and lovely vanished times
     Is tender as the Angelus' sweet chimes.

     Well may each Mission have a holy spell,
     And Serra's name become a household word,
     What marvels can each yellowed archive tell
     Of him and of his martyr-spirit band.
     O faithful, dauntless hearts! What brilliant sons
     Of that great galaxy of Spain's brave sons!

     We love their saintly lives to ponder o'er,
     While childhood's fireside tales come back to us,
     And memory unfolds her precious store,
     The bygone glories of the Mission towns,
     The grand old hymns sung at sweet Mary's shrines
     The Spanish color rich as luscious wines

