prayer, and he blessed God that he could do so in all trouble and trial.

The old man having asked C. how he came to visit them, he replied he
didn't know, but supposed God had sent him, as he had awoke and couldn't
again sleep on account of thought of him.

The incident made a serious and lasting impression on young C's mind.

In the morning, as C. was returning home, he came by his father's house;
his mother, espying his pail, wished to know where he had been. He
replied, "To feed the hungry." His father spreading the incident, the
neighbors all turned out and brought in enough provision to last them
during several weeks, the old man being greatly loved and respected by
his community, on account of his sterling Christian life and character.

Mr. Joseph Clason is still living, now seventy-five years of age, in
Bazine, Ness county, Kansas.


THAT BEAUTIFUL CHRISTMAS GIFT. HOW THE LORD USED IT.


A lady and gentleman were walking up Madison avenue, New York City, from
church, when incidentally the lady said, "We are trying to get up
Christmas decorations and entertainment for our Mission School."

"_Well, put my name down for anything you like_," and then came into his
mind a certain sum to give.

A day passed on, it seemed forgotten; but a note from the lady reminded
him of his promise, and he responded, giving the exact sum originally
thought of, $25. Notice, now, the most singular disposition of it,
which, by the hand of Providence, was made to go on its circuitous way
to meet those who needed it most.

The next Sabbath, the lady and gentleman again meeting each other, she
said, "Your gift was too large. I cannot take so much from you. I shall
give you back part."

"But I won't take it."

"Well, you must. I can't keep it."

It resulted in the lady taking $15 from her muff and forcing it back
into the gentleman's hand.

The gentleman felt badly. "_I intended this for the Lord, and now it is
refused. It is the first time I ever heard that money ever given to a
Sunday school was not wanted. I meant the whole for the. Lord_. If she
don't want it and wont keep it, I will give the rest away. _It does not
belong to me_." Before night he had enclosed it in a letter and sent it
out of the city to an invalid as a _Christmas present_. He had occasion
not long after to visit the invalid, and was fairly astonished at the
extraordinary circumstances connected with its use; and this is his
story, told in his letter to the lady who returned the $15.

"The sequel to the $15 is far more beautiful and wonderful than anything
I have ever known. This invalid had been praying for some money for a
needed article of dress to protect her from cold. _The_ $15 _came the
very next morning in answer to her prayer. But it was more than enough_.
As a consistent Christian, having asked the Lord only for enough to meet
but one need, she felt as if the rest belonged to the Lord and must be
used for Him. So in wondering how to use it, she thought of a poor woman
who needed a new calico dress, and at once bought it and gave it to her.
She had but $5 left. A dear friend was in distress; his horse and
carriage had been seized for failure to pay the livery bill of their
keeping; he could not collect any money of the debts due him, to pay his
bill, and had nothing. His wife and children were in New Britain, and
here he was, no means to get there. The little Christian invalid sent
him her $5, the last money she had, not knowing where her next was to
come from, with these words: "_The Lord has sent you this_," and though
he offered to return, or use only part, she said, "_No, the Lord meant
this for you_. You must keep it, I will not take it back." Now see how
beautifully all these incidents have been made to work for the good of
many, by the managing hand of Providence.

"My original gift of $25 to you was _more than enough_. You did not need
it all for your Sunday-school, and the Lord made you force back the $15
upon me. I could not keep it, because I felt, it belonged to the Lord.
So I sent it to the little invalid.

"She, too, had only needed a part, and used only what she asked the Lord
for, and then she, in her turn, gave the rest away. The most wonderful
part of it is, that the money you gave back to me, and I gave to the
Lord, was _three-fifths of the amount you received_, and the money the
little invalid gave away _to the Lord_ was also _three-fifths the amount
she received. The money which you kept for your use was just two-fifths,
and the money that the invalid kept for her own use was just two-fifths
also. The very next day after she had given her money away_, a lady
called and gave her some money, which _was precisely the same amount_
which _the poor woman's calico dress_ had cost, (though she knew nothing
of the circumstances), and in return for the $5 which she gave her
friend in distress, and refused to take back, the Lord remembered her
and gave her a good home.


THE WIDOW'S WOOD AND FLOUR.--THE UNBELIEVING ONES MADE SPEECHLESS.


The following instance is known to _The Christian_ as true, and to a
remarkable degree indicates how thoroughly God knows our minutest needs,
and how effectively He makes those who ever reproach his name ashamed of
their unbelief.

"A friend and relative of the one who was 'a widow indeed,' one who
trusted in God, and continued in supplications and prayers day and
night, was once brought into circumstances of peculiar straitness and
trial. She had two daughters who exerted themselves with their needles
to earn a livelihood; and at that time they were so busily engaged in
trying to finish some work that had long been on their hands, they had
neglected to make provision for their ordinary wants until they found
themselves one Winter's day in the midst of a New England snow storm,
with food and fuel almost exhausted, at a distance from neighbors, and
without any means of procuring needful sustenance.

"The daughters began to be alarmed, and were full of anxiety at the
dismal prospect, but the good old mother said, 'Don't worry, girls, the
Lord will provide; we have enough for to-day, and to-morrow may be
pleasant,' and in this hope the girls settled down again to their labor.

"Another morning came, and with it no sunshine, but wind and snow in
abundance. The storm still raged, but no one came near the house, and
all was dark and dismal without.

"Noon came, and the last morsel of food was eaten, the wind was almost
gone, and there were no tokens of any relief for their necessities.

"The girls became much distressed, and talked anxiously of their
condition, but the good mother said, 'Don't worry, the Lord will
provide.'

"But they had heard that story the day before, and they, knew not the
strong foundation upon which that mother's trust was builded, and could
not share the confidence she felt.

"'If we get anything to-day the Lord will have to bring it himself, for
nobody else can get here if they try,' said one of the daughters,
impatiently, but the mother said, 'Don't worry.' And so they sat down
again to their sewing, the daughters to muse upon their necessitous
condition, and the mother to roll her burden on the Everlasting Arms."

Now mark the way in which the Lord came to their rescue, and just at
this moment of extremity, put it into the heart of one of his children
to go and carry relief. _Human Nature_ at such a time would never have
ventured out in such a storm, but waited for a pleasant day. But Divine
Wisdom and power made him carry _just what was needed, in the face of
adverse circumstances, and just at the time it was needed_.

"Mr. M. sat at his fireside, about a mile away, surrounded by every
bounty and comfort needed to cheer his heart, with his only daughter
sitting by his side.

"For a long time not a word had been spoken, and he had seemed lost in
silent meditation, till at length he said, 'Mary, I want you to go and
order the cattle yoked, and then get me a bag. I must go and carry some
wood and flour to sister C.'

"'Why, Father, it is impossible for you to go. There is no track, and it
is all of a mile up there. You would almost perish.'

"The old man sat in silence a few moments and said, 'Mary, I must go.'
She knew her father too well to suppose that words would detain him, and
so complied with his wishes. While she held the bag for him, she felt
perhaps a little uneasiness to see the flour so liberally disposed of,
and said, 'I wish you would remember that _I_ want to give a poor woman
some flour, if it ever clears off.' The old man understood the
intimation and said, 'Mary, give all you feel it duty to, and when the
Lord says stop, I will do so.'

"Soon all things were ready, and the patient oxen took their way to the
widow's home, wallowing through the drifted snow, and dragging the sled
with its load of wood and flour. About four o'clock in the afternoon,
the mother had arisen from her work to fix the fire, and, looking out of
the window, she saw the oxen at the door, and she knew that the Lord had
heard her cry.

"She said not a word--why should she? She was not surprised!--but,
presently, a heavy step at the threshold caused the daughters to look up
with astonishment, as Mr. M. strode unceremoniously into the room,
saying, '_The Lord told me, Sister C, that you wanted some wood and
flour_.'

"'_He told you the truth_,' said the widow, 'and I will praise Him
forever.'

"'_What think you now girls_?' she continued, as she turned in solemn
joy to her unbelieving daughters.

"_They were speechless_; not a word escaped their lips; but they
pondered that new revelation of the providential mercy of the Lord,
until it made upon their minds an impression never to be effaced.

"From that hour they learned to trust in Him who cares for _His needy_
in the hour of distress, and who, from His boundless stores, supplies
the wants of those who trust in Him."


A PAIR OF SHOES.--THE LORD'S REBUKE TO THOSE WHO "DIDN'T BELIEVE."


The following incident occurred in Connecticut: In an humble cottage two
sisters were watching over and caring for a much-loved brother, who, for
many long months had been upon a bed of sickness. At length, the younger
of them began to be discouraged. She was dependent, for her clothing,
upon her labor; her shoes were worn out, and how should she get another
pair, unless she could leave the sick bed and go away from home and work
and earn some money.

"Well," said the mother, "I know you need a pair of shoes, but don't
worry, the Lord will provide."

"_Do you think that_ THE LORD _will come down from heaven and buy me a
pair of shoes_?" said the younger sister, with an expression of
discouragement and vexation on her countenance.

"No," said the mother, "but perhaps he will put it into somebody's heart
to buy you a pair."

"Perhaps He will, _but I don't believe it_," said the discouraged girl.

"Well," said the other sister, who was a little more hopeful, "you won't
get them any quicker by fretting, so you might as well be quiet." Then
the subject dropped and the day passed as usual.

As the shades of evening were gathering, a brother who lived at some
distance, and who knew nothing of their previous conversation, called to
inquire after their prosperity. After the customary salutations he said,
"You have been sick here a long time, and I thought I would come round
and see if I could not do something for you; thought perhaps by this
time the girls needed something." Then turning to the younger sister, he
said, "_How is it, aren't your shoes worn out?"_

She dropped her eyes, blushed deeply, and, perhaps, a little
conscience-smitten, answered not a word. Nothing was said of the
previous conversation, though it was not forgotten by those who heard
it. The brother soon saw for himself enough to satisfy him, and said no
more, but went away. The next day _two pairs of shoes_ were sent around
to her, and with them came to her heart a lesson which she never forgot.

She lived many years after that, but was never heard to murmur in that
way again, and often said that the two pairs of shoes taught her to
_wait, hope and trust_, and thereby learn implicit confidence in Him who
sendeth all blessings. The last time she alluded to the occurrence, she
said, "_I was speechless then, but, by the grace of God, I will not be
in the world to come_."


THE LAME HEALED.


Rev. Charles G. Finney, during his life-time, was familiar with the
circumstances connected with the remarkable healing of a sick lady in
Oberlin, O., the wife of Rev. R.D. Miller, and these facts were vouched
for as unquestionably authentic. Mr. Finney says:

"Mrs. Miller is the wife of a Congregational minister, and a lady of
unquestionably veracity. However the fact of her healing is to be
accounted for, her story is no doubt worthy of entire confidence, as we
have known her for years as a lame, suffering invalid, and now see her
in our midst in sound health. This instantaneous restoration will be
accounted for by different persons in different ways. Mrs. Miller and
those who were present regard the healing as supernatural and a direct
answer to prayer. The facts must speak for themselves. Why should not
the sick be healed in answer to the prayer of faith? Unbelief can
discredit them, but faith sees nothing incredible in such facts as are
stated by Mrs. Miller. Mrs. Miller's own statement is as follows, and it
is fully endorsed by the most reliable citizens and members of the First
church at Oberlin:

"From my parents I inherited a constitution subject to a chronic form of
rheumatism. In early life I was attacked with rheumatic weaknesses and
pains, which affected my whole system. For nearly forty years I was
subject to more or less suffering from this cause, sometimes unable to
attend meeting for months at a time. For seven years, until the last
three months, I have been unable to get about without the aid of crutch
or staff, generally both. I have used many liniments and remedies, but
with no permanently good result. I have been a Christian from early
life, but last Spring, in our revival, I received a spiritual refreshing
from the Lord, which gave a new impulse to my faith. Since then my
religion has been a new life to me.

"Last Summer, several of us Christian sisters were in the habit of
spending short seasons of prayer together, that the Lord would send us a
pastor. Some of our number had read the narrative of Dorothea Trudel,
and had spoken to me on the subject of healing in answer to prayer. My
faith had not then risen to this elevation. I had in fact accepted what
I supposed to be the will of God, and made up my mind to be a lame and
suffering invalid the rest of my life. I had long since ceased to use
remedies for the restoration of my health, and had not even thought of
praying in regard to it, for I regarded it as the will of God that I
should suffer in silent submission.

"Notwithstanding what had been said to me, I remained in this opinion
and in this attitude until the 26th of September, 1872, when several
ladies met at our house, by appointment, for a prayer-meeting. I had
been growing worse for some time, and was at that time unable to get out
to attend a meeting. I was suffering much pain that afternoon; indeed, I
was hardly able to be out of my bed. Up to this time none of the sisters
who had conversed with me about the subject of healing by faith, had
been able to tell me anything from their own experience. That afternoon,
one lady was present who could speak to me from her own experience of
being healed in answer to the prayer of faith. She related several
striking instances in which her prayers had been answered in the removal
of divers forms of disease to which she was subject. She also repeated a
number of passages of Scripture, which clearly justified the expectation
of being healed in answer to the prayer of faith. She also said that
Jesus had shown her that he was just as ready to heal diseases now as he
was when on earth; that such healing was expressly promised in
Scripture, in answer to the prayer of faith, and that it was nowhere
taken back. These facts, reasonings, and passages of Scripture, made a
deep impression on my mind, and, for the first time, I found myself able
to believe that Jesus would heal me in answer to prayer. She asked me if
I could join my faith with hers and ask for present healing. I told her
I felt that I could. We then knelt, and called upon the Lord. She
offered a mighty prayer to God, and I followed. While she was leading in
prayer I felt a quickening in my whole being, whereupon my pain
subsided, and when we rose from prayer I felt that a great change had
come over me, that I was cured. I found that I could walk without my
staff or crutch, or any assistance from any one. Since then my pains
have never returned; I have more than my youthful vigor; I walk with
more ease and rapidity than I ever did in my life, and I never felt so
fresh and young as I now do, at the age of fifty-two.

"Now, the hundred and third psalm is my psalm, and my youth is more than
renewed, like the eagle's. I cannot express the constant joy of my heart
for the wonderful healing of my soul and body. I feel as if I was every
whit made whole."

The testimony of eye-witnesses to this healing is as follows:

"We were all present at the time of the healing, and know the facts to
be true. We are all Christians, and have no interest in deceiving
anybody, and would by no means dishonor God by stating more than the
exact truth. Since the healing, Mrs. Miller is still with us, and in
excellent health. Neither the severe cold of last Winter, nor the
extreme heat of this Summer, has at all injured her health. From our
first acquaintance with her, she has been so lame as to be unable to
walk, except by the aid of crutches. Since which time she has been able
to walk without help, and appears perfectly well."

Her husband, also adding his testimony, says:

"She has been unable to walk without crutches for a series of years. A
long time ago, we tried many remedies and physicians, with no lasting
good results, and were expecting she would remain an invalid. Of late,
she had applied no remedy, nor taken any medicine. At the time of her
cure, she was much worse than for a long while before, being in great
pain continually, until the moment she fully believed, and, _in an
instant_, she was restored to perfect soundness. From that moment to
this she has not felt a particle of her former complaint.

"She can now walk for miles as fast as I wish to, without feeling very
much fatigue, does all her own housework, and attends seven meetings
during the week. In short, she is stronger, and seems as young and spry,
as when we were married, thirty-two years ago. The work of the dear
Savior in her cure seems to be perfect, and she is an astonishment to
all who knew her before and see her now. To _His_ name be all the
praise.

"Another lady, the same week my wife was healed, a member of the First
Congregational Church, confined to her bed with a complicated disease,
was prayed for, and restored at once to soundness."


THE WONDERFUL CURE OF MRS. SHERMAN.


Although there are so many cases of healing in answer to prayer, yet the
incident of the healing of Mrs. Sherman is so minute, and resulted in
such a radical change of the physical constitution, that it is necessary
to relate it in full detail. It is too well proven to admit the
possibility of a doubt.

"Mrs. Ellen Sherman is the wife of Rev. Moses Sherman, and, at the time
of this occurrence, in 1873, they were residents of Piermont, N.H. She
had been an invalid for many years. In the Winter after she was fifteen,
she fell on the ice and hurt her left knee, so that it became weak and
easy to slip out of joint. Six years after, she fell again on the same
knee, so twisting it and injuring the ligaments that it became partially
stiff, and, the physician said, incurable.

"The next Summer, by very fast walking, one day, she brought on special
weakness, which no physician was able to cure. From that moment she was
subject to severe neuralgia, sick-headaches, at least monthly, and
sometimes even weekly.

"In December, 1859, while stepping out of doors, she slipped, by reason
of her stiff joint, and fell, striking near the base of the spine,
directly across the sharp edge of the stone step. This caused such a
sickness that she was obliged to leave the school she was attending.

"Three years after (in January, 1862), she fell at the top of a
stairway, striking just as before, and sliding all the way down to the
foot. This nearly paralyzed the spinal cord, and caused deep and
permanent spinal disease. After this she was up and down for many years,
attended by various physicians, yet nothing bettered, but, rather,
growing worse. It may be said, for short, that every organ of the lower
body became chronically diseased, and that the headaches increased in
violence.

"In September, 1872, through a severe cold, she took her bed, where she
lay, except when lifted from it, till the night of August 27, 1873. She
was unable to walk a step, or even stand. She could sit up only a short
time without great distress. The best medical skill that could be
procured gave only temporary relief. The spine grew worse in spite of
every appliance, and the nervous sensitiveness and prostration were
increasing. During the two or three weeks immediately preceding her cure
she was especially helpless, two persons being required to lift her off
and on the bed. On the Monday before, one of her severest neuralgia
sick-headaches came on. During Wednesday she began to be relieved, but
was still so sick that when, in the evening, she tried to have her
clothes changed, she could only endure the change of her night-dress."

It will be seen from this her utter physical helplessness, and not the
slightest hope of any amelioration. During the night of August 27th, she
enjoyed a blessed time of communion with her Lord, giving herself, in
all her helplessness, wholly to Him to do as he wills.

With feelings beyond all expression, she _felt_ the nearness of her
mighty Savior, and the sense of receiving a new and most delicious
pulsation of new life. At last, though she had been bed-ridden for
twelve months, and incapable of any bodily assistance, she felt an
uncontrollable impulse to throw off the clothes of the bed with her left
arm, and sprang out of bed upon her feet, and started to walk across the
room.

"Her husband's first thought was that she was crazed, and would fall to
the floor, and he sprang towards her to help her. But she put up her
hands against him, saying with great energy, 'Don't you touch me! Don't
you touch me!' and went walking back and forth across the room speaking
rapidly, and declaring the work which Jesus had been working upon her.

"Her husband, quickly saw that she was in her right mind, and had been
healed by the Lord, and his soul was filled with unutterable emotion.

"One of the women of the household was called, also their son, twelve
years old, and together they thanked God for the great and blessed
wonder he had wrought.

"In the morning, after a sleep of several hours, she further examined
herself to see if entirely healed, and found both knees perfectly well;
and though for sixteen years she had not been able to use either, now
she lifted the left _foot_ and _put it upon the right knee_, thus
proving the completeness of her restoration.

"At the end of two years from her healing, inquiry having been made as
to how thorough had been the work, Mrs. Sherman gave full and abundant
evidence. 'I cannot remember a Summer when I have been so healthy and
strong, and able to work hard. I am a constant wonder to myself, and to
others, and have been for the two years past. The cure exceeded my
highest expectations at the time I was cured. I did not look forward to
such a state of vigor and strength. No words can express my joy and
gratitude for all this.'

"The parents of Mrs. Sherman also testify of the wonderful change
