the Law is without value, but it only serves to bring home to us the
wrath of God. The Law bows a person down. It takes the Gospel and the
preaching of faith in Christ to raise and save a person.


  VERSE 1. Before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth.

Paul's increasing severity becomes apparent as he reminds the Galatians
that they disobeyed the truth in defiance of the vivid description he
had given them of Christ. So vividly had he described Christ to them
that they could almost see and handle Him. As if Paul were to say: "No
artist with all his colors could have pictured Christ to you as vividly
as I have pictured Him to you by my preaching. Yet you permitted
yourselves to be seduced to the extent that you disobeyed the truth of
Christ."


  VERSE 1. Crucified among you.

"You have not only rejected the grace of God, you have shamefully
crucified Christ among you." Paul employs the same phraseology in
Hebrews 6:6: "Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh,
and put him to an open shame."

It should make any person afraid to hear Paul say that those who seek
to be justified by the Law, not only deny Christ, but also crucify Him
anew. If those who seek to be justified by the Law and its works are
crucifiers of Christ, what are they, I like to know, who seek salvation
by the filthy rags of their own work-righteousness?

Can there be anything more horrible than the papacy, an alliance of
people who crucify Christ in themselves, in the Church, and in the
hearts of the believers?

Of all the diseased and vicious doctrines of the papacy the worst is
this: "If you want to serve God you must earn your own remission of sins
and everlasting life, and in addition help others to obtain salvation by
giving them the benefit of your extra work-holiness." Monks, friars, and
all the rest of them brag that besides the ordinary requirements common
to all Christians, they do the works of supererogation, i.e., the
performance of more than is required. This is certainly a fiendish
illusion.

No wonder Paul employs such sharp language in his effort to recall the
Galatians from the doctrine of the false apostles. He says to them:
"Don't you realize what you have done? You have crucified Christ anew
because you seek salvation by the Law."

True, Christ can no longer be crucified in person, but He is crucified
in us when we reject grace, faith, free remission of sins and endeavor
to be justified by our own works, or by the works of the Law.

The Apostle is incensed at the presumptuousness of any person who thinks
he can perform the Law of God to his own salvation. He charges that
person with the atrocity of crucifying anew the Son of God.


  VERSE 2. This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the
  works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?

There is a touch of irony in these words of the Apostle. "Come on now,
my smart Galatians, you who all of a sudden have become doctors, while
I seem to be your pupil: Received ye the Holy Ghost by the works of
the Law, or by the preaching of the Gospel?" This question gave them
something to think about, because their own experience contradicted
them.

"You cannot say that you received the Holy Spirit by the Law. As long as
you were servants of the Law, you never received the Holy Ghost. Nobody
ever heard of the Holy Ghost being given to anybody, be he doctor or
dunce, as a result of the preaching of the Law. In your own case, you
have not only learned the Law by heart, you have labored with all your
might to perform it. You most of all should have received the Holy Ghost
by the Law, if that were possible. You cannot show me that this ever
happened. But as soon as the Gospel came your way, you received the Holy
Ghost by the simple hearing of faith, before you ever had a chance to do
a single good deed." Luke verifies this statement of Paul in the Book
of Acts: "While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all
them which heard the word." (Acts 10:44.) "And as I began to speak, the
Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning." (Acts 11:15.)

Try to appreciate the force of Paul's argument which is so often
repeated in the Book of Acts. That Book was written for the express
purpose of verifying Paul's assertion, that the Holy Ghost comes upon
men, not in response to the preaching of the Law, but in response to
the preaching of the Gospel. When Peter preached Christ at the first
Pentecost, the Holy Ghost fell upon the hearers, "and the same day there
were added unto them about three thousand souls." Cornelius received the
Holy Ghost while Peter was speaking of Christ. "The Holy Ghost fell on
all of them which heard the word." These are actual experiences that
cannot very well be denied. When Paul and Barnabas returned to Jerusalem
and reported what they had been able to accomplish among the Gentiles,
the whole Church was astonished, particularly when it heard that the
uncircumcised Gentiles had received the Holy Ghost by the preaching of
faith in Christ.

Now as God gave the Holy Ghost to the Gentiles without the Law by the
simple preaching of the Gospel, so He gave the Holy Ghost also to the
Jews, without the Law, through faith alone. If the righteousness of the
Law were necessary unto salvation, the Holy Ghost would never have come
to the Gentiles, because they did not bother about the Law. Hence the
Law does not justify, but faith in Christ justifies.

How was it with Cornelius? Cornelius and his friends whom he had invited
over to his house, do nothing but sit and listen. Peter is doing the
talking. They just sit and do nothing. The Law is far removed from their
thoughts. They burn no sacrifices. They are not at all interested in
circumcision. All they do is to sit and listen to Peter. Suddenly the
Holy Ghost enters their hearts. His presence is unmistakable, "for they
spoke with tongues and magnified God."

Right here we have one more difference between the Law and the Gospel.
The Law does not bring on the Holy Ghost. The Gospel, however, brings
on the gift of the Holy Ghost, because it is the nature of the Gospel to
convey good gifts. The Law and the Gospel are contrary ideas. They have
contrary functions and purposes. To endow the Law with any capacity to
produce righteousness is to plagiarize the Gospel. The Gospel brings
donations. It pleads for open hands to take what is being offered. The
Law has nothing to give. It demands, and its demands are impossible.

Our opponents come back at us with Cornelius. Cornelius, they point out,
was "a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which
gave much alms to the people and prayed God always." Because of these
qualifications, he merited the forgiveness of sins, and the gift of the
Holy Ghost. So reason our opponents.

  I answer: Cornelius was a Gentile. You cannot deny it. As a Gentile he
  was uncircumcised. As a Gentile he did not observe the Law. He never
  gave the Law any thought. For all that, he was justified and received
  the Holy Ghost. How can the Law avail anything unto righteousness?
Our opponents are not satisfied. They reply: "Granted that Cornelius was
a Gentile and did not receive the Holy Ghost by the Law, yet the text
plainly states that he was a devout man who feared God, gave alms, and
prayed. Don't you think he deserved the gift of the Holy Ghost?"

  I answer: Cornelius had the faith of the fathers who were saved by
  faith in the Christ to come. If Cornelius had died before Christ, he
  would have been saved because he believed in the Christ to come. But
  because the Messiah had already come, Cornelius had to be apprized of
  the fact. Since Christ has come we cannot be saved by faith in the
  Christ to come, but we must believe that he has come. The object of
  Peter's visit was to acquaint Cornelius with the fact that Christ was
  no longer to be looked for, because He is here.

As to the contention of our opponents that Cornelius deserved grace and
the gift of the Holy Ghost, because he was devout and just, we say
that these attributes are the characteristics of a spiritual person who
already has faith in Christ, and not the characteristics of a Gentile
or of natural man. Luke first praises Cornelius for being a devout and
God-fearing man, and then Luke mentions the good works, the alms and
prayers of Cornelius. Our opponents ignore the sequence of Luke's words.
They pounce on this one sentence, "which gave much alms to the people,"
because it serves their assertion that merit precedes grace. The fact
is that Cornelius gave alms and prayed to God because he had faith.
And because of his faith in the Christ to come, Peter was delegated to
preach unto Cornelius faith in the Christ who had already come. This
argument is convincing enough. Cornelius was justified without the Law,
therefore the Law cannot justify.

Take the case of Naaman, the Syrian, who was a Gentile and did not
belong to the race of Moses. Yet his flesh was cleansed, the God of
Israel was revealed unto him, and he received the Holy Ghost. Naaman
confessed his faith: "Behold, now I know that there is no God in all the
earth, but in Israel." (II Kings 5:15.) Naaman does not do a thing. He
does not busy himself with the Law. He was never circumcised. That does
not mean that his faith was inactive. He said to the Prophet Elisha:
"Thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice
unto other gods, but unto the Lord. In this thing the Lord pardon thy
servant, that when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship
there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow myself in the house of
Rimmon: when I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon
thy servant in this thing." What did the Prophet tell him? "Go in
peace." The Jews do not like to hear the prophet say this. "What," they
exclaim, "should this heathen be justified without the Law? Should he be
made equal to us who are circumcised?"

Long before the time of Moses, God justified men without the Law. He
justified many kings of Egypt and Babylonia. He justified Job. Nineveh,
that great city, was justified and received the promise of God that
He would not destroy the city. Why was Nineveh spared? Not because it
fulfilled the Law, but because Nineveh believed the word of God. The
Prophet Jonah writes: "So the people of Nineveh believed God, and
proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth." They repented. Nowhere in the
Book of Jonah do you read that the Ninevites received the Law of Moses,
or that they were circumcised, or that they offered sacrifices.

All this happened long before Christ was born. If the Gentiles were
justified without the Law and quietly received the Holy Spirit at a
time when the Law was in full force, why should the Law count unto
righteousness now, now that Christ has fulfilled the Law?

And yet many devote much time and labor to the Law, to the decrees
of the fathers, and to the traditions of the Pope. Many of these
specialists have incapacitated themselves for any kind of work, good or
bad, by their rigorous attention to rules and laws. All the same, they
could not obtain a quiet conscience and peace in Christ. But the moment
the Gospel of Christ touches them, certainty comes to them, and joy, and
a right judgment.

I have good reason for enlarging upon this point. The heart of man finds
it difficult to believe that so great a treasure as the Holy Ghost is
gotten by the mere hearing of faith. The hearer likes to reason like
this: Forgiveness of sins, deliverance from death, the gift of the Holy
Ghost, everlasting life are grand things. If you want to obtain these
priceless benefits, you must engage in correspondingly great efforts.
And the devil says, "Amen."

We must learn that forgiveness of sins, Christ, and the Holy Ghost,
are freely granted unto us at the preaching of faith, in spite of our
sinfulness. We are not to waste time thinking how unworthy we are of the
blessings of God. We are to know that it pleased God freely to give us
His unspeakable gifts. If He offers His gifts free of charge, why not
take them? Why worry about our lack of worthiness? Why not accept gifts
with joy and thanksgiving?

Right away foolish reason is once more offended. It scolds us. "When you
say that a person can do nothing to obtain the grace of God, you foster
carnal security. People become shiftless and will do no good at all.
Better not preach this doctrine of faith. Rather urge the people to
exert and to exercise themselves in good works, so that the Holy Ghost
will feel like coming to them."

What did Jesus say to Martha when she was very "careful and troubled
about many things" and could hardly stand to see her sister Mary sitting
at the feet of Jesus, just listening? "Martha, Martha," Jesus said,
"thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is
needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken
away from her." A person becomes a Christian not by working, but by
hearing. The first step to being a Christian is to hear the Gospel. When
a person has accepted the Gospel, let him first give thanks unto God
with a glad heart, and then let him get busy on the good works to strive
for, works that really please God, and not man-made and self-chosen
works.

Our opponents regard faith as an easy thing, but I know from personal
experience how hard it is to believe. That the Holy Ghost is received by
faith, is quickly said, but not so quickly done.

All believers experience this difficulty. They would gladly embrace the
Word with a full faith, but the flesh deters them. You see, our reason
always thinks it is too easy and cheap to have righteousness, the Holy
Spirit, and life everlasting by the mere hearing of the Gospel.


  VERSE 3. Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
  perfect by the flesh?

Paul now begins to warn the Galatians against a twofold danger. The
first danger is: "Are ye so foolish, that after ye have begun in the
Spirit, ye would now end in the flesh?"

"Flesh" stands for the righteousness of reason which seeks justification
by the accomplishment of the Law. I am told that I began in the spirit
under the papacy, but am ending up in the flesh because I got married.
As though single life were a spiritual life, and married life a carnal
life. They are silly. All the duties of a Christian husband, e.g., to
love his wife, to bring up his children, to govern his family, etc., are
the very fruits of the Spirit.

The righteousness of the Law which Paul also terms the righteousness of
the flesh is so far from justifying a person that those who once had
the Holy Spirit and lost Him, end up in the Law to their complete
destruction.


  VERSE 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain?

The other danger against which the Apostle warns the Galatians is this:
"Have ye suffered so many things in vain?" Paul wants to say: "Consider
not only the good start you had and lost, but consider also the many
things you have suffered for the sake of the Gospel and for the name of
Christ. You have suffered the loss of your possessions, you have borne
reproaches, you have passed through many dangers of body and life. You
endured much for the name of Christ and you endured it faithfully.
But now you have lost everything, the Gospel, faith, and the spiritual
benefit of your sufferings for Christ's sake. What a miserable thing to
endure so many afflictions for nothing."


  VERSE 4. If it be yet in vain.

The Apostle adds the afterthought: "If it be yet in vain. I do not
despair of all hope for you. But if you continue to look to the Law
for righteousness, I think you should be told that all your past
true worship of God and all the afflictions that you have endured
for Christ's sake are going to help you not at all. I do not mean to
discourage you altogether. I do hope you will repent and amend."


  VERSE 5. He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit, and worketh
  miracles among you, doeth he it by the works of the law, or by the
  hearing of faith?

This argument based on the experience of the Galatians, pleased the
Apostle so well that he returns to it after he had warned them against
their twofold danger. "You have not only received the Spirit by the
preaching of the Gospel, but by the same Gospel you were enabled to do
things." "What things?" we ask. Miracles. At least the Galatians had
manifested the striking fruits of faith which true disciples of the
Gospel manifested in those days. On one occasion the Apostle wrote:
"The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power." This "power" revealed
itself not only in readiness of speech, but in demonstrations of the
supernatural ability of the Holy Spirit.

When the Gospel is preached unto faith, hope, love, and patience, God
