P: He said: Know ye what ye did unto Joseph and his brother in your
ignorance?

S: He said: Do you know how you treated Yusuf and his brother when you
were ignorant?

012.090
Y: They said: "Art thou indeed Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph, and this
is my brother: Allah has indeed been gracious to us (all): behold, he
that is righteous and patient,- never will Allah suffer the reward to
be lost, of those who do right."

P: They said: Is it indeed thou who art Joseph? He said: I am Joseph and
this is my brother. Allah hath shown us favour. Lo! he who wardeth off
(evil) and endureth (findeth favour); for lo! Allah loseth not the
wages of the kindly.

S: They said: Are you indeed Yusuf? He said: I am Yusuf and this is my
brother; Allah has indeed been gracious to us; surely he who guards
(against evil) and is patient (is rewarded) for surely Allah does not
waste the reward of those who do good.

012.091
Y: They said: "By Allah! indeed has Allah preferred thee above us, and
we certainly have been guilty of sin!"

P: They said: By Allah, verily Allah hath preferred thee above us, and
we were indeed sinful.

S: They said: By Allah! now has Allah certainly chosen you over us, and
we were certainly sinners.

012.092
Y: He said: "This day let no reproach be (cast) on you: Allah will
forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy!"

P: He said: Have no fear this day! May Allah forgive you, and He is the
Most Merciful of those who show mercy.

S: He said: (There shall be) no reproof against you this day; Allah may
forgive you, and He is the most Merciful of the merciful.

012.093
Y: "Go with this my shirt, and cast it over the face of my father: he
will come to see (clearly). Then come ye (here) to me together with all
your family."

P: Go with this shirt of mine and lay it on my father's face, he will
become (again) a seer; and come to me with all your folk.

S: Take this my shirt and cast it on my father's face, he will (again)
be able to see, and come to me with all your families.

012.094
Y: When the caravan left (Egypt), their father said: "I do indeed scent
the presence of Joseph: Nay, think me not a dotard."

P: When the caravan departed their father had said: Truly I am conscious
of the breath of Joseph, though ye call me dotard.

S: And when the caravan had departed, their father said: Most surely I
perceive the greatness of Yusuf, unless you pronounce me to be weak in
judgment.

012.095
Y: They said: "By Allah! truly thou art in thine old wandering mind."

P: (Those around him) said: By Allah, lo! thou art in thine old
aberration.

S: They said: By Allah, you are most surely in your old error.

012.096
Y: Then when the bearer of the good news came, He cast (the shirt) over
his face, and he forthwith regained clear sight. He said: "Did I not
say to you, 'I know from Allah that which ye know not?'"

P: Then, when the bearer of glad tidings came, he laid it on his face
and he became a seer once more. He said: Said I not unto you that I
know from Allah that which ye know not?

S: So when the bearer of good news came he cast it on his face, so
forthwith he regained his sight. He said: Did I not say to you that I
know from Allah what you do not know?

012.097
Y: They said: "O our father! ask for us forgiveness for our sins, for we
were truly at fault."

P: They said: O our father! Ask forgiveness of our sins for us, for lo!
we were sinful.

S: They said: O our father! ask forgiveness of our faults for us, surely
we were sinners.

012.098
Y: He said: "Soon will I ask my Lord for forgiveness for you: for he is
indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

P: He said: I shall ask forgiveness for you of my Lord. Lo! He is the
Forgiving, the Merciful.

S: He said: I will ask for you forgiveness from my Lord; surely He is
the Forgiving, the Merciful.

012.099
Y: Then when they entered the presence of Joseph, he provided a home for
his parents with himself, and said: "Enter ye Egypt (all) in safety if
it please Allah."

P: And when they came in before Joseph, he took his parents unto him,
and said: Come into Egypt safe, if Allah will!

S: Then when they came in to Yusuf, he took his parents to lodge with
him and said: Enter safe into Egypt, if Allah please.

012.100
Y: And he raised his parents high on the throne (of dignity), and they
fell down in prostration, (all) before him. He said: "O my father! this
is the fulfilment of my vision of old! Allah hath made it come true! He
was indeed good to me when He took me out of prison and brought you
(all here) out of the desert, (even) after Satan had sown enmity
between me and my brothers. Verily my Lord understandeth best the
mysteries of all that He planneth to do, for verily He is full of
knowledge and wisdom."

P: And he placed his parents on the dais and they fell down before him
prostrate, and he said: O my father! This is the interpretation of my
dream of old. My Lord hath made it true, and He hath shown me kindness,
since He took me out of the prison and hath brought you from the desert
after Satan had made strife between me and my brethren. Lo! my Lord is
tender unto whom He will. He is the Knower, the Wise.

S: And he raised his parents upon the throne and they fell down in
prostration before him, and he said: O my father! this is the
significance of my vision of old; my Lord has indeed made it to be
true; and He was indeed kind to me when He brought me forth from the
prison and brought you from the desert after the Shaitan had sown
dissensions between me and my brothers, surely my Lord is benignant to
whom He pleases; surely He is the Knowing, the Wise.

012.101
Y: "O my Lord! Thou hast indeed bestowed on me some power, and taught me
something of the interpretation of dreams and events,- O Thou Creator
of the heavens and the earth! Thou art my Protector in this world and
in the Hereafter. Take Thou my soul (at death) as one submitting to Thy
will (as a Muslim), and unite me with the righteous."

P: O my Lord! Thou hast given me (something) of sovereignty and hast
taught me (something) of the interpretation of events - Creator of the
heavens and the earth! Thou art my Protecting Guardian in the world and
the Hereafter. Make me to die muslim (unto Thee), and join me to the
righteous.

S: My Lord! Thou hast given me of the kingdom and taught me of the
interpretation of sayings: Originator of the heavens and the earth!
Thou art my guardian in this world and the hereafter; make me die a
muslim and join me with the good.

012.102
Y: Such is one of the stories of what happened unseen, which We reveal
by inspiration unto thee; nor wast thou (present) with them then when
they concerted their plans together in the process of weaving their
plots.

P: This is of the tidings of the Unseen which We inspire in thee
(Muhammad). Thou wast not present with them when they fixed their plan
and they were scheming.

S: This is of the announcements relating to the unseen (which) We reveal
to you, and you were not with them when they resolved upon their
affair, and they were devising plans.

012.103
Y: Yet no faith will the greater part of mankind have, however ardently
thou dost desire it.

P: And though thou try much, most men will not believe.

S: And most men will not believe though you desire it eagerly.

012.104
Y: And no reward dost thou ask of them for this: it is no less than a
message for all creatures.

P: Thou askest them no fee for it. It is naught else than a reminder
unto the peoples.

S: And you do not ask them for a reward for this; it is nothing but a
reminder for all mankind.

012.105
Y: And how many Signs in the heavens and the earth do they pass by? Yet
they turn (their faces) away from them!

P: How many a portent is there in the heavens and the earth which they
pass by with face averted!

S: And how many a sign in the heavens and the earth which they pass by,
yet they turn aside from it.

012.106
Y: And most of them believe not in Allah without associating (other as
partners) with Him!

P: And most of them believe not in Allah except that they attribute
partners (unto Him).

S: And most of them do not believe in Allah without associating others
(with Him).

012.107
Y: Do they then feel secure from the coming against them of the covering
veil of the wrath of Allah,- or of the coming against them of the
(final) Hour all of a sudden while they perceive not?

P: Deem they themselves secure from the coming on them of a pall of
Allah's punishment, or the coming of the Hour suddenly while they are
unaware?

S: Do they then feel secure that there may come to them an extensive
chastisement from Allah or (that) the hour may come to them suddenly
while they do not perceive?

012.108
Y: Say thou: "This is my way: I do invite unto Allah,- on evidence clear
as the seeing with one's eyes,- I and whoever follows me. Glory to
Allah! and never will I join gods with Allah!"

P: Say: This is my Way: I call on Allah with sure knowledge. I and
whosoever followeth me - Glory be to Allah! - and I am not of the
idolaters.

S: Say: This is my way: I call to Allah, I and those who follow me being
certain, and glory be to Allah, and I am not one of the polytheists.

012.109
Y: Nor did We send before thee (as messengers) any but men, whom we did
inspire,- (men) living in human habitations. Do they not travel through
the earth, and see what was the end of those before them? But the home
of the hereafter is best, for those who do right. Will ye not then
understand?

P: We sent not before thee (any messengers) save men whom We inspired
from among the folk of the townships - Have they not travelled in the
land and seen the nature of the consequence for those who were before
them? And verily the abode of the Hereafter, for those who ward off
(evil), is best. Have ye then no sense? -

S: And We have not sent before you but men from (among) the people of
the towns, to whom We sent revelations. Have they not then travelled in
the land and seen what was the end of those before them? And certainly
the abode of the hereafter is best for those who guard (against evil);
do you not then understand?

012.110
Y: (Respite will be granted) until, when the messengers give up hope (of
their people) and (come to) think that they were treated as liars,
there reaches them Our help, and those whom We will are delivered into
safety. But never will be warded off our punishment from those who are
in sin.

P: Till, when the messengers despaired and thought that they were
denied, then came unto them Our help, and whom We would was saved. And
Our wrath cannot be warded from the guilty.

S: Until when the messengers despaired and the people became sure that
they were indeed told a lie, Our help came to them and whom We pleased
was delivered; and Our punishment is not averted from the guilty
people.

012.111
Y: There is, in their stories, instruction for men endued with
understanding. It is not a tale invented, but a confirmation of what
went before it,- a detailed exposition of all things, and a guide and a
mercy to any such as believe.

P: In their history verily there is a lesson for men of understanding.
It is no invented story but a confirmation of the existing (Scripture)
and a detailed explanation of everything, and a guidance and a mercy
for folk who believe.

S: In their histories there is certainly a lesson for men of
understanding. It is not a narrative which could be forged, but a
verification of what is before it and a distinct explanation of all
things and a guide and a mercy to a people who believe.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 13:

                            AL-RAD (THE THUNDER)
 Total Verses: 43 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

013.001
Y: A.L.M.R. These are the signs (or verses) of the Book: that which hath
been revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the Truth; but most men
believe not.

P: Alif. Lam. Mim. Ra. These are verses of the Scripture. That which is
revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the Truth, but most of mankind
believe not.

S: Alif Lam Mim Ra. These are the verses of the Book; and that which is
revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, but most people do not
believe.

013.002
Y: Allah is He Who raised the heavens without any pillars that ye can
see; is firmly established on the throne (of authority); He has
subjected the sun and the moon (to his Law)! Each one runs (its course)
for a term appointed. He doth regulate all affairs, explaining the
signs in detail, that ye may believe with certainty in the meeting with
your Lord.

P: Allah it is Who raised up the heavens without visible supports, then
mounted the Throne, and compelled the sun and the moon to be of
service, each runneth unto an appointed term; He ordereth the course;
He detaileth the revelations, that haply ye may be certain of the
meeting with your Lord.

S: Allah is He Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you see,
and He is firm in power and He made the sun and the moon subservient
(to you); each one pursues its course to an appointed time; He
regulates the affair, making clear the signs that you may be certain of
meeting your Lord.

013.003
Y: And it is He who spread out the earth, and set thereon mountains
standing firm and (flowing) rivers: and fruit of every kind He made in
pairs, two and two: He draweth the night as a veil o'er the Day.
Behold, verily in these things there are signs for those who consider!

P: And He it is Who spread out the earth and placed therein firm hills
and flowing streams, and of all fruits He placed therein two spouses
(male and female). He covereth the night with the day. Lo! herein
verily are portents for people who take thought.

S: And He it is Who spread the earth and made in it firm mountains and
rivers, and of all fruits He has made in it two kinds; He makes the
night cover the day; most surely there are signs in this for a people
who reflect.

013.004
Y: And in the earth are tracts (diverse though) neighbouring, and
gardens of vines and fields sown with corn, and palm trees - growing
out of single roots or otherwise: watered with the same water, yet some
of them We make more excellent than others to eat. Behold, verily in
these things there are signs for those who understand!

P: And in the Earth are neighbouring tracts, vineyards and ploughed
lands, and date-palms, like and unlike, which are watered with one
water. And we have made some of them to excel others in fruit. Lo!
herein verily are portents for people who have sense.

S: And in the earth there are tracts side by side and gardens of grapes
and corn and palm trees having one root and (others) having distinct
roots-- they are watered with one water, and We make some of them excel
others in fruit; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
understand.

013.005
Y: If thou dost marvel (at their want of faith), strange is their
saying: "When we are (actually) dust, shall we indeed then be in a
creation renewed?" They are those who deny their Lord! They are those
round whose necks will be yokes (of servitude): they will be Companions
of the Fire, to dwell therein (for aye)!

P: And if thou wonderest, then wondrous is their saying: When we are
dust, are we then forsooth (to be raised) in a new creation? Such are
they who disbelieve in their Lord; such have carcans on their necks;
such are rightful owners of the Fire, they will abide therein.

S: And if you would wonder, then wondrous is their saying: What! when we
are dust, shall we then certainly be in a new creation? These are they
who disbelieve in their Lord, and these have chains on their necks, and
they are the inmates of the fire; in it they shall abide.

013.006
Y: They ask thee to hasten on the evil in preference to the good: Yet
have come to pass, before them, (many) exemplary punishments! But
verily thy Lord is full of forgiveness for mankind for their
wrong-doing, and verily thy Lord is (also) strict in punishment.

P: And they bid thee hasten on the evil rather than the good, when
exemplary punishments have indeed occurred before them. But lo! thy
Lord is rich in pardon for mankind despite their wrong, and lo! thy
Lord is strong in punishment.

S: And they ask you to hasten on the evil before the good, and indeed
there have been exemplary punishments before them; and most surely your
Lord is the Lord of forgiveness to people, notwithstanding their
injustice; and most surely your Lord is severe in requiting (evil).

013.007
Y: And the Unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his
Lord?" But thou art truly a warner, and to every people a guide.

P: Those who disbelieve say: If only some portent were sent down upon
him from his Lord! Thou art a warner only, and for every folk a guide.

S: And those who disbelieve say: Why has not a sign been sent down upon
him from his Lord? You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for
every people.

013.008
Y: Allah doth know what every female (womb) doth bear, by how much the
wombs fall short (of their time or number) or do exceed. Every single
thing is before His sight, in (due) proportion.

P: Allah knoweth that which every female beareth and that which the
wombs absorb and that which they grow. And everything with Him is
measured.

S: Allah knows what every female bears, and that of which the wombs fall
short of completion and that in which they increase; and there is a
measure with Him of everything.

013.009
Y: He knoweth the unseen and that which is open: He is the Great, the
Most High.

P: He is the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Great, the
High Exalted.

S: The knower of the unseen and the seen, the Great, the Most High.

013.010
Y: It is the same (to Him) whether any of you conceal his speech or
declare it openly; whether he lie hid by night or walk forth freely by
day.

P: Alike of you is he who hideth the saying and he who noiseth it
abroad, he who lurketh in the night and he who goeth freely in the
daytime.

S: Alike (to Him) among you is he who conceals (his) words and he who
speaks them openly, and he who hides himself by night and (who) goes
forth by day.

013.011
Y: For each (such person) there are (angels) in succession, before and
behind him: They guard him by command of Allah. Allah does not change a
people's lot unless they change what is in their hearts. But when
(once) Allah willeth a people's punishment, there can be no turning it
back, nor will they find, besides Him, any to protect.

P: For him are angels ranged before him and behind him, who guard him by
Allah's command. Lo! Allah changeth not the condition of a folk until
they (first) change that which is in their hearts; and if Allah willeth
misfortune for a folk there is none that can repel it, nor have they a
defender beside Him.

S: For his sake there are angels following one another, before him and
behind him, who guard him by Allah's commandment; surely Allah does not
change the condition of a people until they change their own condition;
and when Allah intends evil to a people, there is no averting it, and
besides Him they have no protector.

013.012
Y: It is He Who doth show you the lightning, by way both of fear and of
hope: It is He Who doth raise up the clouds, heavy with (fertilising)
rain!

P: He it is Who showeth you the lightning, a fear and a hope, and
raiseth the heavy clouds.

S: He it is Who shows you the lightning causing fear and hope and (Who)
brings up the heavy cloud.

013.013
Y: Nay, thunder repeateth His praises, and so do the angels, with awe:
He flingeth the loud-voiced thunder-bolts, and therewith He striketh
whomsoever He will..yet these (are the men) who (dare to) dispute about
Allah, with the strength of His power (supreme)!

P: The thunder hymneth His praise and (so do) the angels for awe of Him.
He launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom He will while
they dispute (in doubt) concerning Allah, and He is mighty in wrath.

S: And the thunder declares His glory with His praise, and the angels
too for awe of Him; and He sends the thunderbolts and smites with them
whom He pleases, yet they dispute concerning Allah, and He is mighty in
prowess.

013.014
Y: For Him (alone) is prayer in Truth: any others that they call upon
besides Him hear them no more than if they were to stretch forth their
hands for water to reach their mouths but it reaches them not: for the
prayer of those without Faith is nothing but (futile) wandering (in the
mind).

P: Unto Him is the real prayer. Those unto whom they pray beside Allah
respond to them not at all, save as (is the response to) one who
stretcheth forth his hands toward water (asking) that it may come unto
his mouth, and it will never reach it. The prayer of disbelievers goeth
(far) astray.

S: To Him is due the true prayer; and those whom they pray to besides
Allah give them no answer, but (they are) like one who stretches forth
his two hands towards water that it may reach his mouth, but it will
not reach it; and the prayer of the unbelievers is only in error.

013.015
Y: Whatever beings there are in the heavens and the earth do prostrate
themselves to Allah (Acknowledging subjection),- with good-will or in
spite of themselves: so do their shadows in the morning and evenings.

P: And unto Allah falleth prostrate whosoever is in the heavens and the
earth, willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and
the evening hours.

S: And whoever is in the heavens and the earth makes obeisance to Allah
only, willingly and unwillingly, and their shadows too at morn and eve.

013.016
Y: Say: "Who is the Lord and Sustainer of the heavens and the earth?"
Say: "(It is) Allah." Say: "Do ye then take (for worship) protectors
other than Him, such as have no power either for good or for harm to
themselves?" Say: "Are the blind equal with those who see? Or the
depths of darkness equal with light?" Or do they assign to Allah
partners who have created (anything) as He has created, so that the
creation seemed to them similar? Say: "Allah is the Creator of all
things: He is the One, the Supreme and Irresistible."

P: Say (O Muhammad): Who is Lord of the heavens and the earth? Say:
Allah. Say: Take ye then (others) beside Him for protectors, which,
even for themselves, have neither benefit nor hurt? Say: Is the blind
man equal to the seer, or is darkness equal to light? Or assign they
unto Allah partners who created the like of His creation so that the
creation (which they made and His creation) seemed alike to them? Say:
Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the Almighty.

S: Say: Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?-- Say: Allah. Say:
Do you take then besides Him guardians who do not control any profit or
harm for themselves? Say: Are the blind and the seeing alike? Or can
the darkness and the light be equal? Or have they set up with Allah
associates who have created creation like His, so that what is created
became confused to them? Say: Allah is the Creator of all things, and
He is the One, the Supreme.

013.017
Y: He sends down water from the skies, and the channels flow, each
according to its measure: But the torrent bears away to foam that
mounts up to the surface. Even so, from that (ore) which they heat in
the fire, to make ornaments or utensils therewith, there is a scum
likewise. Thus doth Allah (by parables) show forth Truth and Vanity.
For the scum disappears like forth cast out; while that which is for
the good of mankind remains on the earth. Thus doth Allah set forth
parables.

P: He sendeth down water from the sky, so that valleys flow according to
their measure, and the flood beareth (on its surface) swelling foam -
from that which they smelt in the fire in order to make ornaments and
tools riseth a foam like unto it - thus Allah coineth (the similitude
of) the true and the false. Then, as for the foam, it passeth away as
scum upon the banks, while, as for that which is of use to mankind, it
remaineth in the earth. Thus Allah coineth the similitudes.

S: He sends down water from the cloud, then watercourses flow (with
water) according to their measure, and the torrent bears along the
swelling foam, and from what they melt in the fire for the sake of
making ornaments or apparatus arises a scum like it; thus does Allah
compare truth and falsehood; then as for the scum, it passes away as a
worthless thing; and as for that which profits the people, it tarries
in the earth; thus does Allah set forth parables.

013.018
Y: For those who respond to their Lord, are (all) good things. But those
who respond not to Him,- Even if they had all that is in the heavens
and on earth, and as much more, (in vain) would they offer it for
ransom. For them will the reckoning be terrible: their abode will be
Hell,- what a bed of misery!

P: For those who answered Allah's call is bliss; and for those who
answered not His call, if they had all that is in the earth, and
therewith the like thereof, they would proffer it as ransom. Such will
have a woeful reckoning, and their habitation will be hell, a dire
abode.

S: For those who respond to their Lord is good; and (as for) those who
do not respond to Him, had they all that is in the earth and the like
thereof with it they would certainly offer it for a ransom. (As for)
those, an evil reckoning shall be theirs and their abode is hell, and
evil is the resting-place.

013.019
Y: Is then one who doth know that that which hath been revealed unto
thee from thy Lord is the Truth, like one who is blind? It is those who
are endued with understanding that receive admonition;-

P: Is he who knoweth that what is revealed unto thee from thy Lord is
the truth like him who is blind? But only men of understanding heed;

S: Is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your
Lord is the truth like him who is blind? Only those possessed of
understanding will mind,

013.020
Y: Those who fulfil the covenant of Allah and fail not in their plighted
word;

P: Such as keep the pact of Allah, and break not the covenant;

S: Those who fulfil the promise of Allah and do not break the covenant,

013.021
Y: Those who join together those things which Allah hath commanded to be
joined, hold their Lord in awe, and fear the terrible reckoning;

P: Such as unite that which Allah hath commandeth should be joined, and
fear their Lord, and dread a woeful reckoning;

S: And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined and have
awe of their Lord and fear the evil reckoning.

013.022
Y: Those who patiently persevere, seeking the countenance of their Lord;
Establish regular prayers; spend, out of (the gifts) We have bestowed
for their sustenance, secretly and openly; and turn off Evil with good:
for such there is the final attainment of the (eternal) home,-

P: Such as persevere in seeking their Lord's Countenance and are regular
in prayer and spend of that which We bestow upon them secretly and
openly, and overcome evil with good. Theirs will be the sequel of the
(heavenly) Home,

S: And those who are constant, seeking the pleasure of their Lord, and
keep up prayer and spend (benevolently) out of what We have given them
secretly and openly and repel evil with good; as for those, they shall
have the (happy) issue of the abode,

013.023
Y: Gardens of perpetual bliss: they shall enter there, as well as the
righteous among their fathers, their spouses, and their offspring: and
angels shall enter unto them from every gate (with the salutation):

P: Gardens of Eden which they enter, along with all who do right of
their fathers and their helpmeets and their seed. The angels enter unto
them from every gate,

S: The gardens of perpetual abode which they will enter along with those
who do good from among their parents and their spouses and their
offspring; and the angels will enter in upon them from every gate:

013.024
Y: "Peace unto you for that ye persevered in patience! Now how excellent
is the final home!"

P: (Saying): Peace be unto you because ye persevered. Ah, passing sweet
will be the sequel of the (heavenly) Home.

S: Peace be on you because you were constant, how excellent, is then,
the issue of the abode.

013.025
Y: But those who break the Covenant of Allah, after having plighted
their word thereto, and cut asunder those things which Allah has
commanded to be joined, and work mischief in the land;- on them is the
curse; for them is the terrible home!

P: And those who break the covenant of Allah after ratifying it, and
sever that which Allah hath commanded should be joined, and make
mischief in the earth: theirs is the curse and theirs the ill abode.

S: And those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and
cut asunder that which Allah has ordered to be joined and make mischief
in the land; (as for) those, upon them shall be curse and they shall
have the evil (issue) of the abode.

013.026
Y: Allah doth enlarge, or grant by (strict) measure, the sustenance
(which He giveth) to whomso He pleaseth. (The wordly) rejoice in the
life of this world: But the life of this world is but little comfort in
the Hereafter.

P: Allah enlargeth livelihood for whom He will, and straiteneth (it for
whom He will); and they rejoice in the life of the world, whereas the
life of the world is but brief comfort as compared with the Hereafter.

S: Allah amplifies and straitens the means of subsistence for whom He
pleases; and they rejoice in this world's life, and this world's life
is nothing compared with the hereafter but a temporary enjoyment.

013.027
Y: The Unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his
Lord?" Say: "Truly Allah leaveth, to stray, whom He will; But He
guideth to Himself those who turn to Him in penitence,-"

P: Those who disbelieve say: If only a portent were sent down upon him
from his Lord! Say: Lo! Allah sendeth whom He will astray, and guideth
unto Himself all who turn (unto Him),

S: And those who disbelieve say: Why is not a sign sent down upon him by
his Lord? Say: Surely Allah makes him who will go astray, and guides to
Himself those who turn (to Him).

013.028
Y: "Those who believe, and whose hearts find satisfaction in the
remembrance of Allah: for without doubt in the remembrance of Allah do
hearts find satisfaction."

P: Who have believed and whose hearts have rest in the remembrance of
Allah. Verily in the remembrance of Allah do hearts find rest!

S: Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by the remembrance
of Allah; now surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at rest.

013.029
Y: "For those who believe and work righteousness, is (every)
blessedness, and a beautiful place of (final) return."

P: Those who believe and do right: Joy is for them, and bliss (their)
journey's end.

S: (As for) those who believe and do good, a good final state shall be
theirs and a goodly return.

013.030
Y: Thus have we sent thee amongst a People before whom (long since) have
(other) Peoples (gone and) passed away; in order that thou mightest
rehearse unto them what We send down unto thee by inspiration; yet do
they reject (Him), the Most Gracious! Say: "He is my Lord! There is no
god but He! On Him is my trust, and to Him do I turn!"

P: Thus We send thee (O Muhammad) unto a nation, before whom other
nations have passed away, that thou mayst recite unto them that which
We have inspired in thee, while they are disbelievers in the
Beneficent. Say: He is my Lord; there is no God save Him. In Him do I
put my trust and unto Him is my recourse.

S: And thus We have sent you among a nation before which other nations
have passed away, that you might recite to them what We have revealed
to you and (still) they deny the Beneficent Allah. Say: He is my Lord,
there is no god but He; on Him do I rely and to Him is my return.

013.031
Y: If there were a Qur'an with which mountains were moved, or the earth
were cloven asunder, or the dead were made to speak, (this would be the
one!) But, truly, the command is with Allah in all things! Do not the
Believers know, that, had Allah (so) willed, He could have guided all
mankind (to the right)? But the Unbelievers,- never will disaster cease
to seize them for their (ill) deeds, or to settle close to their homes,
until the promise of Allah come to pass, for, verily, Allah will not
fail in His promise.

P: Had it been possible for a Lecture to cause the mountains to move, or
the earth to be torn asunder, or the dead to speak, (this Qur'an would
have done so). Nay, but Allah's is the whole command. Do not those who
believe know that, had Allah willed, He could have guided all mankind?
As for those who disbelieve, disaster ceaseth not to strike them
because of what they do, or it dwelleth near their home until the
threat of Allah come to pass. Lo! Allah faileth not to keep the tryst.

S: And even if there were a Quran with which the mountains were made to
pass away, or the earth were travelled over with it, or the dead were
made to speak thereby; nay! the commandment is wholly Allah's, Have not
yet those who believe known that if Allah please He would certainly
guide all the people? And (as for) those who disbelieve, there will not
cease to afflict them because of what they do a repelling calamity, or
it will alight close by their abodes, until the promise of Allah comes
about; surely Allah will not fail in (His) promise.

013.032
Y: Mocked were (many) messengers before thee: but I granted respite to
the unbelievers, and finally I punished them: Then how (terrible) was
my requital!

P: And verily messengers (of Allah) were mocked before thee, but long I
bore with those who disbelieved. At length I seized them, and how
(awful) was My punishment!

S: And messengers before you were certainly mocked at, but I gave
respite to those who disbelieved, then I destroyed them; how then was
My requital (of evil)?

013.033
Y: Is then He who standeth over every soul (and knoweth) all that it
doth, (like any others)? And yet they ascribe partners to Allah. Say:
"But name them! is it that ye will inform Him of something he knoweth
not on earth, or is it (just) a show of words?" Nay! to those who
believe not, their pretence seems pleasing, but they are kept back
(thereby) from the path. And those whom Allah leaves to stray, no one
can guide.

P: Is He Who is aware of the deserts of every soul (as he who is aware
of nothing)? Yet they ascribe unto Allah partners. Say: Name them. Is
it that ye would inform Him of something which He knoweth not in the
earth? Or is it but a way of speaking? Nay but their contrivance is
made seeming fair for those who disbelieve and they are kept from the
right road. He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no guide.

S: Is He then Who watches every soul as to what it earns? And yet they
give associates to Allah! Say: Give them a name; nay, do you mean to
inform Him of what He does not know in the earth, or (do you affirm
this) by an outward saying? Rather, their plans are made to appear
fair-seeming to those who disbelieve, and they are kept back from the
path; and whom Allah makes err, he shall have no guide.

013.034
Y: For them is a penalty in the life of this world, but harder, truly,
is the penalty of the Hereafter: and defender have they none against
Allah.

P: For them is torment in the life of the world, and verily the doom of
the Hereafter is more painful, and they have no defender from Allah.

S: They shall have chastisement in this world's life, and the
chastisement of the hereafter is certainly more grievous, and they
shall have no protector against Allah.

013.035
Y: The parable of the Garden which the righteous are promised!- beneath
it flow rivers: perpetual is the enjoyment thereof and the shade
therein: such is the end of the Righteous; and the end of Unbelievers
in the Fire.

P: A similitude of the Garden which is promised unto those who keep
their duty (to Allah): Underneath it rivers flow; its food is
everlasting, and its shade; this is the reward of those who keep their
duty, while the reward of disbelievers is the Fire.

S: A likeness of the garden which the righteous are promised; there flow
beneath it rivers, its food and shades are perpetual; this is the
requital of those who guarded (against evil), and the requital of the
unbelievers is the fire.

013.036
Y: Those to whom We have given the Book rejoice at what hath been
revealed unto thee: but there are among the clans those who reject a
part thereof. Say: "I am commanded to worship Allah, and not to join
partners with Him. Unto Him do I call, and unto Him is my return."

P: Those unto whom We gave the Scripture rejoice in that which is
revealed unto thee. And of the clans there are who deny some of it.
Say: I am commanded only that I serve Allah and ascribe unto Him no
partner. Unto Him I cry, and unto Him is my return.

S: And those to whom We have given the Book rejoice in that which has
been revealed to you, and of the confederates are some who deny a part
of it. Say: I am only commanded that I should serve Allah and not
associate anything with Him, to Him do I invite (you) and to Him is my
return.

013.037
Y: Thus have We revealed it to be a judgment of authority in Arabic.
Wert thou to follow their (vain) desires after the knowledge which hath
reached thee, then wouldst thou find neither protector nor defender
against Allah.

P: Thus have We revealed it, a decisive utterance in Arabic; and if thou
shouldst follow their desires after that which hath come unto thee of
knowledge, then truly wouldst thou have from Allah no protecting friend
nor defender.

S: And thus have We revealed it, a true judgment in Arabic, and if you
follow their low desires after what has come to you of knowledge, you
shall not have against Allah any guardian or a protector.

013.038
Y: We did send messengers before thee, and appointed for them wives and
children: and it was never the part of a messenger to bring a sign
except as Allah permitted (or commanded). For each period is a Book
(revealed).

P: And verily We sent messengers (to mankind) before thee, and We
appointed for them wives and offspring, and it was not (given) to any
messenger that he should bring a portent save by Allah's leave. For
everything there is a time prescribed.

S: And certainly We sent messengers before you and gave them wives and
children, and it is not in (the power of) a messenger to bring a sign
except by Allah's permission; for every term there is an appointment.

013.039
Y: Allah doth blot out or confirm what He pleaseth: with Him is the
Mother of the Book.

P: Allah effaceth what He will, and establisheth (what He will), and
with Him is the source of ordinance.

S: Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases, and with
Him is the basis of the Book.

013.040
Y: Whether We shall show thee (within thy life-time) part of what we
promised them or take to ourselves thy soul (before it is all
accomplished),- thy duty is to make (the Message) reach them: it is our
part to call them to account.

P: Whether We let thee see something of that which We have promised
them, or make thee die (before its happening), thine is but conveyance
(of the message). Ours the reckoning.

S: And We will either let you see part of what We threaten them with or
cause you to die, for only the delivery of the message is (incumbent)
on you, while calling (them) to account is Our (business).

013.041
Y: See they not that We gradually reduce the land (in their control)
from its outlying borders? (Where) Allah commands, there is none to put
back His Command: and He is swift in calling to account.

P: See they not how we aim to the land, reducing it of its outlying
parts? (When) Allah doometh there is none that can postpone His doom,
and He is swift at reckoning.

S: Do they not see that We are bringing destruction upon the land by
curtailing it of its sides? And Allah pronounces a doom-- there is no
repeller of His decree, and He is swift to take account.

013.042
Y: Those before them did (also) devise plots; but in all things the
master-planning is Allah's He knoweth the doings of every soul: and
soon will the Unbelievers know who gets home in the end.

P: Those who were before them plotted; but all plotting is Allah's. He
knoweth that which each soul earneth. The disbelievers will come to
know for whom will be the sequel of the (heavenly) Home.

S: And those before them did indeed make plans, but all planning is
Allah's; He knows what every soul earns, and the unbelievers shall come
to know for whom is the (better) issue of the abode.

013.043
Y: The Unbelievers say: "No messenger art thou." Say: "Enough for a
witness between me and you is Allah, and such as have knowledge of the
Book."

P: They who disbelieve say: Thou art no messenger (of Allah). Say:
Allah, and whosoever hath knowledge of the Scripture, is sufficient
witness between me and you.

S: And those who disbelieve say: You are not a messenger. Say: Allah is
sufficient as a witness between me and you and whoever has knowledge of
the Book.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 14:

                             IBRAHIM (ABRAHAM)
 Total Verses: 52 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

014.001
Y: A. L. R. A Book which We have revealed unto thee, in order that thou
mightest lead mankind out of the depths of darkness into light - by the
leave of their Lord - to the Way of (Him) the Exalted in power, worthy
of all praise!-

P: Alif. Lam. Ra. (This is) a Scripture which We have revealed unto thee
(Muhammad) that thereby thou mayst bring forth mankind from darkness
unto light, by the permission of their Lord, unto the path of the
Mighty, the Owner of Praise,

S: Alif Lam Ra. (This is) a Book which We have revealed to you that you
may bring forth men, by their Lord's permission from utter darkness
into light-- to the way of the Mighty, the Praised One,

014.002
Y: Of Allah, to Whom do belong all things in the heavens and on earth!
But alas for the Unbelievers for a terrible penalty (their Unfaith will
bring them)!-

P: Allah, unto Whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth. And woe unto the disbelievers from an awful
doom;

S: (Of) Allah, Whose is whatever is in the heavens and whatever Is in
the earth; and woe to the unbelievers on account of the severe
chastisement,

014.003
Y: Those who love the life of this world more than the Hereafter, who
hinder (men) from the Path of Allah and seek therein something crooked:
they are astray by a long distance.

P: Those who love the life of the world more than the Hereafter, and
debar (men) from the way of Allah and would have it crooked: such are
far astray.

S: (To) those who love this world's life more than the hereafter, and
turn away from Allah's path and desire to make it crooked; these are in
a great error.

014.004
Y: We sent not a messenger except (to teach) in the language of his
(own) people, in order to make (things) clear to them. Now Allah leaves
straying those whom He pleases and guides whom He pleases: and He is
Exalted in power, full of Wisdom.

P: And We never sent a messenger save with the language of his folk,
that he might make (the message) clear for them. Then Allah sendeth
whom He will astray, and guideth whom He will. He is the Mighty, the
Wise.

S: And We did not send any messenger but with the language of his
people, so that he might explain to them clearly; then Allah makes whom
He pleases err and He guides whom He pleases and He is the Mighty, the
Wise.

014.005
Y: We sent Moses with Our signs (and the command). "Bring out thy people
from the depths of darkness into light, and teach them to remember the
Days of Allah." Verily in this there are Signs for such as are firmly
patient and constant,- grateful and appreciative.

P: We verily sent Moses with Our revelations, saying: Bring thy people
forth from darkness unto light. And remind them of the days of Allah.
Lo! therein are revelations for each steadfast, thankful (heart).

S: And certainly We sent Musa with Our communications, saying: Bring
forth your people from utter darkness into light and remind them of the
days of Allah; most surely there are signs in this for every patient,
grateful one.

014.006
Y: Remember! Moses said to his people: "Call to mind the favour of Allah
to you when He delivered you from the people of Pharaoh: they set you
hard tasks and punishments, slaughtered your sons, and let your
women-folk live: therein was a tremendous trial from your Lord."

P: And (remind them) how Moses said unto his people: Remember Allah's
favour unto you when He delivered you from Pharaoh's folk who were
afflicting you with dreadful torment, and were slaying your sons and
sparing your women; that was a tremendous trial from your Lord.

S: And when Musa said to his people: Call to mind Allah's favor to you
when He delivered you from Firon's people, who subjected you to severe
torment, and slew your sons and spared your women; and in this there
was a great trial from your Lord.

014.007
Y: And remember! your Lord caused to be declared (publicly): "If ye are
grateful, I will add more (favours) unto you; But if ye show
ingratitude, truly My punishment is terrible indeed."

P: And when your Lord proclaimed: If ye give thanks, I will give you
more; but if ye are thankless, lo! My punishment is dire.

S: And when your Lord made it known: If you are grateful, I would
certainly give to you more, and if you are ungrateful, My chastisement
is truly severe.

014.008
Y: And Moses said: "If ye show ingratitude, ye and all on earth
together, yet is Allah free of all wants, worthy of all praise."

P: And Moses said: Though ye and all who are in the earth prove
thankless, lo! Allah verily is Absolute, Owner of Praise.

S: And Musa said: If you are ungrateful, you and those on earth all
together, most surely Allah is Self-sufficient, Praised;

014.009
Y: Has not the story reached you, (O people!), of those who (went)
before you? - of the people of Noah, and 'Ad, and Thamud? - And of
those who (came) after them? None knows them but Allah. To them came
messengers with Clear (Signs); but they put their hands up to their
mouths, and said: "We do deny (the mission) on which ye have been sent,
and we are really in suspicious (disquieting) doubt as to that to which
ye invite us."

P: Hath not the history of those before you reached you: the folk of
Noah, and (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud, and those after them? None
save Allah knoweth them. Their messengers came unto them with clear
proofs, but they thrust their hands into their mouths, and said: Lo! we
disbelieve in that wherewith ye have been sent, and lo! we are in grave
doubt concerning that to which ye call us.

S: Has not the account reached you of those before you, of the people of
Nuh and Ad and Samood, and those after them? None knows them but Allah.
Their messengers come to them with clear arguments, but they thrust
their hands into their mouths and said: Surely we deny that with which
you are sent, and most surely we are in serious doubt as to that to
which you invite us.

014.010
Y: Their messengers said: "Is there a doubt about Allah, The Creator of
the heavens and the earth? It is He Who invites you, in order that He
may forgive you your sins and give you respite for a term appointed!"
They said: "Ah! ye are no more than human, like ourselves! Ye wish to
turn us away from the (gods) our fathers used to worship: then bring
us some clear authority."

P: Their messengers said: Can there be doubt concerning Allah, the
Creator of the heavens and the earth? He calleth you that He may
forgive you your sins and reprieve you unto an appointed term. They
said: Ye are but mortals like us, who would fain turn us away from what
our fathers used to worship. Then bring some clear warrant.

S: Their messengers said: Is there doubt about Allah, the Maker of the
heavens and the earth? He invites you to forgive you your faults and to
respite you till an appointed term. They said: You are nothing but
mortals like us; you wish to turn us away from what our fathers used to
worship; bring us therefore some clear authority.

014.011
Y: Their messengers said to them: "True, we are human like yourselves,
but Allah doth grant His grace to such of his servants as He pleases.
It is not for us to bring you an authority except as Allah permits. And
on Allah let all men of faith put their trust."

P: Their messengers said unto them: We are but mortals like you, but
Allah giveth grace unto whom He will of His slaves. It is not ours to
bring you a warrant unless by the permission of Allah. In Allah let
believers put their trust!

S: Their messengers said to them: We are nothing but mortals like
yourselves, but Allah bestows (His) favors on whom He pleases of His
servants, and it is not for us that we should bring you an authority
except by Allah's permission; and on Allah should the believers rely.

014.012
Y: "No reason have we why we should not put our trust on Allah. Indeed
He Has guided us to the Ways we (follow). We shall certainly bear with
patience all the hurt you may cause us. For those who put their trust
should put their trust on Allah."

P: How should we not put our trust in Allah when He hath shown us our
ways? We surely will endure the hurt ye do us. In Allah let the
trusting put their trust.

S: And what reason have we that we should not rely on Allah? And He has
indeed guided us in our ways; and certainly we would bear with patience
your persecution of us; and on Allah should the reliant rely.

014.013
Y: And the Unbelievers said to their messengers: "Be sure we shall drive
you out of our land, or ye shall return to our religion." But their
Lord inspired (this Message) to them: "Verily We shall cause the
wrong-doers to perish!"

P: And those who disbelieved said unto their messengers: Verily we will
drive you out from our land, unless ye return to our religion. Then
their Lord inspired them, (saying): Verily we shall destroy the
wrong-doers,

S: And those who disbelieved said to their messengers: We will most
certainly drive you forth from our land, or else you shall come back
into our religion. So their Lord revealed to them: Most certainly We
will destroy the unjust.

014.014
Y: "And verily We shall cause you to abide in the land, and succeed
them. This for such as fear the Time when they shall stand before My
tribunal,- such as fear the punishment denounced."

P: And verily We shall make you to dwell in the land after them. This is
for him who feareth My Majesty and feareth My threats.

S: And most certainly We will settle you in the land after them; this is
for him who fears standing in My presence and who fears My threat.

014.015
Y: But they sought victory and decision (there and then), and
frustration was the lot of every powerful obstinate transgressor.

P: And they sought help (from their Lord) and every froward potentate
was bought to naught;

S: And they asked for judgment and every insolent opposer was
disappointed:

014.016
Y: In front of such a one is Hell, and he is given, for drink, boiling
fetid water.

P: Hell is before him, and he is made to drink a festering water,

S: Hell is before him and he shall be given to drink of festering water:

014.017
Y: In gulps will he sip it, but never will he be near swallowing it down
his throat: death will come to him from every quarter, yet will he not
die: and in front of him will be a chastisement unrelenting.

P: Which he sippeth but can hardly swallow, and death cometh unto him
from every side while yet he cannot die, and before him is a harsh
doom.

S: He will drink it little by little and will not be able to swallow it
agreeably, and death will come to him from every quarter, but he shall
not die; and there shall be vehement chastisement before him.

014.018
Y: The parable of those who reject their Lord is that their works are as
ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a tempestuous day: No power
have they over aught that they have earned: that is the straying far,
far (from the goal).

P: A similitude of those who disbelieve in their Lord: Their works are
as ashes which the wind bloweth hard upon a stormy day. They have no
control of aught that they have earned. That is the extreme failure.

S: The parable of those who disbelieve in their Lord: their actions are
like ashes on which the wind blows hard on a stormy day; they shall not
have power over any thing out of what they have earned; this is the
great error.

014.019
Y: Seest thou not that Allah created the heavens and the earth in Truth?
If He so will, He can remove you and put (in your place) a new
creation?

P: Hast thou not seen that Allah hath created the heavens and the earth
with truth? If He will, He can remove you and bring (in) some new
creation;

S: Do you not see that Allah created the heavens and the earth with
truth? If He please He will take you off and bring a new creation,

014.020
Y: Nor is that for Allah any great matter.

P: And that is no great matter for Allah.

S: And this is not difficult for Allah.

014.021
Y: They will all be marshalled before Allah together: then will the weak
say to those who were arrogant, "For us, we but followed you; can ye
then avail us to all against the wrath of Allah?" They will reply, "If
we had received the Guidance of Allah, we should have given it to you:
to us it makes no difference (now) whether we rage, or bear (these
torments) with patience: for ourselves there is no way of escape."

P: They all come forth unto their Lord. Then those who were despised say
unto those who were scornful: We were unto you a following, can ye then
avert from us aught of Allah's doom? They say: Had Allah guided us, we
should have guided you. Whether we rage or patiently endure is (now)
all one for us; we have no place of refuge.

S: And they shall all come forth before Allah, then the weak shall say
to those who were proud: Surely we were your followers, can you
therefore avert from us any part of the chastisement of Allah? They
would say: If Allah had guided us, we too would have guided you; it is
the same to us whether we are impatient (now) or patient, there is no
place for us to fly to.

014.022
Y: And Satan will say when the matter is decided: "It was Allah Who gave
you a promise of Truth: I too promised, but I failed in my promise to
you. I had no authority over you except to call you but ye listened to
me: then reproach not me, but reproach your own souls. I cannot listen
to your cries, nor can ye listen to mine. I reject your former act in
associating me with Allah. For wrong-doers there must be a grievous
penalty."

P: And Satan saith, when the matter hath been decided: Lo! Allah
promised you a promise of truth; and I promised you, then failed you.
And I had no power over you save that I called unto you and ye obeyed
me. So blame not, but blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can ye
help me, Lo! I disbelieved in that which ye before ascribed to me. Lo!
for wrong-doers is a painful doom.

S: And the Shaitan shall say after the affair is decided: Surely Allah
promised you the promise of truth, and I gave you promises, then failed
to keep them to you, and I had no authority over you, except that I
called you and you obeyed me, therefore do not blame me but blame
yourselves: I cannot be your aider (now) nor can you be my aiders;
surely I disbelieved in your associating me with Allah before; surely
it is the unjust that shall have the painful punishment.

014.023
Y: But those who believe and work righteousness will be admitted to
gardens beneath which rivers flow,- to dwell therein for aye with the
leave of their Lord. Their greeting therein will be: "Peace!"

P: And those who believed and did good works are made to enter Gardens
underneath which rivers flow, therein abiding by permission of their
Lord, their greeting therein: Peace!

S: And those who believe and do good are made to enter gardens, beneath
which rivers flow, to abide in them by their Lord's permission; their
greeting therein is, Peace.

014.024
Y: Seest thou not how Allah sets forth a parable? - A goodly word like a
goodly tree, whose root is firmly fixed, and its branches (reach) to
the heavens,- of its Lord. So Allah sets forth parables for men, in
order that they may receive admonition.

P: Seest thou not how Allah coineth a similitude: A goodly saying, as a
goodly tree, its root set firm, its branches reaching into heaven,

S: Have you not considered how Allah sets forth a parable of a good word
(being) like a good tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in
heaven,

014.025
Y: It brings forth its fruit at all times, by the leave of its Lord. So
Allah sets forth parables for men, in order that they may receive
admonition.

P: Giving its fruit at every season by permission of its Lord? Allah
coineth the similitudes for mankind in order that they may reflect.

S: Yielding its fruit in every season by the permission of its Lord? And
Allah sets forth parables for men that they may be mindful.

014.026
Y: And the parable of an evil Word is that of an evil tree: It is torn
up by the root from the surface of the earth: it has no stability.

P: And the similitude of a bad saying is as a bad tree, uprooted from
upon the earth, possessing no stability.

S: And the parable of an evil word is as an evil tree pulled up from the
earth's surface; it has no stability.

014.027
Y: Allah will establish in strength those who believe, with the word
that stands firm, in this world and in the Hereafter; but Allah will
leave, to stray, those who do wrong: Allah doeth what He willeth.

P: Allah confirmeth those who believe by a firm saying in the life of
the world and in the Hereafter, and Allah sendeth wrong-doers astray.
And Allah doeth what He will.

S: Allah confirms those who believe with the sure word in this world's
life and in the hereafter, and Allah causes the unjust to go astray,
and Allah does what He pleases.

014.028
Y: Hast thou not turned thy vision to those who have changed the favour
of Allah. Into blasphemy and caused their people to descend to the
House of Perdition?-

P: Hast thou not seen those who gave the grace of Allah in exchange for
thanklessness and led their people down to the Abode of Loss,

S: Have you not seen those who have changed Allah's favor for
ungratefulness and made their people to alight into the abode of
perdition;

014.029
Y: Into Hell? They will burn therein,- an evil place to stay in!

P: (Even to) hell? They are exposed thereto. A hapless end!

S: (Into) hell? They shall enter into it and an evil place it is to
settle in.

014.030
Y: And they set up (idols) as equal to Allah, to mislead (men) from the
Path! Say: "Enjoy (your brief power)! But verily ye are making
straightway for Hell!"

P: And they set up rivals to Allah that they may mislead (men) from His
way. Say: Enjoy life (while ye may) for lo! your journey's end will be
the Fire.

S: And they set up equals with Allah that they may lead (people) astray
from His path. Say: Enjoy yourselves, for surely your return is to the
fire.

014.031
Y: Speak to my servants who have believed, that they may establish
regular prayers, and spend (in charity) out of the sustenance we have
given them, secretly and openly, before the coming of a Day in which
there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending.

P: Tell My bondmen who believe to establish worship and spend of that
which We have given them, secretly and publicly, before a day cometh
wherein there will be neither bargaining nor befriending.

S: Say to My servants who believe that they should keep up prayer and
spend out of what We have given them secretly and openly before the
coming of the day in which there shall be no bartering nor mutual
befriending.

014.032
Y: It is Allah Who hath created the heavens and the earth and sendeth
down rain from the skies, and with it bringeth out fruits wherewith to
feed you; it is He Who hath made the ships subject to you, that they
may sail through the sea by His command; and the rivers (also) hath He
made subject to you.

P: Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth, and causeth water
to descend from the sky, thereby producing fruits as food for you, and
maketh the ships to be of service unto you, that they may run upon the
sea at His command, and hath made of service unto you the rivers;

S: Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and sent down water
from the clouds, then brought forth with it fruits as a sustenance for
you, and He has made the ships subservient to you, that they might run
their course in the sea by His command, and He has made the rivers
subservient to you.

014.033
Y: And He hath made subject to you the sun and the moon, both diligently
pursuing their courses; and the night and the day hath he (also) made
subject to you.

P: And maketh the sun and the moon, constant in their courses, to be of
service unto you, and hath made of service unto you the night and the
day.

S: And He has made subservient to you the sun and the moon pursuing
their courses, and He has made subservient to you the night and the
day.

014.034
Y: And He giveth you of all that ye ask for. But if ye count the favours
of Allah, never will ye be able to number them. Verily, man is given up
to injustice and ingratitude.

P: And He giveth you of all ye ask of Him, and if ye would count the
bounty of Allah ye cannot reckon it. Lo! man is verily a wrong-doer, an
ingrate.

S: And He gives you of all that you ask Him; and if you count Allah's
favors, you will not be able to number them; most surely man is very
unjust, very ungrateful.

014.035
Y: Remember Abraham said: "O my Lord! make this city one of peace and
security: and preserve me and my sons from worshipping idols."

P: And when Abraham said: My Lord! Make safe this territory, and
preserve me and my sons from serving idols.

S: And when Ibrahim said: My Lord! make this city secure, and save me
and my sons from worshipping idols:

014.036
Y: "O my Lord! they have indeed led astray many among mankind; He then
who follows my (ways) is of me, and he that disobeys me,- but Thou art
indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

P: My Lord! Lo! they have led many of mankind astray. But whoso
followeth me, he verily is of me. And whoso disobeyeth me - Still Thou
art Forgiving, Merciful.

S: My Lord! surely they have led many men astray; then whoever follows
me, he is surely of me, and whoever disobeys me, Thou surely arc
Forgiving, Merciful:

014.037
Y: "O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring to dwell in a valley
without cultivation, by Thy Sacred House; in order, O our Lord, that
they may establish regular Prayer: so fill the hearts of some among men
with love towards them, and feed them with fruits: so that they may
give thanks."

P: Our Lord! Lo! I have settled some of my posterity in an uncultivable
valley near unto Thy holy House, our Lord! that they may establish
proper worship; so incline some hearts of men that they may yearn
toward them, and provide Thou them with fruits in order that they may
be thankful.

S: O our Lord! surely I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
unproductive of fruit near Thy Sacred House, our Lord! that they may
keep up prayer; therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards
them and provide them with fruits; haply they may be grateful:

014.038
Y: "O our Lord! truly Thou dost know what we conceal and what we reveal:
for nothing whatever is hidden from Allah, whether on earth or in
heaven."

P: Our Lord! Lo! Thou knowest that which we hide and that which we
proclaim. Nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from Allah.

S: O our Lord! Surely Thou knowest what we hide and what we make public,
and nothing in the earth nor any thing in heaven is hidden from Allah:

014.039
Y: "Praise be to Allah, Who hath granted unto me in old age Isma'il and
Isaac: for truly my Lord is He, the Hearer of Prayer!"

P: Praise be to Allah Who hath given me, in my old age, Ishmael and
Isaac! Lo! my Lord is indeed the Hearer of Prayer.

S: Praise be to Allah, Who has given me in old age Ismail and Ishaq;
most surely my Lord is the Hearer of prayer:

014.040
Y: O my Lord! make me one who establishes regular Prayer, and also
(raise such) among my offspring O our Lord! and accept Thou my Prayer.

P: My Lord! Make me to establish proper worship, and some of my
posterity (also); our Lord! and accept my prayer.

S: My Lord! make me keep up prayer and from my offspring (too), O our
Lord, and accept my prayer:

014.041
Y: "O our Lord! cover (us) with Thy Forgiveness - me, my parents, and
(all) Believers, on the Day that the Reckoning will be established!"

P: Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents and believers on the day when the
account is cast.

S: O our Lord! grant me protection and my parents and the believers on
the day when the reckoning shall come to pass!

014.042
Y: Think not that Allah doth not heed the deeds of those who do wrong.
He but giveth them respite against a Day when the eyes will fixedly
stare in horror,-

P: Deem not that Allah is unaware of what the wicked do. He but giveth
them a respite till a day when eyes will stare (in terror),

S: And do not think Allah to be heedless of what the unjust do; He only
respites them to a day on which the eyes shall be fixedly open,

014.043
Y: They running forward with necks outstretched, their heads uplifted,
their gaze returning not towards them, and their hearts a (gaping)
void!

P: As they come hurrying on in fear, their heads upraised, their gaze
returning not to them, and their hearts as air.

S: Hastening forward, their heads upraised, their eyes not reverting to
them and their hearts vacant.

014.044
Y: So warn mankind of the Day when the Wrath will reach them: then will
the wrong-doers say: "Our Lord! respite us (if only) for a short term:
we will answer Thy call, and follow the messengers!" "What! were ye not
wont to swear aforetime that ye should suffer no decline?"

P: And warn mankind of a day when the doom will come upon them, and
those who did wrong will say: Our Lord! Reprieve us for a little while.
We will obey Thy call and will follow the messengers. (It will be
answered): Did ye not swear before that there would be no end for you?

S: And warn people of the day when the chastisement shall come to them,
then those who were unjust will say: O our Lord! respite us to a near
term, (so) we shall respond to Thy call and follow the messengers.
What! did you not swear before (that) there will be no passing away for
you!

014.045
Y: "And ye dwelt in the dwellings of men who wronged their own souls; ye
were clearly shown how We dealt with them; and We put forth (many)
parables in your behoof!"

P: And (have ye not) dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged
themselves (of old) and (hath it not) become plain to you how We dealt
with them and made examples for you?

S: And you dwell in the abodes of those who were unjust to themselves,
and it is clear to you how We dealt with them and We have made (them)
examples to you.

014.046
Y: Mighty indeed were the plots which they made, but their plots were
(well) within the sight of Allah, even though they were such as to
shake the hills!

P: Verily they have plotted their plot, and their plot is with Allah,
though their plot were one whereby the mountains should be moved.

S: And they have indeed planned their plan, but their plan is with
Allah, though their plan was such that the mountains should pass away
thereby.

014.047
Y: Never think that Allah would fail his messengers in His promise: for
Allah is Exalted in power, - the Lord of Retribution.

P: So think not that Allah will fail to keep His promise to His
messengers. Lo! Allah is Mighty, Able to Requite (the wrong).

S: Therefore do not think Allah (to be one) failing in His promise to
His messengers; surely Allah is Mighty, the Lord of Retribution.

014.048
Y: One day the earth will be changed to a different earth, and so will
be the heavens, and (men) will be marshalled forth, before Allah, the
One, the Irresistible;

P: On the day when the earth will be changed to other than the earth,
and the heavens (also will be changed) and they will come forth unto
Allah, the One, the Almighty,

S: On the day when the earth shall be changed into a different earth,
and the heavens (as well), and they shall come forth before Allah, the
One, the Supreme.

014.049
Y: And thou wilt see the sinners that day bound together in fetters;-

P: Thou wilt see the guilty on that day linked together in chains,

S: And you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains.

014.050
Y: Their garments of liquid pitch, and their faces covered with Fire;

P: Their raiment of pitch, and the Fire covering their faces,

S: Their shirts made of pitch and the fire covering their faces

014.051
Y: That Allah may requite each soul according to its deserts; and verily
Allah is swift in calling to account.

P: That Allah may repay each soul what it hath earned. Lo! Allah is
swift at reckoning.

S: That Allah may requite each soul (according to) what it has earned;
surely Allah is swift in reckoning.

014.052
Y: Here is a Message for mankind: Let them take warning therefrom, and
let them know that He is (no other than) One Allah: let men of
understanding take heed.

P: This is a clear message for mankind in order that they may be warned
thereby, and that they may know that He is only One Allah, and that men
of understanding may take heed.

S: This is a sufficient exposition for the people and that they may be
warned thereby, and that they may know that He is One Allah and that
those possessed of understanding may mind.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 15:

                  AL-HIJR (AL-HIJR, STONELAND, ROCK CITY)
 Total Verses: 99 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

015.001
Y: A. L. R. These are the Ayats of Revelation,- of a Qur'an that makes
things clear.

P: Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verses of the Scripture and a plain Reading.

S: Alif Lam Ra. These are the verses of the Book and (of) a Quran that
makes (things) clear.

015.002
Y: Again and again will those who disbelieve, wish that they had bowed
(to Allah's will) in Islam.

P: It may be that those who disbelieve wish ardently that they were
Muslims.

S: Often will those who disbelieve wish that they had been Muslims.

015.003
Y: Leave them alone, to enjoy (the good things of this life) and to
please themselves: let (false) hope amuse them: soon will knowledge
(undeceive them).

P: Let them eat and enjoy life, and let (false) hope beguile them. They
will come to know!

S: Leave them that they may eat and enjoy themselves and (that) hope may
beguile them, for they will soon know.

015.004
Y: Never did We destroy a population that had not a term decreed and
assigned beforehand.

P: And We destroyed no township but there was a known decree for it.

S: And never did We destroy a town but it had a term made known.

015.005
Y: Neither can a people anticipate its term, nor delay it.

P: No nation can outstrip its term nor can they lag behind.

S: No people can hasten on their doom nor can they postpone (it).

015.006
Y: They say: "O thou to whom the Message is being revealed! truly thou
art mad (or possessed)!"

P: And they say: O thou unto whom the Reminder is revealed, lo! thou art
indeed a madman!

S: And they say: O you to whom the Reminder has been revealed! you are
most surely insane:

015.007
Y: "Why bringest thou not angels to us if it be that thou hast the
Truth?"

P: Why bringest thou not angels unto us, if thou art of the truthful?

S: Why do you not bring to us the angels if you are of the truthful
ones?

015.008
Y: We send not the angels down except for just cause: if they came (to
the ungodly), behold! no respite would they have!

P: We send not down the angels save with the Fact, and in that case (the
disbelievers) would not be tolerated.

S: We do not send the angels but with truth, and then they would not be
respited.

015.009
Y: We have, without doubt, sent down the Message; and We will assuredly
guard it (from corruption).

P: Lo! We, even We, reveal the Reminder, and lo! We verily are its
Guardian.

S: Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian.

015.010
Y: We did send messengers before thee amongst the religious sects of
old:

P: We verily sent (messengers) before thee among the factions of the men
of old.

S: And certainly We sent (messengers) before you among the nations of
yore.

015.011
Y: But never came a messenger to them but they mocked him.

P: And never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him.

S: And there never came a messenger to them but they mocked him.

015.012
Y: Even so do we let it creep into the hearts of the sinners -

P: Thus do We make it traverse the hearts of the guilty:

S: Thus do We make it to enter into the hearts of the guilty;

015.013
Y: That they should not believe in the (Message); but the ways of the
ancients have passed away.

P: They believe not therein, though the example of the men of old hath
gone before.

S: They do not believe in it, and indeed the example of the former
people has already passed.

015.014
Y: Even if We opened out to them a gate from heaven, and they were to
continue (all day) ascending therein,

P: And even if We opened unto them a gate of heaven and they kept
mounting through it,

S: And even if We open to them a gateway of heaven, so that they ascend
into it all the while,

015.015
Y: They would only say: "Our eyes have been intoxicated: Nay, we have
been bewitched by sorcery."

P: They would say: Our sight is wrong - nay, but we are folk bewitched.

S: They would certainly say: Only our eyes have been covered over,
rather we are an enchanted people.

015.016
Y: It is We Who have set out the zodiacal signs in the heavens, and made
them fair-seeming to (all) beholders;

P: And verily in the heaven we have set mansions of the stars, and We
have beautified it for beholders.

S: And certainly We have made strongholds in the heaven and We have made
it fair seeming to the beholders.

015.017
Y: And (moreover) We have guarded them from every cursed devil:

P: And We have guarded it from every outcast devil,

S: And We guard it against every accursed Shaitan,

015.018
Y: But any that gains a hearing by stealth, is pursued by a flaming
fire, bright (to see).

P: Save him who stealeth the hearing, and them doth a clear flame
pursue.

S: But he who steals a hearing, so there follows him a visible flame.

015.019
Y: And the earth We have spread out (like a carpet); set thereon
mountains firm and immovable; and produced therein all kinds of things
in due balance.

P: And the earth have We spread out, and placed therein firm hills, and
caused each seemly thing to grow therein.

S: And the earth-- We have spread it forth and made in it firm mountains
and caused to grow in it of every suitable thing.

015.020
Y: And We have provided therein means of subsistence,- for you and for
those for whose sustenance ye are not responsible.

P: And we have given unto you livelihoods therein, and unto those for
whom ye provide not.

S: And We have made in it means of subsistence for you and for him for
whom you are not the suppliers.

015.021
Y: And there is not a thing but its (sources and) treasures
(inexhaustible) are with Us; but We only send down thereof in due and
ascertainable measures.

P: And there is not a thing but with Us are the stores thereof. And we
send it not down save in appointed measure.

S: And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it, and We
do not send it down but in a known measure.

015.022
Y: And We send the fecundating winds, then cause the rain to descend
from the sky, therewith providing you with water (in abundance), though
ye are not the guardians of its stores.

P: And We send the winds fertilising, and cause water to descend from
the sky, and give it you to drink. It is not ye who are the holders of
the store thereof.

S: And We send the winds fertilizing, then send down water from the
cloud so We give it to you to drink of, nor is it you who store it up.

015.023
Y: And verily, it is We Who give life, and Who give death: it is We Who
remain inheritors (after all else passes away).

P: Lo! and it is We, even We, Who quicken and give death, and We are the
Inheritor.

S: And most surely We bring to life and cause to die and We are the
heirs.

015.024
Y: To Us are known those of you who hasten forward, and those who lag
behind.

P: And verily We know the eager among you and verily We know the
laggards.

S: And certainly We know those of you who have gone before and We
certainly know those who shall come later.

015.025
Y: Assuredly it is thy Lord Who will gather them together: for He is
perfect in Wisdom and Knowledge.

P: Lo! thy Lord will gather them together. Lo! He is Wise, Aware.

S: And surely your Lord will gather them together; surely He is Wise,
Knowing.

015.026
Y: We created man from sounding clay, from mud moulded into shape;

P: Verily We created man of potter's clay of black mud altered,

S: And certainly We created man of clay that gives forth sound, of black
mud fashioned in shape.

015.027
Y: And the jinn race, We had created before, from the fire of a
scorching wind.

P: And the jinn did We create aforetime of essential fire.

S: And the jinn We created before, of intensely hot fire.

015.028
Y: Behold! thy Lord said to the angels: "I am about to create man, from
sounding clay from mud moulded into shape;"

P: And (remember) when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am creating
a mortal out of potter's clay of black mud altered,

S: And when your Lord said to the angels: Surely I am going to create a
mortal of the essence of black mud fashioned in shape.

015.029
Y: "When I have fashioned him (in due proportion) and breathed into him
of My spirit, fall ye down in obeisance unto him."

P: So, when I have made him and have breathed into him of My Spirit, do
ye fall down, prostrating yourselves unto him.

S: So when I have made him complete and breathed into him of My spirit,
fall down making obeisance to him.

015.030
Y: So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together:

P: So the angels fell prostrate, all of them together

S: So the angels made obeisance, all of them together,

015.031
Y: Not so Iblis: he refused to be among those who prostrated themselves.

P: Save Iblis. He refused to be among the prostrate.

S: But Iblis (did it not); he refused to be with those who made
obeisance.

015.032
Y: (Allah) said: "O Iblis! what is your reason for not being among those
who prostrated themselves?"

P: He said: O Iblis! What aileth thee that thou art not among the
prostrate?

S: He said: O Iblis! what excuse have you that you are not with those
who make obeisance?

015.033
Y: (Iblis) said: "I am not one to prostrate myself to man, whom Thou
didst create from sounding clay, from mud moulded into shape."

P: He said: I am not one to prostrate myself unto a mortal whom Thou
hast created out of potter's clay of black mud altered!

S: He said: I am not such that I should make obeisance to a mortal whom
Thou hast created of the essence of black mud fashioned in shape.

015.034
Y: (Allah) said: "Then get thee out from here; for thou art rejected,
accursed."

P: He said: Then go thou forth from hence, for lo! thou art outcast.

S: He said: Then get out of it, for surely you are driven away:

015.035
Y: "And the curse shall be on thee till the day of Judgment."

P: And lo! the curse shall be upon thee till the Day of Judgment.

S: And surely on you is curse until the Day of Judgment.

015.036
Y: (Iblis) said: "O my Lord! give me then respite till the Day the
(dead) are raised."

P: He said: My Lord! Reprieve me till the day when they are raised.

S: He said: My Lord! then respite me till the time when they are raised.

015.037
Y: (Allah) said: "Respite is granted thee-"

P: He said: Then lo! thou art of those reprieved

S: He said: So surely you are of the respited ones

015.038
Y: "Till the Day of the Time appointed."

P: Till the Day of appointed time.

S: Till the period of the time made known.

015.039
Y: (Iblis) said: "O my Lord! because Thou hast put me in the wrong, I
will make (wrong) fair-seeming to them on the earth, and I will put
them all in the wrong,-"

P: He said: My Lord! Because Thou hast sent me astray, I verily shall
adorn the path of error for them in the earth, and shall mislead them
every one,

S: He said: My Lord! because Thou hast made life evil to me, I will
certainly make (evil) fair-seeming to them on earth, and I will
certainly cause them all to deviate,

015.040
Y: "Except Thy servants among them, sincere and purified (by Thy
Grace)."

P: Save such of them as are Thy perfectly devoted slaves.

S: Except Thy servants from among them, the devoted ones.

015.041
Y: (Allah) said: "This (way of My sincere servants) is indeed a way that
leads straight to Me."

P: He said: This is a right course incumbent upon Me:

S: He said: This is a right way with Me:

015.042
Y: "For over My servants no authority shalt thou have, except such as
put themselves in the wrong and follow thee."

P: Lo! as for My slaves, thou hast no power over any of them save such
of the froward as follow thee,

S: Surely. as regards My servants, you have no authority over them
except those who follow you of the deviators.

015.043
Y: And verily, Hell is the promised abode for them all!

P: And lo! for all such, hell will be the promised place.

S: And surely Hell is the promised place of them all:

015.044
Y: To it are seven gates: for each of those gates is a (special) class
(of sinners) assigned.

P: It hath seven gates, and each gate hath an appointed portion.

S: It has seven gates; for every gate there shall be a separate party of
them.

015.045
Y: The righteous (will be) amid gardens and fountains (of clear-flowing
water).

P: Lo! those who ward off (evil) are among gardens and watersprings.

S: Surely those who guard (against evil) shall be in the midst of
gardens and fountains:

015.046
Y: (Their greeting will be): "Enter ye here in peace and security."

P: (And it is said unto them): Enter them in peace, secure.

S: Enter them in peace, secure.

015.047
Y: And We shall remove from their hearts any lurking sense of injury:
(they will be) brothers (joyfully) facing each other on thrones (of
dignity).

P: And We remove whatever rancour may be in their breasts. As brethren,
face to face, (they rest) on couches raised.

S: And We will root out whatever of rancor is in their breasts-- (they
shall be) as brethren, on raised couches, face to face.

015.048
Y: There no sense of fatigue shall touch them, nor shall they (ever) be
asked to leave.

P: Toil cometh not unto them there, nor will they be expelled from
thence.

S: Toil shall not afflict them in it, nor shall they be ever ejected
from it.

015.049
Y: Tell My servants that I am indeed the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful;

P: Announce, (O Muhammad) unto My slaves that verily I am the Forgiving,
the Merciful,

S: Inform My servants that I am the Forgiving, the Merciful,

015.050
Y: And that My Penalty will be indeed the most grievous Penalty.

P: And that My doom is the dolorous doom.

S: And that My punishment-- that is the painful punishment.

015.051
Y: Tell them about the guests of Abraham.

P: And tell them of Abraham's guests,

S: And inform them of the guests of Ibrahim:

015.052
Y: When they entered his presence and said, "Peace!" He said, "We feel
afraid of you!"

P: (How) when they came in unto him, and said: Peace. He said: Lo! we
are afraid of you.

S: When they entered upon him, they said, Peace. He said: Surely we are
afraid of you.

015.053
Y: They said: "Fear not! We give thee glad tidings of a son endowed with
wisdom."

P: They said: Be not afraid! Lo! we bring thee good tidings of a boy
possessing wisdom.

S: They said: Be not afraid, surely we give you the good news of a boy,
possessing knowledge.

015.054
Y: He said: "Do ye give me glad tidings that old age has seized me? Of
what, then, is your good news?"

P: He said: Bring ye me good tidings (of a son) when old age hath
overtaken me? Of what then can ye bring good tidings?

S: He said: Do you give me good news (of a son) when old age has come
upon me?-- Of what then do you give me good news!

015.055
Y: They said: "We give thee glad tidings in truth: be not then in
despair!"

P: They said: We bring thee good tidings in truth. So be not thou of the
despairing.

S: They said: We give you good news with truth, therefore be not of the
despairing.

015.056
Y: He said: "And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord, but such as go
astray?"

P: He said: And who despaireth of the mercy of his Lord save those who
are astray?

S: He said: And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord but the erring
ones?

015.057
Y: Abraham said: "What then is the business on which ye (have come), O
ye messengers (of Allah)?"

P: He said: And afterward what is your business, O ye messengers (of
Allah)?

S: He said: What is your business then, O messengers?

015.058
Y: They said: "We have been sent to a people (deep) in sin,"

P: They said: We have been sent unto a guilty folk,

S: They said: Surely we are sent towards a guilty people,

015.059
Y: "Excepting the adherents of Lut: them we are certainly (charged) to
save (from harm),- All -"

P: (All) save the family of Lot. Them we shall deliver every one,

S: Except Lut's followers: We will most surely deliver them all,

015.060
Y: "Except his wife, who, We have ascertained, will be among those who
will lag behind."

P: Except his wife, of whom We had decreed that she should be of those
who stay behind.

S: Except his wife; We ordained that she shall surely be of those who
remain behind.

015.061
Y: At length when the messengers arrived among the adherents of Lut,

P: And when the messengers came unto the family of Lot,

S: So when the messengers came to Lut's followers,

015.062
Y: He said: "Ye appear to be uncommon folk."

P: He said: Lo! ye are folk unknown (to me).

S: He said: Surely you are an unknown people.

015.063
Y: They said: "Yea, we have come to thee to accomplish that of which
they doubt."

P: They said: Nay, but we bring thee that concerning which they keep
disputing,

S: They said: Nay, we have come to you with that about which they
disputed.

015.064
Y: "We have brought to thee that which is inevitably due, and assuredly
we tell the truth."

P: And bring thee the Truth, and lo! we are truth-tellers.

S: And we have come to you with the truth, and we are most surely
truthful.

015.065
Y: "Then travel by night with thy household, when a portion of the night
(yet remains), and do thou bring up the rear: let no one amongst you
look back, but pass on whither ye are ordered."

P: So travel with thy household in a portion of the night, and follow
thou their backs. Let none of you turn round, but go whither ye are
commanded.

S: Therefore go forth with your followers in a part of the night and
yourself follow their rear, and let not any one of you turn round, and
go forth whither you are commanded.

015.066
Y: And We made known this decree to him, that the last remnants of those
(sinners) should be cut off by the morning.

P: And We made plain the case to him, that the root of them (who did
wrong) was to be cut at early morn.

S: And We revealed to him this decree, that the roots of these shall be
cut off in the morning.

015.067
Y: The inhabitants of the city came in (mad) joy (at news of the young
men).

P: And the people of the city came, rejoicing at the news (of new
arrivals).

S: And the people of the town came rejoicing.

015.068
Y: Lut said: "These are my guests: disgrace me not:"

P: He said: Lo! they are my guests. Affront me not!

S: He said: Surely these are my guests, therefore do not disgrace me,

015.069
Y: "But fear Allah, and shame me not."

P: And keep your duty to Allah, and shame me not!

S: And guard against (the punishment of) Allah and do not put me to
shame.

015.070
Y: They said: "Did we not forbid thee (to speak) for all and sundry?"

P: They said; Have we not forbidden you from (entertaining) anyone?

S: They said: Have we not forbidden you from (other) people?

015.071
Y: He said: "There are my daughters (to marry), if ye must act (so)."

P: He said: Here are my daughters, if ye must be doing (so).

S: He said: These are my daughters, if you will do (aught).

015.072
Y: Verily, by thy life (O Prophet), in their wild intoxication, they
wander in distraction, to and fro.

P: By thy life (O Muhammad) they moved blindly in the frenzy of
approaching death.

S: By your life! they were blindly wandering on in their intoxication.

015.073
Y: But the (mighty) Blast overtook them before morning,

P: Then the (Awful) Cry overtook them at the sunrise.

S: So the rumbling overtook them (while) entering upon the time of
sunrise;

015.074
Y: And We turned (the cities) upside down, and rained down on them
brimstones hard as baked clay.

P: And We utterly confounded them, and We rained upon them stones of
heated clay.

S: Thus did We turn it upside down, and rained down upon them stones of
what had been decreed.

015.075
Y: Behold! in this are Signs for those who by tokens do understand.

P: Lo! therein verily are portents for those who read the signs.

S: Surely in this are signs for those who examine.

015.076
Y: And the (cities were) right on the high-road.

P: And lo! it is upon a road still uneffaced.

S: And surely it is on a road that still abides.

015.077
Y: Behold! in this is a sign for those who believed.

P: Lo! therein is indeed a portent for believers.

S: Most surely there is a sign in this for the believers.

015.078
Y: And the Companions of the Wood were also wrong-doers;

P: And the dwellers in the wood indeed were evil-doers.

S: And the dwellers of the thicket also were most surely unjust.

015.079
Y: So We exacted retribution from them. They were both on an open
highway, plain to see.

P: So we took vengeance on them; and lo! they both are on a high-road
plain to see.

S: So We inflicted retribution on them, and they are both, indeed, on an
open road (still) pursued.

015.080
Y: The Companions of the Rocky Tract also rejected the messengers:

P: And the dwellers in Al-Hijr denied (Our) messengers.

S: And the dwellers of the Rock certainly rejected the messengers;

015.081
Y: We sent them Our Signs, but they persisted in turning away from them.

P: And we gave them Our revelations, but they were averse to them.

S: And We gave them Our communications, but they turned aside from them;

015.082
Y: Out of the mountains did they hew (their) edifices, (feeling
themselves) secure.

P: And they used to hew out dwellings from the hills, (wherein they
dwelt) secure.

S: And they hewed houses in the mountains in security.

015.083
Y: But the (mighty) Blast seized them of a morning,

P: But the (Awful) Cry overtook them at the morning hour,

S: So the rumbling overtook them in the morning;

015.084
Y: And of no avail to them was all that they did (with such art and
care)!

P: And that which they were wont to count as gain availed them not.

S: And what they earned did not avail them.

015.085
Y: We created not the heavens, the earth, and all between them, but for
just ends. And the Hour is surely coming (when this will be manifest).
So overlook (any human faults) with gracious forgiveness.

P: We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them
save with truth, and lo! the Hour is surely coming. So forgive, (O
Muhammad), with a gracious forgiveness.

S: And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between
them two but in truth; and the hour is most surely coming, so turn away
with kindly forgiveness.

015.086
Y: For verily it is thy Lord who is the Master-Creator, knowing all
things.

P: Lo! Thy Lord! He is the All-Wise Creator.

S: Surely your Lord is the Creator of all things, the Knowing.

015.087
Y: And We have bestowed upon thee the Seven oft-repeated (verses) and
the Grand Qur'an.

P: We have given thee seven of the oft-repeated (verses) and the great
Qur'an.

S: And certainly We have given you seven of the oft-repeated (verses)
and the grand Quran.

015.088
Y: Strain not thine eyes. (Wistfully) at what We have bestowed on
certain classes of them, nor grieve over them: but lower thy wing (in
gentleness) to the believers.

P: Strain not thine eyes toward that which We cause some wedded pairs
among them to enjoin, and be not grieved on their account, and lower
thy wing (in tenderness) for the believers.
