 slumbering grandeur of their nature wakes and acknowledges kindred
 with the sky and storm. "I cannot speak," they would say, "the
 feelings which are in me; I have had emotions, aspirations, thoughts;
 I cannot put them into words. Look there! listen now to the storm!
 That is what I meant, only I never could say it out till now." Thus do
 art and nature speak for us, and thus do we adopt them as our own.
 This is the way in which His righteousness becomes righteousness for
 us. This is the way in which the heart presents to God the sacrifice
 of Christ; gazing on that perfect Life we, as it were, say, "There,
 that is my religion--that is my righteousness--what I want to be,
 which I am not--that is my offering, my life as I would wish to give
 it, freely and not checked, entire and perfect." So the old prophets,
 their hearts big with unutterable thoughts, searched "what or what
 manner of time the spirit of Christ which was in them did signify,
 when it testified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and of the
 glory which should follow;" and so with us, until it passes into
 prayer: "My Saviour, fill up the blurred and blotted sketch which my
 clumsy hand has drawn of a divine life, with the fullness of Thy
 perfect picture. I feel the beauty which I cannot realize:--robe me in
 Thine unutterable purity:--

   "Rock of ages cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee."


 II. The influence of that Sacrifice on man is the introduction of the
 principle of self-sacrifice into his nature,--"then were all dead."
 Observe again, not He died that we might not die, but that in His
 death we might be dead, and that in His sacrifice we might become each
 a sacrifice to God. Moreover, this death is identical with life. They
 who in the first sentence, are called dead, are in the second
 denominated "they who live." So in another place, "I am crucified with
 Christ, nevertheless I live;" death, therefore--that is the sacrifice
 of self--is equivalent to life. Now, this rests upon a profound truth.
 The death of Christ was a representation of the life of God. To me
 this is the profoundest of all truths, that the whole of the life of
 God is the sacrifice of self. God is Love; love is sacrifice--to give
 rather than to receive--the blessedness of self-giving. If the life of
 God were not such it would be a falsehood, to say that God is Love;
 for even in our human nature, that which seeks to enjoy all instead of
 giving all, is known by a very different name from that of love. All
 the life of God is a flow of this divine self-giving charity. Creation
 itself is sacrifice--the self-impartation of the divine Being.
 Redemption too, is sacrifice, else it could not be love; for which
 reason we will not surrender one iota of the truth that the death of
 Christ was the sacrifice of God--the manifestation once in time of
 that which is the eternal law of His life.

 If man therefore, is to rise into the life of God, he must be absorbed
 into the spirit of that sacrifice--he must die with Christ if he would
 enter into his proper life. For sin is the withdrawing into self and
 egotism, out of the vivifying life of God, which alone is our true
 life. The moment the man sins he dies. Know we not how awfully true
 that sentence is, "Sin revived, and I died?" The vivid life of sin is
 the death of the man. Have we never felt that our true existence has
 absolutely in that moment disappeared, and that _we_ are not?

 I say therefore, that real human life is a perpetual completion and
 repetition of the sacrifice of Christ--"all are dead;" the explanation
 of which follows, "to live not to themselves, but to Him who died for
 them and rose again." This is the truth which lies at the bottom of
 the Romish doctrine of the mass. Rome asserts that in the mass a true
 and proper sacrifice is offered up for the sins of all--that the
 offering of Christ is for ever repeated. To this Protestantism has
 objected vehemently, that there is but one offering once offered--an
 objection in itself entirely true; yet the Romish doctrine contains a
 truth which it is of importance to disengage from the gross and
 material form with which it has been overlaid. Let us hear St. Paul,
 "I fill up that which is behindhand of the sufferings of Christ, in my
 flesh, for His body's sake, which is the Church." Was there then,
 something behindhand of Christ's sufferings remaining uncompleted, of
 which the sufferings of Paul could be in any sense the complement? He
 says there was. Could the sufferings of Paul for the Church in any
 form of correct expression be said to eke out the sufferings that were
 complete? In one sense it is true to say that there is one offering
 once offered _for_ all. But it is equally true to say that that one
 offering is valueless, except so far as it is completed and repeated
 in the life and self-offering _of_ all. This is the Christian's
 sacrifice. Not mechanically completed in the miserable materialism of
 the mass, but spiritually in the life of all in whom the Crucified
 lives. The sacrifice of Christ is done over again in every life which
 is lived, not to self but, to God.

 Let one concluding observation be made--self-denial, self-sacrifice,
 self-surrender! Hard doctrines, and impossible! Whereupon, in silent
 hours, we sceptically ask, Is this possible? is it natural? Let
 preacher and moralist say what they will, I am not here to sacrifice
 myself for others. God sent me here for happiness, not misery. Now
 introduce one sentence of this text of which we have as yet said
 nothing, and the dark doctrine becomes illuminated--"the _love_ of
 Christ constraineth us." Self-denial, for the sake of self-denial,
 does no good; self-sacrifice for its own sake is no religious act at
 all. If you give up a meal for the sake of showing power over self, or
 for the sake of self-discipline, it is the most miserable of all
 delusions. You are not more religious in doing this than before. This
 is mere self-culture, and self-culture being occupied for ever about
 self, leaves you only in that circle of self from which religion is to
 free you; but to give up a meal that one you love may have it, is
 properly a religious act--no hard and dismal duty, because made easy
 by affection. To bear pain for the sake of bearing it has in it no
 moral quality at all, but to bear it rather than surrender truth, or
 in order to save another, is positive enjoyment as well as ennobling
 to the soul. Did you ever receive even a blow meant for another in
 order to shield that other? Do you not know that there was actual
 pleasure in the keen pain far beyond the most rapturous thrill of
 nerve which could be gained from pleasure in the midst of
 painlessness? Is not the mystic yearning of love expressed in words
 most purely thus, Let me suffer for him?

 This element of love is that which makes this doctrine an intelligible
 and blessed truth. So sacrifice alone, bare and unrelieved, is
 ghastly, unnatural, and dead; but self-sacrifice, illuminated by love,
 is warmth and life; it is the death of Christ, the life of God, the
 blessedness, and only proper life of man.




 VIII.

 _Preached June 30, 1850._

 THE POWER OF SORROW.


   "Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed
    to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that
    ye might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow worketh
    repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of
    the world worketh death."--2 Corinthians vii. 9, 10.

 That which is chiefly insisted on in this verse, is the distinction
 between sorrow and repentance. To grieve over sin is one thing, to
 repent of it is another.

 The apostle rejoiced, not that the Corinthians sorrowed, but that they
 sorrowed unto repentance. Sorrow has two results; it may end in
 spiritual life, or in spiritual death; and in themselves, one of these
 is as natural as the other. Sorrow may produce two kinds of
 reformation--a transient, or a permanent one--an alteration in habits,
 which originating in emotion, will last so long as that emotion
 continues, and then after a few fruitless efforts, be given up,--a
 repentance which will be repented of; or again, a permanent change,
 which will be reversed by no after thought--a repentance not to be
 repented of. Sorrow is in itself, therefore, a thing neither good nor
 bad: its value depends on the spirit of the person on whom it falls.
 Fire will inflame straw, soften iron, or harden clay; its effects are
 determined by the object with which it comes in contact. Warmth
 developes the energies of life, or helps the progress of decay. It is
 a great power in the hot-house, a great power also in the coffin; it
 expands the leaf, matures the fruit, adds precocious vigour to
 vegetable life: and warmth too developes, with tenfold rapidity, the
 weltering process of dissolution. So too with sorrow. There are
 spirits in which it developes the seminal principle of life; there are
 others in which it prematurely hastens the consummation of irreparable
 decay. Our subject therefore is the twofold power of sorrow.

    I. The fatal power of the sorrow of the world.
   II. The life-giving power of the sorrow that is after God.

 The simplest way in which the sorrow of the world works death, is seen
 in the effect of mere regret for worldly loss. There are certain
 advantages with which we come into the world. Youth, health, friends,
 and sometimes property. So long as these are continued we are happy;
 and because happy, fancy ourselves very grateful to God. We bask in
 the sunshine of His gifts, and this pleasant sensation of sunning
 ourselves in life we call religion; that state in which we all are
 before sorrow comes, to test the temper of the metal of which our
 souls are made, when the spirits are unbroken and the heart buoyant,
 when a fresh morning is to a young heart what it is to the skylark.
 The exuberant burst of joy seems a spontaneous hymn to the Father of
 all blessing, like the matin carol of the bird; but this is not
 religion: it is the instinctive utterance of happy feeling, having as
 little of moral character in it, in the happy human being, as in the
 happy bird.

 Nay more--the religion which is only sunned into being by happiness,
 is a suspicious thing: having been warmed by joy, it will become cold
 when joy is over; and then when these blessings are removed, we count
 ourselves hardly treated, as if we had been defrauded of a right;
 rebellious hard feelings come; then it is you see people become
 bitter, spiteful, discontented. At every step in the solemn path of
 life, something must be mourned which will come back no more; the
 temper that was so smooth becomes rugged and uneven; the benevolence
 that expanded upon all, narrows into an ever dwindling selfishness--we
 are alone; and then that death-like loneliness deepens as life goes
 on. The course of man is downwards, and he moves with slow and ever
 more solitary steps, down to the dark silence--the silence of the
 grave. This is the death of heart; the sorrow of the world has worked
 death.

 Again there is a sorrow of the world, when sin is grieved for in a
 worldly spirit. There are two views of sin: in one it is looked upon
 as wrong--in the other, as producing loss--loss for example, of
 character. In such cases, if character could be preserved before the
 world, grief would not come; but the paroxysms of misery fall upon our
 proud spirit when our guilt is made public. The most distinct instance
 we have of this is in the life of Saul. In the midst of his apparent
 grief, the thing still uppermost was that he had forfeited his kingly
 character: almost the only longing was, that Samuel should honour him
 before his people. And hence it comes to pass, that often remorse and
 anguish only begin with exposure. Suicide takes place, not when the
 act of wrong is done, but when the guilt is known, and hence too, many
 a one becomes hardened who would otherwise have remained tolerably
 happy; in consequence of which we blame the exposure, not the guilt;
 we say if it had hushed up, all would have been well; that the servant
 who robbed his master was ruined by taking away his character; and
 that if the sin had been passed over, repentance might have taken
 place, and he might have remained a respectable member of society. Do
 not think so. It is quite true that remorse was produced by exposure,
 and that the remorse was fatal; the sorrow which worked death arose
 from that exposure, and so far exposure may be called the cause: had
 it never taken place, respectability, and comparative peace, might
 have continued; but outward respectability is not change of heart.

 It is well known that the corpse has been preserved for centuries in
 the iceberg, or in antiseptic peat; and that when atmospheric air was
 introduced to the exposed surface it crumbled into dust. Exposure
 worked dissolution, but it only manifested the death which was already
 there; so with sorrow, it is not the living heart which drops to
 pieces, or crumbles into dust, when it is revealed. Exposure did not
 work death in the Corinthian sinner, but life.

 There is another form of grief for sin, which the apostle would not
 have rejoiced to see; it is when the hot tears come from pride. No two
 tones of feeling, apparently similar, are more unlike than that in
 which Saul exclaimed, "I have played the fool exceedingly," and that
 in which the Publican cried out, "God be merciful to me a sinner."
 The charge of folly brought against oneself only proves that we feel
 bitterly for having lost our own self-respect. It is a humiliation to
 have forfeited the idea which a man had formed of his own
 character--to find that the very excellence on which he prided
 himself, is the one in which he has failed. If there were a virtue for
 which Saul was conspicuous, it was generosity; yet it was exactly in
 this point of generosity in which he discovered himself to have
 failed, when he was overtaken on the mountain, and his life spared by
 the very man whom he was hunting to the death, with feelings of the
 meanest jealousy. Yet there was no real repentance there; there was
 none of that in which a man is sick of state and pomp. Saul could
 still rejoice in regal splendour, go about complaining of himself to
 the Ziphites, as if he was the most ill-treated and friendless of
 mankind; he was still jealous of his reputation, and anxious to be
 well thought of. Quite different is the tone in which the Publican,
 who felt himself a sinner, asked for mercy. He heard the contumelious
 expression of the Pharisee, "this Publican." With no resentment, he
 meekly bore it as a matter naturally to be taken for granted--"he did
 not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven;" he was as a worm which
 turns in agony, but not revenge, upon the foot which treads it into
 the dust.

 Now this sorrow of Saul's too, works death: no merit can restore
 self-respect; when once a man has found himself out, he cannot be
 deceived again. The heart is as a stone: a speck of canker corrodes
 and spreads within. What on this earth remains, but endless sorrow,
 for him who has ceased to respect himself, and has no God to turn to?


 II. The divine power of sorrow.

 1. It works repentance. By repentance is meant, in Scripture, change
 of life, alteration of habits, renewal of heart. This is the aim and
 meaning of all sorrow. The consequences of sin are meant to wean from
 sin. The penalty annexed to it is in the first instance, corrective,
 not penal. Fire burns the child, to teach it one of the truths of this
 universe--the property of fire to burn. The first time it cuts its
 hand with a sharp knife, it has gained a lesson which it never will
 forget. Now, in the case of pain, this experience is seldom, if ever,
 in vain. There is little chance of a child forgetting that fire will
 burn, and that sharp steel will cut; but the moral lessons contained
 in the penalties annexed to wrong-doing are just as truly intended,
 though they are by no means so unerring in enforcing their
 application. The fever in the veins and the headache which succeed
 intoxication, are meant to warn against excess. On the first occasion
 they are simply corrective; in every succeeding one they assume more
 and more a penal character in proportion as the conscience carries
 with them the sense of ill desert.

 Sorrow then, has done its work when it deters from evil; in other
 words when it works repentance. In the sorrow of the world, the
 obliquity of the heart towards evil is not cured; it seems as if
 nothing cured it: heartache and trials come in vain; the history of
 life at last is what it was at first. The man is found erring where he
 erred before. The same course, begun with the certainty of the same
 desperate end which has taken place so often before.

 They have reaped the whirlwind, but they will again sow the wind.
 Hence I believe, that life-giving sorrow is less remorse for that
 which is irreparable, than anxiety to save that which remains. The
 sorrow that ends in death hangs in funeral weeds over the sepulchres
 of the past. Yet the present does not become more wise. Not one
 resolution is made more firm, nor one habit more holy. Grief is all.
 Whereas sorrow avails _only_ when the past is converted into
 experience, and from failure lessons are learned which never are to be
 forgotten.

 2. Permanence of alteration; for after all, a steady reformation is a
 more decisive test of the value of mourning than depth of grief.

 The susceptibility of emotion varies with individuals. Some men feel
 intensely, others suffer less keenly; but this is constitutional,
 belonging to nervous temperament, rather than to moral character.
 _This_ is the characteristic of the divine sorrow, that it is a
 repentance "not repented of;" no transient, short-lived resolutions,
 but sustained resolve.

 And the beautiful law is, that in proportion as the, repentance
 increases the grief diminishes. "I rejoice," says Paul, that "I made
 you sorry, though it were but for a time." Grief for a time,
 repentance for ever. And few things more signally prove the wisdom of
 this apostle than his way of dealing with this grief of the
 Corinthian. He tried no artificial means of intensifying it--did not
 urge the duty of dwelling upon it, magnifying it, nor even of gauging
 and examining it. So soon as grief had done its work, the apostle was
 anxious to dry useless tears--he even feared lest haply such an one
 should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. "A true penitent," says
 Mr. Newman, "never forgives himself." O false estimate of the gospel
 of Christ, and of the heart of man! A proud remorse does not forgive
 itself the forfeiture of its own dignity; but it is the very beauty of
 the penitence which is according to God, that at last the sinner,
 realizing God's forgiveness, does learn to forgive himself. For what
 other purpose did St. Paul command the Church of Corinth to give
