
Bengal, especially western Bengal and Bihar, was the stronghold of
decadent Buddhism, though even here hostile influences were not
absent. But about 730 A.D. a pious Buddhist named Gopala founded the
Pala dynasty and extended his power over Magadha. The Palas ruled for
about 450 years and supplied a long and devout line of defenders of
the faith. But to the east of their dominions lay the principality of
Kanauj, a state of varying size and fortunes and from the eighth
century onwards a stronghold of Brahmanic learning.

The revolution in Hinduism which definitely defeated, though it did
not annihilate Buddhism, is generally connected with the names of
Kumarila Bhatta (_c._ 750) and Sankara (_c._ 800). We know the
doctrines of these teachers, for many of their works have come down to
us, but when we enquire what was their political importance, or the
scope and extent of the movement which they championed we are
conscious (as so often) of the extraordinary vagueness of Indian
records even when the subject might appeal to religious and
philosophic minds.[269] Kumarila is said to have been a Brahman of
Bihar who abjured Buddhism for Hinduism and raged with the ardour of a
proselyte against his ancient faith. Tradition[270] represents him as
instigating King Sudhanvan to exterminate the Buddhists. But nothing
is known of this king and he cannot have had the extensive empire with
which he is credited.

Sankara was a Brahman of the south who in a short life found time to
write numerous works, to wander over India, to found a monastic order
and build four monasteries. In doctrine and discipline he was more
pliant than Kumarila and he assimilated many strong points of
Buddhism. Both these teachers are depicted as the successful heroes of
public disputations in which the interest at stake was considerable.
The vanquished had to become a disciple of the vanquisher or to
forfeit his life and, if he was the head of an institution, to
surrender its property. These accounts, though exaggerated, are
probably a florid version of what occurred and we may surmise that the
popular faith of the day was generally victorious. What violence the
rising tide of Hinduism may have wrought, it is hard to say. There is
no evidence of any general persecution of Buddhism in the sense in
which one Christian sect persecuted another in Europe. But at a rather
later date we hear that Jains were persecuted and tortured by Saiva
princes both in southern India and Gujarat, and if there were any
detailed account, epigraphic or literary, of such persecutions in the
eighth and ninth centuries, there would be no reason for doubting it.
But no details are forthcoming. Without resorting to massacre, an
anti-Buddhist king had in his power many effective methods of
hostility. He might confiscate or transfer monastic property, or
forbid his subjects to support monks. Considering the state of
Buddhism as represented by Hsuean Chuang and I-Ching it is probable
that such measures would suffice to ensure the triumph of the Brahmans
in most parts of India.

After the epoch of Sankara, the history of Indian Buddhism is
confined to the Pala kingdom. Elsewhere we hear only of isolated
grants to monasteries and similar acts of piety, often striking but
hardly worthy of mention in comparison with the enormous number of
Brahmanic inscriptions. But in the Pala kingdom[271] Buddhism, though
corrupt, was flourishing so far as the number of its adherents and
royal favour were concerned. Gopala founded the monastery of
Odontapuri or Udandapura, which according to some authorities was in
the town of Bihar. Dharmapala the second king of the dynasty (_c._ 800
A.D.) built on the north bank of the Ganges the even more celebrated
University of Vikramasila,[272] where many commentaries were composed.
It was a centre not only of tantric learning but of logic and grammar,
and is interesting as showing the connection between Bengal and Tibet.
Tibetans studied there and Sanskrit books were translated into Tibetan
within its cloisters. Dharmapala is said to have reigned sixty-four
years and to have held his court at Patna, which had fallen into decay
but now began to revive. According to Taranatha his successor Devapala
built Somapuri, conquered Orissa and waged war with the unbelievers
who had become numerous, no doubt as a result of the preaching of
Sankara. But as a rule the Palas, though they favoured Buddhism, did
not actively discourage Hinduism. They even gave grants to Hindu
temples and their prime ministers were generally Brahmans who[273]
used to erect non-Buddhist images in Buddhist shrines. The dynasty
continued through the eleventh century and in this period some
information as to the condition of Indian Buddhism is afforded by the
relations between Bengal and Tibet. After the persecution of the tenth
century Tibetan Buddhism was revived by the preaching of monks from
Bengal. Mahipala then occupied the throne (_c._ 978-1030) and during
his reign various learned men accepted invitations to Tibet. More
celebrated is the mission of Atisa, a monk of the Vikramasila
monastery, which took place about 1038. That these two missions should
have been invited and despatched shows that in the eleventh century
Bengal was a centre of Buddhist learning. Probably the numerous
Sanskrit works preserved in Tibetan translations then existed in its
monasteries. But about the same time the power of the Pala dynasty,
and with it the influence of Buddhism, were curtailed by the
establishment of the rival Sena dynasty in the eastern provinces.
Still, under Ramapala, who reigned about 1100, the great teacher
Abhayakara was an ornament of the Mahayana. Taranatha[274] says that
he corrected the text of the scriptures and that in his time there
were many Pandits and resident Bhikshus in the monasteries of
Vikramasila, Bodh-Gaya and Odontapuri.

There is thus every reason to suppose that in the twelfth century
Buddhism still nourished in Bihar, that its clergy numbered several
thousands and its learning was held in esteem. The blow which
destroyed its power was struck by a Mohammedan invasion in 1193. In
that year Ikhtiyar-ud-Din Muhammad,[275] a general of Kutb-ud-Din,
invaded Bihar with a band of only two hundred men and with amazing
audacity seized the capital, which, consisting chiefly of palaces and
monasteries, collapsed without a blow. The monks were massacred to a
man, and when the victors, who appear not to have understood what
manner of place they had captured, asked the meaning of the libraries
which they saw, no one was found capable of reading the books.[276]
It was in 1193 also that Benares was conquered by the Mohammedans. I
have found no record of the sack of the monastery at Sarnath but the
ruins are said to show traces of fire and other indications that it
was overwhelmed by some sudden disaster.

The Mohammedans had no special animus against Buddhism. They were
iconoclasts who saw merit in the destruction of images and the
slaughter of idolaters. But whereas Hinduism was spread over the
country, Buddhism was concentrated in the great monasteries and when
these were destroyed there remained nothing outside them capable of
withstanding either the violence of the Moslims or the assimilative
influence of the Brahmans. Hence Buddhism suffered far more from these
invasions than Hinduism but still vestiges of it lingered long[277]
and exist even now in Orissa. Taranatha says that the immediate result
of the Moslim conquest was the dispersal of the surviving teachers and
this may explain the sporadic occurrence of late Buddhist inscriptions
in other parts of India. He also tells us that a king named
Cangalaraja restored the ruined Buddhist temples of Bengal about 1450.
Elsewhere[278] he gives a not discouraging picture of Buddhism in the
Deccan, Gujarat and Rajputana after the Moslim conquest of Magadha but
adds that the study of magic became more and more prevalent. In the
life of Caitanya it is stated that when travelling in southern India
(about 1510 A.D.) he argued with Buddhists and confuted them,
apparently somewhere in Arcot.[279] Manuscripts preserved in Nepal
indicate that as late as the fifteenth or sixteenth century Bengali
copyists wrote out Buddhist works, and there is evidence that
Bodh-Gaya continued to be a place of pilgrimage. In 1585 it was
visited by a Nepalese named Abhaya Raja who on his return erected in
Patan a monastery imitated from what he had seen in Bengal, and in
1777 the Tashi Lama sent an embassy. But such instances prove little
as to the religion of the surrounding Hindu population, for at the
present day numerous Buddhist pilgrims, especially Burmese, frequent
the shrine. The control of the temple passed into the hands of the
Brahmans and for the ordinary Bengali Buddha became a member of
India's numerous pantheon. Pandit Haraprasad Sastri mentions a
singular poem called Buddhacaritra, completed in 1711 and celebrating
an incarnation of Buddha which apparently commenced in 1699 and was to
end in the reappearance of the golden age. But the being called Buddha
is a form of Vishnu and the work is as strange a jumble of religion
as it is of languages, being written in "a curious medley of bad
Sanskrit, bad Hindi and bad Bihari."

It is chiefly in Orissa that traces of Buddhism can still be found
within the limits of India proper. The Saraks of Baramba, Tigaria and
the adjoining parts of Cuttack describe themselves as Buddhists.[280]
Their name is the modern equivalent of Sravaka and they apparently
represent an ancient Buddhist community which has become a sectarian
caste. They have little knowledge of their religion but meet once a
year in the cave temples of Khandagiri, to worship a deity called
Buddhadeva or Caturbhuja. All their ceremonies commence with the
formula _Ahimsa parama dharma_ and they respect the temple of Puri,
which is suspected of having a Buddhist origin.

Nagendranath Vasu has published some interesting details as to the
survival of Buddhist ideas in Orissa.[281] He traces the origin of
this hardy though degraded form of Mahayanism to Ramai Pandit,[282] a
tantric Acarya of Magadha who wrote a work called Sunya Purana which
became popular. Orissa was one of the regions which offered the
longest resistance to Islam, for it did not succumb until 1568. A
period of Sivaism in the tenth and eleventh centuries is indicated by
the temples of Bhuvaneshwar and other monuments. But in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries the reigning dynasty were worshippers of
Vishnu and built the great temples at Puri and Konarak, dedicated to
Jagannatha and Surya-narayana respectively. We do not however hear
that they persecuted Buddhism and there are reasons for thinking that
Jagannatha is a form of the Buddha[283] and that the temple at Puri
was originally a Buddhist site. It is said that it contains a gigantic
statue of the Buddha before which a wall has been built and also that
the image of Jagannatha, which is little more than a log of wood, is
really a case enclosing a Buddhist relic. King Prataparudra ({~DAGGER~} 1529)
persecuted Buddhism, which implies that at this late date its
adherents were sufficiently numerous to attract attention. Either at
the beginning of his reign or before it there flourished a group of
six poets of whom the principal were Acyutananda Dasa and Caitanya
Dasa.[284] Their works are nominally devoted to the celebration of
Krishna's praises and form the chief vernacular scripture of the
Vaishnavas in Orissa but in them Krishna, or the highest form of
the deity by whatever name he is called, is constantly identified with
Sunya or the Void, that favourite term of Mahayanist philosophy.
Passages from them are also quoted stating that in the Kali age the
followers of the Buddha must disguise themselves; that there are 3000
crypto-Buddhists hidden in various parts of Orissa, that Hari has been
incarnate in many Buddhas and that the Buddha will appear again on
earth. The phrase "I take refuge in the Buddha, in Mata Adisakti (=
Dharma) and in the Sangha" is also quoted from these works and
Caitanya Dasa describes five Vishnus, who are apparently identical
with the five Dhyani Buddhas.[285]

Taranatha states that the last king of Orissa, Mukunda Deva, who was
overthrown by the Mohammedans in 1568, was a Buddhist and founded some
temples and monasteries. In the seventeenth century, there flourished
a Buddhist poet named Mahadevadasa,[286] and the Tibetan pilgrim
Buddhagupta visited among other sites the old capital of Mayurabhanja
and saw a stupa there. It is claimed that the tribe known as Bathuris
or Bauris have always been crypto-Buddhists and have preserved their
ancient customs. They are however no credit to their religion, for one
of their principal ceremonies is hook-swinging.[287]

The doctrine of the Bathuris is called Mahima Dharma and experienced
an interesting revival in 1875.[288] A blind man named Bhima Bhoi had
a vision of the Buddha who restored his sight and bade him preach the
law. He attracted some thousands of adherents and led a band to Puri
proclaiming that his mission was to bring to light the statue of
Buddha concealed in the temple. The Raja resisted the attempt and the
followers of Bhima Bhoi were worsted in a sanguinary encounter. Since
that time they have retired to the more remote districts of Orissa and
are said to hold that the Buddha will appear again in a new
incarnation. They are also called Kumbhipatias and according to the
last census of India (1911) are hostile to Brahmans and probably
number about 25,000.

Traces of Buddhism also survive in the worship of a deity called
Dharma-Raja or Dharma-Thakur which still prevails in western and
southern Bengal.[289] Priests of this worship are usually not Brahmans
but of low caste, and Haraprasad thinks that the laity who follow it
may number "several millions." Though Dharma has come to be associated
with the goddess of smallpox and is believed even by his adorers to be
a form of Vishnu or of Siva, yet Dhyana, or meditation, forms a part
of his worship and the prayers and literature of the sect retain some
traces of his origin. Thus he is said to be highly honoured in Ceylon
and receives the epithet Sunyamurti.

A corrupt form of Buddhism still exists in Nepal.[290] This country
when first heard of was in the hands of the Nevars who have preserved
some traditions of a migration from the north and are akin to the
Tibetans in race and language, though like many non-Aryan tribes they
have endeavoured to invent for themselves a Hindu pedigree. Buddhism
was introduced under Asoka. As Indian influence was strong and
communication with Tirhut and Bengal easy, it is probable that
Buddhism in Nepal reflected the phases which it underwent in Bengal. A
Nepalese inscription of the seventh century gives a list of shrines of
which seven are Sivaite, six Buddhist and four Vishnuite.[291] After
that date it was more successful in maintaining itself, for it did not
suffer from Mohammedan attacks and was less exposed to the
assimilative influence of Brahmanism. That influence however, though
operating in a foreign country and on people not bred among Brahmanic
traditions, was nevertheless strong. In 1324 the king of Tirhut, being
expelled thence by Mohammedans, seized the throne of Nepal and brought
with him many learned Brahmans. His dynasty was not permanent but
later in the fourteenth century a subsequent ruler, Jayasthiti,
organized society and religion in consultation with the Brahman
immigrants. The followers of the two religions were arranged in
parallel divisions, a group of Buddhists classified according to
occupation corresponding to each Hindu caste, and appropriate rules
and ceremonies were prescribed for the different sections. The code
then established is still in force in essentials and Nepal, being
intellectually the pupil of India, has continued to receive such new
ideas as appeared in the plains of Bengal. When these ascended to the
mountain valleys they were adopted, with free modification of old and
new material alike, by both Buddhists and Hindus, but as both sects
were geographically isolated, each tended to resemble the other more
than either resembled normal Buddhism or Hinduism. Naturally the new
ideas were mainly Brahmanic and Buddhism had no chance of being
fortified by an importation of even moderately orthodox doctrine. In
the fourteenth century arose the community of wandering ascetics
called Nathas who were reverenced by Hindus and Buddhists alike. They
rejected the observances of both creeds but often combined their
doctrines and, though disavowed by the Brahmans, exercised a
considerable influence among the lower castes. Some of the peculiar
deities of Nepal, such as Matsyendranath, have attributes traceable to
these wanderers. In 1769 Nepal was conquered by the Gurkhas. This
tribe seems related to the Tibetan stock, as are the Nevars, but it
had long been Hinduized and claimed a Rajput ancestry. Thus Gurkha
rule has favoured and accelerated the hinduizing of Nepalese Buddhism.

Since the time of Hodgson the worship of the Adi-Buddha, or an
original divine Buddha practically equivalent to God, has been often
described as characteristic of Nepalese religion and such a worship
undoubtedly exists. But recent accounts indicate that it is not
prominent and also that it can hardly be considered a distinct type of
monotheistic Buddhism. The idea that the five Dhyani-Buddhas are
emanations or manifestations of a single primordial Buddha-spirit is a
natural development of Mahayanist ideas, but no definite statement of
it earlier than the Kalacakra literature is forthcoming, though many
earlier works point towards it.[292] In modern Nepal the chief temple
of the Adi-Buddha is on the hill of Svayambhu (the self-existent) near
Katmandu. According to a legend preserved in the Svayambhu Purana, a
special divine manifestation occurred in ancient times on an adjoining
lake; a miraculous lotus arose on its surface, bearing an image, over
which a Caitya was subsequently erected. The shrine is greatly
venerated but this Adi-Buddha, or Svayambhu, does not differ
essentially from other miraculous images in India which are said not
to consist of ordinary matter but to embody in some special way the
nature of a deity. The religion of Nepal is less remarkable for new
developments of Buddhism than for the singular fusion of Buddhism with
Hinduism which it presents and which helps us to understand what must
have been the last phase in Bengal.

The Nepalese Brahmans tolerate Buddhism. The Nepala-mahatmya says that
to worship Buddha is to worship Siva, and the Svayambhu Purana returns
the compliment by recommending the worship of Pasupati.[293] The
official itinerary of the Hindu pilgrim includes Svayambhu, where he
adores Buddha under that name. More often the two religions adore the
same image under different names: what is Avalokita to the one is
Mahakala to the other. Durga is explained as being the incarnation of
the Prajna-paramita and she is even identified with the Adi-Buddha.
The Nepalese pantheon like the Tibetan contains three elements, often
united in modern legends: firstly aboriginal deities, such as Nagas
and other nature spirits: secondly definitely Buddhist deities or
Bodhisattvas of whom Manjusri receives the most honour: thirdly Hindu
deities such as Ganesa and Krishna. The popular deity
Matsyendranath appears to combine all three elements in his own
person.

Modern accounts of Nepal leave the impression that even corrupt
Buddhism is in a bad way, yet the number of religious establishments
is considerable. Celibacy is not observed by their inmates, who are
called banras (bandyas). On entering the order the novice takes the
ancient vows but after four days he returns to his tutor, confesses
that they are too hard for him and is absolved from his obligations.
The classes known as Bhikshus and Gubharjus officiate as priests, the
latter being the higher order. The principal ceremony is the offering
of melted butter. The more learned Gubharjus receive the title of
Vajracarya[294] and have the sole right of officiating at marriages
and funerals.

There is little learning. The oldest scriptures in use are the
so-called nine Dharmas.[295] Hodgson describes these works as much
venerated and Rajendralal Mitra has analysed them, but Sylvain Levi
heard little of them in 1898, though he mentions the recitation of the
Prajna-paramita. The Svayambhu Purana is an account of the
manifestation of the Adi-Buddha written in the style of those portions
of the Brahmanic Puranas which treat of the glories of some sacred
place. In its present form it can hardly be earlier than the sixteenth
century A.D. The Nepala-mahatmya is a similar work which, though of
Brahmanic origin, puts Buddha, Vishnu and Siva on the same footing and
identifies the first with Krishna. The Vagvati-mahatmya[296] on the
other hand is strictly Sivaite and ignores Buddha's claims to worship.
The Vamsavali, or Chronicle of Nepal, written in the Gurkha language
(Parbatiya) is also largely occupied with an account of sacred sites
and buildings and exists in two versions, one Buddhist, the other
Brahmanical.

But let us return to the decadence of Buddhism in India. It is plain
that persecution was not its main cause nor even very important among
the accessory causes. The available records contain clearer statements
about the persecution of Jainism than of Buddhism but no doubt the
latter came in for some rough handling, though not enough to
annihilate a vigorous sect. Great numbers of monasteries in the north
were demolished by the Huns and a similar catastrophe brought about
the collapse of the Church in Bihar. But this last incident cannot be
called religious persecution, for Muhammad did not even know what he
was destroying. Buddhism did not arouse more animosity than other
Indian religions: the significant feature is that when its temples and
monasteries were demolished it did not live on in the hearts of the
people, as did Hinduism with all its faults.

The relation between the laity and the Church in Buddhism is curious
and has had serious consequences for both good and evil. The layman
"takes refuge" in the Buddha, his law and his church but does not
swear exclusive allegiance: to follow supplementary observances is not
treasonable, provided they are not in themselves objectionable. The
Buddha prescribed no ceremonies for births, deaths and marriages and
apparently expected the laity to continue in the observance of such
rites as were in use. To-day in China and Japan the good layman is
little more than one who pays more attention to Buddhism than to other
faiths. This charitable pliancy had much to do with the victories of
Buddhism in the Far East, where it had to struggle against strong
prejudices and could hardly have made its way if it had been
intolerant of local deities. But in India we see the disadvantages of
the omission to make the laity members of a special corporation and
the survival of the Jains, who do form such a corporation, is a clear
object lesson. Social life in India tends to combine men in castes or
in communities which if not castes in the technical sense have much
the same character. Such communities have great vitality so long as
they maintain their peculiar usages, but when they cease to do so they
soon disintegrate and are reabsorbed. Buddhism from the first never
took the form of a corporation. The special community which it
instituted was the sangha or body of monks. Otherwise, it aimed not
at founding a sect but at including all the world as lay believers on
easy terms. This principle worked well so long as the faith was in the
ascendent but its effect was disastrous when decline began. The line
dividing Buddhist laymen from ordinary Hindus became less and less
marked: distinctive teaching was found only in the monasteries: these
became poorly recruited and as they were gradually deserted or
destroyed by Mohammedans the religion of the Buddha disappeared from
his native land.

Even in the monasteries the doctrine taught bore a closer resemblance
to Hinduism than to the preaching of Gotama and it is this absence of
the protestant spirit, this pliant adaptability to the ideas of each
age, which caused Indian Buddhism to lose its individuality and
separate existence. In some localities its disappearance and
absorption were preceded by a monstrous phase, known as Tantrism or
Saktism, in which the worst elements of Hinduism, those which would
have been most repulsive to Gotama, made an unnatural alliance with
his church.

I treat of Tantrism and Saktism in another chapter. The original
meaning of Tantra as applied to literary compositions is a simplified
manual.[297] Thus we hear of Vishnuite Tantras and in this sense there
is a real similarity between Buddhist and tantric teaching, for both
set aside Brahmanic tradition as needlessly complicated and both
profess to preach a simple and practical road to salvation. But in
Hinduism and Buddhism alike such words as Tantra and tantric acquire a
special sense and imply the worship of the divine energy in a female
form called by many names such as Kali in the former, Tara in the
latter. This worship which in my opinion should be called Saktism
rather than Tantrism combines many elements: ancient, savage
superstitions as well as ingenious but fanciful speculation, but its
essence is always magic. It attempts to attain by magical or
sacramental formulae and acts not only prosperity and power but
salvation, nirvana and union with the supreme spirit. Some of its
sects practise secret immoral rites. It is sad to confess that
degenerate Buddhism did not remain uncorrupted by such abuses.

It is always a difficult and speculative task to trace the early
stages of new movements in Indian religion, but it is clear that by
the eighth century and perhaps earlier the Buddhism of Bihar and
Bengal had fallen a prey to this influence. Apparently the public
ritual in the Viharas remained unchanged and the usual language about
_nirvana_ and _sunyata_ was not discarded, but it was taught that
those who followed a certain curriculum could obtain salvation by
magical methods. To enter this curriculum it was necessary to have a
qualified teacher and to receive from him initiation or baptism
(abhisheka). Of the subsequent rites the most important is to evoke
one of the many Buddhas or Bodhisattvas recognized by the Mahayana and
identify oneself with him.[298] He who wishes to do this is often
called a sadhaka or magician but his achievements, like many Indian
miracles, are due to self-hypnotization. He is directed to repair to a
lonely place and offer worship there with flowers and prayers. To this
office succeed prolonged exercises in meditation which do not depart
much from the ancient canon since they include the four
Brahma-viharas. Their object is to suppress thought and leave the mind
empty. Then the sadhaka fills this void with the image of some
Bodhisattva, for instance Avalokita. This he does by uttering mystic
syllables called bija or seed, because they are supposed to germinate
and grow into the figures which he wishes to produce. In this way he
imagines that he sees the emblems of the Bodhisattva spring up round
him one by one and finally he himself assumes the shape of Avalokita
and becomes one with him. Something similar still exists in Tibet
where every Lama chooses a tutelary deity or Yi-dam whom he summons in
visible form after meditation and fasting.[299] Though this procedure
when set forth methodically in a mediaeval manual seems an absurd
travesty of Buddhism, yet it has links with the early faith. It is
admitted in the Pitakas that certain forms of meditation[300] lead to
union with Brahma and it is no great change to make them lead to union
with other supernatural beings. Still we are not here breathing the
atmosphere of the Pitakas. The object is not to share Brahma's heaven
but to become temporarily identified with a deity, and this is not a
byway of religion but the high road.

But there is a further stage of degradation. I have already mentioned
that various Bodhisattvas are represented as accompanied by a female
deity, particularly Avalokita by Tara. The mythological and
metaphysical ideas which have grown up round Siva and Durga also
attached themselves to these couples. The Buddha or Bodhisattva is
represented as enjoying nirvana because he is united to his spouse,
and to the three bodies already enumerated is added a fourth, the body
of perfect bliss.[301] Sometimes this idea merely leads to further
developments of the practices described above. Thus the devotee may
imagine that he enters into Tara as an embryo and is born of her as a
Buddha.[302] More often the argument is that since the bliss of the
Buddha consists in union with Tara, nirvana can be obtained by sexual
union here, and we find many of the tantric wizards represented as
accompanied by female companions. The adept should avoid all action
but he is beyond good and evil and the dangerous doctrine that he can
do evil with impunity, which the more respectable sects repudiate, is
expressly taught. The sage is not defiled by passion but conquers
passion by passion: he should commit every infamy: he should rob, lie
and kill Buddhas.[303] These crazy precepts are probably little more
than a speculative application to the moral sphere of the doctrine
that all things are non-existent and hence equivalent. But though
tantrists did not go about robbing and murdering so freely as their
principles allowed, there is some evidence that in the period of
decadence the morality of the Bhikshus had fallen into great
discredit. Thus in the allegorical Vishnuite drama called
Prabodhacandrodaya and written at Kalanjar near the end of the
eleventh century Buddhists and Jains are represented as succumbing to
the temptations of inebriety and voluptuousness.

It is necessary to mention this phase of decadence but no good purpose
would be served by dwelling further on the absurd and often disgusting
prescriptions of such works as the Tathagata-guhyaka. If the European
reader is inclined to condemn unreservedly a religion which even in
decrepitude could find place for such monstrosities, he should
