"course of study" lasting three weeks,--in a country singing school at
Groton. When sixteen years old he went to Northfield, Mass., and learned
the hatter's trade, and while at work began to practice making
psalm-tunes. "Montague," in two parts, was his first achievement. From
that time for thirty years, mostly spent in Suffield, Ct., he wrote and
taught music while supporting himself by his trade. Many of his tunes
were published by himself, and had a wide currency a century ago.

Swan was a genius in his way, and it was a true comment on his work that
"his tunes were remarkable for their originality as well as
singularity--unlike any other melodies." "China," his masterpiece, will
be long kept track of as a curio, and preserved in replicates of old
psalmody to illustrate self-culture in the art of song. But the major
mode will replace the minor when tender voices on burial days sing--

    Why do we mourn departed friends?

Another hymn of Watts,--

    God is the refuge of His saints
      When storms of sharp distress invade,

--sung to Lowell Mason's liquid tune of "Ward," and the priceless
stanza,--

    Jesus can make a dying bed
      Feel soft as downy pillows are,

doubly prove the claim of the Southampton bard to a foremost place with
the song-preachers of Christian trust.

The psalm (Amsterdam version), "God is the refuge," etc., is said to
have been sung by John Howland in the shallop of the Mayflower when an
attempt was made to effect a landing in spite of tempestuous weather. A
tradition of this had doubtless reached Mrs. Hemans when she wrote--

    Amid the storm they sang, etc.


"FATHER, WHATE'ER OF EARTHLY BLISS."

This hymn had originally ten stanzas, of which the three usually sung
are the three last. The above line is the first of the eighth stanza,
altered from--

    And O, whate'er of earthly bliss.

Probably for more than a century the familiar surname "Steele" attached
to this and many other hymns in the hymn-books conveyed to the general
public no hint of a mind and hand more feminine than Cowper's or
Montgomery's. Even intelligent people, who had chanced upon sundry
copies of _The Spectator_, somehow fell into the habit of putting
"Steele" and "Addison" in the same category of hymn names, and Sir
Richard Steele got a credit he never sought. But since stories of the
hymns began to be published--and made the subject of evening talks in
church conference rooms--many have learned what "Steele" in the
hymn-book means. It introduces us now to a very retiring English lady,
Miss Anna Steele, a Baptist minister's daughter. She was born in 1706,
at Broughton, Hampshire, in her father's parsonage, and in her father's
parsonage she spent her life, dying there Nov. 1778.

She was many years a severe sufferer from bodily illness, and a lasting
grief of mind and heart was the loss of her intended husband, who was
drowned the day before their appointed wedding. It is said that this
hymn was written under the recent sorrow of that loss.

In 1760 and 1780 volumes of her works in verse and prose were published
with her name, "Theodosia," and reprinted in 1863 as "_Hymns, Psalms,
and Poems_, by Anna Steele." The hymn "Father, whate'er," etc., is
estimated as her best, though some rank it only next to her--

    Dear Refuge of my weary soul.

Other more or less well-known hymns of this devout and loving writer
are,--

    Lord, how mysterious are Thy ways,

    O Thou whose tender mercy hears,

    Thou lovely Source of true delight,

    Alas, what hourly dangers rise,

    So fades the lovely blooming flower.

--to a stanza of which latter the world owes the tune of "Federal St."


_THE TUNE._

The true musical mate of the sweet hymn-prayer came to it probably about
the time of its hundredth birthday; but it came to stay. Lowell Mason's
"Naomi" blends with it like a symphony of nature.

    Father, whate'er of earthly bliss
      Thy sovereign will denies,
    Accepted at Thy throne of grace
      Let this petition rise.

    Give me a calm and thankful heart
      From every murmer free.
    The blessings of Thy grace impart,
      And make me live to Thee.


"GUIDE ME, O THOU GREAT JEHOVAH."

This great hymn has a double claim on the name of Williams. We do not
have it exactly in its original form as written by Rev. William
Williams, "The Watts of Wales," familiarly known as "Williams of
Pantycelyn." His fellow countryman and contemporary, Rev. Peter
Williams, or "Williams of Carmarthen," who translated it from Welsh into
English (1771) made alterations and substitutions in the hymn with the
result that only the first stanza belongs indisputably to Williams of
Pantycelyn, the others being Peter's own or the joint production of the
two. As the former, however, is said to have approved and revised the
English translation, we may suppose the hymn retained the name of its
original author by mutual consent.

    Guide me, O Thou Great Jehovah,
      Pilgrim through this barren land.
    I am weak, but Thou art mighty,
      Hold me by Thy powerful hand;
        Bread of heaven,
      Feed me till I want no more.

    Open Thou the crystal Fountain
      Whence the healing streams do flow,
    Let the fiery cloudy pillar
      Lead me all my journey through.
        Strong Deliverer,
      Be Thou still my Strength and Shield!

    When I tread the verge of Jordan
      Bid my anxious fears subside;
    Death of death, and hell's destruction,
      Land me safe on Canaan's side.
        Songs of praises
      I will ever give to Thee.

    Musing on my habitation,
      Musing on my heavenly home,
    Fills my heart with holy longing;
      Come, Lord Jesus, quickly come.
        Vanity is all I see,
      Lord, I long to be with Thee.

The second and third stanzas have not escaped the touch of critical
editors. The line,--

    Whence the healing streams do flow

--becomes,--

    Whence the healing waters flow,

--with which alteration there is no fault to find except that it is
needless, and obliterates the ancient mark. But the third stanza,
besides losing its second line for--

    Bid the swelling stream divide,

--is weakened by a more needless substitution. Its original third line--

    Death of death, and hell's destruction,

--is exchanged for the commonplace--

    Bear me through the swelling current.

That is modern taste; but when modern taste meddles with a stalwart old
hymn it is sometimes more nice than wise.

It is probable that the famous hymn was sung in America before it
obtained a European reputation. Its history is as follows: Lady
Huntingdon having read one of Williams' books with much spiritual
satisfaction, persuaded him to prepare a collection of hymns, to be
called the _Gloria in Excelsis_, for special use in Mr. Whitefield's
Orphans' House in America. In this collection appeared the original
stanzas of "Guide me, O Thou Great Jehovah." In 1774, two years after
its publication in the _Gloria in Excelsis_, it was republished in
England in Mr. Whitefield's collections of hymns.

The Rev. Peter Williams was born in the parish of Llansadurnen,
Carmarthenshire, Wales, Jan. 7, 1722, and was educated in Carmarthen
College. He was ordained in the Established Church and appointed to a
curacy, but in 1748 joined the Calvinistic Methodists. He was an
Independent of the Independents however, and preached where ever he
chose. Finally he built a chapel for himself on his paternal estate,
where he ministered during the rest of his life. Died Aug. 8, 1796.


_THE TUNE._

If "Sardius," the splendid old choral (triple time) everywhere
identified with the hymn, be not its original music, its age at least
entitles it to its high partnership. _The Sacred Lyre_ (1858) ascribes
it to Ludovic Nicholson, of Paisley, Scotland, violinist and amateur
composer, born 1770; died 1852; but this is not beyond dispute. Of
several names one more confidently referred to as its author is F.H.
Barthelemon (1741-1808).


"PEACE, TROUBLED SOUL"

Is the brave faith-song of a Christian under deep but blameless
humiliation--Sir Walter Shirley[16].

[Footnote 16: See page 127]


_THE TUNE._

Apparently the favorite in several (not recent) hymnals for the subdued
but confident spirit of this hymn of Sir Walter Shirley is Mazzinghi's
"Palestine," appearing with various tone-signatures in different books.
The treble and alto lead in a sweet duet with slur-flights, like an
obligato to the bass and tenor. The melody needs rich and cultured
voices, and is unsuited for congregational singing. So, perhaps, is the
hymn itself.

    Peace, troubled soul, whose plaintive moan
      Hath taught these rocks the notes of woe;
    Cease thy complaint--suppress thy groan,
      And let thy tears forget to flow;
    Behold the precious balm is found,
    To lull thy pain, to heal thy wound.

    Come, freely come, by sin oppressed,
      Unburden here thy weighty load;
    Here find thy refuge and thy rest,
      And trust the mercy of thy God.
    Thy God's thy Saviour--glorious word!
    For ever love and praise the Lord.

As now sung the word "scenes" is substituted for "rocks" in the second
line, eliminating the poetry. Rocks give an _echo_; and the vivid
thought in the author's mind is flattened to an unmeaning generality.

Count Joseph Mazzinghi, son of Tommasso Mazzinghi, a Corsican musician,
was born in London, 1765. He was a boy of precocious talent. When only
ten years of age he was appointed organist of the Portuguese Chapel, and
when nineteen years old was made musical director and composer at the
King's Theatre. For many years he held the honor of Music Master to the
Princess of Wales, afterwards Queen Caroline, and his compositions were
almost numberless. Some of his songs and glees that caught the popular
fancy are still remembered in England, as "The Turnpike Gate," "The
Exile," and the rustic duet, "When a Little Farm We Keep."

Of sacred music he composed only one mass and six hymn-tunes, of which
latter "Palestine" is one. Mazzinghi died in 1844, in his eightieth
year.


"BEGONE UNBELIEF, MY SAVIOUR IS NEAR."

The Rev. John Newton, author of this hymn, was born in London, July 24,
1725. The son of a sea-captain, he became a sailor, and for several
years led a reckless life. Converted, he took holy orders and was
settled as curate of Olney, Buckinghamshire, and afterwards Rector of
St. Mary of Woolnoth, London, where he died, Dec. 21, 1807. It was
while living at Olney that he and Cowper wrote and published the _Olney
Hymns_. His defiance to doubt in these lines is the blunt utterance of a
sailor rather than the song of a poet:

    Begone, unbelief, my Saviour is near,
    And for my relief will surely appear.
    By prayer let me wrestle and He will perform;
    With Christ in the vessel I smile at the storm.


_THE TUNE_

Old "Hanover," by William Croft (1677-1727), carries Newton's hymn
successfully, but Joseph Haydn's choral of "Lyons" is more familiar--and
better music.

"Hanover" often accompanies Charles Wesley's lyric,--

    Ye servants of God, your Master proclaim.


"HOW FIRM A FOUNDATION."

The question of the author of this hymn is treated at length in Dr.
Louis F. Benson's _Studies of Familiar Hymns_. The utmost that need to
be said here is that two of the most thorough and indefatigable
hymn-chasers, Dr. John Julian and Rev. H.L. Hastings, working
independently of each other, found evidence fixing the authorship with
strong probability upon Robert Keene, a precentor in Dr. John Rippon's
church. Dr. Rippon was pastor of a Baptist Church in London from 1773
to 1836, and in 1787 he published a song-manual called _A Selection of
Hymns from the Best Authors_, etc., in which "How Firm a Foundation"
appears as a new piece, with the signature "K----."

The popularity of the hymn in America has been remarkable, and promises
to continue. Indeed, there are few more reviving or more spiritually
helpful. It is too familiar to need quotation. But one cannot suppress
the last stanza, with its powerful and affecting emphasis on the Divine
promise--

    The soul that on Jesus has leaned for repose
    I will not, I will not, desert to his foes;
    That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake,
    I'll never, no never, no never forsake.


_THE TUNE._

The grand harmony of "Portuguese Hymn" has always been identified with
this song of trust.

One opinion of the date of the music writes it "about 1780." Since the
habit of crediting it to John Reading (1677-1764) has been discontinued,
it has been in several hymnals ascribed to Marco Portogallo (Mark, the
Portuguese), a musician born in Lisbon, 1763, who became a composer of
operas in Italy, but was made Chapel-Master to the Portuguese King. In
1807, when Napoleon invaded the Peninsula and dethroned the royal house
of Braganza, Old King John VI. fled to Brazil and took Marco with him,
where he lived till 1815, but returned and died in Italy, in 1830. Such
is the story, and it is all true, only the man's name was Simao,
instead of Marco. _Grove's Dictionary_ appends to Simao's biography the
single sentence, "His brother wrote for the church." That the Brazilian
episode may have been connected with this brother's history by a
confusion of names, is imaginable, but it is not known that the
brother's name was Marco.

On the whole, this account of the authorship of the "Portuguese
Hymn"--originally written for the old Christmas church song "Adeste
Fideles"--is late and uncertain. Heard (perhaps for the first time) in
the Portuguese Chapel, London, it was given the name which still clings
to it. If proofs of its Portuguese origin exist, they may yet be found.

"How Firm a Foundation" was the favorite of Deborah Jackson, President
Andrew Jackson's beloved wife, and on his death-bed the warrior and
statesman called for it. It was the favorite of Gen. Robert E. Lee, and
was sung at his funeral. The American love and familiar preference for
the remarkable hymn was never more strikingly illustrated than when on
Christmas Eve, 1898, a whole corps of the United States army Northern
and Southern, encamped on the Quemados hills, near Havana, took up the
sacred tune and words--

   "Fear not, I am with thee, O be not dismayed."

Lieut. Col. Curtis Guild (since Governor Guild of Massachusetts) related
the story in the Sunday School Times for Dec. 7, 1901, and Dr. Benson
quotes it in his book.

[Illustration: John Wesley]


"WHILE THEE I SEEK, PROTECTING POWER."

Miss Helen Maria Williams, who wrote this gentle hymn of confidence, in
1786, was born in the north of England in 1762. When but a girl she won
reputation by her brilliant literary talents and a mental grasp and
vigor that led her, like Gail Hamilton, "to discuss public affairs,
besides clothing bright fancies and devout thoughts in graceful verse."
Most of her life was spent in London, and in Paris, where she died, Dec.
14, 1827.

    While Thee I seek, Protecting Power
      Be my vain wishes stilled,
    And may this consecrated hour
      With better hopes be filled:

       *       *       *       *       *

    When gladness wings my favored hour,
      Thy love my thoughts shall fill,
    Resigned where storms of sorrow lower
      My soul shall meet Thy will.

    My lifted eye without a tear
      The gathering storm shall see:
    My steadfast heart shall know no fear:
      My heart will rest on Thee.


_THE TUNES._

Old "Norwich," from _Day's Psalter_, and "Simpson," adapted from Louis
Spohr, are found with the hymn in several later manuals. In the memories
of older worshipers "Brattle-Street," with its melodious choral and duet
arranged from Pleyel by Lowell Mason, is inseparable from Miss
Williams' words; but modern hymnals have dropped it, probably because
too elaborate for average congregational use.

Ignaz Joseph Pleyel was born June 1, 1757, at Ruppersthal, Lower
Austria. He was the _twenty-fourth_ child of a village schoolmaster. His
early taste and talent for music procured him friends who paid for his
education. Haydn became his master, and long afterwards spoke of him as
his best and dearest pupil. Pleyel's work--entirely instrumental--was
much admired by Mozart.

During a few years spent in Italy, he composed the music of his
best-known opera, "Iphigenia in Aulide," and, besides the thirty-four
books of his symphonies and chamber-pieces, the results of his prolific
genius make a list too long to enumerate. Most of his life was spent in
Paris, where he founded the (present) house of Pleyel and Wolfe, piano
makers and sellers. He died in that city, Nov. 14, 1831.


"COME UNTO ME."

    Come unto Me, when shadows darkly gather,
    When the sad heart is weary and distressed,
    Seeking for comfort from your heavenly Father,
    Come unto Me, and I will give you rest.

This sweet hymn, by Mrs. Catherine Esling, is well known to many
thousands of mourners, as also is its equally sweet tune of "Henley," by
Lowell Mason. Melody and words melt together like harp and flute.

    Large are the mansions in thy Father's dwelling,
    Glad are the homes that sorrows never dim,
    Sweet are the harps in holy music swelling.
    Soft are the tones that raise the heavenly hymn.

Mrs. Catherine Harbison Waterman Esling was born in Philadelphia, Apr.
12, 1812. A writer for many years under her maiden name, Waterman, she
married, in 1840, Capt. George Esling, of the Merchant Marine, and lived
in Rio Janeiro till her widowhood, in 1844.


JOHN WESLEY'S HYMN.

    How happy is the pilgrim's lot,
    How free from every anxious thought.

These are the opening lines of "John Wesley's Hymn," so called because
his other hymns are mostly translations, and because of all his own it
is the one commonly quoted and sung.

John Wesley, the second son in the famous Epworth family of ministers,
was a man who knew how to endure "hardness as a good soldier of Christ."
He was born June 27, 1703, and studied at Charterhouse, London, and at
Christ Church, Oxford, becoming a Fellow of Lincoln College. After
taking holy orders he went as a missionary to Georgia, U.S., in 1735,
and on his return began his remarkable work in England, preaching a more
spiritual type of religion, and awakening the whole kingdom with his
revival fervor and his brother's kindling songs. The following paragraph
from his itinerant life, gathered probably from a page of his own
journals, gives a glimpse of what the founder of the great Methodist
denomination did and suffered while carrying his Evangelical message
from place to place.

On February 17, 1746, when days were short and weather far from
favorable, he set out on horseback from Bristol to Newcastle, a distance
between three and four hundred miles. The journey occupied ten days.
Brooks were swollen, and in some places the roads were impassable,
obliging the itinerant to go round through the fields. At Aldrige Heath,
in Staffordshire, the rain turned to snow, which the northerly wind
drove against him, and by which he was soon crusted over from head to
foot. At Leeds the mob followed him, and pelted him with whatever came
to hand. He arrived at Newcastle, February 26, "free from every anxious
thought," and "every worldly fear."

How lightly he regarded hardship and molestation appears from his
verses--

    Whatever molests or troubles life,
    When past, as nothing we esteem,
    And pain, like pleasure, is a dream.

And that he actually enjoys the heroic freedom of a rough-rider
missionary life is hinted in his hymn--

    Confined to neither court nor cell,
    His soul disdains on earth to dwell,
      He only sojourns here.

God evidently built John Wesley fire-proof and water-proof with a view
to precisely what he was to undertake and accomplish. His frame was
vigorous, and his spirit unconquerable. Besides all this he had the
divine gift of a religious faith that could move mountains and a
confidence in his mission that became a second nature. No wonder he
could suffer, and _last_. The brave young man at thirty was the brave
old man at nearly ninety. He died in London, March 2, 1791.

    Blest with the scorn of finite good,
    My soul is lightened of its load
      And seeks the things above.

    There is my house and portion fair;
    My treasure and my heart are there,
      And my abiding home.

    For me my elder brethren stay,
    And angels beckon me away.
      And Jesus bids me come.


_THE TUNE._

An air found in the _Revivalist_ (1869), in sextuple time, that has the
real camp-meeting swing, preserves the style of music in which the hymn
was sung by the circuit-preachers and their congregations--ringing out
the autobiographical verses with special unction. The favorite was--

    No foot of land do I possess,
    No cottage in this wilderness;
      A poor wayfaring man,
    I lodge awhile in tents below,
    Or gladly wander to and fro
      Till I my Canaan gain.

More modern voices sing the John Wesley hymn to the tune "Habakkuk," by
Edward Hodges. It has a lively three-four step, and finer melody than
the old.

Edward Hodges was born in Bristol, Eng., July 20, 1796, and died there
Sept. 1876. Organist at Bristol in his youth, he was graduated at
Cambridge and in 1825 received the doctorate of music from that
University. In 1835 he went to Toronto, Canada, and two years later to
New York city, where he was many years Director of Music at Trinity
Church. Returned to Bristol in 1863.


"WHEN GATHERING CLOUDS AROUND I VIEW."

One of the restful strains breathed out of illness and affliction to
relieve one soul and bless millions. It was written by Sir Robert Grant
(1785-1838).

    When gathering clouds around I view,
    And days are dark, and friends are few,
    On Him I lean who not in vain
    Experienced every human pain.

The lines are no less admirable for their literary beauty than for their
feeling and their faith. Unconsciously, it may be, to the writer, in
this and the following stanza are woven an epitome of the Saviour's
history. He--

    Experienced every human pain,
    --felt temptation's power,
    --wept o'er Lazarus dead,

--and the crowning assurance of Jesus' human sympathy is expressed in
the closing prayer,--

    --when I have safely passed
    Thro' every conflict but the last,
    Still, still unchanging watch beside
    My painful bed--for _Thou hast died_.


_THE TUNE._

Of the few suitable six-line long metre part songs, the charming Russian
tone-poem of "St. Petersburg" by Dimitri Bortniansky is borrowed for the
hymn in some collections, and with excellent effect. It accords well
with the mood and tenor of the words, and deserves to stay with it as
long as the hymn holds its place.

Dimitri Bortniansky, called "The Russian Palestrina," was born in 1752
at Gloukoff, a village of the Ukraine. He studied music in Moscow, St.
Petersburg, Vienna, Rome and Naples. Returning to his native land, he
was made Director of Empress Catharine's church choir. He reformed and
systematized Russian church music, and wrote original scores in the
intervals of his teaching labors. His works are chiefly motets and
concertos, which show his genius for rich harmony. Died 1825.


"JUST AS I AM, WITHOUT ONE PLEA."

Charlotte Elliott, of Brighton, Eng., would have been well-known through
her admired and useful hymns,--

    My God, my Father, while I stray,

    My God, is any hour so sweet,

    With tearful eyes I look around,

--and many others. But in "Just as I am" she made herself a voice in the
soul of every hesitating penitent. The currency of the hymn has been too
swift for its authorship and history to keep up with, but it is a
blessed law of influence that good works out-run biographies. This
master-piece of metrical gospel might be called Miss Elliott's
spiritual-birth hymn, for a reply of Dr. Caesar Malan of Geneva was its
prompting cause. The young lady was a stranger to personal religion
when, one day, the good man, while staying at her father's house, in his
gentle way introduced the subject. She resented it, but afterwards,
stricken in spirit by his words, came to him with apologies and an
inquiry that confessed a new concern of mind. "You speak of coming to
Jesus, but how? I'm not fit to come."

"Come just as you are," said Dr. Malan.

The hymn tells the result.

Like all the other hymns bound up in her _Invalid's Hymn-book_, it was
poured from out the heart of one who, as the phrase is, "never knew a
well day"--though she lived to see her eighty-second year.

Illustrative of the way it appeals to the afflicted, a little anecdote
was told by the eloquent John B. Gough of his accidental seat-mate in a
city church service. A man of strange appearance was led by the kind
usher or sexton to the pew he occupied. Mr. Gough eyed him with strong
aversion. The man's face was mottled, his limbs and mouth twitched, and
he mumbled singular sounds. When the congregation sang he attempted to
sing, but made fearful work of it. During the organ interlude he leaned
toward Mr. Gough and asked how the next verse began. It was--

    Just as I am, poor, wretched, blind.

"That's it," sobbed the strange man, "I'm blind--God help me!"--and the
tears ran down his face--"and I'm wretched--and paralytic," and then he
tried hard to sing the line with the rest.

"After that," said Mr. Gough, "the poor paralytic's singing was as
sweet to me as a Beethoven symphony."

Charlotte Elliott was born March 18, 1789, and died in Brighton, Sept.
22, 1871. She stands in the front rank of female hymn-writers.

The tune of "Woodworth," by William B. Bradbury, has mostly superseded
Mason's "Elliott," and is now the accepted music of this lyric of
perfect faith and pious surrender.

    Just as I am,--Thy love unknown
    Hath broken every barrier down,
    Now to be Thine, yea, Thine alone,
    O Lamb of God, I come, I come.


"MY HOPE IS BUILT ON NOTHING LESS."

