Bogoris. The king undertook to force his people to change their
religion and they revolted. He succeeded in suppressing the
rebellion, and showed the superficial nature of his Christianity by
the cruel revenge he took on the leaders of the revolt. Then the
nation followed the lead of their king, and has ever since been
nominally Christian. Neander says, that Cyrill was distinguished
from all other missionaries of that period, by not yielding to the
prejudice which regarded the languages of the rude nations as too
profane to be employed for sacred uses, and by not shrinking from
any toil which was necessary to master the language of the people
among whom he labored.

The Bulgarians wavered for a time, according to the sway of their
political interests, between the Greek and Latin Churches, until
finally they decided wholly in favor of the former, and a Greek
archbishop and bishops were set over them.[1]

[1] Neander's _Ecclesiastical History_, vol. iii. pp. 307-316,
Torrey's Translation; and Dr. Murdock's Note to p. 51 of Mosheim's
_Institute of Ecclesiastical History_, vol. ii.

In the year 924, Simeon, the Bulgarian monarch, compelled the
Byzantine Emperor, Romanus I., to recognize the National Church of
Bulgaria as wholly independent of the Greek Hierarchy. This
independence, after about fifty years, was partially destroyed by a
Greek Emperor; and in 1018, Basil II. restored the supremacy of the
Patriarch of Constantinople. The kingdom was revived in the latter
part of the twelfth century, but was again overthrown in 1393, by
the Sultan Bajazet I. Mohammed II., when he subverted the Eastern
Empire in 1453, made the religious chiefs of the Christian sects
responsible, not only for the spiritual administration of their
respective flocks, but also for that of a large share of their
temporal affairs,--such as public education, civil suits, contracts,
wills, and the like. The Bulgarians appear for a time not to have
been formally recognized by the Turks as belonging to the Greek
Church, and of course were not subject to its Patriarch; but the
Fanariote Greeks succeeded at last in making the Porte believe that,
being of the same religion with the Greeks, they should be placed
under the direct authority of the Patriarch of Constantinople; and
this was effected in the year 1767. Thus the Bulgarians lost their
religious independence.

Since then, they have ever cherished an intense dislike of the Greek
bishops, whose aim has always been to extinguish every remnant of
national feeling, and obliterate all traces of their origin. They
earnestly desired to have the Bible and the church-services in their
own vernacular language, while the Greek Patriarch and his bishops
insisted upon using only the ancient Greek. The people desired to
have their children taught in the schools through the language of
their own homes, while the bishops insisted that the instruction
should be in the Greek language. They desired that their bishops and
other ecclesiastics should be chosen from among themselves; but the
Patriarch forced upon them Greek bishops, men of a foreign tongue,
and foreign habits and sympathies, whose whole aim was to keep the
people under the galling yoke of ecclesiastical tyranny.[1]

[1] _Missionary Herald_, 1858, p. 322.

What the Bulgarian people specially desired was ecclesiastical
independence; and, in order to be freed from their forced dependence
on the Greek Patriarchate, their leading men sometimes inclined to
go over to the Pope. This of course was favored by the intrigues of
the Jesuits, and politically by all the power of France. This
awakened state of mind led many to examine the teachings of
Scripture, and compare them with those of the Greek and Papal
Churches; and some made inquiries of the missionaries at the several
stations, as to Protestantism; and the question naturally arose,
whether it would not be as well to become Protestants, as Roman
Catholics.

The Greek Patriarch was decided and bold. In 1861, he summoned the
Bulgarian bishops to appear and answer for themselves before his
great ecclesiastical Council at Constantinople; but they refused,
declaring that they owed him no allegiance. The summons was thrice
repeated, but in vain; whereupon the bishops were anathematized, and
it was resolved to banish them to Mount Sinai. This was prevented by
the interference of the Protestant Ambassadors, and the Bulgarians
rallied to the defense of their bishops. Three thousand of them
gathered at one time in one of their churches in the metropolis, and
were prevented from proclaiming a Free Bulgarian Church only by the
intervention of the Turkish government. Meanwhile the Bulgarian
nation was agitated with the discussion of religious doctrines and
ecclesiastical relations, and the Papists flooded the land with
their publications. When the anathema against the bishops was sent
to the Bulgarian towns, the people in some places would not allow it
to be read, and publicly burnt it. They even caused a counter
anathema to be read against the Greek Church. They doubtless
regarded this matter as wholly a religious one; but, in an
evangelical point of view, it was little more than a national
movement for securing their rights. Sentiments were sometimes
uttered, however, which strongly reminded one of the commencement of
the Reformation in Germany. "The religion of the Greeks," says Mr.
Crane, "has been denounced as contrary to the Bible, and the
Scriptures eulogized and recommended to the people. In their printed
speeches we have seen no instance, in which they have called upon
Mary and the saints for protection, but many in which they have
called upon God to vindicate their cause."

Roumelia was partially explored in 1857 by Dr. Hamlin, accompanied
by the Rev. Henry Jones, Secretary of the Turkish Missions Aid
Society, then visiting our missions in Turkey. From Rodosto to
Adrianople, a distance of seventy-two miles, they saw but few
Bulgarian villages. Yet what came within their observation was of
special interest, "Wherever we saw flocks, we saw Bulgarian
shepherds; and wherever we saw cultivation, we saw Bulgarian
laborers. They are indeed spread all over Roumelia, as laborers and
shepherds, and the industry of the country is in their hands. The
land is generally of excellent quality. It lies spread out in
beautiful levels, and undulating, gently rising hills. In the
neighborhood of villages it is covered with rich fields of grain,
but elsewhere, for successive miles, it is roamed over by flocks of
sheep, which, however, cannot crop a tithe of the grass. It is a
beautiful region, waiting for the taste and intelligence of virtuous
industry to make it a paradise."

We have also a charming view given us of the hundred miles of
country between Adrianople and Philippopolis, as it presented itself
to the travellers in the opening of spring. "The Greek race
disappears entirely from the soil, and the predominant race is the
Bulgarian. So entirely unconscious are the people of the Balkan's
being the boundary, that when I spoke of Bulgaria, I was repeatedly
corrected by the remark, 'You are now in Bulgaria.' The soil along
our route is of the finest quality, and large villages were
occasionally seen on our right and left, with magnificent views of
cultivated lands and vast pastures, the snowy Balkan summits
bounding the north, and lower ranges of hills the south. The fields,
clothed in the brightest verdure of spring, gave promise of
unsurpassed abundance; and in view of the inspiring scenes before
us, we could not forbear exclaiming, with the Psalmist: 'Thou
crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness. The
pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over
with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.'"

Dr. Hamlin speaks thus of the people: "In the midst of this
fertility, we had only to cast the eye upon one of the villages in
order to feel that cruel oppression and spiritual darkness are upon
the people. In some of the Bulgarian villages we saw no window, nor
even a place for one, in a single house. The country being destitute
of forest trees, there is no timber, except what is brought from a
great distance, and so they construct their dwellings of the
lightest material possible. They are generally of wicker work,
plastered within with mud. A large mud chimney and a door are the
only openings. And yet the Bulgarians, in these miserable cottages,
are the cleanliest people in the world. Excepting the rice
cultivators, who dress expressly for their muddy work, we saw not a
ragged Bulgarian between Adrianople and Philippopolis. Their clothes
are of home manufacture, coarse, strong, whole, and clean. The
unembarrassed, kind, respectful bearing of the people, men, women,
and children, must impress the most cursory observer. An impudent
laugh, an over-curious gaze, or a rude remark, we did not meet with
from old or young. We could hardly say this after going ten steps
into a Greek or Turkish village."

The favorable report made by Dr. Hamlin to his mission, awakened
much interest, and it was resolved, "That the Bulgarian and other
Slavonic races inhabiting European Turkey, call loudly for immediate
and vigorous missionary efforts; and being providentially thrown
upon the American churches as the chosen instrumentality for
evangelizing them, are worthy of their most devoted patronage."

The mission was commenced with the understanding, that the
operations of the American Board would be in the country south of
the Balkan Mountains; while the missionaries of the American
Methodist Episcopal Church were to occupy stations north of these
mountains. The Methodist brethren desired the aid of one of the
older missionaries at Constantinople in the selection of their first
station, and Mr. E. E. Bliss accompanied them. They visited Varna,
Shumla, Rasgrad, and Rustchuk, and decided upon occupying the first
and second of these places. The acquaintance thus formed between the
two missions was ever after a source of mutual pleasure and profit.
Mr. Bliss thus concludes a report of his visit:--

"This, my first acquaintance with the Bulgarians, has given me a
very favorable opinion of them. Others have expressed a different
opinion, but I should rank them before the Armenians in native
intelligence and cultivation. Certainly a higher degree of
civilization prevails among them, than among the Armenians of Asia
Minor. They have better homes, better vehicles, better implements of
husbandry. Wherever we went, we found much to remind us that we were
in Europe, and not in Asia. Our road from Varna to Rustchuk was
bordered by the posts and wires of the telegraph. Every town had its
telegraphic station and corps of operators--French, English, and
Polish gentlemen. More than once, through their unsolicited
kindness, our approach to a stopping place was announced by the
wire, and we found lodgings made ready against our coming. This, to
me, was quite a strange feature of missionary travelling, very
unlike my experience in Asia Minor."

The Rev. Charles F. Morse, who joined the Armenian mission in 1857,
was appointed to commence the mission. Leaving his family at
Constantinople until he had completed his arrangements, he proceeded
to Adrianople in March, 1858, with Hagopos, a graduate of the Bebek
Seminary, as an assistant. The population of Adrianople was then
estimated at one hundred and forty thousand, of whom forty thousand
were supposed to be Turks. The books in the Turkish language found
in Mr. Morse's baggage, including a large number of New Testaments,
were at first detained at the custom-house, under instructions from
the Porte, but were released upon application of the American and
English Consuls. His bookseller obtained a firman for the sale of
books, and freely exposed the Turkish Testament, and Mr. Morse was
himself allowed free access to the largest and finest of the
mosques,--a favor not granted at the capital.

The most formidable opposition apprehended was from the Romish
missionaries. They had been quick to see a double advantage in the
disaffection of the Bulgarians with the Greek Church, and the fall
of the Russian Protectorate, and had already erected a fine church.
The French residents, their consul, and even the English consular
agent, were Catholics. An intelligent Bulgarian expressed the
opinion that Protestant missions furnished the only possible
safeguard against Rome in that country, and one of the best informed
of the American missionaries declared his belief, that the greatest
contest of Protestantism with Rome, since the era of the
Reformation, would be in Turkey.

The Rev. Theodore L. Byington and wife joined the mission in 1858,
and were stationed at Adrianople. In the next year, the mission was
strengthened by the arrival of Rev. Messrs. William W. Meriam and
James F. Clark and their wives, who commenced a station at
Philippopolis, in ancient Thrace. The Rev. William F. Arms and wife
arrived in 1860, and were associated with Mr. Byington in a new
station at Eski Zagra, seventy-five miles northwest from Adrianople,
sixty northeast from Philippopolis, and twenty miles south of the
Balkan Mountains. Mr. Oliver Crane was transferred from the Western
Turkey Mission to Adrianople, in 1860. The population of
Philippopolis was estimated at about sixty thousand, of whom twenty
thousand were Bulgarians, sixteen thousand Mohammedans, fourteen
thousand Greeks, and five thousand Jews. Surrounding the city, there
were, within a circuit of thirty or forty miles, more than three
hundred villages, including a large population, mostly Bulgarians.
These villages were easy of access, and some of them would afford a
healthy retreat in summer. There were numerous mosques, and five
Greek and three Bulgarian churches. The Romanists were building a
large church edifice. The situation of Eski Zagra was at the
northern extremity of a luxuriant and beautiful plain, and contained
ten thousand Bulgarians and eight thousand Turks.

Mr. Byington found a remarkable zeal for education. There were in
the town six Bulgarian schools for boys, with eight hundred
scholars, and four for girls with one hundred and thirty-five
scholars; and in the surrounding villages there were eleven schools,
with three hundred pupils. For the two principal schools they had
spacious buildings, that would grace a New England town. The
teachers were gentlemenly men, and enthusiastic in their work. This
class of teachers had generally received their education abroad, for
the most part in Russia, where they could secure it without expense.
They were earnest in their efforts to introduce a higher
civilization, and gave the missionaries a cordial reception. It was
otherwise with the priests.

The readiness of the Bulgarians to receive the New Testament in
their spoken language, is deserving of special note. An English
gentleman, at one of the fairs in 1857, sold four hundred copies,
which was all he had. Several editions were printed under the
direction of the British and Foreign Bible Society, and were
exhausted in 1859. At least fifteen thousand copies had been
distributed, chiefly by sale, and the demand did not seem
diminished. Mr. Byington reports at Eski Zagra in September, 1860,
that, at the examination of one of the schools, each of twelve
members of the most advanced class was presented by the Trustees
with a handsome copy of the Bible Society's edition of the New
Testament. Subsequent experience tended somewhat to diminish the
value of such facts.

A church was formed at Adrianople, on the first Sabbath in 1862,
with a mixed membership. Pastor Apraham, already known to the reader
in connection with the church at Rodosto, came by invitation, with
one of his deacons, to assist in its formation; as also did the
missionaries from Eski Zagra.

Mr. Meriam at the close of 1861, stated as the results of
observations in his recent tours, that in villages and towns where
colporters had penetrated with the Word of Life, the people were no
longer afraid of Protestants, but respected and confided in them;
while they venerated and clung to their own form of religion; and
that the obvious way to benefit the people, spiritually and
temporally, most thoroughly and speedily, was to have suitable
native helpers quietly settled in such villages. His account of some
of the incidents on these tours will prepare the reader to
sympathize with this excellent missionary, and his estimable wife,
in the sad events soon to be narrated.

"On reaching Tatar Bazarjik, the family of one of our boarding
scholars would not permit me to go to a public khan, but insisted
that I should go to their house. I accepted the kind invitation, and
while with them, at their request, conducted family worship, morning
and evening. Visited a dozen families and was cordially welcomed by
all. In walking the street, one morning, I heard a voice from a shop
inviting me to come in, and on entering found a company of
Bulgarians, with their faces all aglow with the questions they had
to ask. A number of persons collected from other shops, and after an
hour, all seemed still unwilling that the conversation should be
broken off. Their questions showed an intelligent desire for light
on the true way of salvation."

"Early Sabbath morning, a number of Bulgarians came to our room at
the khan (at Otluk-Keuy), and began to ask questions about Christ,
the Virgin Mary, the New Testament, Popery, Protestantism, the
ceremonies of the Greek Church, etc., etc. The number of persons
increased until we had an audience of forty. They gave us no time to
eat until nightfall; and in the evening nine more came, and seemed
convinced of the truth. We spent a week in this village. Wine is
drank largely, and most of the young men are very wild, but we found
some whose conversation encouraged us much. For example, there are
three who hold regular meetings for the study of the New Testament
on Sabbaths and fast days. Such questions as they cannot solve for
themselves they reserve, until some one who can, passes through
their village. They have become fully aware, by their study of the
New Testament, that the Greek Church is not the one established by
the Apostles. One of their earnest questions was, 'Can we find
salvation in the Greek Church?' We found one enlightened priest in
this village, and spent a half day conversing with him. He informed
us that he was endeavoring to have the church service in the vulgar
tongue, so that all might understand. He quotes Scripture readily,
and is doing much good. All the other priests are miserable wine
drinkers. On my refusing the invitation of one of these to drink
with him, he exclaimed in astonishment, 'What! are you not a
Christian'?"






CHAPTER XXXII.

THE BULGARIANS OF EUROPEAN TURKEY.

1862-1871.


Brigandage has at times prevailed in some parts of Bulgaria,
especially in the Balkan Mountains. In the spring of 1862, the roads
were more or less infested with highwaymen, but the one from
Philippopolis to Adrianople, and thence to Rodosto, being constantly
travelled, was deemed safe. By this road Mr. Byington, and Mr.
Meriam with his wife and child, went to Constantinople, to attend
the annual meeting of the Western Turkey Mission. Returning, Mr.
Byington started a week before Mr. Meriam, and reached Eski Zagra
safely, going from Adrianople to Philippopolis alone. Mr. Meriam
passed over the same route with his family. Nothing noticeable
occurred till they reached Hermanli, twelve hours from Adrianople,
at noon, July 3d. Here they found a company of half a score or more
of men, with four wagons, hesitating to proceed on account of a band
of mounted brigands, said to be lying in wait to rob them.
Unfortunately the courageous advice of Mr. Meriam decided them to
proceed, accompanied by two armed guards. After they had started,
Mr. Meriam became convinced that it would have been safer for him
and his family to have gone alone; and such was the fact, for the
robbers did not know of his presence, and designed only to plunder
the rayahs. The brigands came upon them about three o'clock in the
afternoon. The faithless guards fled at once, and some valuable
horses were seized. The drivers of the two forward talaccas, of
which Mr. Meriam's was one, then increased their speed, endeavoring
to escape; when the robbers pursued, firing rapidly upon the wagons,
piercing the covering of Mr. Meriam's, and killing or wounding two
or three occupants of the next vehicle. The missionary and his
family were shielded for a time by the boxes in the hinder part of
the carriage, till the fall of one of the horses wheeled it round,
so as to face the assailants. Mr. Meriam sprang out to protect his
wife and child, and immediately fell, pierced by two balls. When the
agonized wife expostulated with one of the brigands, saying, that
"he loved the Osmanlees, and wished to do them good," he replied,
"Why then did you flee"? Had they quietly waited, though they might
have been robbed, life would probably have been spared.

Mrs. Meriam retained her presence of mind, and placing her infant
upon the ground, carefully collected the papers and other articles
which the robbers had scattered about, and then sat down to watch
the lifeless remains of her husband. The Turkish authorities of the
next village sent a conveyance to take her and her precious treasure
to a khan. When the moodir saw her in her little room, with her babe
and the corpse of her husband, he was much moved, and did what he
could for her comfort. He sent a telegram to the governor of
Philippopolis, designed for Mr. Clarke, but Mr. Clarke received no
notice, and consequently no friend came to meet her. She conveyed
the body in her own carriage; and spent the whole of the next night,
with her babe, watching the talacca in the open air, vainly
listening for the coming of the messenger whom she had so much
reason to expect. On the next and last day, she prevailed on a
Bulgarian boy to hasten on with a message, which brought Mr. Clarke
to her relief, but only just before she entered the city. An
immediate burial was necessary. The Austrian, Greek, and French
Consuls were very kind, and the Bulgarian church was offered for the
funeral.

Mrs. Meriam possessed an excellent constitution, but the strain had
been too much for her. A premature confinement followed, and fever,
which assumed a typhoid form, closed her earthly career, July 25,
about three weeks after her husband's murder.[1]

[1] A statement, made at the time, that Mr. Meriam fired on the
assassins was afterwards found to be untrue. Nor did Mrs. Meriam
receive any injury at the time of the murder. Nothing was taken from
her personally, and no violence was offered her. _Missionary
Herald_, 1863, p. 143.

It was necessary that an example should be made of the murderers.
Mr. Seward, Secretary of State at Washington, took Mr. Webster's
view as to the rights of missionaries, and removed the doubts of Mr.
Morris, the American Minister at the Porte, which had occasioned an
unfortunate delay; so that he, with Mr. Goddard the Consul General,
put matters in train at Adrianople, which led the Pasha of that
province to offer four hundred dollars, and soon after as much more,
for information that would insure the detection of the assassins,
and to distribute bands of soldiers over the country. Mr. Blunt, the
English Consul at Adrianople, offered a reward of ninety dollars on
his own responsibility; and with him the Austrian Consul, Mr.
Camerlobe, actively cooeperated.

These efforts resulted in the arrest, conviction, and execution of
three of the five engaged in the murder. The remaining two met with
an ignominious and violent death; one having been assassinated, and
the other shot down while committing highway robbery in an adjacent
province.

A very effectual check was thus put to the brigandage so prevalent
before, and the attention of all classes was drawn to the character,
position, and aims of the missionaries.

Scarcely a year had elapsed, since Mr. Coffing had fallen by the
hands of assassins in Central Turkey; and who can tell how much the
punishment inflicted on the murderers of these missionaries, has
contributed to the safety of their brethren, or how much it will be
instrumental in preventing future massacres of native Christians, as
well as missionaries, by fanatical Mohammedans.

The Rev. Henry C. Haskell and wife joined the mission in the autumn
of 1862, and assisted Mr. Morse in forming a new station at Sophia,
about four days' journey northwest of Philippopolis. In the
following year, Miss Mary E. Reynolds took charge of a school for
girls at Eski Zagra, which had been successfully commenced by a
young woman from Catholic Bohemia, who spoke the Bulgarian like a
native, and gave good evidence of piety. The school was designed for
the education of female teachers. The health of Mrs. Crane obliged
her and her husband to return home, and ask for a release from their
connection with the Board. Adrianople was thus left, for a time,
without a missionary. The death of Mr. and Mrs. Meriam stirred up
several young men in the school at Philippopolis who became active
and successful colporters in the surrounding villages. Many of the
people in Sophia were found to possess the Scriptures, and a
considerable number were known to read them with interest; but as
soon as the fact became known to their acquaintance, they were
subjected to persecution.

At Samokov, a pleasant town nine hours to the southeast of Sophia,
with a Bulgarian population of ten thousand, there were encouraging
indications, and that place proving to be more healthful and a
better centre than Sophia, the station was removed thither in 1869.

In 1863, the missionaries of the American Board and the Methodists
working in this field held a meeting at Eski Zagra, for cultivating
the friendly relations already existing between them. Dr. Wood and
Mr. Isaac G. Bliss were present from the Armenian Mission. They
found themselves in substantial agreement as to the methods of
missionary labor, and also as to the nature of the field. "While
some facts of a more or less hopeful nature," writes Mr. Byington,
"were reported, the general feeling seemed to be, that the
Bulgarians were a very different people from what they were supposed
to be, six or eight years ago, and that in our efforts for their
good, patience must have her perfect work. They cannot be said to be
a particularly depraved people; they are not probably addicted to
the grosser sins in any unusual degree; but there seems to be among
them a great want of impressibility. When the truth is presented,
they at once assent to it, but without any apparent impression on
the heart. The brethren generally spoke of the pleasant social
intercourse which they enjoyed with the people, but upon religious
