
[Sidenote: 2. Notices of the persecution in the Koran.]

The oppressions, trials, and sufferings which the early Moslems
underwent compelled them to fly from their homes, leaving their families
and property in the hands of their oppressors. They chose this course
rather than revert to paganism. They held steadfastly to the one true
God whom their Prophet had taught them to trust and believe. All these
facts are clearly outlined in the following verses of the Koran:--

"And as to those who when oppressed have fled their country for the sake
of God, We will surely provide them a goodly abode in this world, but
greater the reward of next life, did they but know it."

"They who bear ills with patience, and put their trust in the
Lord!"--xvi, 43, 44.

"To those also who after their trials fled their country, then did their
utmost and endured with patience, verily, thy Lord will afterwards be
forgiving, gracious."--_Ibid_, 111.

"But they who believe, and who fly their country, and do their utmost in
the cause of God, may hope for God's mercy: and God is Gracious,
Merciful."--ii, 215.

"And they who have fled their country and quitted their homes and
suffered in my cause and have fought and fallen--I will blot out their
sins from them and will bring them into gardens beneath which the
streams do flow."--iii, 194.

"And as to those who fled their country for the cause of God, and were
afterwards slain, or died, surely with goodly provision will God provide
for them! for verily, God is the best of providers!"--xxii, 57.

"Those believers who sit at home free from trouble, and those who toil
in the cause of God with their substance and their persons, shall not be
treated alike. God hath assigned to those who strive with their persons
and with their substance, a rank above those who sit at home. Goodly
promises hath He made to all: But God hath assigned to those who make
efforts a rich recompense above those who sit still at home."

"The angels, when they took the souls of those who had been unjust to
their own weal, demanded, 'What hath been your state?' They said, 'We
were the weak ones of the earth.' They replied, 'Was not God's earth
broad enough for you to flee away in?' These! their home shall be Hell,
and evil the passage to it"--

"Except the men and women and children who were not able through their
weakness to find the means _of escape_, and were not guided on their
way. These haply God will forgive: for God is Forgiving,
Pardoning."--iv, 97, 99, 100.

"God doth not forbid you to deal with kindness and fairness towards
those who have not made war upon you on account of your religion, or
driven you forth from your homes: verily, God loveth those who act with
fairness."

"Only doth God forbid you to make friends of those who, on account of
your religion, have warred against you, and have driven you forth from
your homes, and have aided your expulsion: and whoever maketh friends of
them, these therefore are evil-doers."--lx, 8, 9.

[Sidenote: 3. Insults suffered by Mohammad.]

The Prophet himself suffered insults and personal injuries from the
hands of his persecutors. He was prevented from offering his prayers
(xcvi, 10). He allowed himself to be spat upon, to have dust thrown upon
him, and to be dragged out of the Kaaba by his own turban fastened to
his neck. He bore all these indignities with the utmost humility, and he
daily beheld his followers treated oppressively. After his uncle's death
his life was attempted, but he escaped by flying to Medina.

"And _call to mind_ when the unbelievers plotted against thee, to detain
thee prisoner or to kill thee or to banish thee: they plotted--but God
plotted; and of plotters is God the best."--viii, 30.

[Sidenote: 4. Historical summary of the persecutions.]

About 615 of the Christian era, the Koreish of Mecca began to persecute
the faith of Islam. Those who had no protection among the early Moslems
were hard pressed, as related above. A body of eleven men, some with
their families, fled the country, and found refuge, notwithstanding
their pursuit by the Koreish, across the Red Sea at the Court of
Abyssinia. This was the first Hegira, or flight of the persecuted
Moslems. After some time, the persecution being resumed by the Koreish
more hotly than ever, a larger number of Moslems, more than hundred,
emigrated to Abyssinia. This was the second flight of the Moslems. The
Koreish had sent an embassy to the Court of Abyssinia to fetch back the
refugees. The king denied their surrender. About two years later the
Koreish formed a hostile confederacy, by which all intercourse with the
Moslems and their supporters was suspended. The Koreish forced upon the
Moslems, by their threats and menaces, to retire from the city. For
about three years, they, together with the Prophet and the Hashimites
and their families, had to shut themselves up in the _Sheb_ of Abu
Talib. They remained there, cut off from communication with the outer
world. The ban of separation was put rigorously in force. The terms of
the social and civil ban put upon them were, that they would neither
intermarry with the proscribed, nor sell to or buy from them anything,
and that they would entirely cease from all intercourse with them.
Mohammad, in the interval of the holy months, used to go forth and
mingle with the pilgrims to Mecca, and preached to them the abhorrence
of idolatry and the worship of the One True God. The _Sheb_, or quarter
of Abu Talib, lies under the rocks of Abu Cobeis. A low gateway cut them
off from the outer world, and within they had to suffer all privations
of a beleaguered garrison. No one would venture forth except in the
sacred months, when all hostile feelings and acts had to be laid aside.
The citizens could hear the voices of the half-famished children inside
the _Sheb_ and this state of endurance on the one side, and persecution
on the other, went on for some three years. Five of the chief
supporters of the adverse faction detached from the league and broke up
the confederacy and released the imprisoned religionists. This was in
the tenth year of Mohammad's ministry. Soon after Mohammad and the early
Moslems suffered a great loss in the death of his venerable uncle and
protector Abu Talib. Thus, Mohammad and his followers became again
exposed to the unchecked insults and persecutions incited by Abu Sofian,
Abu Jahl, and others; and being a handful in the hostile city, were
unable to cope with its rich and powerful chiefs. At this critical
period, either because he found it unsafe to remain at Mecca, or because
he trusted his message would find more acceptance elsewhere, Mohammad
set off to Tayef of the Bani Thakif,--the town was one of the great
strongholds of idolatry. There was a stone image, called Al-Lat, adorned
with costly vestments and precious stones, was an object of worship, and
esteemed to be one of the daughters of God. Here Mohammad preached to
unwilling ears, and met with nothing but opposition and scorn from the
chief men, which soon spread to the populace. He was driven out of the
town, maltreated, and wounded. He could not return to and enter Mecca
unless protected by Mut-im, a chief of the blood of Abd Shams.

At the yearly pilgrimage, a little group of worshippers from Medina was
attracted and won over by the preaching of Islam; and the following
year it increased to twelve. They met Mohammad and took an oath of
allegiance. A teacher was deputed by Mohammad to Medina, and the new
faith spread there with a marvellous rapidity. Again the time of
pilgrimage arrived, and more than seventy disciples from Medina pledged
themselves to receive and defend him at the risk of their lives and
property. This was all done in secret; but the Koreish, having got
notice of it, renewed such severities and persecutions, including, in
some cases, imprisonment, as hastened the departure of the Moslems to
Medina, their city of refuge.

[Sidenote: 5. The Hegira.]

Mohammad, being much troubled by the intolerance of the people and the
personal safety and security of himself and his followers being
endangered, and mutual intercourse denied, saw that it was hopeless to
expect any forbearance on the part of the Koreish, who would not permit
him to live and preach his religion at home, and looked for assistance
and protection from a strange land. He asked the people of Medina to
receive and protect him. The Medina converts, who had come to Mecca on
pilgrimage, pledged themselves to Mohammad, and promised to defend him
as they would defend their wives and children. The Medina converts,
although not acting on the offensive, became at once objects of
suspicion to the Koreish, who endeavoured to seize those who were in
Mecca. They maltreated one of the Medina converts who fell into their
hands, and the work of persecution was recommenced in right
earnest.[160] Two months elapsed before the believers, except those
detained in confinement or who were unable to escape from slavery, or
women and children, could emigrate. Families after families silently
disappeared, and house after house was abandoned. One or two quarters of
the city were entirely deserted. The Koreish held a council and
proscribed Mohammad, who escaped together with Abu Bakr, leaving Ali in
his house, around whom, to lull the suspicions of his neighbours, he
threw his own mantle, and desired him to occupy his bed. Mohammad and
his follower took refuge in a cave. The Koreish despatched scouts in all
directions to search for Mohammad, but in vain. After hiding for three
days in the cave, Mohammad and Abu Bakr started for Medina, where they
arrived safely.

The foregoing circumstances would have fully justified immediate
hostilities on the part of Mohammad, but he did not take up arms until
compelled to do so by the attacks of the Meccans.

[Sidenote: 6. The persecution of the Moslems by the Koreish after their
flight from Mecca.]

Notwithstanding the flight of the Prophet and of all the early Moslem
converts who were able to effect an escape except their families, women
and children, and those weak Moslems who could not leave Mecca, the
Meccans or the Koreish did not forgive the fugitives and did not abstain
from their aggressions against them. They maltreated the children and
weak Moslems left at Mecca (iv, 77, 99 and 100), expelled the Moslems
from their houses, and would not allow them to come back to Mecca for a
pilgrimage (ii, 214). The Meccans several times invaded the Medina
territory with the avowed intention of making war upon the Moslems (and
actually fought the battles of Bedr, Ohad, Khandak or Ahzab, at Medina),
consequently the Moslems were forced to resort to arms in pure
self-defence.

These were sufficient grounds for the Moslems to assume the offensive.
They were desirous also of rescuing their families and those who had
been unable to join in the flight from the tyranny and oppression of the
Meccans. Yet they were in no instance the aggressors. Driven from their
homes and families they did not resort to arms until absolutely
compelled to do so in self-defence.

All that Mohammad claimed for himself and his followers was, full
liberty of conscience and actions, and permission to preach and practice
his religion without being molested. This being refused, he advised his
followers to leave the city and seek refuge elsewhere. They emigrated
twice to Abyssinia, and for the third time were expelled to Medina,
where he himself followed, when his own life was attempted.

[Footnote 159: Islam and its Founder, by J.W.H. Stobart, B.A., page 76.

But, in fact, there was no such permission. The verse quoted above says,
that the wrath and punishment of God will be on those who deny God,
except those who do so by being forced. The latter were not put on the
same footing as the former; in short, those who denied God under
compulsion were not counted unbelievers.]

[Footnote 160: "The support of the Medina adherents, and the suspicion
of an _intended_ emigration, irritated the Koreish to severity; and this
severity forced the Moslems to petition Mahomet for leave to emigrate.
The two causes might co-exist and re-act one another; the persecution
would hasten the departure of the converts, while each fresh departure
would irritate the Koreish to greater cruelty."--William Muir's Life of
Mahomet, Vol. II, pp. 242, 243, foot-note.]


_The Meccans or the Koreish._

[Sidenote: 7. A Koreish chieftain commits a raid near Medina.--A.H., I.]

The attitude of the Koreish towards the Prophet and his followers after
the flight rapidly became more hostile. Kurz-ibn Jabir, one of the
marauding chieftains of the Koreish, fell upon some of the camels and
flocks of Medina, while feeding in a plain a few miles from the city,
and carried them off.

[Sidenote: 8. The Koreish march to attack Medina. Mohammad marches forth
in defence, and gains the battle at Badr.--A.H., II.]

Still there was no hostile response from Medina, till the aggressors
(the Koreish) brought from Medina an army of 950 strong, mounted on 700
camels and 100 horses, to Badr, nine stages from Mecca, advancing
towards Medina. Then the Prophet set out from Medina at the head of his
small army of 305 to check the advance of his aggressors. This was the
first offensive and defensive war between the Koreish and Mohammad
respectively. The aggressors lost the battle.

[Sidenote: 9. Attack by Abu Sofian upon Medina.--A.H., II.]

After this Abu Sofian, the head of the Koreish, accompanied by 200
mounted followers, alarmed Mohammad and the people of Medina by a raid
upon the cornfields and palm gardens two or three miles north-east of
Medina. The nomad tribes of Suliem and Ghatafan, who were descended from
a common stock with the Koreish, being probably incited by them, or at
least by the example of Abu Sofian, had twice assembled and projected a
plundering attack upon Medina--a task in itself congenial with their
predatory habits.

[Sidenote: 10. The battle of Ohad.]

The Koreish made great preparations for a fresh attack upon Medina. One
year after the battle of Badr, they commenced their march,--three
thousand in number, seven hundred were mailed warriors, and two hundred
well mounted cavalry. Reaching Medina they encamped in an extensive and
fertile plain to the west of Ohad.

Mohammad met Abu Sofian at the head of 700 followers and only two
horsemen, but lost the battle and was wounded.

[Sidenote: 11. Mohammad's prestige affected by the defeat.]

Mohammad's prestige being affected by the defeat at Ohad, many of the
Bedouin tribes began to assume an hostile attitude towards him. The Bani
Asad, a powerful tribe connected with the Koreish in Najd and Bani
Lahyan in the vicinity of Mecca, prepared to make a raid upon Medina.
The Mohammadan missionaries were killed at Raji and Bir Mauna. The
marauding bands of Duma also threatened a raid upon the city. Bani
Mustalik also raised forces to join the Koreish in their threatened
attack upon Medina.

[Sidenote: 12. Abu Sofian threatened the Moslems with another attack
next year.]

Abu Sofian, while retiring from the field, victorious as he was,
threatened the Moslem with a fresh attack the next year as he said to
Omar: "We shall meet again, let it be after a year, at Badr." Medina and
the Moslems, however, enjoyed a long exemption from the threatened
attack of the Koreish.

At length the time came when the forces of the Koreish and the Moslems
were again to meet at Badr. But the year was one of great draught, and
the Koreish were desirous that the expedition should be deferred to a
more favorable season. Accordingly the Koreish engaged Naeem, an Arab of
a neutral tribe, to repair to Medina, and there to give forth an
exaggerated account of the preparations of the Koreish, in the hope
that, with the field of Ohad fresh in memory, it might deter the Moslems
from setting out to meet them. But Mohammad, with a force of fifteen
hundred men and only ten horses, set forth for Badr. The Koreish, who
never appeared mortified at the triumph of Mohammad, began to project
another grand attack upon him.

[Sidenote: 13. The Koreish again attack Medina with a large army.
Mohammad defends the city. The enemy retire. (Ditch or Nations.--A.H.,
V.)]

The winter season in the next year was chosen for the renewal of
hostilities by the Koreish. They joined an immense force of the Bedouin
tribes (the entire army was estimated at ten thousand), marched against
Mohammad, and besieged Medina. Mohammad defended the city by digging a
Ditch. The army of Medina was posted within the trench, and that of the
Koreish encamped opposite them. In the meantime Abu Sofian succeeded in
detaching the Jewish tribe of Koreiza from their allegiance to Mohammad.
The danger to Medina from this defection was great. The enemy made a
general attack, which was repulsed. Bad weather set in, and Abu Sofian
ordered the allied force to break up. The enemy retired, and never came
again to attack the Moslems. This, therefore, was the last war of
aggression on the part of the Koreish, and of defence on the part of
Mohammad.

[Sidenote: 14. Mohammad, with his followers, advanced to perform the
lesser pilgrimage of Mecca. The Koreish opposed Mohammad, who returned
disappointed.--A.H. VI.]

Six years had passed since the expulsion of Mohammad and his followers
from Mecca. They had not since visited the Holy house, nor had they
joined the yearly pilgrimage, which was an essential part of their
social and religious life. Mohammad undertook to perform the lesser
pilgrimage to Mecca in the month of Zalkada, in which war was unlawful
throughout Arabia. Mohammad, with his followers, the pious and peaceful
worshippers, fifteen hundred in number, set forth for Mecca. The
pilgrims carried no arms, but such as were allowed by custom to
travellers,--_namely_, each a sheathed sword. The Koreish, with their
allies, the surrounding tribes, hearing of the approach of the
pilgrims, took up arms. They pushed forward to obstruct the pilgrims.
Mohammad encamped at Hodeibia, where a treaty of peace was concluded
between the Koreish and Mohammad. The treaty was to the effect, that war
should be suspended for ten years, neither party attacking the other.
Whosoever wished to join Mohammad and enter into treaty with him, should
have liberty to do so. "If any one goeth over to Mohammad, without the
permission of his guardian, he shall be sent back to his guardian. But
if any one from amongst the followers of Mohammad return to the Koreish,
the same shall not be sent back, provided, on the part of the Koreish,
that Mohammad and his followers retire from us this year without
entering our city. In the coming year he may visit Mecca--he and his
followers--for three days, when we shall retire therefrom. But they may
not enter it with any weapons, save those of the travellers--_namely_,
to each a sheathed sword." Bani Khozaa entered into the alliance of
Mohammad, and Bani Bakr adhered to the Koreish.

[Sidenote: 15. Violation of the treaty by the Koreish, and their
submission.]

The peace remained unbroken until the Koreish violated the treaty of
Hodeibia[161] and treacherously killed several men of the Bani Khozaa.
Mohammad marched against them in the eighth year of the Hegira in
defence of the injured and oppressed Bani Khozaa, and to chastize the
Koreish for violation of the treaty. But the Koreish submitted to the
authority of Mohammad before he arrived at Mecca, and the city was
occupied without resistance.

[Sidenote: 16. Two other tribes assume the offensive.]

Soon after, the great and warlike tribe of Hawazin and Thakeef assumed
the offensive. They assembled at Autas, and advanced upon Honain to
attack Mohammad. He was obliged to leave Mecca and set out to disperse
them, who were beaten back at Honain (S. ix, 26-28). Taif of the Thakeef
was besieged, but in vain.

[Footnote 161: Unfortunately several missionary expeditious sent by
Mohammad were met with unfavorable circumstances. The party sent to Bani
Suleim, demanding their allegiance to the faith of Islam, was slain.
Another party sent to Bani Leith was surprised, and its camels
plundered. A small party sent by Mohammad to Fadak was cut to pieces by
Bani Murra. Another party sent to Zat Atlah to call upon the people to
embrace Islam, of which only one person escaped. Mohammad's messenger
despatched to the Ghassanide Prince at Bostra was murdered by the chief
of Muta. His army sent to avenge the treachery of the chief was
defeated. All these mishaps and reverses dangerously affected the
prestige of Mohammad, and encouraged the Meccans to violate the truce.]


_The defensive character of the wars._

[Sidenote: 17. Verses from the Koran in support of the defensive
character of the wars.]

This brief sketch of the defensive wars of Mohammad with the Koreish
will fully show, that those who assert that Mohammad was aggressive or
revengeful in his wars, or that he made war to force his religion upon
the people, are altogether in the wrong.

I will now quote some verses of the Koran, showing that all the wars of
Mohammad with the Koreish were defensive wars.

39. "Verily, God will ward off[162] _mischief_ from believers: lo, God
loveth not the false, the unbeliever."

40. "A sanction is given to those who have been fought,[163] because
they have suffered outrages, and verily, God is well able to succour
them"--

41. "Those who have been driven forth from their homes wrongfully, only
because they say, 'Our Lord is the God.' And if God had not repelled
some men by others, cloisters and churches and oratories and mosques
wherein the name of God is ever commemorated, would surely have been
destroyed! And him who helpeth God will God surely help: Verily, God is
Strong, Mighty."

42. "They who, if We established them in _this_ land, will observe
prayer and pay the alms of obligation and enjoin what is recognized _as
right_--and forbid what is unlawful. And the final issue of all things
is unto God."--Sura, xxii.

186. "And fight for the cause of God against those who fight against
you: but commit not the injustice of _attacking them first_: verily, God
loveth not the unjust."

187. "And kill them wherever ye find them, and eject them from whatever
place they have ejected you, for (_fitnah_)[164] persecution is worse
than slaughter: yet attack them not at the sacred mosque, until they
attack you therein; but if they attack you, then slay them--Such is the
recompense of the infidels!"--

188. "But if they desist,[165] then verily God is Gracious, Merciful!"

189. "And do battle against them until there be no more (_fitnah_)
persecution, and the worship be that of God: but if they desist, then
let there be no hostility, save against wrong-doers."

214. "They will ask thee concerning war in the Sacred Month. Say: The
act of fighting therein is a grave crime; but the act of turning others
aside from the path of God, and unbelief in Him, and to prevent access
to the Sacred Mosque, and to drive out his people, is worse in the sight
of God; and persecution[166] (_fitnah_[167]) is worse than bloodshed.
But they will not cease to war against you until they turn you from your
religion, if they be able: but whoever of you shall turn from his
religion, and die an infidel, their works shall be fruitless in this
world and in the next: and they shall be consigned to the fire; therein
to abide for aye."

215. "But they who believe, and who fly their country, and do their
utmost in the cause of God, may hope for God's mercy: and God is
Gracious, Merciful."

245. "And fight in the cause of God; and know that God is He who
Heareth, Knoweth."

247. "Hast thou not considered the assembly of the children of Israel
after _the death of_ Moses, when they said to a prophet of
theirs,--'Raise up for us a king; we will do battle for the cause of
God?' He said, 'May it not be that if to fight were ordained you, ye
would not fight?' They said, 'And why should we not fight in the cause
of God, since we are driven forth from our dwellings and our children?'
But when fighting was commanded them they turned back, save a few of
them: But God knew the offenders!"

252. "And by the will of God they routed them; and (Daood) David slew
Goliath; and God gave him the kingship and wisdom, and taught him
according to his will: and were it not for the restraint of one by the
