
In some cases "the word of God," whether preached by Christ or by his
followers, falls on hearts which are pictured by the hard-trodden footpath
which runs through the field of grain. No possible impression can be made.
The Word finds no entrance and Satan snatches it away as a bird picks up
the grain which falls by the wayside. Faith and salvation cannot result.

Other hearers are compared to the thin layer of earth which covers a ledge
of stone. Seed which falls into such soil springs up most quickly because
warmed by the underlying rock; but as the roots cannot strike downward,
the grain soon withers beneath the scorching sun. So there are hearers who
receive with joy the message of life, but when subjected to the
persecution and trials which followers of Christ must endure, they quickly
desert his cause.

Other hearers are compared to seed which falls where thorns are growing.
This seed springs into life but it has not room for development. It is
robbed by the thorns of its needed nourishment. Thus some Christians are
so preoccupied by "cares and riches and pleasures" that they can bear no
spiritual fruit.

There are those, however, who are like seed which fell on "good ground"
and "brought forth fruit a hundredfold;" they receive the truth "in an
honest and good heart" and patiently and perseveringly they produce in
their lives a golden harvest of grain.

The great message of the parable is summarized in the words of our Lord,
"Take heed therefore how ye hear." V. 18. The purpose of his parables, as
of all his teachings, was to give spiritual light. Those who love him and
obey his word will have their understanding quickened and their knowledge
increased; but one who is careless or disobedient to the truth, will lose
"even that which he thinketh he hath." It is a great privilege to hear the
gospel of Christ, but it involves a great responsibility as well.



9. Kinship with Jesus. Ch. 8:19-21


    19 And there came to him his mother and brethren, and they could
    not come at him for the crowd. 20 And it was told him, Thy mother
    and thy brethren stand without, desiring to see thee. 21 But he
    answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are these
    that hear the word of God, and do it.


It is only from the other Gospels that we learn the exact nature and
purpose of the visit paid to Jesus by his mother and brethren. Luke does
not reveal the fact that it occasioned one of the most delicate and
difficult dilemmas by which our Lord was ever confronted. The real purpose
of these relatives was to interrupt his work. They feared that his mind
was unbalanced and they wished to take him home. Should Jesus repudiate
them, or should he allow his work needlessly to be interrupted? This
situation Luke does not sketch, but he does state clearly the impressive
message which Jesus found occasion to deliver. When Jesus was told that
these relatives desired to see him, he pointed to his disciples with the
reply, "My mother and my brethren are these that hear the word of God, and
do it." Thus Luke connects this incident with the parable of the Sower
which he has just related. The parable shows the need of careful attention
to the gospel truth, and, according to Luke's account of this incident,
the same fact is emphasized, namely, the blessed result of heeding the
divine Word. According to the statement of Christ, such obedience to him
and such true discipleship as was shown by his followers results in a
relationship with him more intimate and close than is secured by any human
ties. This spiritual kinship is more vital than any relationship of blood
or of nature. It results in a fellowship, at once blessed and forever
abiding, which is possible for all. The reply of our Lord could not have
offended his brethren even though it did contain a delicate rebuke. Only
those have a right to claim relationship with him who submit to him as
their Lord and are ready to do his will.



10. Jesus Stilling the Storm. Ch. 8:22-25


    22 Now it came to pass on one of those days, that he entered into
    a boat, himself and his disciples; and he said unto them, Let us
    go over unto the other side of the lake: and they launched forth.
    23 But as they sailed he fell asleep: and there came down a storm
    of wind on the lake; and they were filling _with water_, and were
    in jeopardy. 24 And they came to him, and awoke him, saying,
    Master, master, we perish. And he awoke, and rebuked the wind and
    the raging of the water: and they ceased, and there was a calm. 25
    And he said unto them, Where is your faith? And being afraid they
    marvelled, saying one to another, Who then is this, that he
    commandeth even the winds and the water, and they obey him?


Storms were common on the surface of the little lake which Jesus so often
crossed with his disciples; and storms are still frequent in the lives of
his followers. To accompany the Master does not exempt us from struggles
and tempests, from dark skies and angry waves. This, however, was no usual
storm. Even the sturdy fishermen of Galilee, who were familiar with all
the changeful moods of that inland sea, were filled with terror. Jesus at
the time was quietly resting and had fallen asleep in what seemed to his
followers to be an hour of greatest peril.

Their fear may have been foolish but it was wise in them to come to the
Master in their moment of pressing need. They awoke him with the cry,
"Master, master, we perish." The followers of Christ are not saved from
encountering storms but in the hour of peril they should be comforted by
his presence and they can ever turn to him for relief. "He awoke, and
rebuked the wind and the raging of the water: and they ceased, and there
was a calm." Then when he had rebuked the disordered elements Jesus turned
to rebuke his followers, "Where is your faith?" He did not find fault with
them for awakening him, or for crying out for help; he rebuked only their
lack of trust which should have relieved them from distress of mind while
he was so near and so abundantly able to save. Such a miracle must have
strengthened their faith but its first effect was to fill them with wonder
and with awe. Every new manifestation of his power came as a surprise to
these disciples, and now for the first time they saw his control over the
blind forces of nature; thus once again they felt themselves in the
presence not only of a perfect Man--but of One who was divine.



11. A Demoniac Healed. Ch. 8:26-39


    26 And they arrived at the country of the Gerasenes, which is over
    against Galilee. 27 And when he was come forth upon the land,
    there met him a certain man out of the city, who had demons; and
    for a long time he had worn no clothes, and abode not in _any_
    house, but in the tombs. 28 And when he saw Jesus, he cried out,
    and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I
    to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I beseech
    thee, torment me not. 29 For he was commanding the unclean spirit
    to come out from the man. For often-times it had seized him: and
    he was kept under guard, and bound with chains and fetters; and
    breaking the bands asunder, he was driven of the demon into the
    desert. 30 And Jesus asked him, What is thy name? And he said,
    Legion; for many demons were entered into him. 31 And they
    entreated him that he would not command them to depart into the
    abyss. 32 Now there was there a herd of many swine feeding on the
    mountain: and they entreated him that he would give them leave to
    enter into them. And he gave them leave. 33 And the demons came
    out from the man, and entered into the swine: and the herd rushed
    down the steep into the lake, and were drowned. 34 And when they
    that fed them saw what had come to pass, they fled, and told it in
    the city and in the country. 35 And they went out to see what had
    come to pass; and they came to Jesus, and found the man, from whom
    the demons were gone out, sitting, clothed and in his right mind,
    at the feet of Jesus: and they were afraid. 36 And they that saw
    it told them how he that was possessed with demons was made whole.
    37 And all the people of the country of the Gerasenes round about
    asked him to depart from them; for they were holden with great
    fear: and he entered into a boat, and returned. 38 But the man
    from whom the demons were gone out prayed him that he might be
    with him: but he sent him away, saying, 39 Return to thy house,
    and declare how great things God hath done for thee. And he went
    his way, publishing throughout the whole city how great things
    Jesus had done for him.


The sufferings of a demoniac were so similar to those of mental disease
that by many they are regarded as identical. Those who observe the
distinction are faced with a further problem as to whether demon
possession exists at the present day. What is most important of all is to
note the exact parallel existing between the demoniacs described in the
New Testament and those persons who at all times are tormented by envy and
lust and anger and greed and other evil passions which dominate the human
soul.

On the eastern shore of the Lake of Gennesaret Jesus was encountered by a
man whose suffering and nakedness are types of the anguish and
shamelessness of sin. He could not be controlled; he was dwelling among
the tombs, and these, too, are pictures of the helplessness and loneliness
and hopelessness which evil passions produce. Most of all it is
interesting to note that while the demon cried out in dread, the man drew
near to Jesus, really hoping for help. The experience was like that of
those who suffer from mental disease where a dual consciousness is
manifested. Likewise most of us have experienced such a conflict of
desires; we have longed for liberty at the very moment when we have felt
the controlling power of some passion. Some tell us that we must cease to
love the sin before Christ will give us help, but this picture sketched by
Luke gives a more hopeful message. It intimates that as we cry out for
relief, or even before we speak, Jesus sees the heart and recognizes the
longing and assures release.

Jesus asked the sufferer for his name. He wished the real man to be
awakened and to be conscious of the distinction between himself and the
evil spirit by which he was possessed. The reply of the demoniac was full
of pathos. He declared that his name was "Legion," the reason assigned
being that "many demons were entered into him." His case was particularly
desperate; but the evil spirits realized that they stood before One whose
power was absolute. Certain that they were to be expelled from the
sufferer, they asked permission to enter into a herd of swine which was
feeding on the mountain side. A question has often been raised as to why
Jesus granted this request. Probably one reason was that the sight which
followed assured the sufferer of his cure; another may have been that the
destruction of the herd would give to the men of the region an arresting
message both of their own peril and of the power of Christ. However, when
"They went out to see what had come to pass," they were full of terror and
they requested Jesus to leave their land. They were evidently more
concerned for the beasts which had been lost than for the soul that had
been saved, when they saw their countryman sitting clothed and in his
right mind as a disciple at the feet of Jesus. Their request was granted;
our Lord never continues the gracious manifestations of his presence when
these are not desired. However, he refused the request of the man whom he
had healed. The latter wished to accompany Jesus as he entered the boat to
cross to the other side of the lake; but Jesus bade him to remain as a
witness for Christ in his own home and among his own people. It is ever
the desire of the Master that the testimony of those who have known his
power should be given first to those by whom they are best known.



12. The Daughter of Jairus and the Woman with an Issue of Blood. Ch.
8:40-56


    40 And as Jesus returned, the multitude welcomed him; for they
    were all waiting for him. 41 And behold, there came a man named
    Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue: and he fell down at
    Jesus' feet, and besought him to come into his house; 42 for he
    had an only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she was
    dying. But as he went the multitudes thronged him.


    43 And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, who had
    spent all her living upon physicians, and could not be healed of
    any, 44 came behind him, and touched the border of his garment:
    and immediately the issue of her blood stanched. 45 And Jesus
    said, Who is it that touched me? And when all denied, Peter said,
    and they that were with him, Master, the multitudes press thee and
    crush _thee_. 46 But Jesus said, Some one did touch me; for I
    perceived that power had gone forth from me. 47 And when the woman
    saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and falling down
    before him declared in the presence of all the people for what
    cause she touched him, and how she was healed immediately. 48 And
    he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in
    peace.


    49 While he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the
    synagogue's _house_, saying, Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the
    Teacher. 50 But Jesus hearing it, answered him, Fear not: only
    believe, and she shall be made whole. 51 And when he came to the
    house, he suffered not any man to enter in with him, save Peter,
    and John, and James, and the father of the maiden and her mother.
    52 And all were weeping, and bewailing her: but he said, Weep not;
    for she is not dead, but sleepeth. 53 And they laughed him to
    scorn, knowing that she was dead. 54 But he, taking her by the
    hand, called, saying, Maiden, arise. 55 And her spirit returned,
    and she rose up immediately: and he commanded that _something_ be
    given her to eat. 56 And her parents were amazed: but he charged
    them to tell no man what had been done.


As Jesus returned to Capernaum after curing the demoniac across the lake,
he was welcomed by a great multitude in the midst of which were two
sufferers for whom the Saviour showed his sympathy as he perfected their
faith and relieved their distress. They were strangely contrasted in
circumstances, alike only in their desperate need. One was Jairus, a man
of prominence in his community, "a ruler of the synagogue," a person of
comparative wealth and power and social position, whose home for twelve
years had been brightened by the presence of a little daughter, an only
child, who was now lying at the point of death.

The other was a woman, poor, weak, ceremonially unclean, friendless, who
for twelve years had been suffering from an incurable disease and who knew
that by no human power could her life be prolonged.

As Jesus was starting for the home of Jairus this woman came up behind
him, touched the border of his garment, and was instantly healed. Her
faith was imperfect but it was real. She had supposed the power of Christ
to be merely magical and mechanical. Jesus showed that it is inseparable
from divine knowledge and love. He had felt the touch of her trembling
finger. He had distinguished it from the press of the jostling throng; and
now for her own sake he required the woman "in the presence of all the
people" to acknowledge her cure. Jesus would have us know that faith is a
dependence upon his gracious person and purpose, and also that only after
public confession of our relation to him can we receive the assurance that
we are saved and can hear his blessed word, "Thy faith hath made thee
whole; go in peace."

The faith of Jairus was likewise imperfect. It was more intelligent than
the faith of the woman but it fell short of that revealed by the centurion
in the same city who felt it unnecessary for Jesus to come to his house
but only to speak a word and a cure would be effected. Nevertheless this
faith was genuine and so Jesus strengthened it and rewarded it. The very
fact that Jesus started toward his home was reassuring to the father, but
his faith was tested by the delay caused in curing the woman. However, it
was also strengthened by this proof of divine wisdom and power. Most
terribly was his faith tested by the message which then reached him, "Thy
daughter is dead; trouble not the Teacher." Yet again, it was confirmed by
the word of Jesus, "Fear not: only believe, and she shall be made whole."
As he entered the house, Jesus spoke another word which rebuked the
faithless mourners and cheered the agonized parents, "Weep not; for she is
not dead, but sleepeth." He meant that in his presence and in virtue of
his power death loses its reality and is robbed of its victory. Nor has
the word lost its meaning and its comfort for the followers of Christ
during all the subsequent years.

Jesus showed clearly what he meant as he took into the death chamber his
three closest friends and the two trembling parents, as he stood before
the sleeping child and "taking her by the hand, called, saying Maiden,
arise. And her spirit returned, and she rose up immediately: and he
commanded that something be given her to eat." The record indicates the
supreme thoughtfulness and tenderness of the Master. He took with him only
three disciples for he would not have the awakened child terrified by the
sight of more strangers. When the miracle had been performed he requested
that the little girl should be given food; this was for her own comfort
but also to break for the parents the spell of awe and terror which had
been cast upon them by the presence of death, and also as a proof not only
that life had returned but also that complete recovery from disease had
been secured. One other command is recorded, "He charged them to tell no
