Father and the Son. The Father sends the Son to accomplish the works
assigned to him. The Son reveals the Father, and executes his will. The
Holy Spirit does the will of the Father and the Son. It is in these
relations that the respective Persons are worshipped, and not jointly or
in unity. The Father is worshipped through the Son as the medium of
access and homage. The Father and Son respectively are worshipped
through the gracious indwelling influence of the Holy Spirit.

These relations of the respective Persons are therefore official, and
must be referred to as originating in the covenant, in which the whole
scheme of agency and manifestation in the works of creation, providence,
and redemption, was founded. No such relations are to be conceived of as
existing eternally; for in their nature the respective Persons are
coequal. Subordination must have been voluntarily assumed for special
purposes and agencies which required it. When creatures were to be
brought into existence, relations not previously existing were
requisite; and as those relations to creatures required various agencies
of the respective Persons, new relations between them were requisite;
and these, being founded in compact, are properly termed _official_.
Accordingly, all Divine acts towards creatures are personal acts of the
Father, the Son, or the Holy Spirit. They act not as a unity in respect
to creatures.

Hence all the acts of the Son in the works of creation, providence, and
redemption, are ascribed to him in one and the same official Person and
delegated character, by whatever designations he may, in relation to
those works, be referred to; and it was accordingly in that character
that he appeared personally and visibly in the ancient dispensations;
assumed the human form, walked, conversed, and performed various actions
proper only to one in that form. The nature of his delegated
undertaking, and the objects of those dispensations, required such
local manifestations of his person and visible agency, and also that he
should speak to and of himself in the different aspects in which he then
appeared, and in which he exercised his prophetic office, in relation to
his future coming and his sacerdotal work. Thus he speaks of himself as
the Seed of the Woman, the Son of David, the King, the Saviour, the
Anointed, the Messenger, the Redeemer, the Holy One, the Branch, the
Shepherd, Immanuel.

This may be illustrated by referring to the New Testament, and
considering that the Divine and human natures being united in the Person
of the incarnate Word, whatever is true of either of those natures in
that union, is affirmed of him as a Person; and for aught that appears,
whatever is affirmed of his Divine nature in that Person is affirmed of
him in his official character, whether with reference to his preexistent
or to his incarnate state. Many things are said of him which are
predicable of his human nature only, but which nevertheless could not be
said if he was not both God and man in one Person. Thus it is said, that
he died for our sins--and that he rose for our justification. Other
things are said of the same Person, which are predicable only of his
Divine Nature; as that he came down from heaven, that he came forth from
God, and that he was in the beginning. Hence the propriety with which in
both the Old and New Testaments the various Divine names and titles are
applied to him, to designate the One Anointed, delegated--Person.

Since writing this work, the author has read the treatise of Dr. Isaac
Watts, entitled, "The Glory of Christ as God-Man," in which he describes
the visible appearances of Christ before his incarnation, inquires into
the extensive powers of his human nature in its present glorified state,
and endeavors to explain and illustrate the Scriptures which relate to
those appearances, and to the Person who under various divine names and
official designations visibly appeared, by supposing that the human soul
of Christ was created prior to the creation of the world, and
thenceforth, being united to the Second Person of the Godhead, appeared
and acted, visibly and otherwise, in all that related to this world.
There being no question but that the mediatorial Person created the
world, appeared visibly, and conducted the administration of the Old
Testament dispensations, there is, as might be anticipated, a degree of
plausibility in the reasonings and illustrations of this venerated
author. But many grave and unanswerable objections to his peculiar views
present themselves. It is not perceived that the supposition of the
preexistence of the human soul of Christ is either sustained by the
Scriptures, or has in any respect, as a means of explanation, any
advantage as compared with the view taken in this work, viz: that,
pursuant to a covenant between the Persons of the Godhead, the Second
Person assumed the official character and relations which are peculiar
to him as Mediator; those, viz: in which he executed the works of
creation and providence, and manifested himself under various Divine
names and official designations, as Jehovah, Elohim, the Messenger, the
Messiah; the official personal actor and revealer. To his Person in this
official character and agency the human nature was in due time united,
so as to include two natures in his one Person. But since the delegated
official Person, into union with which the human nature was taken,
preexisted, and as a Person was the same before as after the
incarnation, the acts of that Person in the delegated official
character and relations above referred to, were to the same effect, and
involved essentially the same conditions before as after the advent.
Since he undoubtedly acted as Mediator in the ancient dispensations, we
must, in reference to his agency then, ascribe to him what peculiarly
constituted and ever preeminently distinguishes that character, viz: its
being the delegated official character of a Divine Person. Regarded in
that light, there seems no more difficulty in ascribing visible
appearances and other acts suitable to his office in his relations to
men, prior to the assumption of human nature into union with his Person,
than after that union. The relations of his Person, in his delegated
official character, to creatures and material things, were the result,
not of the incarnation, nor of any occurrence after the commencement of
his delegated, subordinate, mediatorial work, but of his appointment to
that work, and must be regarded as coeval with that appointment. They
were the relations of the official, mediatorial Person; and for aught
that appears or is conceivable, rendered visible personal appearances in
the likeness of man, and the performance of acts, utterance of words,
&c., like those of man, as practicable before as after the addition of
human nature to that Person.

The views advanced by Dr. Watts proceed upon the assumption that two
distinct _persons_ were united; whereas it was two distinct _natures_ that
were united in one Person. That Person existed before the human nature was
added to it. The nature added had no separate or distinct personality. It
became part of the preexisting Person. "He took it to be his own nature,
... causing it to subsist in his own Person," says Owen. The Logos, the
personal Word or Revealer, the delegated Official Person or Mediator, who
"was in the beginning and was God, was made flesh and dwelt among us."
John i. "He took not on him the nature of angels, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham." Heb. ii. 16. "He did not assume a nature from angels,
but he assumed a nature from the seed of Abraham." Syriac Text. "The Lord
Jesus Christ is God and man in one person. For there is supposed in these
words (Heb. i. 16) his preexistence in another nature than that which he
is said here to assume. He subsisted before, else he could not have taken
on him what he had not before. Gal. iv. 4; John i. 14; Tim. iii. 16; Phil.
ii. 6, 7. That is, ... the Word of God ... became incarnate. He took to
himself another nature, of the seed of Abraham according to the promise;
so, continuing what he was, he became what he was not; for he took this to
be his own nature ... by taking that nature into personal subsistence with
himself, in the hypostasis [substance or subsistence] of the Son of God;
seeing the nature he assumed could no otherwise become his. For if he had
by any ways or means taken the person of a man in the strictest union that
two persons are capable of, in that case the nature had still been the
nature of that other person, and not his own. But he took it to be his own
nature, which, therefore, must be by a personal union, causing it to
subsist in his own person.... This is done without a multiplication of
persons in him; for the human nature can have no personality of its own,
because it was taken to be the nature of another person who was
preexistent to it, and by assuming it, prevented its proper personality."
(Owen on the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. ii. 16.)

"Christ is the Jehovah whose dominion is proclaimed, [Psalm xcvii.,] who
is declared to be the God whom men and angels are bound to serve and
worship. Such is He who for our deliverance condescended to assume our
nature.... For thus it seems the matter stood in the counsels of Eternal
Wisdom: It behooved Him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might
be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining unto God, to
make reconciliation for the sins of the people." (Horsley's Sermon on
the 97th Psalm.) That is: It behooved Him, the Christ, Jehovah in the
preexisting official Person, to assume our nature.




CHAPTER XII.

    Local and visible Manifestations, Intercourse and Instructions
    as characterizing the primeval and Mosaic Dispensations--Local
    Presence of the Messenger Jehovah in the Tabernacle.


It being evident that the Messiah appeared to the patriarchs in a
visible form, that they recognized him under various designations, saw
him face to face, conversed with him, offered to him burnt offerings and
prayers, believed in him with that faith which is unto righteousness,
received from him revelations, promises, and covenants, and in all the
aspects and relations in which he appeared, regarded him as their God
and the God of providence and grace, their Creator, Preserver, Lawgiver,
and Ruler, it is safe to conclude that this method of personal and
visible manifestation and intercourse was a primary and essential
characteristic of that dispensation. If the instances of such personal
appearance and intercourse in which minute details are recorded, as in
that to Abraham in the plain of Mamre, and that to Jacob at Peni-El,
are not greatly multiplied, they are yet sufficiently numerous,
considered in connection with the occasions, circumstances and
expressions by which other instances are distinguished, to warrant us in
supposing the frequent occurrence of like manifestations to the same
individuals, and to many others of whose personal history no extended
details are recorded, and many others of whom nothing, or nothing except
their names, is mentioned. Moreover, when Moses wrote, such visible
manifestations were familiar to the Israelites, and in his retrospective
history no more required to be specially mentioned, except as incidents
interwoven with, and inseparable from, the personal narratives of the
past, than full details respecting sacrificial offerings, their typical
references, the law of the Sabbath, and other matters, which were in
like manner familiar, and constituted the essential elements of their
religious system.

There is ground to conclude that this mode of manifestation was coeval
with the creation; and that, if there had been no apostasy of man, He
"for whom are all things, and by whom are all things," would have
continued visibly and constantly present with the race on earth, as he
will be after he shall have destroyed the last enemy, and obviated the
consequences of the fall. At that predicted restitution, a condition of
things like that which preceded the defection is to be realized; when he
is to dwell with men--their God.

The New Testament clearly ascertains to us that he was personally the
Creator. The style and manner in which he spoke and acted, as recorded by
Moses in his account of the creation, and in his primeval intercourse with
Adam, coincides in familiarity, and may be described as homogeneous, with
that employed on occasions of his visible manifestations to Abraham,
Jacob, and others. When he said, "Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness," it may well be presumed that, among other things, he had
reference to that visible form in which he was thenceforth frequently
recognized, and in which he at length became incarnate, and will hereafter
be seen by every eye.

As instances of the appropriateness of what he said to a person locally
present, and speaking and acting as a man would naturally do, the
following are referred to: "He _saw_ every thing that he had made, and
behold, it was very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth
day. And on the seventh day, having ended his work, he _rested_, and
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; because that in it he had
_rested_ from all his work which Elohim created and made." Such
references to time and place imply an actor having coincident relations.
Again, "He planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man
whom he had formed, and commanded him, saying, Of every tree of the
garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil." After the transgression, the same local references, and the
like familiarity, and implication of his personal presence, are
continued: "And they heard the voice"--according to Owen and others, the
WORD--"of Jehovah Elohim, _walking_ in the garden; and Adam and his wife
hid themselves from _the presence_"--literally, _the face_--"of Jehovah
Elohim, amongst the trees of the garden. And Jehovah Elohim called unto
Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? And he said, I heard thy voice,
and I was afraid, and I hid myself." These passages seem to be
demonstrative of the local personal presence of the Divine speaker, as
clearly as of that of the guilty couple. They heard him in the garden,
and to avoid meeting or being met by him, they hid themselves among the
trees. This would have been to no purpose, had he not been locally, but
only spiritually present. They heard him walking, and having retreated
to a covert for concealment, he called to Adam; acts which, in a plain,
literal narrative, imply a local personal presence.

If on this occasion, when the delinquent parties were successively
arraigned and questioned, and the sentence of condemnation was
pronounced in words addressed personally to each, he was locally
present, the otherwise seeming paradox, that the same style and manner
of address to the subtle adversary should be employed as to Adam,
disappears. So the words addressed to Cain can hardly be thought to have
been literally spoken, but upon the supposition that the Divine speaker
was locally present, and that his presence was matter of previous and
familiar recognition to Cain. A like inference may be made from the
statement that Elohim came to Abimelech, and spake to him in a dream,
and from his address to Jehovah, Gen. xx.; and also from the statement
that Elohim came to Laban in a dream, and his mention of the fact, and
of the caution he renewed to Jacob, Gen. xxxi.

Nor is there in any respect any thing improbable in the supposition that
he was locally and visibly present in the likeness of man at that
period, any more than at subsequent periods. On the contrary, the
statement (John i. 1) that the WORD--the delegated Person who in due
time assumed our nature and was visibly on earth--_was_ in the
beginning, and created all things, implies that he was then recognized
in his official character, which implies relations and acts of which
place and visibility were indispensable conditions. Such must
undoubtedly have been the case when he was seen, if not uniformly when
his voice was heard. He may have been often locally present when, though
heard, he was not seen. Such, with respect to Daniel's companions, was
the case in his vision, chap. x. He saw one in the form of man, whose
face was as the appearance of lightning, and heard his words; but the
men that were with him saw not the vision. And when Paul saw his person
so unequivocally as to constitute him a witness of his resurrection, the
men accompanying him heard his voice, but saw him not. When it is simply
said that he appeared to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or others, and the
narrative proceeds to relate what he said, and what answers were made,
the language plainly implies his local personal presence, though no
mention is made of his being seen. The occasions and objects of his
appearance in such instances were, so far as we can judge, as important
and as appropriate to such local and visible manifestations, as those in
relation to which it is expressly recorded that he was seen in the
likeness of man.

The primeval and Levitical dispensations were specially characterized by
visible manifestations, acts, rites and events, embodying, enforcing,
and illustrating the great truths which were revealed. Thus, on the part
of man, the first prohibition enjoined upon Adam, besides its reference
to his will, had relation to an external and visible act, and an
external and visible object, the fruit of a particular tree. The ritual
of worship prescribing, among other offerings, that of slaughtered
animals on an altar, the observance of the Sabbath, the long list of
fasts, feasts, convocations, ordinances, rites and ceremonies, and most
of the injunctions and prohibitions of the moral law, had respect to
outward and visible acts. And on the other hand, the Divine Lawgiver
and Ruler manifested himself visibly, announced his revelations and
commands in audible words, distinguished the righteous generally by
outward prosperity, long life, and numerous descendants, and the wicked
by opposite evils, or by special calamities and judgments manifest to
public observation. By this method, the personality, the attributes and
perfections, the prerogatives and rights, the holiness, faithfulness,
mercy and truth of Jehovah, were not only exhibited to the view of all
intelligent creatures, fallen and unfallen, but were exhibited in such
relations to accountable creatures, in their various circumstances, and
in their connections with laws, covenants, promises, and predictions, as
to lead unmistakably to a right apprehension of them, and a right
apprehension of the conduct of men in view of them; results which, so
far as we can judge, could have been produced in no other way, unless by
endowing creatures with omniscience, or with plenary inspiration. For,
from their nature as created, finite and dependent agents, their
thoughts, apprehensions and inferences are successive, and all the
knowledge of external things which they acquire otherwise than by
inspiration, they acquire by means of their external senses; seeing
visible objects, hearing audible sounds, &c. Those to whom these divine
manifestations, personal, visible, and audible, were first made, had no
prototypes, precedents or analogies, to assist them in gaining right
apprehensions, and deducing just conclusions, had the method of
instruction been that merely of announcements, from an invisible source,
of abstract propositions. But by the method actually adopted,
prototypes, precedents and analogies were furnished, which, being
recorded in the relations and historical connections in which they
occurred and were observed, serve effectually for the instruction of
those to whom similar outward and visible manifestations are not
vouchsafed.

On the other hand, by the method taken, the nature, deserts, and
consequences of sin were unmistakably shown, by its being embodied and
publicly exhibited in visible acts and their consequences. Thus the
transgression of Adam, regarded in its connection with the prohibition
which had been emphatically enjoined, with his arraignment, and the
sentence pronounced upon him, and with his expulsion from Eden, and the
curse and blight visibly produced upon the earth on which he was doomed
to toil for a subsistence, and at length to decline and die, furnished
illustrations of the indescribable turpitude of his apostasy, and of the
moral and physical evils that were among its just and legitimate
