confer. It is incongruous with every idea of episcopal government.
That authority which confers power can, for proper reasons, take
it away. But where there is no authority to confer power, there
can be none to disannul it. Wherever, therefore, the power of
ordination is lodged, the power of deprivation is lodged also."
Concerning the absolute irrecognition of the Episcopate, as
entitled to any share in either legislation or discipline, by the
Constitution of 1785, I need only cite, again, the bishop's words:
"In so essential a matter as Church government is, no alterations
should be made that affect its foundation. If a man be called a
bishop who has not the episcopal powers of government, he is
called by a wrong name, even though he should have the power of
ordination and confirmation."

The position assumed by our first bishop in regard to both these
matters was justified and sustained by the action of this Church
in 1789, when the Constitution, as amended, was made to provide
for a House of Bishops, "with power to originate and propose
acts," and also for the administration of discipline by the
Episcopate alone. This was the Constitution to which--"on a dingy
half sheet of paper"--Bishop Seabury and Drs. Jarvis and Hubbard,
as representatives from Connecticut, and Dr. Parker, as deputy
from Massachusetts and New Hampshire, set their hands in October,
1789, and by their act effected the consolidation of our Church.

I will not say that a victory was thus gained, for it was not
victory that was sought. But we may say that something far better
than a victory was attained, in that a great principle was
accepted. Nor has the lapse of time raised any doubt as to the
rightfulness and wisdom of the acceptance. [Footnote: It is worth
while to state the steps by which final action was reached:

1. The Constitution adopted in 1785 took no account of the
Episcopate as a possible component part of the General Convention.
In 1786 provision was made that "a bishop should always preside in
General Convention, if any of the episcopal order were present."
In August, 1789, it was agreed, with certain limitations and
restrictions, that "the bishops of this Church, when there shall
be three or more, shall, whenever a General Convention shall be
held, form a _House of Revision;_ and when any proposed act
shall have passed in the _General Convention_, the same shall
be transmitted to the _House of Revision_ for their concurrence."
Obviously the House of Revision is not here regarded as
a component part of the General Convention. Finally, in
October, 1789, it was ordered that "the bishops of this Church,
when there shall be three or more, shall, whenever General
Conventions are held, form a separate house, _with a right to
originate and propose acts_ for the concurrence of _the House
of Deputies_, composed of clergy and laity." Certain restrictions,
which have since been modified, were added. But clearly
the great principle contended for by Bishop Seabury and
those who acted with him is here admitted.

2. As to the other point insisted on: In 1785, article viii. of
the Constitution read: "Every clergyman, whether bishop or
presbyter or deacon, shall be amenable to the authority of the
convention in the State to which he belongs, so far as relates to
suspension or removal from office; and the convention in each
State shall institute rules for their conduct, and an equitable
mode of trial." Here there is not even an allusion to the
Episcopate, and each convention is recognized as absolutely
supreme. In June, 1786, the following sentence was added to
article viii. of 1785: "And at every trial of a bishop there shall
be one or more of the episcopal order present, and none but a
bishop shall pronounce sentence of deposition or degradation from
the ministry on any clergyman, whether bishop, presbyter, or
deacon." Here is an advance in the right direction. In August,
1789, the first sentence of the foregoing article disappears, and
in its place we read: "In every State the mode of trying clergymen
shall be instituted by the convention of the Church therein." The
last sentence of the article remains unchanged, and the second
principle contended for is accepted.]

While the years between 1785 and 1789, with their discussions,
doubts, and difficulties, were wearing away, the general
acceptance of the great principles on which I have been dwelling
seemed always uncertain, and sometimes hopeless. Steps were
accordingly taken to provide for a possible emergency of
rejection--an emergency which cannot be contemplated without a
shudder. It was decided in the convocation which met at
Wallingford in February, 1787, to send, should it become
necessary, a "presbyter to Scotland for consecration, as coadjutor
to Dr. Seabury." The purpose no doubt was, should such necessity
arise, to secure the number of bishops canonically requisite to
continue the succession. It was wise to provide for all
contingencies; but it was equally wise, and as much a matter of
duty, to take no actual steps till contingencies arose, and,
meantime, to make all possible endeavors to avert them. The
prudent counsels of the Scottish bishops, and the conciliatory and
patient action of Bishop White on the one side and Bishop Seabury
on the other, did avert the contingency; and by the year 1789 all
danger of the separation, so much feared and deprecated, had
passed away. It was of God's good providence that, in the General
Convention of that most memorable year, 1789, there was found in
the House of Bishops no root of bitterness, no disturbing element
growing out of political prejudice or personal animosity. When, on
the fifth day of October, the House was, for the first time,
constituted, Bishops Seabury and White composed its membership.

The great subject which occupied the attention of the bishops, as
well as that of the House of Deputies, was the Book of Common
Prayer. This is neither the time nor the place to speak at length
of what was then accomplished. But I must not omit to state, even
at the risk of saying what is familiar to us all, that in that
book, as we then received and still have it, the Order of the Holy
Communion stands--and, please God, will ever stand--the great
memorial of Seabury's share in framing our sacred offices, the
memorial, also, of the faithfulness with which, if not in the very
letter, yet substantially and in spirit, he redeemed the pledge
which he had given in the Concordate. Let me also add Bishop
White's own words touching the intercourse--for in a house
consisting of two members, one can hardly speak of debates--of
himself and his brother of Connecticut. He says: "To this day are
there recollected with satisfaction the hours which were spent
with Bishop Seabury on the important subjects which came before
them, and especially the Christian temper which he manifested all
along." For the results of that memorable Convention, in which so
much was gained--may we not say so little lost?--we are mainly
indebted, under the overruling wisdom of the Holy Spirit, to the
stedfast gentleness of Bishop White and the gentle stedfastness of
Bishop Seabury.

And here, since mention has been already made of Seabury's work in
his own diocese, and of his departure, when "he was not found"
because God had taken him, this historical review may end. Does it
not tell what he was? Does it not clearly reveal his character? If
it does not, then no words of mine can do it. Strong in faith,
patient in hope, humble and self-sacrificing in charity, he stands
out as a man "that had understanding of the times to know what
Israel ought to do"; as a builder able to "revive the stones out
of the heaps of the rubbish which were burned"; as a wise ruler
who "fed" those over whom the Holy Ghost had made him an overseer,
"according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the
skilfulness of his hands." Therefore for him and for his work, we
praise and magnify God's holy Name!

I cannot close without some mention of two scenes, in both of
which it was my privilege to share, More than fifty years had
passed since our first bishop was borne to his grave. In the town
in which, during his entire Episcopate, he had fulfilled the
lowlier duties of a parish priest, a stately church had replaced
the humble temple in which he ministered, and it was felt in all
our borders that under its altar his honored remains should find
their final resting-place. Reverently gathered, they were carried
by the clergy through crowded streets, and laid down where we
trust they may abide till the judgment of the great day.[Footnote:
"Ut in loco quietis ultimo usque ad magni diei judicium," are the
words of the epitaph on the altar-tomb in St. James's Church, New
London.] As we stood around his sepulchre there rose from every
lip the words of the symbol of Nicaea, for which he had striven so
faithfully, and which he had urged his clergy as faithfully to
teach, saying, in words which now seem prophetic, that he foresaw
the day when in New England there would come a widespread lapse
from the ancient faith. That was a scene which none who shared in
it can forget.

A hundred years had gone. In that city where he sought his
consecration to the Episcopate the little upper room had
disappeared, and six churches had arisen. In one of these, the
successor of the humble "oratory in the house of Bishop Skinner,"
there are gathered seventeen bishops and near two hundred clergy,
together with a vast congregation of the faithful. What do they
represent? Not what those who came together a century before had
represented; not one Church brought almost to the verge of
extinction, and another threatened with even deeper ruin. No! but
they represent a Church that has emerged from the darkness that
shrouded it in Scotland; a Church that has risen from what seemed
but shattered fragments in the United States; the great Mother
Church of England; the national Church of Ireland; and the
Churches in communion with them on the Continent of Europe, in the
dependencies and colonies of the empire of Great Britain, on this
Western Continent, in India, Australia, Southern Africa, and the
islands of the sea. "A little one has become a thousand, and a
small one a strong nation."

What has brought them together? Not merely to do honor to the
memory of one man or of several men, though their memories are
inseparably blended with the thoughts and associations of the
occasion. "In many centenaries the dominant interest is the
personal. The birthday of the 'monk that shook the world' is a
handy peg on which to hang the whole of his marvellous career, and
the massive personality of the man is never absent from view. But
in the consecration of Bishop Seabury the Churchman beholds, not
the preponderance of an individual, but the birthday of a Church.
The difference is suggestive, and illustrates the radical
divergence between the Catholic and the sectarian frame of mind.
When the ideal of the one Body of Christ is strongly realized, the
Church will overshadow the individual; when it is little
cherished, the individual will eclipse the Church. We may be
content to be of those who think that, as the State is greater
than its worthiest citizen, so the Church should take precedence
of its greatest member."[Footnote: These admirable words are
quoted from the Scottish Church Review for November, 1884, p.
749.] Who would have more gladly owned all this, who would have
been more thankful for it, than he who gave its name to that
centenary? For, indeed, it was this which swelled the tide of
emotion to its height. It was because of this that men felt in
their hearts, and said with their lips, "Glorious things are
spoken of thee, thou City of God."

One closing word, dear brethren, and the duty that from time to
time you have laid upon me will be accomplished; not as it should
have been, but as I have been able to accomplish it. The great
principles on which they of whom I have been speaking placed
themselves, are as lasting and as unchangeable as the everlasting
hills. The lines on which they wrought have borne the trial and
stood the test of all the Christian ages. Are we tempted, in a
spirit of self-sufficiency or of doubt or of impatience, to
forsake them? Then let us put the temptation firmly to one side.
Only by so doing shall we maintain for ourselves, and hand on to
others, who shall then in coming years rise up and call us
blessed, the precious deposit that has come down to us, and for
which we bless those who have gone before us. Christianity is not
_one of the religions of_ the world, but it is _the one_
_religion for_ the world. Jesus Christ, our Prophet, Priest,
and King, our sufficing Sacrifice and our living Lord, is not the
ideal man, the product of the growth, circumstances, and
conditions of one nation or of the whole human race, but He is the
"Son of God with power," miraculously conceived by the Holy Ghost,
miraculously born of the Virgin Mary, dying for our sins and
rising again for our justification. "A Christianity," I use the
words of Coleridge, "without a Church exercising spiritual
authority, is vanity and dissolution."[Footnote: _Aids to
Reflection_, p. 224, note (fourth edition).] The Church is not
an aggregation of persons agreeing in certain doctrines or
practices, but it is the "Body of Christ," perpetuated in
accordance with the laws of its organism. "The fellowship of
kindred minds" is not the Communion of saints. A certain
"continuity of Christian thought" is not the same thing as the
Faith once and forever given to the saints.

If we fling away these truths to which our predecessors clung so
firmly, if they who shall come after us fling them away, then on
us and on them will come the shame and the woe of making the well-
ordered "city of the living God," the walls of which are salvation
and its gates praise, to be "like a city that is broken down and
without walls." On the other hand, if we, and they who shall come
after us, hold them, teach them, act on them, then, and only then,
shall we and they, in very deed, "grow up into Him in all things,
Which is the Head, even Christ, from Whom the whole Body fitly
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
maketh increase of the Body unto the edifying of itself in love."

A SPECIAL service was held in the Church of the Holy Trinity,
Middletown, on the one-hundredth anniversary of the first
Ordination held by Bishop Seabury, August 3, 1885, at 11 o'clock
A. M. The processional hymn being ended, Bishop Williams began the
Communion-service, the Collect being that for St. Simon and St.
Jude's Day. The Epistle (that for St. Mark's Day) was read by the
Rev. Prof. Samuel Hart of Trinity College, and the Gospel (that
for St. Matthias's Day), by the Rev. Sylvester Clarke, Rector of
Trinity Church, Bridgeport. After the Creed, the Bishop delivered
this address:

The third of August, 1785, was a memorable day for this diocese
and for our whole Church. For the first time an American Bishop
was to hold an ordination in the United States. The event carries
us back, in thought, to Apostolic days. The first act of
ordination by the Apostles at Jerusalem, after the miracle of
Pentecost, was the laying on of hands upon the seven deacons. The
first ordination ministered by him who first bore the Apostolic
commission to this nation, was an ordination--not of seven indeed,
but of four--to the diaconate. The authority, the ministration,
and the order imparted were in both cases the same, separated
though the acts were by the great chasm of seventeen centuries. It
is good to commemorate such an event. It is right to commemorate
it in the place in which it occurred. Such a commemoration fitly
ends the series of centenary observances which we began in
Woodbury in the spring-tide of 1883. For the act of this day
certified our fathers that what they had sought and cried out for
through long and weary years was gained at last; that no longer
did three thousand miles of ocean separate them from the
possibility of admission to the "ministry of Christ, and the
stewardship of the mysteries of God."

Let me, first, say something of the place in which the service of
ordination, and all the services and acts connected with it, were
held. There stood, at that time, on what used to be called the
South Green in this city, a small wooden church known as Christ
Church. There are not many persons, probably, now living who
remember it, but a rough sketch of it, which has been preserved,
has given many who never saw it an idea at least of what it was.
It was not an altogether ungraceful building with its arched
windows--regarded by many in those days as indicating Romeward
tendencies--and its pointed spire. And it had nothing in common
with those hideous combinations of packing-box and Grecian
portico, which prevailed many years later on; but which decay and
fire and other merciful interferences and visitations have made
things of the past.

It had a story of its own, too--that old church--to tell; a story
of trial, perseverance, and success; a story exactly parallel to
that of the clergy, and especially the bishop, who came together
within its walls. About the middle of the last century, a number
of persons who, in the exercise of that "freedom to worship God,"
which has been claimed as the peculiar glory of New England, had
declared themselves to be attached to the Church of England,
petitioned the town authorities to grant them a piece of ground on
which they might erect a church. Their application was refused.
After a time it was renewed, and refused again. At last, a
building-place was granted them, the situation of which has just
been mentioned. It was a marshy spot, on which few persons
believed that any building could ever be erected. It is strangely
noticeable, however, that a great many things which never can be
done, are nevertheless somehow brought about, especially in the
progress of the Church. So it was here. Careful drainage overcame
