every virtue and who, for his splendour, could be gazed at with difficulty,
approached that forest resounding with the notes of maddened peacocks and
like unto the gardens of the great Gandharva, Chitraratha, himself. And
halting his army consisting of flags, cavalry, infantry, and elephants at
the entrance of the forest, the monarch spoke as follows, "I shall go to
behold the mighty ascetic of Kasyapa's race, one who is without darkness.
Stay ye here until my return!"

"'And the king having entered that forest which was like unto Indra's
garden, soon forgot his hunger and thirst. And he was pleased beyond
measure. And the monarch, laying aside all signs of royalty, entered that
excellent asylum with but his minister and his priest, desirous of
beholding that Rishi who was an indestructible mass of ascetic merit. And
the king saw that the asylum was like unto the region of Brahman. Here
were bees sweetly humming and there were winged warblers of various
species pouring forth their melodies. At particular places that tiger
among men heard the chanting of Rik hymns by first-rate Brahmanas
according to the just rules of intonation. Other places again were graced
with Brahmanas acquainted with ordinances of sacrifice, of the Angas and
of the hymns of the Yajurveda. Other places again were filled with the
harmonious strains of Saman hymns sung by vow-observing Rishis. At other
places the asylum was decked with Brahmanas learned in the Atharvan Veda.
At other places again Brahmanas learned in the Atharvan Veda and those
capable of chanting the sacrificial hymns of the Saman were reciting the
Samhitas according to the just rules of voice. And at other places again,
other Brahmanas well-acquainted with the science of orthoepy were reciting
mantras of other kinds. In fact, that sacred retreat resounding with these
holy notes was like unto a second region of Brahman himself. And there
were many Brahmanas skilled in the art of making sacrificial platforms and
in the rules of Krama in sacrifices, conversant with logic and the mental
sciences, and possessing a complete knowledge of the Vedas. There were
those also who were fully acquainted with the meanings of all kinds of
expressions; those that were conversant with all special rites, those also
that were followers of Moksha-Dharma; those again that were well-skilled
in establishing propositions, rejecting superfluous causes, and drawing
right conclusions. There were those having a knowledge of the science of
words (grammar), of prosody, of Nirukta; those again that were conversant
with astrology and learned in the properties of matter and the fruits of
sacrificial rites, possessing a knowledge of causes and effects, capable
of understanding the cries of birds and monkeys, well-read in large
treatises, and skilled in various sciences. And the king, as he proceeded,
heard their voices. And the retreat resounded also with voice of men
capable of charming human hearts. And the slayer of hostile heroes also
saw around him learned Brahmanas of rigid vows engaged in Japa (the
repeated muttering of the names of gods) and Homa (burnt-offering). And
the king wondered much on beholding the beautiful carpets which those
Brahmanas offered to him respectfully. And that best of monarchs, at the
sight of the rites with which those Brahmanas worshipped the gods and the
great Rishis, thought within himself that he was in the region of Brahman.
And the more the king saw that auspicious and sacred asylum of Kasyapa
protected by that Rishi's ascetic virtues and possessing all the
requisites of a holy retreat, the more he desired to see it. In fact, he
was not satisfied with his short survey. And the slayer of heroes at last,
accompanied by his minister and his priest, entered that charming and
sacred retreat of Kasyapa inhabited all around by Rishis of ascetic wealth
and exalted vows.'"


SECTION LXXI

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'The monarch then, as he proceeded, left even his
reduced retinue at the entrance of the hermitage. And entering quite alone
he saw not the Rishi (Kanwa) of rigid vows. And not seeing the Rishi and
finding that the abode was empty, he called loudly, saying, "What ho, who
is here?" And the sound of his voice was echoed back. And hearing the
sound of his voice, there came out of the Rishi's abode a maiden beautiful
as Sri herself but dressed as an ascetic's daughter. And the black-eyed
fair one, as she saw king Dushmanta, bade him welcome and received him
duly. And, showing him due respect by the offer of a seat, water to wash
his feet, and Arghya, she enquired about the monarch's health and peace.
And having worshipped the king and asked him about his health and peace,
the maiden reverentially asked, "What must be done, O king! I await your
commands." The king, duly worshipped by her, said unto that maiden of
faultless features and sweet speech, "I have come to worship the highly-
blessed Rishi Kanwa. Tell me, O amiable and beautiful one, where has the
illustrious Rishi gone?"

"'Sakuntala then answered, "My illustrious father hath gone away from the
asylum to fetch fruit. Wait but a moment and thou wilt see him when he
arrives."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The king not seeing the Rishi and addressed thus
by her, beheld that the maiden was exceedingly beautiful and endued with
perfect symmetry of shape. And he saw that she was of sweet smiles. And
she stood decked with the beauty of her faultless features, her ascetic
penances, and her humility. And he saw that she was in the bloom of youth.
He therefore asked her, "Who art thou? And whose daughter, O beautiful
one? Why hast thou come into the woods also? O handsome one, gifted with
so much beauty and such virtues, whence hast thou come? O charming one, at
the very first glance hast thou stolen my heart! I desire to learn all
about thee; therefore tell me all." And thus addressed by the monarch, the
maiden smilingly replied in these sweet words, "O Dushmanta, I am the
daughter of the virtuous, wise, high-souled, and illustrious ascetic
Kanwa."

"'Dushmanta, hearing this, replied, "The universally-worshipped and highly-
blessed Rishi is one whose seed hath been drawn up. Even Dharma himself
might fall off from his course but an ascetic of rigid vows can never fall
off so. Therefore, O thou of the fairest complexion, how hast thou been
born as his daughter? This great doubt of mine it behoveth thee to
dispel."

"'Sakuntala then replied, "Hear, O king, what I have learnt regarding all
that befell me of old and how I became the daughter of the Muni. Once on a
time, a Rishi came here and asked about my birth. All that the illustrious
one (Kanwa) told him, hear now from me, O king!

"'"My father Kanwa, in answer to that Rishi's enquiries, said, 'Viswamitra,
of old, having been engaged in the austerest penances alarmed Indra, the
chief of the celestials, who thought that the mighty ascetic of blazing
energy would, by his penances, hurl him down from his high seat in heaven.
Indra, thus alarmed, summoned Menaka and told her, "Thou, O Menaka, art
the first of celestial Apsaras. Therefore, O amiable one, do me this
service. Hear what I say. This great ascetic Viswamitra like unto the Sun
in splendour, is engaged in the most severe of penances. My heart is
trembling with fear. Indeed, O slender-waisted Menaka, this is thy
business. Thou must see that Viswamitra of soul rapt in contemplation and
engaged in the austerest penances, who might hurl me down from my seat. Go
and tempt him and frustrating his continued austerities accomplish my good.
Win him away from his penances, O beautiful one, by tempting him with thy
beauty, youth, agreeableness, arts, smiles and speech." Hearing all this,
Menaka replied, "The illustrious Viswamitra is endued with great energy
and is a mighty ascetic. He is very short-tempered too, as is known to
thee. The energy, penances, and wrath of the high-souled one have made
even thee anxious. Why should I not also be anxious? He it was who made
even the illustrious Vasishtha bear the pangs of witnessing the premature
death of his children. He it was who, though at first born as Kshatriya,
subsequently became a Brahmana by virtue of his ascetic penances. He it
was who, for purposes of his ablutions, created a deep river that can with
difficulty be forded, and which sacred stream is known by the name of the
Kausiki. It was Viswamitra whose wife, in a season of distress, was
maintained by the royal sage Matanga (Trisanku) who was then living under
a father's curse as a hunter. It was Viswamitra who, on returning after
the famine was over, changed the name of the stream having his asylum from
Kausik into Para. It was Viswamitra who in return for the services of
Matanga, himself became the latter's priest for purposes of a sacrifice.
The lord of the celestials himself went through fear to drink the Soma
juice. It was Viswamitra who in anger created a second world and numerous
stars beginning with Sravana. He it was who granted protection to Trisanku
smarting under a superior's curse. I am frightened to approach him of such
deeds. Tell me, O Indra, the means that should be adopted so that I may
not be burnt by his wrath. He can burn the three worlds by his splendour,
can, by a stamp (of his foot), cause the earth to quake. He can sever the
great Meru from the earth and hurl it to any distance. He can go round the
ten points of the earth in a moment. How can a woman like me even touch
such a one full of ascetic virtues, like unto a blazing fire, and having
his passions under complete control? His mouth is like unto a blazing fire;
the pupils of his eyes are like the Sun and the Moon; his tongue is like
unto Yama himself. How shall, O chief of the celestials, a woman like me
even touch him? At the thought of his prowess Yama, Soma, the great Rishis,
the Saddhyas, the Viswas, Valakhilyas, are terrified! How can a woman like
me gaze at him without alarm? Commanded, however, by thee, O king of the
celestials, I shall somehow approach that Rishi. But, O chief of the gods,
devise thou some plan whereby protected by thee, I may safely move about
that Rishi. I think that when I begin to play before the Rishi, Marut (the
god of wind) had better go there and rob me of my dress, and Manmatha (the
god of love) had also, at thy command, better help me then. Let also Marut
on that occasion bear thither fragrance from the woods to tempt the
Rishi." Saying this and seeing that all she had spoken about had been
duly provided, Menaka went to the retreat of the great Kausika.'"'


SECTION LXXII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'"Kanwa continued, 'And Sakra, thus addressed by her, then commanded him
who could approach every place (viz., the god of the wind) to be present
with Menaka at the time she would be before the Rishi. And the timid and
beautiful Menaka then entered the retreat and saw there Viswamitra who had
burnt, by his penances, all his sins, and was engaged still in ascetic
penances. And saluting the Rishi, she then began to sport before him. And
just at that time Marut robbed her of her garments that were white as the
Moon. And she thereupon ran, as if in great bashfulness, to catch hold of
her attire, and as if she was exceedingly annoyed with Marut. And she did
all this before the very eyes of Viswamitra who was endued with energy
like that of fire. And Viswamitra saw her in that attitude. And beholding
her divested of her robes, he saw that she was of faultless feature. And
that best of Munis saw that she was exceedingly handsome, with no marks of
age on her person. And beholding her beauty and accomplishments that bull
amongst Rishis was possessed with lust and made a sign that he desired her
companionship. And he invited her accordingly, and she also of faultless
features expressed her acceptance of the invitation. And they then passed
a long time there in each other's company. And sporting with each other,
just as they pleased, for a long time as if it were only a single day, the
Rishi begat on Menaka a daughter named Sakuntala. And Menaka (as her
conception advanced) went to the banks of the river Malini coursing along
a valley of the charming mountains of Himavat. And there she gave birth to
that daughter. And she left the new-born infant on the bank of that river
and went away. And beholding the new-born infant lying in that forest
destitute of human beings but abounding with lions and tigers, a number of
vultures sat around to protect it from harm. No Rakshasas or carnivorous
animals took its life. Those vultures protected the daughter of Menaka. I
went there to perform my ablution and beheld the infant lying in the
solitude of the wilderness surrounded by vultures. Bringing her hither I
have made her my daughter. Indeed, the maker of the body, the protector of
life, the giver of food, are all three, fathers in their order, according
to the scriptures. And because she was surrounded in the solitude of the
wilderness, by Sakuntas (birds), therefore, hath she been named by me
Sakuntala (bird-protected). O Brahman, learn that it is thus that
Sakuntala hath become my daughter. And the faultless Sakuntala also
regards me as her father.'

"'"This is what my father had said unto the Rishi, having been asked by
him. O king of men, it is thus that thou must know I am the daughter of
Kanwa. And not knowing my real father, I regard Kanwa as my father. Thus
have I told thee, O king, all that hath been heard by me regarding my
birth!"'"


SECTION LXXIII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana continued, 'King Dushmanta, hearing all this, said, "Well-
spoken, O princess, this that thou hast said! Be my wife, O beautiful one!
What shall I do for thee? Golden garlands, robes, ear-rings of gold, white
and handsome pearls, from various countries, golden coins, finest carpets,
I shall present thee this very day. Let the whole of my kingdom be thine
today, O beautiful one! Come to me, O timid one, wedding me, O beautiful
one, according to the Gandharva form. O thou of tapering thighs, of all
forms of marriage, the Gandharva one is regarded as the first."

"'Sakuntala, hearing this, said, "O king, my father hath gone away from
this asylum to bring fruit. Wait but a moment; he will bestow me on thee."

"'Dushmanta replied, "O beautiful and faultless one, I desire that thou
shouldst be my life's companion. Know thou that I exist for thee, and my
heart is in thee. One is certainly one's own friend, and one certainly may
depend upon one's own self. Therefore, according to the ordinance, thou
canst certainly bestow thyself. There are, in all, eight kinds of
marriages. These are Brahma, Daiva, Arsha, Prajapatya, Asura, Gandharva,
Rakshasa, and Paisacha, the eighth. Manu, the son of the self-create, hath
spoken of the appropriateness of all these forms according to their order.
Know, O faultless one, that the first four of these are fit for Brahmanas,
and the first six for Kshatriyas. As regards kings, even the Rakshasa form
is permissible. The Asura form is permitted to Vaisyas and Sudras. Of the
first five the three are proper, the other two being improper. The
Paisacha and the Asura forms should never be practised. These are the
institutes of religion, and one should act according to them. The
Gandharva and the Rakshasa form are consistent with the practices of
Kshatriyas. Thou needst not entertain the least fear. There is not the
least doubt that either according to any one of these last-mentioned forms,
or according to a union of both of them, our wedding may take place. O
thou of the fairest complexion, full of desire I am, thou also in a
similar mood mayst become my wife according to the Gandharva form."

"'Sakuntala, having listened to all this, answered, "If this be the course
sanctioned by religion, if, indeed, I am my own disposer, hear, O thou
foremost one of Puru's race, what my terms are. Promise truly to give me
what I ask thee. The son that shall be begotten on me shall become thy
heir-apparent. This, O king, is my fixed resolve. O Dushmanta, if thou
grant this, then let our union take place."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The monarch, without taking time to consider at
once told her, "Let it be so. I will even take thee, O thou of agreeable
smiles, with me to my capital. I tell thee truly. O beautiful one, thou
deservest all this." And so saying, that first of kings wedded the
handsome Sakuntala of graceful gait, and knew her as a husband. And
assuring her duly, he went away, telling her repeatedly, "I shall send
thee, for thy escort, my troops of four classes. Indeed, it is even thus
that I shall take thee to my capital, O thou of sweet smiles!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'O Janamejaya, having promised so unto her, the
king went away. And as he retraced his way homewards, he began to think of
Kasyapa. And he asked himself, "What will the illustrious ascetic say,
after he has known all?" Thinking of this, he entered his capital.

"'The moment the king had left, Kanwa arrived at his abode. But Sakuntala,
from a sense of shame, did not go out to receive her father. That great
ascetic, however, possessed of spiritual knowledge, knew all. Indeed
beholding everything with his spiritual eye, the illustrious one was
pleased, and addressing her, said, "Amiable one, what hath been done by
thee today in secret, without having waited for me--viz., intercourse
with a man--hath not been destructive of thy virtue. Indeed, union
according to the Gandharva form, of a wishful woman with a man of sensual
desire, without mantras of any kind, it is said, is the best for
Kshatriyas. That best of men, Dushmanta, is also high-souled and virtuous.
Thou hast, O Sakuntala, accepted him for thy husband. The son that shall
be born of thee shall be mighty and illustrious in this world. And he
shall have sway over the sea. And the forces of that illustrious king of
kings, while he goeth out against his foes shall be irresistible."

"'Sakuntala then approached her fatigued father and washed his feet. And
taking down the load he had with him and placing the fruits in proper
order, she told him, "It behoveth thee to give thy grace to that Dushmanta
whom I have accepted for my husband, as well as his ministers!"

"'Kanwa replied, "O thou of the fairest complexion, for thy sake I am
inclined to bless him. But receive from me, O blessed one, the boon that
thou desirest."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Sakuntala, thereupon, moved by desire of
benefiting Dushmanta, asked the boon that the Paurava monarchs might ever
be virtuous and never deprived of their thrones.'"


SECTION LXXIV

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'After Dushmanta had left the asylum having made those
promises unto Sakuntala, the latter of tapering thighs brought forth a boy
of immeasurable energy. And when the child was three years old, he became
in splendour like the blazing fire. And, O Janamejaya, he was possessed of
beauty and magnanimity and every accomplishment. And that first of
virtuous men, Kanwa, caused all the rites of religion to be performed in
respect of that intelligent child thriving day by day. And the boy gifted
with pearly teeth and shining locks, capable of slaying lions even then,
with all auspicious signs on his palm, and broad expansive forehead, grew
up in beauty and strength. And like unto a celestial child in splendour,
he began to grow up rapidly. And when he was only six years of age, endued
with great strength he used to seize and bind to the trees that stood
around that asylum, lions and tigers and bears and buffaloes and elephants.
And he rode on some animals, and pursued others in sportive mood. The
dwellers at Kanwa's asylum thereupon bestowed on him a name. And they said,
because he seizes and restrains an animals however strong, let him be
called Sarvadamana (the subduer of all). And it was thus that the boy came
to be named Sarvadamana, endued as he was with prowess, and energy and
strength. And the Rishi seeing the boy and marking also his extraordinary
acts, told Sakuntala that the time had come for his installation as the
heir-apparent. And beholding the strength of the boy, Kanwa commanded his
disciples, saying, "Bear ye without delay this Sakuntala with her son from
this abode to that of her husband, blessed with every auspicious sign.
Women should not live long in the houses of their paternal or maternal
relations. Such residence is destructive of their reputation, their good
conduct, their virtue. Therefore, delay not in bearing her hence." These
disciples of the Rishi thereupon, saying "So be it," went towards the city
named after an elephant (Hastinapura) with Sakuntala and her son ahead of
them. And then she of fair eye-brows, taking with her that boy of
celestial beauty, endued with eyes like lotus petals, left the woods where
she had been first known by Dushmanta. And having approached the king, she
with her boy resembling in splendour the rising sun was introduced to him.
And the disciples of the Rishi having introduced her, returned to the
asylum. And Sakuntala having worshipped the king according to proper form,
told him, "This is thy son, O king! Let him be installed as thy heir-
apparent. O king, this child, like unto a celestial, hath been begotten by
thee upon me. Therefore, O best of men, fulfil now the promise thou gavest
me. Call to mind, O thou of great good fortune, the agreement thou hadst
made on the occasion of thy union with me in the asylum of Kanwa."

"'The king, hearing these her words, and remembering everything said, "I
do not remember anything. Who art thou, O wicked woman in ascetic guise?
I do not remember having any connection with thee in respect of Dharma,
Kama and Arthas. Go or stay or do as thou pleasest." Thus addressed by
him, the fair-coloured innocent one became abashed. Grief deprived her
of consciousness and she stood for a time like an wooden post. Soon,
however, her eyes became red like copper and her lips began to quiver.
And the glances she now and then cast upon the king seemed to burn the
latter. Her rising wrath however, and the fire of her asceticism, she
extinguished within herself by an extraordinary effort. Collecting her
thoughts in a moment, her heart possessed with sorrow and rage, she thus
addressed her lord in anger, looking at him, "Knowing everything, O
monarch, how thou, like an inferior person, thus say that thou knowest
it not? Thy heart is a witness to the truth or falsehood of this matter.
Therefore, speak truly without degrading thyself. He who being one thing
representeth himself as another thing to others, is like a thief and a
robber of his own self. Of what sin is he not capable? Thou thinkest
that thou alone hast knowledge of thy deed. But knowest thou not that
the Ancient, Omniscient one (Narayana) liveth in thy heart? He knoweth
all thy sins, and thou sinnest in His presence. He that sins thinks that
none observes him. But he is observed by the gods and by Him also who is
in every heart. The Sun, the Moon, the Air, the Fire, the Earth, the
Sky, Water, the heart, Yama, the day, the night, both twilights, and
Dharma, all witness the acts of man. Yama, the son of Surya, takes no
account of the sins of him with whom Narayana the witness of all acts,
is gratified. But he with whom Narayana is not gratified is tortured for
his sins by Yama. Him who degradeth himself by representing his self
falsely, the gods never bless. Even his own soul blesseth him not. I am
a wife devoted to my husband. I have come of my own accord, it is true.
But do not, on that account, treat me with disrespect. I am thy wife
and, therefore, deserve to be treated respectfully. Wilt thou not treat
me so, because I have come hither of my own accord? In the presence of
so many, why dost thou treat me like an ordinary woman? I am not
certainly crying in the wilderness. Dost thou not hear me? But if thou
refuse to do what I supplicate thee for, O Dushmanta, thy head this
moment shall burst into a hundred pieces! The husband entering the womb
of the wife cometh out himself in the form of the son. Therefore is the
wife called by those cognisant of the Vedas as Jaya (she of whom one is
born). And the son that is so born unto persons cognisant of the Vedic
Mantras rescueth the spirits of deceased ancestors. And because the son
rescueth ancestors from the hell called Put, therefore, hath he been
called by the Self-create himself as Puttra (the rescuer from Put). By a
son one conquereth the three worlds. By a son's son, one enjoyeth
eternity. And by a grandson's son great-grand-fathers enjoy everlasting
happiness. She is a true wife who is skilful in household affairs. She
is a true wife who hath borne a son. She is a true wife whose heart is
devoted to her lord. She is a true wife who knoweth none but her lord.
The wife is a man's half. The wife is the first of friends. The wife is
the root of religion, profit, and desire. The wife is the root of
salvation. They that have wives can perform religious acts. They that
have wives can lead domestic lives. They that have wives have the means
to be cheerful. They that have wives can achieve good fortune.
Sweet-speeched wives are friends on occasions of joy. They are as
fathers on occasions of religious acts. They are mothers in sickness and
woe. Even in the deep woods to a traveller a wife is his refreshment and
solace. He that hath a wife is trusted by all. A wife, therefore, is
one's most valuable possession. Even when the husband leaving this world
goeth into the region of Yama, it is the devoted wife that accompanies
him thither. A wife going before waits for the husband. But if the
husband goeth before, the chaste wife followeth close. For these
reasons, O king, doth marriage exist. The husband enjoyeth the
companionship of the wife both in this and in the other worlds. It hath
been said by learned persons that one is himself born as one's son.
Therefore, a man whose wife hath borne a son should look upon her as his
mother. Beholding the face of the son one hath begotten upon his wife,
like his own face in a mirror, one feeleth as happy as a virtuous man,
on attaining to heaven. Men scorched by mental grief, or suffering under
bodily pain, feel as much refreshed in the companionship of their wives
as a perspiring person in a cool bath. No man, even in anger, should
ever do anything that is disagreeable to his wife, seeing that
happiness, joy, and virtue,--everything dependeth on the wife. A wife is
the sacred field in which the husband is born himself. Even Rishis
cannot create creatures without women. What happiness is greater than
what the father feeleth when the son running towards him, even though
his body be covered with dust, claspeth his limbs? Why then dost thou
treat with indifference such a son, who hath approached thee himself and
who casteth wistful glances towards thee for climbing thy knees? Even
ants support their own eggs without destroying them; then why shouldst
not thou, a virtuous man that thou art, support thy own child? The touch
of soft sandal paste, of women, of (cool) water is not so agreeable as
the touch of one's own infant son locked in one's embrace. As a Brahmana
is the foremost of all bipeds, a cow, the foremost of all quadrupeds, a
protector, the foremost of all superiors, so is the son the foremost of
all objects, agreeable to the touch. Let, therefore, this handsome child
touch thee in embrace. There is nothing in the world more agreeable to
the touch than the embrace of one's son. O chastiser of foes, I have
brought forth this child, O monarch, capable of dispelling all thy
sorrows after bearing him in my womb for full three years. O monarch of
Puru's race, 'He shall perform a hundred horse-sacrifices'--these were
the words uttered from the sky when I was in the lying-in room. Indeed,
men going into places remote from their homes take up there others'
children on their laps and smelling their heads feel great happiness.
Thou knowest that Brahmanas repeat these Vedic mantras on the occasion
of the consecrating rites of infancy.--Thou art born, O son, of my body!
Thou art sprung from my heart. Thou art myself in the form of a son.
Live thou to a hundred years! My life dependeth on thee, and the
continuation of my race also, on thee. Therefore, O son, live thou in
great happiness to a hundred years. He hath sprung from thy body, this
second being from thee! Behold thyself in thy son, as thou beholdest thy
image in the clear lake. As the sacrificial fire is kindled from the
domestic one, so hath this one sprung from thee. Though one, thou hast
divided thyself. In course of hunting while engaged in pursuit of the
deer, I was approached by thee, O king, I who was then a virgin in the
asylum of my father. Urvasi, Purvachitti, Sahajanya, Menaka, Viswachi
and Ghritachi, these are the six foremost of Apsaras. Amongst them
again, Menaka, born of Brahman, is the first. Descending from heaven on
Earth, after intercourse with Viswamitra, she gave birth to me. That
celebrated Apsara, Menaka, brought me forth in a valley of Himavat.
Bereft of all affection, she went away, cast me there as if I were the
child of somebody else. What sinful act did I do, of old, in some other
life that I was in infancy cast away by my parents and at present am
cast away by thee! Put away by thee, I am ready to return to the refuge
of my father. But it behoveth thee not to cast off this child who is thy
own."

"'Hearing all this, Dushmanta said, "O Sakuntala, I do not know having
begot upon thee this son. Women generally speak untruths. Who shall
believe in thy words? Destitute of all affection, the lewd Menaka is thy
mother, and she cast thee off on the surface of the Himavat as one throws
away, after the worship is over, the flowery offering made to his gods.
Thy father too of the Kshatriya race, the lustful Viswamitra, who was
tempted to become a Brahmana, is destitute of all affection. However,
Menaka is the first of Apsaras, and thy father also is the first of Rishis.
Being their daughter, why dost thou speak like a lewd woman? Thy words
deserve no credit. Art thou not ashamed to speak them, especially before
me? Go hence, O wicked woman in ascetic guise. Where is that foremost of
great Rishis, where also is that Apsara Menaka? And why art thou, low as
thou art, in the guise of an ascetic? Thy child too is grown up. Thou
sayest he is a boy, but he is very strong. How hath he soon grown like a
Sala sprout? Thy birth is low. Thou speakest like a lewd woman. Lustfully
hast thou been begotten by Menaka. O woman of ascetic guise, all that thou
sayest is quite unknown to me. I don't know thee. Go withersoever thou
choosest."

"'Sakuntala replied, "Thou seest, O king, the fault of others, even though
they be as small as a mustard seed. But seeing, thou noticest not thy own
faults even though they be as large as the Vilwa fruit. Menaka is one of
the celestials. Indeed, Menaka is reckoned as the first of celestials. My
birth, therefore, O Dushmanta, is far higher than thine. Thou walkest upon
the Earth, O king, but I roam in the skies! Behold, the difference between
ourselves is as that between (the mountain) Meru and a mustard seed!
Behold my power, O king! I can repair to the abodes of Indra, Kuvera, Yama,
and Varuna! The saying is true which I shall refer to before thee, O
sinless one! I refer to it for example's sake and not from evil motives.
Therefore, it behoveth thee to pardon me after thou hast heard it. An ugly
person considereth himself handsomer than others until he sees his own
face in the mirror. But when he sees his own ugly face in the mirror, it
is then that he perceiveth the difference between himself and others. He
that is really handsome never taunts anybody. And he that always talketh
evil becometh a reviler. And as the swine always look for dirt and filth
even when in the midst of a flower-garden, so the wicked always choose the
evil out of both evil and good that others speak. Those, however, that are
wise, on hearing the speeches of others that are intermixed with both good
and evil, accept only what is good, like geese that always extract the
milk only, though it be mixed with water. As the honest are always pained
at speaking ill of others, so do the wicked always rejoice in doing the
same thing. As the honest always feel pleasure in showing regard for the
old, so do the wicked always take delight in aspersing the good. The
honest are happy in not seeking for faults. The wicked are happy in
seeking for them. The wicked ever speak ill of the honest. But the latter
never injure the former, even if injured by them. What can be more
ridiculous in the world than that those that are themselves wicked should
represent the really honest as wicked? When even atheists are annoyed with
those that have fallen off from truth and virtue and who are really like
angry snakes of virulent poison, what shall I say of myself who am
nurtured in faith? He that having begotten a son who is his own image,
regardeth him not, never attaineth to the worlds he coveteth, and verily
the gods destroy his good fortune and possessions. The Pitris have said
that the son continueth the race and the line and is, therefore, the best
of all religious acts. Therefore, none should abandon a son. Manu hath
said that there are five kinds of sons: those begotten by one's self upon
his own wife, those obtained (as gift) from others, those purchased for a
consideration, those reared with affection and those begotten upon other
women than upon wedded wives. Sons support the religion and achievements
of men, enhance their joys, and rescue deceased ancestors from hell. It
behoveth thee not, therefore, O tiger among kings, to abandon a son who is
such. Therefore, O lord of Earth, cherish thy own self, truth, and virtue
by cherishing thy son. O lion among monarchs, it behoveth thee not to
support this deceitfulness. The dedication of a tank is more meritorious
than that of a hundred wells. A sacrifice again is more meritorious than
the dedication of a tank. A son is more meritorious than a sacrifice.
Truth is more meritorious than a hundred sons. A hundred horse-sacrifices
had once been weighed against Truth, and Truth was found heavier than a
hundred horse-sacrifices. O king, Truth, I ween, may be equal to the study
of the entire Vedas and ablutions in all holy places. There is no virtue
equal to Truth: there is nothing superior to Truth. O king, Truth is God
himself; Truth is the highest vow. Therefore, violate not thy pledge, O
monarch! Let Truth and thee be even united. If thou placest no credit in
my words, I shall of my own accord go hence. Indeed, thy companionship
should be avoided. But thou, O Dushmanta, that when thou art gone, this
son of mine shall rule the whole Earth surrounded by the four seas and
adorned with the king of the mountains."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Sakuntala having spoken to the monarch in this
wise, left his presence. But as soon as she had left, a voice from the
skies, emanating from no visible shape, thus spoke unto Dushmanta as he
was sitting surrounded by his occasional and household priests, his
preceptors, and ministers. And the voice said, "The mother is but the
sheath of flesh; the son sprung from the father is the father himself.
Therefore, O Dushmanta, cherish thy son, and insult not Sakuntala. O best
of men, the son, who is but a form of one's own seed, rescueth (ancestors)
from the region of Yama. Thou art the progenitor of this boy. Sakuntala
hath spoken the truth. The husband, dividing his body in twain, is born
of his wife in the form of son. Therefore, O Dushmanta, cherish, O monarch,
thy son born of Sakuntala. To live by forsaking one's living son is a
great misfortune. Therefore, O thou of Puru's race, cherish thy high-
souled son born of Sakuntala--And because this child is to be cherished by
thee even at our word, therefore shall this thy son be known by the name
of Bharata (the cherished)." Hearing these words uttered by the dwellers
in heaven, the monarch of Puru's race became overjoyed and spoke as
follows unto his priests and ministers, "Hear ye these words uttered by
the celestial messenger? I myself know this one to be my son. If I had
taken him as my son on the strength of Sakuntala's words alone, my people
would have been suspicious and my son also would not have been regarded as
pure."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The monarch, then, O thou of Bharata's race,
seeing the purity of his son established by the celestial messenger,
became exceedingly glad. And he took unto him that son with joy. And the
king with a joyous heart then performed all those rites upon his son that
a father should perform. And the king smelt his child's head and hugged
him with affection. And the Brahmanas began to utter blessings upon him
and the bards began to applaud him. And the monarch then experienced the
great delight that one feeleth at the touch of one's son. And Dushmanta
also received that wife of his with affection. And he told her these
words, pacifying her affectionately, "O goddess, my union with thee took
place privately. Therefore, I was thinking of how best to establish thy
purity. My people might think that we were only lustfully united and not
as husband and wife, and therefore, this son that I would have installed
as my heir apparent would only have been regarded as one of impure birth.
And dearest, every hard word thou hast uttered in thy anger, have I, O
large-eyed one, forgiven thee. Thou art my dearest!" And the royal sage
Dushmanta, having spoken thus unto his dear wife, O Bharata, received her
with offerings of perfume, food, and drink. And king Dushmanta, then,
bestowed the name of Bharata upon his child, and formally installed him as
the heir apparent. And the famous and bright wheels of Bharata's car,
invincible and like unto the wheels of the cars owned by the gods,
traversed every region, filling the whole Earth with their rattle. And the
son of Dushmanta reduced to subjection all kings of the Earth. And he
ruled virtuously and earned great fame. And that monarch of great prowess
was known by the titles of Chakravarti and Sarvabhauma. And he performed
many sacrifices like Sakra, the lord of the Maruts. And Kanwa was the
chief priest at those sacrifices, in which the offerings to Brahmanas were
great. And the blessed monarch performed both the cow and the horse-
sacrifices. And Bharata gave unto Kanwa a thousand gold coins as the
sacerdotal fee. It is that Bharata from whom have emanated so many mighty
achievements. It is from him that the great race called after him in his
race are called after him. And in the Bharata race there have been born
many godlike monarchs gifted with great energy, and like unto Brahman
himself. Their number cannot be counted. But, O thou of Bharata's race, I
shall name the principal ones that were blessed with great good fortune,
like unto the gods, and devoted to truth and honesty.'"


SECTION LXXV

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Hear now, as I recite the recorded genealogy, that is
sacred and subservient to religion, profit and pleasure, of these royal
sages--Daksha, the lord of creation, Manu, the son of Surya, Bharata, Ruru,
Puru, and Ajamidha. I shall also recite to thee, O sinless one, the
genealogies of the Yadavas and of the Kurus and of the king of the Bharata
line. These genealogies are sacred and their recitation is a great act of
propitiation. That recitation conferreth wealth, fame and long life. And,
O sinless one, all these I have named shone in their splendour and were
equal unto the great Rishis in energy.

"'Prachetas had ten sons who were all devoted to asceticism and possessed
of every virtue. They burnt, of old, by the fire emanating from their
mouths, several plants of poisonous and innumerable large trees that had
covered the Earth and became a source of great discomfort to man. After
these ten, was born another named Daksha. It is from Daksha that all
creatures have sprung. Therefore is he, O tiger among men, called the
Grandfather. Born of Prachetas the Muni Daksha, uniting himself with
Virini, begat a thousand sons of rigid vows, all like himself. And Narada
taught these thousand sons of Daksha the excellent philosophy of Sankhya
as a means of salvation. And, O Janamejaya, the lord of creation, Daksha,
then, from the desire of making creatures, begat fifty daughters. And he
made all of them his appointed daughters (so that their sons might be his
sons also for the performance of all religious acts). And he bestowed ten
of his daughters on Dharma, and thirteen on Kasyapa. And he gave twenty-
seven to Chandra, who are all engaged in indicating time. And Kasyapa, the
son of Marichi, begat on the eldest of his thirteen wives, the Adityas,
the celestials endued with great energy and having Indra as their head and
also Vivaswat (the Sun). And of Vivaswat was born the lord Yama. And
Martanda (Vivaswat) also begat another son after Yama, gifted with great
intelligence and named Manu. And Manu was endued with great wisdom and
devoted to virtue. And he became the progenitor of a line. And in Manu's
race have been born all human beings, who have, therefore, been called
Manavas. And it is of Manu that all men including Brahmanas, Kshatriyas,
and others have been descended, and are, therefore, all called Manavas.
Subsequently, O monarch, the Brahmanas became united with the Kshatriyas.
And those sons of Manu that were Brahmanas devoted themselves to the study
of the Vedas. And Manu begat ten other children named Vena, Dhrishnu,
Narishyan, Nabhaga, Ikshvaku, Karusha, Saryati, the eighth, a daughter
named Ila, Prishadhru the ninth, and Nabhagarishta, the tenth. They all
betook themselves to the practices of Kshatriyas. Besides these, Manu had
fifty other sons on Earth. But we heard that they all perished,
quarrelling with one another. The learned Pururavas was born of Ila. It
hath been heard by us that Ila was both his mother and father. And the
great Pururavas had sway over thirteen islands of the sea. And, though a
human being, he was always surrounded by companions that were superhuman.
And Pururavas intoxicated with power quarrelled with the Brahmanas and
little caring for their anger robbed them of their wealth. Beholding all
this Sanatkumara came from the region of Brahman and gave him good counsel,
which was, however, rejected by Pururavas. Then the wrath of the great
Rishis was excited, and the avaricious monarch, who intoxicated with power,
had lost his reason, was immediately destroyed by their curse.

"'It was Pururavas who first brought from the region of the Gandharvas the
three kinds of fire (for sacrificial purpose). And he brought thence, the
Apsara Urvasi also. And the son of Ila begat upon Urvasi six sons who were
called Ayus, Dhimat, Amavasu and Dhridhayus, and Vanayus, and Satayus. And
it is said that Ayus begat four sons named Nahusha, Vriddhasarman,
Rajingaya, and Anenas, on the daughter of Swarbhanu. And, O monarch,
Nahusha, of all the sons of Ayus, being gifted with great intelligence and
prowess ruled his extensive kingdom virtuously. And king Nahusha supported
evenly the Pitris, the celestials, the Rishis, the Brahmanas, the
Gandharvas, the Nagas, the Rakshasas, the Kshatriyas, and the Vaisyas. And
he suppressed all robber-gangs with a mighty hand. But he made the Rishis
pay tribute and carry him on their backs like bests of burden. And,
conquering the very gods by the beauty of his person, his asceticism,
prowess, and energy, he ruled as if he were Indra himself. And Nahusha
begat six sons, all of sweet speech, named Yati, Yayati, Sanyati, Ayati,
and Dhruva. Yati betaking himself to asceticism became a Muni like unto
Brahman himself. Yayati became a monarch of great prowess and virtue. He
ruled the whole Earth, performed numerous sacrifices, worshipped the
Pitris with great reverence, and always respected the gods. And he brought
the whole world under his sway and was never vanquished by any foe. And
the sons of Yayati were all great bowmen and resplendent with every virtue.
And, O king, they were begotten upon (his two wives) Devayani and
Sarmishtha. And of Devayani were born Yadu and Turvasu, and of Sarmishtha
were born Drahyu, Anu, and Puru. And, O king, having virtuously ruled his
subjects for a long time, Yayati was attacked with a hideous decrepitude
destroying his personal beauty. And attacked by decrepitude, the monarch
then spoke, O Bharata, unto his sons Yadu and Puru and Turvasu and Drahyu
and Anu these words, "Ye dear sons, I wish to be a young man and to
gratify my appetites in the company of young women. Do you help me
therein." To him his eldest son born of Devayani then said, "What needest
thou, O king? Dost thou want to have your youth?" Yayati then told him,
"Accept thou my decrepitude, O son! With thy youth I would enjoy myself.
During the time of a great sacrifice I have been cursed by the Muni
Usanas (Sukra). O son, I would enjoy myself with your youth. Take any of
you this my decrepitude and with my body rule ye my kingdom. I would
enjoy myself with a renovated body. Therefore, ye my sons, take ye my
decrepitude." But none of his sons accepted his decrepitude. Then his
youngest son Puru said unto him, "O king, enjoy thyself thou once again
with a renovated body and returned youth! I shall take thy decrepitude
and at thy command rule thy kingdom." Thus addressed, the royal sage, by
virtue of his ascetic power then transferred his own decrepitude unto
that high-souled son of his and with the youth of Puru became a youth;
while with the monarch's age Puru ruled his kingdom.

"'Then, after a thousand years had passed away, Yayati, that tiger among
kings, remained as strong and powerful as a tiger. And he enjoyed for a
long time the companionship of his two wives. And in the gardens of
Chitraratha (the king of Gandharvas), the king also enjoyed the company of
the Apsara Viswachi. But even after all this, the great king found his
appetites unsatiated. The king, then recollected the following truths
contained in the Puranas, "Truly, one's appetites are never satiated by
enjoyment. On the other hand, like sacrificial butter poured into the fire,
they flame up with indulgence. Even if one enjoyed the whole Earth with
its wealth, diamonds and gold, animals and women, one may not yet be
satiated. It is only when man doth not commit any sin in respect of any
living thing, in thought, deed, or speech, it is then that he attaineth to
purity as that of Brahman. When one feareth nothing, when one is not
feared by anything, when one wisheth for nothing, when one injureth
nothing, it is then that one attaineth to the purity of Brahman." The wise
monarch seeing this and satisfied that one's appetites are never satiated,
set his mind at rest by meditation, and took back from his son his own
decrepitude. And giving him back his youth, though his own appetites were
unsatiated, and installing him on the throne, he spoke unto Puru thus,
"Thou art my true heir, thou art my true son by whom my race is to be
continued. In the world shall my race be known by thy name."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then that tiger among kings, having installed
his son Puru on the throne, went away to the mount of Bhrigu for devoting
himself to asceticism. And, having acquired great ascetic merit, after
long years, he succumbed to the inevitable influence of Time. He left his
human body by observing the vow of fasting, and ascended to heaven with
his wives.'"


SECTION LXXVI

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Janamejaya said, 'O thou of the wealth of asceticism, tell me how our
