correspond to their gladness and certainty. This rapid glance at the
structure of the whole naturally suggests the fourfold division to
which we shall adhere.

I. God speaks and bids His servants speak (vs. 1, 2), That is a
wonderfully tender word with which the silence and sadness of exile are
broken. The inmost meaning of God's voice is ever comfort. What a world
of yearning love there is, too, in the two little words 'my' and
'your'! The exiles are still His; He who has hidden His face from them
so long is still theirs. And what was true of them is true of us; for
sin may separate us from God, but it does not separate Him from us, and
He still seeks to make us recognise the imperishable bond, which itself
is the ground of both our comfort and of His will that we should be
comforted.

As the very first words go deep into the meaning of all God's voices,
and unveil the permanence of His relation of love even to sinful and
punished men, so the next disclose the tender manner of His approach to
us, and prescribe the tone for all His true servants: 'Speak ye to the
heart of Jerusalem,' with loving words, which may win her love; for is
she not the bride of Jehovah, fallen though she be? And is not humanity
the beloved of Jesus, in whom God's heart is unveiled that our hearts
may be won? How shall human voices be softened to tenderness worthy of
the message which they carry? Only by dwelling near enough to Him to
catch the echoes, and copy the modulations, of His voice, as some birds
are taught sweeter notes than their own. The prophet's charge is laid
upon all who would speak of Christ to men. Speak to the heart, not only
to the head or to the conscience. God beseeches in the person of His
'ambassadors.' The substance of the message may well find its way to
the heart; for it is the assurance that the long, hard service of the
appointed term of exile is past, that the sin which brought it about is
forgiven, and, more wonderful and gracious still, that God's mercy
reckons that the ills which followed on faithlessness have more than
expiated it. We need not seek for any other explanation of these
startling words than the exuberance of the divine pity, which 'doth not
willingly afflict.'

Of course, the captivity is in the foreground of the prophet's vision;
but the wider sense of the prophecy embraces the worse captivity of sin
under which we all groan, and the divine voice bids His prophets
proclaim that Jehovah comes, to set us all free, to end the weary
bondage, and to exact no more punishment for sins.

II. The forerunner speaks. There is something very impressive in the
abrupt bursting in of this second voice, all unnamed. It is the
reverberation, as it were, of the former, giving the preparation on the
side of man for the coming of Jehovah. Israel in bondage in Egypt had
been delivered by Jehovah marching through the wilderness, a wilderness
stretched between Babylon and Jerusalem; these supply the scenery, so
to speak; but the scenery is symbolic, and the call is really one to
prepare the way of the Lord in the wilderness of human sin, by raising
up the cast-down by reason of transgressions or sorrows, to subdue
lofty thoughts and self-sufficiency by humble self-abnegation, to make
the 'crooked things' or 'rugged things' straight or smooth, and the
rough ground where heights were tumbled on heights a deep valley, by
forsaking evil.

The moral preparation, not the physical, is meant. It was fitting that
the road for such a coming should be prepared. But the coming was not
so contingent on the preparation that the 'glory of the Lord' would not
'be revealed' unless men made a highway for Him. True, that the
revelation of His glory to the individual soul must be preceded by such
a preparation; but that raising of abjectness and levelling of
loftiness needs some perception of Him ere it can be done by man.
Christ must come to the heart before the heart can be prepared for His
coming. John the Baptist came crying in the wilderness, but his fiery
message did little to cast up a highway for the footsteps of the King.
John's immovable humility pierced to the very heart of the prophecy
when he answered the question 'Who art thou?' with 'I am a voice. The
voice was unnamed; why, what does it matter who I am?'

The substance and the range of the coming manifestation are next
defined. It is to be the revelation of 'the glory of the Lord,' and to
be for all mankind, not for Israel only. That lowly life and that
shameful death were a strange revelation of God's glory. If _they_
revealed it, then it cannot consist in power or any of the majestic
'attributes,' but in love, pity, and long-suffering. Love is the
divinest thing in God. The guarantee for all lies simply here, that God
has spoken it. It is because the unnamed herald's ear has heard the
divine voice uttering the gracious assurances of verse 1, that _his_
voice is lifted up in the commands and assurances of verse 4. Absolute
faith in God's utterances, however they seem to transcend experience,
is wisdom and duty.

III. Yet another voice, whether sounding from heaven or earth is as
uncertain as is the person to whom it is addressed, authoritatively
commands a third to 'cry,' and, on being asked what is to be the burden
of the call, answers. This new herald is to proclaim man's frailty and
the immortal vigour of God's word, which secures the fulfilment of His
promises. Is it the questioning voice, or the commanding one, which
says, 'All flesh is grass,... the people is grass'? If the former, it
is the utterance of hopelessness, all but refusing the commission. But,
dramatic as that construction is, it seems better to regard the whole
as the answer to the question, 'What shall I cry?' The repetition of
the theme of man's frailty is not unnatural, and gives emphasis to the
contrast of the unchangeable stability of God's word. An hour of the
deadly hot wind will scorch the pastures, and all the petals of the
flowers among the herbage will fall. So everything lovely, bright, and
vigorous in humanity wilts and dies. One thing alone remains fresh from
age to age,--the uttered will of Jehovah. His breath kills and makes
alive. It withers the creatural, and it speaks the undying word.

This message is to follow those others which tell of God's merciful
promises, that trembling hearts may not falter when they see all
created stays sharing the common lot, but may rest assured that God's
promises are as good as God's facts, and so may hope when all things
visible would preach despair. It was given to hearten confidence in the
prophecy of a future revelation of the glory of God. It remains with us
to hearten confidence in a past revelation, which will stand unshaken,
whatever forces war against it. Its foes and its friends are alike
short-lived as the summer's grass. The defences of the one and the
attacks of the other are being antiquated while being spoken; but the
bare word of God, the record of the incarnate Word, who is the true
revelation of the glory of God, will stand for ever,--'And this is the
Word which by the gospel is preached to you.'

IV. The prophet seems to be the speaker in verses 9-11, or perhaps the
same anonymous voice which already commanded the previous message
summons Jerusalem to become the ambassadress of her God. The coming of
the Lord is conceived as having taken place, and He is enthroned in
Zion. The construction which takes Jerusalem or Zion (the double name
so characteristic of the second part of Isaiah) to be the recipient of
the good tidings is much less natural than that which regards her as
their bearer.

The word rendered 'tellest good tidings' is a feminine form, and falls
in with the usual personification of a city as a woman. She, long laid
in ruins, the Niobe of nations, the sad and desolate widow, is bid to
bear to her daughter cities the glad tidings, that God is in her of a
truth. It is exactly the same thought as 'Cry out and shout, thou
inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of
thee.' The prophecy refers to the Church. It sets forth her highest
office as being the proclamation of her indwelling King. The possession
of Christ makes the Church the evangelist for the world; for it gives
the capacity and the impulse as well as the obligation to speak the
glad tidings. Every Christian has this command binding on him by the
fact of his having Christ.

The command sets forth the bold clearness which should mark the
herald's call. Naturally, any one with a message to peal out to a crowd
would seek some vantage-ground, from which his words might fly the
farther. If we have a message to deliver, let us seek the best place
from which to deliver it. 'Lift up thy voice with strength.' No whisper
will do. Bated breath is no fit vehicle for God's gospel. There are too
many of God's heralds who are always apologising for their message, and
seeking to reconcile it with popular opinions. We are all apt to speak
truth less confidently because it is denied; but, while it is needful
to speak with all gentleness and in meekness to them that oppose, it is
cowardly, as well as impolitic, to let one tremor be heard in our tones
though a world should deny our message.

The command tells the substance of the Church's message. Its essence is
the proclamation of the manifested God. To gaze on Jesus is to behold
God. That God is made known in the twin glories of power and
gentleness. He comes 'as a strong one.' His dominion rests on His own
power, and on no human allies. His reign is retributive, and that not
merely as penally recompensing evil, but as rewarding the faith and
hope of those who waited for Him.

But beyond the limits of our text, in verse 11, we have the necessary
completion of the manifestation, in the lovely figure of the Shepherd
carrying the lambs in His arms, and gently leading the flock of
returning exiles. The strength of Jesus is His lowliness; and His
mighty arm is used, not to wield an iron sceptre, but to gather us to
His bosom and guide us in His ways. The paradox of the gospel, which
points to a poor, weak man dying in the dark on a cross and says,
'Behold the great Power of God!' is anticipated in this prophecy. The
triumphant paradox of the Apostle is shadowed here: 'We preach Christ
crucified, ... the power of God, and the wisdom of God.'




O THOU THAT BRINGEST GOOD TIDINGS

'O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high
mountain: O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice
with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah,
Behold your God!'--ISAIAH xl. 9.


There is something very grand in these august and mysterious voices
which call one to another in the opening verses of this chapter. First,
the purged ear of the prophet hears the divine command to him and to
his brethren--Comfort Jerusalem with the message of the God who comes
for her deliverance. Then afar off another voice is heard, the herald
and forerunner of the approaching Deity; and when thus the foundation
has been laid, yet another takes up the speech, and 'The voice said,
Cry,' and the anonymous recipient of the command asks with what message
he shall be entrusted, and the answer is the signature and pledge of
the divine fulfilment of the word thus spoken. And then there comes, as
I take it, a pause of silence, within which the great Epiphany and
manifestation takes place, and the coming God comes, enters into the
rebuilded city, and there shines in His beauty; and then breaks forth
the rapturous commandment of my text to the resuscitated city, to tell
to all her daughters of Judah the glad tidings of a present God.

I need not, I suppose, spend your time in vindicating the translation
of our Bible as against one which has been made very familiar by being
wedded to Handel's music, and has commended itself to many, according
to which Zion is rather the recipient than the herald of the tidings,
'O thou that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with
strength,' and so on.

And I suppose I need not either spend any time in vindicating the
transference of the text to the Gentile Church, beyond the simple
remark that, whatever be the date of this second portion of Isaiah's
prophecy, its standpoint is the time of the Captivity, when Jerusalem
lay desolate, burned with fire, and all their pleasant things were laid
waste, so that the city here addressed is the new form of the ancient
Zion, which had risen from her ashes, and had a better tidings of glad
significance to impart to all the nations. And so, dear brethren,
looking at the words from that point of view, I think that they may
very fairly yield to us two or three very old-fashioned and well-worn
thoughts, which may yet be stimulating and encouraging to us. I take
them as simply as possible, just as they run here in this text, which
brings out very strikingly and beautifully, first, the function of the
Evangelist Zion; secondly, the manner of her message; and lastly, its
contents.

I. Look with me at the thoughts that cluster round the name, 'O Zion,
that bringest glad tidings.'

It is almost a definition of the Church; at any rate, it is a
description of her by her most characteristic office and function, that
which marks and separates her from all associations and societies of
men. This is her highest office; this is the reason of her being; this
is her noblest dignity. All mystical powers have been claimed for her,
men have been bidden to submit their judgment and manhood to her
authority; but her true dignity is that she bears a gospel in her hand,
and that grace is poured into her lips. Fond and sense-bound regrets
have been sighed forth that her miracle-working gifts have faded away;
but so long as her voice can quicken dead souls, and make the tongue of
the dumb to speak, her noblest energies remain unimpaired, and so we
may think of her as most exalted and dignified in that her Master
addresses her, 'O Zion, that bringest good tidings.'

Now, if I was right in my preliminary remark, to the effect that, prior
to my text, we are to suppose the manifestation and approach of the
Divine Deliverer, then I think it is quite clear that what constitutes
Zion the messenger of good tidings is the presence in her of the living
God. Translate that into New Testament language, and it just comes to
this: that what constitutes the Church the evangelist for the world is
the simple possession of Christ or of the Gospel. That thought branches
into some considerations on which we may touch.

The first of them is this: Whoever has Christ has the power to impart
Him. All believers are preachers, or meant to be so, by virtue of the
possession of that Divine Christ for your own. We Nonconformists are
ready enough to proclaim the universal priesthood of all believers when
we are opposing ecclesiastical assumption; are we as ready to take it
for the law of our own lives, and to say, 'Yes, priests by the
imposition of a mightier hand, and ministers of Christ by the
possession of Christ, and therefore bound and able to impart Him to all
around'? He has given us His love, and He thereby has made us fit to
impart Him. Zion only needed to receive its God, in order thereby to
possess the power to say unto all the cities of Judah, 'Behold your
God.' It does not take much genius, it does not take much culture, it
does not need any prolonged training, for a man who has Christ to say,
'Behold, I have Him.' The very first Christian sermon that was ever
preached was a very short one, and a very effectual one, for it
converted the whole congregation, and it was this: 'We have found the
Messiah.' That was all--the utterance of individual possession and
personal experience--and it 'brought him to Jesus.'

Take another point. The possession of Christ for ourselves imposes upon
us the obligation to impart Him. All property in this world is trust
property, and everything that a man has that can help or bless the
moral or spiritual or intellectual condition of his fellows, he is
thereby under solemn obligation to impart. There is an obligation
arising from the bands that knit us to one another, so that no man can
possess his good alone without being untrue to what we call nowadays
the solidarity of humanity. You have, you say, the bread of life: very
well, what would you think of a man in a famine who, when women were
boiling their children, and men were fighting with the swine on the
dunghill for garbage, was content to eat his morsel alone, and leave
others to perish by starvation? You possess, you say, the healing for
all the diseases of humanity: very well, what would you think of a man
who, in a pestilence, was contented with swallowing his own specific,
and leaving others to die and to rot in the street? If you have the
Christ, you have Him that you may impart Him. 'He that withholdeth
bread, the people shall curse him'; of how much deeper malediction from
despairing lips will they be thought worthy who call themselves the
followers of Him that gave His life to be the bread of the world, and
yet withhold it from famishing souls?

And it is an obligation that arises, too, from the very purposes of our
calling. What are Christian men and women saved for? For their own
blessedness? Yes, and no. No creature in God's great universe but is
great enough to be a worthy end of the divine action; the happiness of
the humblest and most insignificant moves His mighty hand. Ay, but no
creature in God's universe so great as that he is a worthy end of the
divine action, if he is going to keep all the divine gifts in himself.
We are all brought into the light that we may impart light.

  'Heaven doth with us as we with torches do;
  Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
  Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
  As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch'd
  But to fine issues.'

II. And now turn to the second thought which I desire to draw from
these words. We have here, in a very picturesque and vivid form, the
setting forth of the manner in which the Evangelist Zion is to proclaim
her message.

The fair-featured herald is bidden to get up into the high
mountain--perhaps a mere picturesque detail, perhaps some reference to
the local position of the city set upon a hill--like the priests on
Ebal and Gerizim, or Alpine shepherds, calling to each other across the
valleys, to secure some vantage-ground, and next, to let her voice roll
out across the glen. No faltering whisper will do, but a voice that
compels audience, that can be heard above the tumult and afar off, and
confident and loud and clear, because courageous and without dread.
'Lift up thy voice with strength.' Yes, but a timid heart will make a
tremulous voice, and fear and doubt will whisper a message when courage
will ring it out. 'Be not afraid' is the foundation of the clearness
and the loudness with which the word is to be uttered.

That thought opens itself out into these two others, on each of which I
say a word or two. Our message is to be given with a courage and a
force that are worthy of it; 'Be not afraid.' That is a lesson for this
day, my brethren. There are plenty of causes of fear round about us if,
like poor Peter on the water, we look at the waves instead of at the
Master. There are the great forces of evil that are always arrayed
against Christ. There is the thoroughgoing and formidable rejection of
all that is dearest to us, which is creeping like poison through
cultivated society at home; there is the manifest disproportion between
our resources and the task that we have set ourselves to. 'They need
not depart; give ye them to eat,' said the Master. What! five thousand
people need not depart, and only this scanty provision of loaves and
fishes! Yes; the Master's hand can multiply it. There is the
consciousness of our own weakness; there is the apparent slow progress
of the Gospel in the world. All these things come surging in upon us
when our spirits are low and our faith weak; and yet the message comes
to us, 'Be not afraid.' I venture to break that injunction up into two
or three exhortations, which I cast into the shape of exhortations, not
from any assumption of superiority, but for the sake of point and force.

First of all, I would say, let us cherish a firm, soul-absorbing
confidence in the power and truth of the message we have to carry. I do
not speak now of the intellectual discipline which may be required from
each of us to meet the difficulties of this day--that is outside of my
present subject; but there is a moral discipline quite as important as
the intellectual. There cannot be any question, I suppose, to any one
who looks round about, and notices the tendencies of his own mind, but
that all we Christian people, in our various circles and organisations,
are under a very great temptation to a very perceptible lowering of our
key in the presence of widespread doubt. We are tempted to fancy that a
truth is less certain because it is denied; that because a has attacked
this thing, and b's clever book has unsettled that thing, and c's
researches seem to cast a great deal of doubt upon that other thing,
therefore we are to surrender them all, and talk about them as if they
were doubtful problems or hypotheses rather than sure verities of our
faith. And there are some of us, I venture to say, who are in danger of
another temptation, and that is of getting a little ashamed and
becoming afraid to say 'Yes, I stand by that great truth, God in Christ
reconciling the world to Himself,' for fear of being thought to
be--well, 'narrow' is the favourite word, 'old-fashioned,' or 'holders
of a creed outworn,' 'in antagonism with the spirit of the age,' and so
on, and so on. Brethren, I am not the man, I hope, to preach an
unreasonable attitude of antagonism; I am not the man to ask anybody to
exaggerate his beliefs because somebody else denies them, but I do
believe that among us all, and especially among young men, there is the
temptation just to be a little bit afraid, and not to let the voice
ring out with that clear certitude which becomes the messenger of the
Cross. Try by mental discipline to find intellectual standing-ground
that will be firm below your feet, and then remember that that is not
all, but that moral discipline is wanted also that I may open my mouth
boldly, as I ought to speak.'

And then, if I might venture to dwell for a moment or two further upon
this class of consideration, I would say, Do not let us make too much
of the enemy. There is no need why we should take them at their own
appraisement. Men are always tempted to think that no generation ever
had such a fight as their own generation. They have said that ever
since there was a Christian Church. But the true, healthy way of
looking at the adversary--and by that I mean all the various forms of
difficulty which beset us in our evangelistic work, difficulties in the
mission-field, difficulties in the state of things here round us--the
true, healthy way of looking at them all, is to look at them as the
brave Apostle Paul did, when he said, 'I am going to stop at Ephesus
till Pentecost, for there is a great and effectual door opened to me.'
And how did he know that? He tells us in the next clause, 'There are
many adversaries.' Where there are many adversaries, there is an
effectual door, if you and I are bold and big enough to go in and
occupy.

And then I would venture to say, still further, let us remember the
victories of the past. Let us make personal experience of the
overcoming powers that are stored and hidden in Christ's Gospel. And,
above all, let us remember who fights with us. Jesus Christ and one man
are always the majority. There is an old story, which you may remember,
about the Conqueror of Rome, who dashed his sword into the scales when
the ransom was being weighed; and Christ flings His sharp sword with
the two edges into the scales when we are weighing resources, and the
other kicks the beam. There are enemies, plenty of them, all round
about. Yes, and the spreading forth of their wings fills the breadth of
the land. Be it so. But notwithstanding the irruption of the barbarous
and cruel hosts, it is 'Thy land, O Emanuel!' And in His time He will
sweep them before His presence, as the north wind drives the locusts
into the hindermost sea. I do not know if any of you remember an
ancient Christian legend, and I do not know whether it is a legend or a
truth--it does not matter, it will serve for our purpose all the same
either way--how when the Emperor Julian, surnamed the Apostate, once
taunted a humble Christian man with the question, 'What is the
carpenter's son doing now?' and the answer was, 'Hewing wood for the
emperor's funeral pile,' and not very long after there came the fatal
field on which, according to ancient tradition, he died with the words
on his lips, 'Thou hast conquered, Galilean. As in Carlyle's grand
translation of Luther's Hymn of the Reformation--

  'Of our own strength we nothing can,
  Full soon were we downridden;
  But for us fights the proper Man,
  Whom God Himself hath bidden.
  Ask ye, who is the same?
  Christ Jesus is His name,
  The Lord Sabaoth's Son.
  He and none other one
  Shall conquer in this battle.'

'Lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid.'

III. I come to the last thought that emerges from these words, and that
is the substance and contents of the Evangelist Zion's message: 'Say
unto the cities of Judah, behold your God!'

They were to be pointed to a great historical act, in which God had
manifested and made Himself visible to men; and the words of my text
are, not only an exclamation, but they are an entreaty, and the message
was to be given to these little daughter cities of Judah as
representing all of those for whom the deliverance had been
wrought--all which things are paralleled in the message that is
committed to our hand.

For, first of all, we all have given to us the charge of pointing men
to the great historical fact wherein God is visible to men, and so
crying, 'Behold your God!' God cannot be revealed by word, God cannot
be revealed by thought. There is no way open to Him to make Himself
known to His creatures except the way by which men make themselves
known to one another; that is, by their deeds; and so, high above all
speculation, high above all abstraction, nearer to us than all thought
stands the historical fact in which God shows Himself to the world, and
that is the person and work of Jesus Christ, 'the brightness of His
glory and the express image of His person,' in whom the abysses of the
divine nature are opened, and through whom all the certitude of divine
light that human eyes can receive pours itself in genial and yet
intensest radiance upon the world. How beautiful in that connection the
verses following my text are I need only indicate in a word as I pass,
'Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand,' and yet, 'behold, He
shall feed His flock like a shepherd.' And so in Christ is the power of
God, for I take it that He is the arm of the Lord; and in Christ is the
gentleness of God; and whilst men grope in the darkness, our business
is to point to the living, dying Son, and to say, 'There you have the
complete, the ultimate revelation of the unseen God.'

And do not let us forget that the burning centre of all that brightness
is the Cross, that ever-wondrous paradox; that the depth of humiliation
is the height of glorifying; that Christ's Cross is the throne of the
manifested divine power quite as much as it is the seat of the
manifested divine love, and that when He is hanging there in His
weakness and mortal agony, the words are yet true--strange,
paradoxical, blessedly true--'He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father.' And when we say, pointing to His Cross and Him there, His brow
paled with dying, and His soul faint with loss--when we say, 'Behold
the Lamb!' we are also and therein saying, 'Behold your God!'

And therefore, with what of gentleness, with what of tenderness, with
what of patient entreaty as well as strength and confidence, the word
that speaks of a strength manifested in weakness, and a God made
visible in Christ, should be spoken, it needs not here to enlarge
upon--only take that one last thought that I suggested, that this
message comes to all those for whom God has appeared, and for whom the
deliverance has been wrought. We each have the right, and we each have
the charge, to go to every man and say, 'Behold your God!' and the
hearts of men will leap up to meet the message. For, though overlaid by
sin, perverted often into its own opposite by fear, misinterpreted and
misunderstood by the very men that bear it, there yet lies deep in
every heart the aching thirst for the living God, and we have the word
that alone can meet that thirst. All around us men are saying--'In all
the fields of science and of nature, in human history and in the spirit
of men, I find no God,' and are falling back into that dreary negation,
'Behold, we know not anything!' And some of them, orphaned in their
agony, are crying, though it be often in contemptuous tones that almost
sound as if they meant the opposite, 'Oh, that I knew where I might
find Him!' We have a word that can meet that. For cultivated Europe it
has come to this--Christ or nothing; either He has shown us the Father,
or there is no knowledge of Him possible. We do not need to dread the
alternative; we can face it, and overcome it. And in far-off lands men
are groping in twilight uncertainty, worshipping, with a nameless
horror at their hearts, gods capricious, gods cruel, gods
terrible--tamely believing in gods far-off and mysterious, cowering
before gods careless and heartless, degrading their manhood by
imitating gods foul and bestial, and yet all the while dimly feeling,
'Surely, surely there is somewhere a good and a fair Being, that has an
eye to see my sorrows, and a heart to pity them; an ear to hear my
prayer, and a hand to stretch out.' We have a word that can meet that.
Let that word ring out, brother, as far as your influence can reach.
Set the trumpet to thy mouth, and say, 'Behold your God!' and be sure
that from the uttermost parts of the earth we shall hear the choral
songs of many voices answering, 'Lo! this is our God, we have waited
for Him, and He will save us! This is our God; we will be glad and
rejoice in His salvation!'




'HAVE YE NOT? HAST THOU NOT?'

'Have ye not known, have ye not heard? hath it not been told yon from
the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the
earth?... Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard?'--ISAIAH xl. 21 and
28.


The recurrence of the same form of interrogation in these two verses is
remarkable. In the first case the plural is used, in the second the
singular, and we may reasonably conclude that as Israel is addressed in
the latter, the nations outside the sphere illumined by Revelation are
appealed to in the former. The context of the two passages confirms
this reference, for the witness of Creation and History is summoned in
the former section, and that of God's inward dealings with trustful
souls is brought out in the latter.

I. What Nature and History tell men about God.

Observe that emphatic '_told you_'; then the witness here appealed to
is truly a Revelation, though a silent one. 'There is no speech nor
language,' yet 'their line is gone out through all the earth, and their
words to the ends of the world.'

The general idea of the divine nature, as revealed 'from the beginning'
and 'from the foundation of the earth,' is that of Majesty transcending
all comparison.

The contrast is drawn between Him and men, in the magnificent image of
Him as throned above 'the circle of the earth,' and so far above that
all the busy tribes of men 'are as grasshoppers,' their restless
activity but aimless leaping, and 'the tumult of the peoples' only as a
meaningless chirping.

God's creative and sustaining power is further set forth by that great
image of His 'stretching out the heavens as a curtain, and spreading
them out as a tent to dwell in.' As easily as travellers set up their
tents when the day's march is done, did He stretch the great expanse
above the low earth; and all its depths and spaces are, in comparison
with Him, thin, transient, and as easily rolled up and put aside as the
stuff that makes a nomad's home for a night. Nor are the two implied
thoughts that 'the heavens' are a veil screening Him from men even
while they tell of Him to men, and that they are His lofty
dwelling-place, to be left out of view.

But in verse 26 we have a more specific and grander exhibition of God's
relation to the Universe. The stars, in number numberless, are
conceived of as a great army drilled and directed by Him. And that
metaphor, familiar to us as it is, and condensed into the divine title
so frequent in this prophetic book, is pregnant with great truths.

It speaks of God as the Imperator, the Commander, exercising supreme
authority by 'the word of His power,' and of creation as obedient
thereto. 'For ever, O Lord, Thy word is settled in the heavens.' The
Commander needs but to speak, and so mystic is the power of His uttered
will, that effects on the material universe follow that altogether
immaterial energy.

It speaks of the harmony and order of the whole Creation. 'By number'
and 'by name' He sways and ranks them. 'All things work together.' They
are an ordered whole--a kosmos, not a chaos. Modern science is slowly
establishing by experiment the truth which is enshrined in that old
name, 'the Lord of hosts,' that all things in the physical universe are
a unity.

It speaks of the perfectness of God's knowledge of each item in the
mighty whole. 'He calleth them all by name.' Thereby are expressed
authority, ownership, particular knowledge of, and relation to, each
individual of the overwhelming aggregate. God knows all, because He
knows each.

It speaks of the inexhaustible energy of His sustaining power, and the
consequent strength of His creatures. 'Preservation is a continued
creation.' The prophet saw much deeper than the mechanical view of the
creative act. To him God was, to use more modern language, 'immanent'
as well as 'transcendent.' True, He 'sits above the circle of the
earth,' but as truly He is working on His creatures, and it is by His
communicated strength that they are strong. If any being--star, or
insect--were separated utterly from Him, it would crumble into
nothingness.

But the appeal to Creation is singularly interrupted by an appeal to
History. The prophet drops from the serene expanse of the silent yet
eloquent heavens to the stormy scenes of changing dynasties and
revolutions of earth's kingdoms. How calm the one, how tumultuous the
other! How the one witnesses to Him by its apparently unchanging
continuance! how the other witnesses by its swift mutations! In the
one, He is revealed as Preserver; in the other, the most clear
demonstration of His power is given in His destroying of rebel
kingdoms. But in these acts by which ancient and firmly rooted
dynasties are rooted up or withered as by the simoom, He reveals a side
of His nature to which the calm heavens bore no witness. He is the
moral Governor of the world, 'The history of the world is the judgment
of the world,' and when hoary iniquities are smitten to death, 'the
Holy One' is revealed as the righteous Judge. And the conjoint witness
of creation and of history attests that none can be 'likened' to Him.

II. What Revelation tells Israel about God.

It is noteworthy that in the section of which our first text is the
centre, there is no mention of the divine Name, and even the well-known
title, 'the Holy One of Israel,' is truncated, so as to leave out
reference to the people of Revelation; whereas in this section He is
not only designated as God and Creator, but as Jehovah, the God who has
made a covenant with Israel, and made known His will and to some extent
His nature. The distinct climax in the divine Names itself implies a
nobler relation to men, and a clearer revelation than was declared in
the former part of this prophecy. It is the fitting preparation for the
loftier and infinitely more tender and touching aspect of the divine
nature which shines with lambent, inviting lustre within the sphere of
Revelation.

The distinctive glory of the long process of God's self-manifestation
to Israel is that, while it emphasises all that nature and history
affirm of Him, it sets Him forth as restoring the weak, as well as
sustaining the strong. The sad contrast between the untroubled and
unwearied strength of the calm heavens and the soon-exhausted strength
of struggling and often beaten men strikes the poet prophet's sensitive
soul. He did not know, what modern astronomy teaches us, that change,
convulsions, ruin, are not confined to earth, but that stars as well as
men faint and fail, dwindle and die. The scriptural view of Nature is
not that of the scientist, but that of the poet and of the devout man.
It lies quite apart from the scientific attitude, and has as good a
right to exist as it has. The contrast of heaven and earth is for the
prophet the contrast of strength with weakness, of joyful harmony with
moral disorder, of punctual, entire obedience with rebellion and the
clash of multitudes of anarchic self-willed men.

But there is a sadder contrast still--namely, that between God and the
wretched weaklings that men have made of themselves. 'He fainteth not,
neither is weary.' Strange anomaly that in His universe there should be
the faint and 'them that have no might'! The only explanation of such
an exception to the order of Creation is that men have broken loose
from Creation's dependence on God, and that therefore the inflow of
sustaining strength has been checked. In other words, man's weakness
comes from man's sin.

Hence to restore strength to those whose power has been drained away by
sin is God's divinest work. It is more to restore than to sustain. It
takes less energy to keep a weight stationary at a height than to roll
it up again if it falls to the bottom. Since sin is the cause of our
weakness, the first step to deliver from the weakness is to deliver
from the sin. If we are ever to be restored, hearts, consciences,
averted wills must be dealt with--and but One Hand can deal with these.

And not only does God outdo all His mightiest works in the work of
restoring strength to the faint, but He crowns that restoration by
making the restored weakling like Himself. 'He fainteth not, neither is
weary.' They, too, 'shall ran and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint.' In the long drawn out grind of monotonous marching along the
common path of daily small duties and uneventful life, they shall not
faint; in the rare occasional spurts, occurring in every man's
experience, when extraordinary tax is laid on heart and limbs, they
shall not be weary. And they will be able both to walk and to run,
because they soar on wings as eagles. And they do all because they wait
on the Lord. Communion with Him buoys us above this low earth, and
bears us up into the heavenly places, and, living there, we shall be
fit for the slow hours of commonplace plodding and for the crowded
moments of great crises.




UNFAILING STABS AND FAINTING MEN

'...For that He is strong in power; not one faileth.... He giveth power
to the faint; and to them that have no might He increaseth
strength.'--ISAIAH xl. 26 and 29.


These two verses set forth two widely different operations of the
divine power as exercised in two sadly different fields, the starry
heavens and this weary world. They are interlocked, as it were, by the
recurrence in the latter of the emphatic words of the former. The one
verse says, 'He is strong in power'; the other, 'He giveth power.' In
the former verse, 'the greatness of His might' sustains the stars; in
the latter verse, a still diviner operation is set forth in that 'to
them that have no might He increaseth strength.' Thus there are three
contrasts suggested: that between unfailing stars, and men that faint;
that between the unwearied God and wearied men; and that between the
sustaining power that is exercised in the heavens and the restoring
power that is manifested on earth.

There is another interlocking between the latter of these two texts and
its context, which is indicated by a similar recurrence of epithets. In
my second text we read of the 'faint,' and in the verse that follows
it, again we find the expressions 'faint' and 'weary,' while in the
verse before my text we read that 'the Lord fainteth not, neither is
weary.' So again the contrast between Him and us is set forth, but, in
the verse that closes the chapter, we read how that contrast merges
into likeness, inasmuch as the unfainting and unwearied God makes even
the men that wait upon Him unwearied and unfainting. Here, then, we
have lessons that we may well ponder.

Note, first--

I. That sad contrast.

The prophet in the former of these verses seems to be expanding the
thoughts that lie in the name, 'the Lord of hosts,' in so far as that
name expresses the divine relation to the starry universe. The image
that underlies both it and the words of the text is that of a captain
who commands his soldiers, and they obey. Discipline and plan array
them in their ranks; they are not a mob, but an army. The voice that
reads the roll-call summons one after another to his place, and,
punctually obedient, there they stand, ready for any evolution that may
be prescribed. The plain prose of which is, that night by night above
the horizon rise the bright orbs, and roll on their path obedient to
the Sovereign will; 'because He is strong in might not one' is lacking.
Astronomers have taught us, what the prophet did not know, that even in
the apparently serene spaces there are collisions and catastrophes, and
that stars may dwindle and dim, and finally go out. But while Scripture
deals with creation neither from the scientific nor from the aesthetic
point of view, it leaves room for both of these--for all that the
poet's imagination can see or say, for all that the scientist's
investigation can discover, it sees that beneath the beauty is the
Fountain of all loveliness, beneath and behind the 'number' of the
numberless stars works the infinite will of God. Surely an intelligible
creation must have an intelligent source. Surely a universe in which
Mind can apprehend order and number must have a Mind at the back of it.
Wordsworth has nobly said of Duty what we may more truly say of God:
'Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong, And the most ancient heavens
through Thee are fresh and strong.' 'For that He is great in might, not
one faileth.' Scripture bids us think of God, not as a creative energy
that set the universe in motion, and leaves it to roll or spin, but as
of a Divine Presence--to use a word which can only be in a very
modified sense applied to that mysterious, intelligent
Entity--operating in, and being the sustaining Cause of, all that is.
This Divine Presence stamps its signature on the unfailing strength of
these bright creatures above.

But in our second text we drop from the illumination of the heavens to
the shadowed plain of this low earth. It is as if a man, looking up
into the violet sky, with all its shining orbs, should then turn to
some reeking alley, with its tumult and its squalor. Just because man
is greater than the stars, man 'fails,' whilst they shine on unwearied.
For what the prophet has in view as the clinging curse that cleaves to
our greatness, is not merely the bodily fatigue which is necessarily
involved in the very fact of bodily existence, since energy cannot be
put forth without waste and weariness, but it is far more the weary
heart, the heart that is weary of itself, the heart that is weary of
toil, the heart that is weary of the momentary crises that demand
effort, and wearier still of the effortless monotony of our daily
lives; the heart that all of us carry, and which to all of us sometimes
whispers, with a dark and gloomy voice which we cannot contradict,
'Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.' I was going to say, happy are you
if you do not know that weariness, but I check myself and say, tenfold
more miserable are you if you have never been sober and wise enough to
have felt the weariness and weight of all this unintelligible world,
and of your own sorry selves.

For it is ever to be remembered that the faintness and the ebbing away
of might, which is the truly tragic thing in humanity, does not depend
upon physical constitution, but upon separation from the Source of all
strength, breaking the union between ourselves and God. If a star could
shake off its dependence, and shut out the influx of the sustaining
power that by continual creation preserves it, it would die into
darkness, or crumble into dust. It cannot, and we cannot, in so far as
our physical being is concerned, but we can shake ourselves free from
God, in so far as the life of the spirit is concerned, and the godless
spirit bears the Cain-curse of restlessness and weariness ever upon it.
So the contrast between the unfailing strengths that ever shine down
upon us from the heavens, and the weariness of body and of mind
afflicting the sleeping millions on whom they shine, is tragical
