their Judge, whether they knew it or not.  And for three transgressions 
of theirs, and for four, the Lord would not turn away their punishment, 
but would send fire and sword among them, and they should be carried away 
captive, as they had carried others away.  But to go back.  Amos next 
turns to his own countrymen--to Judah and Israel, who were then two 
separate nations.  For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, the 
Lord would not turn away their punishment, because they had despised the 
law of the Lord, and had not walked in His commandments.  Therefore He 
would send a fire on Judah, and it should devour the palaces of 
Jerusalem.  But Amos is most bitter against Israel, against the court of 
King Jeroboam at Samaria, and against the rich men of Israel, the bulls 
of Bashan, as he calls them.  For three transgressions, and for four, the 
Lord would not turn away their punishment.  And why?

Now see what I meant when I said that Amos believed not only in the 
kingdom of God, but in the righteousness of God.  It was not merely that 
they were worshipping idols--golden calves at Dan, and Bethel, and 
Samaria, at the same time that they worshipped the true God.  That was 
bad, but there was more behind.  These men were bad, proud, luxurious, 
cruel; they were selling their countrymen for slaves--selling, he says so 
twice, as if it was some notorious and special case, an honest man for 
silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes.  They were lying down on 
clothes taken on pledge by every altar.  They were breaking the seventh 
commandment in an abominable way.  They were falsifying weights and 
measures, and selling the refuse of the wheat.  They stored up the fruits 
of violence and robbery in their palaces.  They hated him who rebuked 
them, and abhorred him that spoke uprightly.  They trod upon the poor and 
crushed the needy, and then said to their stewards, "Bring wine, and let 
us drink."  Therefore though they had built houses of hewn stone, they 
should not live in them.  They had planted pleasant vineyards, but should 
not drink of them.  And all the while these superstitious and wicked rich 
men were talking of the day of the Lord, and hoping that the day of the 
Lord would appear.

You, if you have read your Bibles carefully and reverently, must surely 
be aware that the day of the Lord, either in the Old Testament or in the 
New, does not mean merely the final day of judgment, but any striking 
event, any great crisis in the world's history, which throws a divine 
light upon that history, and shows to men--at least to those who have 
eyes wherewith to see--that verily there is a God who judges the earth in 
righteousness, and ministers true judgment among the people;--a God whom 
men, and all their institutions, should always be prepared to meet, lest 
coming suddenly, He find them sleeping.  If you are not aware of this, 
the real meaning of a day of the Lord, a day of the Son of Man, let me 
entreat you to go and search the Scriptures for yourselves; for in them 
ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of the 
Lord, of that Eternal Son of whom the second Psalm speaks, in words which 
mobs and tyrants, the atheist and the superstitious, are alike willing to 
forget.

In the time of Amos, the rich tyrants of Israel seem to have meant by the 
day of the Lord some vague hope that, in those dark and threatening 
times, God would interfere to save them, if they were attacked by foreign 
armies.  But woe to you that desire the day of the Lord, says Amos the 
herdsman.  What do you want with it?  You will find it very different 
from what you expect.  There is a day of the Lord coming, he says, 
therefore prepare to meet your God.  But you are unprepared, and you will 
find the day of the Lord very different from what you expect.  It will be 
a day in which you will learn the righteousness of God.  Because He is 
righteous He will not suffer your unrighteousness.  Because He is good, 
He will not permit you to be bad.  The day of the Lord to you will be 
darkness and not light, not as you dream deliverance from the invaders, 
but ruin by the invaders, from which will be no escape.  "As if a man did 
flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house and leaned 
his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him."  There will be no escape 
for those wicked men.  Though they dug into hell, God's hand would take 
them; though they climbed up into heaven, God would fetch them down; 
though they hid in the bottom of the sea, God would command the serpent, 
and it should bite them.  He would sift the house of Israel among all 
nations like corn in a sieve, and not a grain should fall to the earth.  
And all the sinners among God's people should die by the sword, who say, 
"The evil shall not overtake us."

This was Amos's notion of the kingdom of God and His righteousness.  
These Israelites would not obey the laws of God's kingdom, and be 
righteous and good.  But Amos told them, they could not get rid of God's 
kingdom.  The Lord was King, in spite of them, and they would find it out 
to their sorrow.  If they would not seek His kingdom and His government, 
His government would seek them and find them, and find their evil-doings 
out.  If they would not seek God's righteousness, His righteousness would 
seek them, and execute righteous judgment on them.  No wonder that the 
Israelites thought Amos a most troublesome and insolent person.  No 
wonder that the smooth priest Amaziah begged him to begone and talk in 
that way somewhere else.  He saw plainly enough that either Amos must 
leave Samaria, or he must leave it.  The two could no more work together 
than fire and water.  Amos wanted to make men repent of their sins, while 
Amaziah wanted only to make them easy in their minds; and no man can do 
both at once.

So it was then, my friends, and so it will be till the end of this wicked 
world.  The way to please men, and be popular, always was, and always 
will be, Amaziah's way; to tell men that they may worship God and the 
golden calf at the same time, that they may worship God and money, 
worship God and follow the ways of this wicked world which suit their 
fancy and their interest; to tell them the kingdom of God is not over you 
now, Christ is not ruling the world now; that the kingdom of God will 
only come, when Christ comes at the last day, and meanwhile, if people 
will only believe what they are told, and live tolerably respectable 
lives, they may behave in all things else as if there was no God, and no 
judgments of God.  Seeking the righteousness of God, say these preachers 
of Amaziah's school, only means, that if Christ's righteousness is 
imputed to you need not be righteous yourselves, but will go to heaven 
without having been good men here on earth.  That is the comfortable 
message which the world delights to hear, and for which the world will 
pay a high price to its flatterers.

But if any man dares to tell his fellow-men what Amos told them, and say, 
The kingdom of God is among you, and within you, and over you, whether 
you like or not, and you are in it; the Lord is King, be the people never 
so unquiet; and all power is given to Him in heaven and earth already; 
and at the last great day, when He comes in glory, He will show that He 
has been governing the world and the inhabitants thereof all along, 
whether they cared to obey Him or not:--if he tell men, that the 
righteousness of God means this--to pray for the Spirit of God and of 
Christ, that they may be perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect, 
and holy as Christ is holy, for without holiness no man shall see the 
Lord:  if he tell men, that the wrath of God was revealed from heaven at 
the fall of man, and has been revealed continuously ever since, against 
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, that indignation and wrath, 
tribulation and anguish will fall upon every soul of man that doeth evil; 
and glory, honour, and peace to every man that worketh good:--when a man 
dares to preach that, he is no more likely to be popular with the wicked 
world (for it is a wicked world) than Amos was popular, or St Paul was 
popular, or our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave both to Amos and to St Paul 
their messages, was popular.  False preachers will dislike that man, 
because he wishes to make sinners uneasy, while they wish to make them 
easy.  Philosophers, falsely so-called, will dislike that man, because he 
talks of the kingdom of God, the providence of God, and they are busy--at 
least, just now--in telling men that there is no providence and no God--
at least, no living God.  The covetous and worldly will dislike that man, 
for they believe that the world is governed, not by God, but by money.  
Politicians will dislike that man, because they think that not God, but 
they, govern the world, by those very politics and knavish tricks, which 
we pray God to confound, whenever we sing "God save the Queen."  And the 
common people--the masses--who ought to hear such a man gladly, for his 
words are to them, if they would understand them, a gospel, and good news 
of divine hope and deliverance from sin and ignorance, oppression and 
misery--the masses, I say, will dislike that man, because he tells them 
that God's will is law, and must be obeyed at all risks:  and the poor 
fools have got into their heads just now that not God's will, but the 
will of the people, is law, and that not the eternal likeness of God, but 
whatever they happen to decide by the majority of the moment, is right.

And so such a preacher will not be popular with the many.  They will 
dismiss him, at best, as they might a public singer or lecturer, with 
compliments and thanks, and so excuse themselves from doing what he tells 
them.  And he must look for his sincere hearers in the hearts of those--
and there are such, I verily believe, in this congregation--who have a 
true love and a true fear of Christ, their incarnate God--who believe, 
indeed, that Christ is their King, and the King of all the earth; who 
think that to please Him is the most blessed, as well as the most 
profitable, thing which man can do; to displease Him the most horrible, 
as well as the most dangerous, thing which man can do; and who, 
therefore, try to please Him by becoming like Him, by really renouncing 
the world and all its mean and false and selfish ways, and putting on His 
new pattern of man, which is created after God's likeness in 
righteousness and true holiness.  Blessed are they, for of them it is 
written, "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, for they shall be filled."  Even Christ Himself shall fill 
them.  Blessed are they, and all that they take in hand, for of them it 
is written, "Blessed are all they that fear the Lord, and walk in His 
ways.  For thou shalt eat the labours of thine hands."  "The Lord is 
righteous in all His ways, and holy in all His works.  The Lord is nigh 
unto all them that call upon Him, yea, all such as call upon Him 
faithfully.  He will fulfil the desire of them that fear Him.  He also 
will hear their cry"--ay, "and will help them."

Happy, ay, blest will such souls be, let the day of the Lord appear when 
it will, or how it will.  It may appear--the day of the Lord, as it has 
appeared again and again in history--in the thunder of some mighty war.  
It may appear after some irresistible, though often silent revolution, 
whether religious or intellectual, social or political.  It will appear 
at last, as that great day of days, which will conclude, so we believe, 
the drama of human history, and all men shall give account for their own 
works.  But, however and whenever it shall appear, they at least will 
watch its dawning, neither with the selfish assurance of modern 
Pharisaism, nor with the abject terror of mediaeval superstition; but 
with that manful faith with which he who sang the 98th Psalm saw the day 
of the Lord dawn once in the far east, more than two thousand years ago, 
and cried with solemn joy, in the glorious words which you have just 
heard sung--words which the Church of England has embodied in her daily 
evening service, in order, I presume, to show her true children how they 
ought to look at days of judgment; and so prepare to meet their God:--

"Show yourselves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands:  sing, rejoice, and 
give thanks.

"Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is:  the round world, and 
they that dwell therein.

"Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together 
before the Lord:  for He cometh to judge the earth.

"With righteousness shall He judge the world:  and the people with 
equity.

"Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

"As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end.  
Amen."



SERMON III.  THE PURIFYING HOPE



Eversley, 1869.  Windsor Castle, 1869.

1 John iii. 2.  "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet 
appear what we shall be:  but we know that, when he shall appear, we 
shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.  And every man that 
hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure."

Let us consider this noble text, and see something, at least, of what it 
has to tell us.  It is, like all God's messages, all God's laws, ay, like 
God's world in which we live and breathe, at once beautiful and awful; 
full of life-giving hope; but full, too, of chastening fear.  Hope for 
the glorious future which it opens to poor human beings like us; fear, 
lest so great a promise being left us, we should fall short of it by our 
own fault.  Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed on us, 
that we should be called the sons of God.

There is the root and beginning of all Christianity,--of all true 
religion.  We are the sons of God, and the infinite, absolute, eternal 
Being who made this world, and all worlds, is our Father.  We are the 
children of God.  It is not for us to say who are not God's children.  
That is God's concern, not ours.  All that we have to do with, is the 
awful and blessed fact that we are.  We were baptised into God's kingdom, 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.  Let us 
believe the Gospel and good news which baptism brings us, and say each of 
us;--Not for our own goodness and deserving; not for our own faith or 
assurance; not for anything which we have thought, felt, or done, but 
simply out of the free grace and love of God, seeking out us unconscious 
infants, we are children of God.  "Beloved now are we the sons of God, 
and it doth not yet appear what we shall be."  It doth not yet appear 
what the next life will be like, or what we shall be like in it.  That 
there will be a next life,--that death does not end all for us, the New 
Testament tells us.  Yea, our own hearts and reasons tell us.  That 
sentiment of immortality, that instinct that the death of our body will 
not, cannot destroy our souls, or ourselves--all men have had that, 
except a few; and it is a question whether they had it not once, and have 
only lost it by giving way to their brute animal nature.  But be that as 
it may, it concerns us, I think, very little.  For we at least believe 
that we shall live again.  That we shall live again in some state or 
other, is as certain to our minds as it was to the minds of our 
forefathers, even while they were heathens; as certain to us as it is 
that we are alive now.  But in that future state, what we shall be like, 
we know not.  St. John says that he did not know; and we certainly have 
no more means of knowing than St. John.

Therefore let us not feed our fancies with pictures of what the next 
world will be like,--pictures, I say, which are but waking dreams of men, 
intruding into those things which they have not seen, vainly puffed up in 
their fleshly minds--that is in their animal and mortal brain.  Let us be 
content with what St. John tells us, which is a matter not for our 
brains, but for our hearts; not for our imaginations, but for our 
conscience, which is indeed our highest reason.  Whatever we do not know 
about the next world, this, he says, we do know,--that when God in Christ 
shall appear, we shall be like Him.  Like God.  No more:  No:  but no 
less.  To be like God, it appears, is the very end and aim of our being.  
That we might be like God, God our Father sent us forth from His eternal 
bosom, which is the ground of all life, in heaven and in earth.  That we 
might be like God, He clothed us in mortal flesh, and sent us into this 
world of sense.  That we might be like God, He called us, from our 
infancy, into His Church.  That we might be like God, He gave us the 
divine sense of right and wrong; and more, by the inspiration of His holy 
spirit, that inward witness, that Light of God, which lightens every man 
that cometh into the world, He taught us to love the right and hate the 
wrong.  That we might be like God, God is educating us from our cradle to 
our grave, by every event, even the smallest, which happens to us.  That 
we might be like God, it is in God that we live, and move, and have our 
being; that as the raindrop which falls from heaven, rises again surely, 
soon or late, to heaven again; so each soul of man, coming forth from God 
at first, should return again to God, as many of them as have eternal 
life, having become like to God from whom it came at first.  And how 
shall we become like God? or rather like Christ who is both God and man?  
To become like God the Father,--that is impossible for finite and created 
beings as we are.  But to become somewhat, at least, like God the Son, 
like Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the brightness of His Father's glory, 
and the express image of His person, that is not impossible.  For He has 
revealed Himself as a man, in the soul and body of a man, that our sinful 
souls might be made like His pure soul; our sinful bodies like His 
glorious body; and that so He might be the first born among many 
brethren.  And how?  "We know that when He appears, we shall be like Him, 
for we shall see Him as He is."

For we shall see Him as He is.  Herein is a great mystery, and one which 
I do not pretend to fathom.  Only this I can try to do--to shew how it 
may seem possible and reasonable, from what is called analogy, that is by 
judging of an unknown thing from a known thing, which is, at least, 
something like it.  Now do we not all know how apt we are to become like 
those whom we see, with whom we spend our hours--and, above all, like 
those whom we admire and honour?  For good and for evil, alas!  For evil-
-for those who associate with evil or frivolous persons are too apt to 
catch not only their low tone, but their very manner, their very 
expression of face, speaking, and thinking, and acting.  Not only do they 
become scornful, if they live with scorners; false, if they live with 
liars; mean, if they live with covetous men; but they will actually catch 
the very look of their faces.  The companions of affected, frivolous 
people, men or women, grow to look affected frivolous.  Indulging in the 
same passions, they mould their own countenances and their very walk, 
also the very tones of their voice, as well as their dress, into the 
likeness of those with whom they associate, nay, of those whose fashions 
(as they are called) they know merely by books and pictures.  But thank 
God, who has put into the hearts of Christian people the tendency towards 
God--just in the same way does good company tend to make men good; high-
minded company to make them high-minded; kindly company to make them 
kindly; modest company to make them modest; honourable company to make 
them honourable; and pure company to make them pure.  If the young man or 
woman live with such, look up to such as their ideal, that is, the 
pattern which they ought to emulate--then, as a fact, the Spirit of God 
working in them does mould them into something of the likeness of those 
whom they admire and love.  I have lived long enough to see more than one 
man of real genius stamp his own character, thought, even his very manner 
of speaking, for good or for evil, on a whole school or party of his 
disciples.  It has been said, and truly, I believe, that children cannot 
be brought up among beautiful pictures,--I believe, even among any 
beautiful sights and sounds,--without the very expression of their faces 
becoming more beautiful, purer, gentler, nobler; so that in them are 
fulfilled the words of the great and holy Poet concerning the maiden 
brought up according to God, and the laws of God--


   "And she shall bend her ear
   In many a secret place,
Where rivulets dance their wayward round,
And beauty, born of murmuring sound,
   Shall pass into her face."


But if mere human beings can have this "personal influence," as it is 
called, over each others' characters, if even inanimate things, if they 
be beautiful, can have it--what must be the personal influence of our 
Lord Jesus Christ?  Of Him, who is the Man of all men, the Son of Man, 
the perfect and ideal Man--and more, who is very God of very God; the 
Author of all life, power, wisdom, genius, in every human being, whether 
they use to good, or abuse to ill, His divine gifts; the Author, too, of 
all natural beauty, from the sun over our heads to the flower beneath our 
feet?  Think of that steadily, accurately, rationally.  Think of who 
Christ is, and what Christ is--and then think what His personal influence 
must be--quite infinite, boundless, miraculous.  So that the very 
blessedness of heaven will not be merely the sight of our Lord; it will 
be the being made holy, and kept holy, by that sight.  If only we be fit 
for it.  For let us ask ourselves the question,--If St John's words come 
true of us, if we should see Him as He is, would the sight of His all-
glorious countenance warm us into such life, love, longing for virtue and 
usefulness, as we never felt before?  Or would it crush us into the very 
earth with utter shame and humiliation, full and awful knowledge of how 
weak and foolish, sinful and unworthy we were?--as it does to Gerontius 
in the poem, when he dreams that, after death, he demanded, rashly and 
