them as a recognised part of Matins. In solemn vigils, in the early
Church, the congregation took part in the psalm singing, and hence we
find _psalmi responsorii_ mentioned, and we still have a typical
instance in the Invitatory Psalm of our Office. Probably, some similar
practice existed in the readings from Sacred Scripture. "At those
primitive vigils, then, after the reading of the Sacred Scripture, the
responsory was given by the precentor and the assembled faithful took up
the words and chanted them forth in the same simple melody. Next, a
verse was sung frequently echoing the same sentiment, and the choir
again, as in the _psalmi responsorii_, repeated the refrain or the
responsorii proper. Frequently other verses were added according to the
dignity of the festivals, and after each the faithful struck in with the
original refrain.... At first those responsories would probably have
been extempore ... left to the genius or to the inspiration of the
individual chanter, but gradually, by a survival of the fittest, the
most beautiful ones became stereotyped and spread throughout several
churches.... Later they were carefully collected, arranged and codified
by St. Gregory or one of his predecessors and passed into all the books
of liturgy" (Rev. M. Eaton, _loc. cit._). Monsignor Battifol (_History
of the Roman Breviary_, Eng, trans., p. 78) says that these parts of the
liturgy, in beauty and eloquence rival the chorus dialogues of Greek
drama, and quotes as an example the _Aspiciens a longe_ from the first
Sunday of Advent.

_Rubrics._ The responsories, as a rule, are said after each lesson of
Matins. When the _Te Deum_ is said after the ninth lesson, there are
only eight responsories. At the end of the third, sixth and eighth
lesson the _Gloria Patri_ with a repetition of part of the responsory is
said. It is said in the second responsory in offices of three lessons
only. In Passiontide the _Gloria Patri_ is not said, but the responsory
is repeated _ab initio_. In the Requiem Office _Gloria Patri_ is
replaced by "_requiem aeternam_." In the Sundays of Advent, Sundays
after Septuagesima until Palm Sunday, and in the triduum before Easter,
there are nine responsories recited.

Perhaps an explanation of the rubric may not be useless. The asterisk
(*) indicates the part which should be repeated first after the verse
and immediately after the _Gloria Patri_. The _Gloria Patri_ should be
said to include the word _sancto_, and _sicut erat_ should not be said.
Some responsories have two or three asterisks, and then the repetitions
should be made from one asterisk to another and not as far as the verse
ending. Examples may be seen in the responsories for the first Sunday
of Advent and in the _Libera nos_ of the Requiem Office. The
responsories of the Requiem Office--which is almost the only Office
which missionary priests have an opportunity of reciting in choir--are
highly praised for their beauty of thought and expression. They were
compiled by Maurice de Sully (circa 1196), Bishop of Paris.

_Symbolism of the Rubric._ The responsories are placed after the
lessons, the old writers on liturgy say, to excite attention and
devotion, to thank God for the instruction given in the lessons, to make
us realise and practise what has been read and to teach us that "Blessed
are they who hear the word of God and keep it." Again, those writers
knew why the chanter said only one verse and the worshippers replied in
chorus--to show that all their souls were united and free from schism.

_Te Deum_ (Title XXXI.). _Author._ In the Breviary prior to the reform
of Pius X., this hymn was printed under the words "Hymnus SS. Ambrosii
et Augustini." However, "no one thinks now of attributing this canto to
either St. Ambrose or St. Augustine" (Battifol, _op. cit._, p. 110).
Formerly, it was piously believed to have been composed and sung by
these saints on the evening of Augustine's baptism. The question of the
authorship of this hymn has led to much study and much controversy. Some
scholars attribute it to St. Hilary, others to Sisebut, a Benedictine;
others to Nicetas, Bishop of Treves, in the year 527. To-day, the
opinion of the learned Benedictine, Dom. Morin--who follows the readings
of the Irish manuscripts--that the hymn was written by Nicetas of
Remesiana (circa 400 A.D.), is the most probable. This opinion has been
criticised by several Continental scholars (V. _Cath. Encly_., art.
"Te Deum").

_Rubrics_. The Te Deum is always said at the end of Matins, unless in
Matins of Feast of Holy Innocents, of Sundays of Advent, and from
Septuagesima to Palm Sunday, and ferias outside Eastertide (from Low
Sunday to Ascension Day).

_The Structure of the Hymn_. In this wonderful composition, there are
probably two hymns connected, and followed by a set of versicles and.
responses, which might be used with any similar hymn. It is probable
that the first hymn (_Te Deum ... Paraclitum Spiritum_), lines 1 to 13 of
Te Deum are older than the second part, which was written probably as a
sequel to the early hymn. The rhythm of the hymn is very beautiful,
being free from abruptness and monotony. Students of poetry may note
that seven lines have the exact hexameter ending, if scanned
accentually, as voce proclamant; Deus sabbaoth, etc. Seven have two
dactyls, as laudabilis numerus, laudat exercitus; one ends with
spondees, apostolorum chorus. The other six lines have a less
regular ending.

This hymn of praise to the Blessed Trinity is divided into two parts and
seems to be modelled on the lines of the Psalm 148, _Laudate Dominum de
coelis_ (see Sunday Lauds I.). The verses 1 to 6 of the hymn, like the
opening verses of the psalm, record the worship and adoration of the
angels. The second part of the hymn records the worship of human beings
living or dead--Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs. The second hymn, _Tu Rex
gloriae Christi_, etc., is a prayer to Christ, the God Incarnate, the
Redeemer now in Glory, to aid His servants and to aid them to be of the
number of His saints in everlasting glory.

The third part of the hymn, vv. 22-29 (_Salvum fac_ ... _in aeternum_)
is considered by scholars to be simply versicles, responses and prayers;
the verses 22-23 (Salvum fac... usque in aeternum). being the versicle,
and verses 24-25 (Per singulos dies... saeculi), verse 2 of Psalm 144
being the response before the beautiful verses of prayer "Dignare Domine
die isto sine peccato nos custodire," etc. "Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep
us this day from sin; O Lord, have mercy on us," etc., etc.

This hymn has a special interest for Irish priests, as the Irish
recensions of it, found in the Bangor Antiphoner (to be seen in the
Library of Trinity College, Dublin) are of the greatest value to
scholars engaged in critical study. They date from the tenth century,
and give Nicetas as the author. The wording in the old Irish Antiphoner
differs in some verses from the text given in our Breviary. Thus, in
verse 6, the Bangor text has, _universa_ before the word _terra_; again,
in verse 18, the Breviary reads "_Tu ad deteram Dei sedes_," Bangor, and
probably more correctly, reads _sedens_. Verses 26-29, "_Dignare
Domine_... _confundar in aeternum_" are not found in the Irish book.
Those who wish to study these old Irish MSS. may receive great help from
Warren's _Bangor Antiphoner_ (II., pp.83-91) and light comes too from
Julian's _Dictionary of Hymnology_ (pp. 1120-1121).


SOME TEXTS AND INTENTIONS WHICH MAY HELP TOWARDS THE WORTHY RECITATION
  OF MATINS (_vide_ pages 4, 120).

  "Matutina ligat Christum qui crimina purgat."
  "Although I should die with Thee, I will not deny Thee."
  "And in like manner also said they all."
  "Pray, lest you enter into temptation,"
  "And being in agony He prayed the longer."
  "Friend, whereunto art thou come?--"
  "And they holding Jesus led Him away"--the Garden.
  "Art thou one of His disciples?"
  "My kingdom is not of this world"--Before the High Priest.

_General Intentions_:-Exaltation of the Church; the Pope; the Mission to
the heathen; Christian nations; the conversion of the heretics, infidels
and sinners; the Catholic laity; the Catholic priesthood.

_Personal Intentions_:-Lively faith; a greater hope; ardent charity.

_Special Intentions_:-For parents; for benefactors; for those in sorrow;
dying sinners; deceased priests of Ireland; for the conversion of
England; for vocations to the priesthood.




CHAPTER II.

LAUDS.

_Etymology, Definition, Symbolism_. The word "Lauds" is derived from the
Latin _laus_, praise. It is applied to this Hour, as it is _par
excellence_, the hour in which God's praises are chanted by His Church.
This Hour succeeds Matins and precedes Prime. The name is said to have
been given to this Hour on account of the last three Psalms, which
formerly formed part of the Office. In these Psalms, 148, 149, 150, the
word _Laudate_ recurs several times. Before the eighth century the Hour
was called "Matutinum," or morning Office, and sometimes it was called
_Gallicinum_ or _Galli cantus_ from being recited at cock-crow. This is
the Office of daybreak and hence its symbolism is of Christ's
resurrection. "Christ, the light of the world, rose from the tomb on
Easter morning, like a radiant sun, trampling over darkness and shedding
His brightness upon the earth. The hymns, psalms, antiphons and
versicles of Lauds, all proclaim the mystery of Christ's Resurrection,
and the light which enlightens our souls. The reform of the Psalter in
1911 has not always preserved this liturgical idea; nevertheless, the
character of the Office has not been altered. Lauds remains the true
morning prayer, which hails in the rising sun, the image of Christ
triumphant--consecrates to Him the opening day. No other morning prayer
is comparable to this" (Dom. F. Cabrol, _The Day Hours of the Church_,
London, 1910).

_Antiquity_. The Christians, in their night vigils, followed the pious
practices of the Jews, as to prayers at dead of night and at dawn,
Hence, the Hour, Lauds is of great antiquity, coming, perhaps, from
Apostolic times. It is found well established in the very earliest
accounts of Christian liturgy.

The old writers on liturgy loved to dwell on pious congruities and
parallelisms. They ask the questions, why did the early Christians pray
at dawn and why is the practice continued? They answer at great length,
I will try to summarise their holy themes. The early Christians prayed
at dawn, 1. that in the New Law the figures of the Old may be fulfilled;
2. to honour the risen Saviour and to remind us of our resurrection; 3.
to glorify Jesus typified by the physical light. "I am the Light of the
world" (St. John, viii. 12); 4. because at dawn, after rest, body and
soul are refreshed and ready to devote all their powers to God, free
from distractions and noise. Each dawn, revealing God's wondrous work,
should hear God's praises in the most sublime words ever uttered, the
Psalms (e.g., _Dominus regnavit, Jubilate Deo_, etc., etc.);
5. because God seems more disposed to hear prayers made at that hour. For,
He has said, "Yet if thou wilt arise early to God and wilt beseech the
Almighty... He will presently awake unto thee and make the dwelling of thy
justice peaceable" (Job, viii. 5-6). "I love them that love me; and
they that in the morning early watch for me shall find me" (Proverbs
viii. 17).

_Structure_. If Lauds succeeds Matins immediately, _Pater Noster_ and
_Ave Maria_ are omitted, and the Hour begins with _Deus in adjutorium_.
At these words it is a practice but not an obligation to make the sign
of the cross from head to breast (see Vespers, _infra_). Then the Gloria
Patri, Sicut erat, Amen, Alleluia are said before the antiphons and
psalms. But if a notable delay--say, of ten minutes' duration--be made
between the end of Matins and the start of Lauds, the _Pater Noster_ and
_Ave Maria_ begin Lauds. After the psalms, comes the Capitulum, the
Hymn, Versicle and Response, antiphon to Benedictus, Canticle
_Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel, Gloria Patri, Sicut erat_, Antiphon to
Benedictus repeated, _Dominus vobiscum, Et cum spiritu tuo, Oremus_,
collect, commemorations preceded by versicle, response and _Oremus_
before each. Then _Dominus vobiscum_, _Et cum spiritu tuo_, _Benedicamus
Domino, Deo Gratias, Fidelium animae, Amen_. If another Hour do not
succeed immediately, _Pater Noster_ (said silently), _Dominus det nobis_
(with a sign of the cross) _suam pacem, Et vitam aeternam_. _Amen_. Then
is said the antiphon of the Blessed Virgin, Alma Redemptoris or Ave
Regina, or Regina Coeli, or Salve Regina, according to the part of the
ecclesiastical year for which each is assigned, with _versicle,
response, oremus, collect, Divinum auxilium_.... Amen.

_Rubrics_. In the paragraphs dealing with the structure of this hour is
given the rule for saying _Pater Noster_ and _Ave_, The Psalms for
Lauds in the new Breviary follow these rules:--

_General Rule_: Psalms of the current day.

_Exception_: Sunday Psalms on the excepted Feasts.

In applying the general rule to Sundays and week days, it will be seen
that the Psalter contains two sets of Psalms for Lauds. The use of the
two sets is as follows:--

_Sundays_:
   (i) Throughout the year: first set of Psalms.

  (ii) Sundays from Septuagesima to Easter: second set of Psalms.


_Ferias_: The first set of Psalms is to be used on:--

   (i) Ferias throughout the year, not including those in Advent,
       Septuagesima, Sexagesima and Quinquagesima weeks.

  (ii) Ferias in Paschal time.

 (iii) Feasts at any season of the year.

  (iv) Vigils of Christmas and Epiphany.


The second set of Psalms is to be used on:--

   (i) Ferias of Advent.

  (ii) Ferias from Septuagesima to Wednesday in Holy Week, inclusive.

 (iii) Vigils (common) outside Paschal time, when the Office of Vigil
       is said (_New Psalter and Its Uses_, p. 188).

On Maundy Thursday, Good Friday and Holy Saturday, the Psalms of the
Feria are to be said. But the Canticle of Moses (Deut, 33) is not said
on Holy Saturday.

_Antiphons_. As a general rule antiphons of the current day of the week
are to be said.

_Exceptions_. (1) On excepted Feasts, (2) non-excepted Feasts which have
proper antiphons, (3) Holy Week has special antiphons, (4) Six ferias
before Christmas have special antiphons.

In Paschal time, all psalms and the canticles are recited under one
antiphon.

Antiphon of Benedictus (1) Sunday antiphons are proper. (2) Ferias
throughout the year have antiphons of current feria. But Ferias in
Advent, and in Lent, in Passiontide, Paschal time and September Ember
days have proper antiphons. (3) Feasts have antiphons from proper or
from common.

_Capitulum_ (Title XXIX.). _Etymology, meaning and synonyms_.

The word _capitulum_ comes from the Latin, and means a little chapter, a
heading, a beginning, an abridgment, because this little chapter is a
little lesson, a brief extract from Sacred Scripture, the head or the
beginning of the Epistle of the Mass of the Feast (Gavantus, Bona). It
is found in every Hour, except Matins. It is known by other names, the
summarium, collectio, collatio, lectio brevis, epistoletto, lectiuncula,
Versiculus brevis.

_Antiquity_. Some authors hold that this usage of reading a brief
extract from Sacred Scripture is of Jewish origin. For, the Jews were
accustomed to interpose brief readings from Scripture prose in their
psalm chanting service. The _capitulum_ is found in Christian services
of the fourth century; and St. Ambrose (340-397) is said to have
instituted the _capitula_ of Terce, Sext and None. This new practice
spread quickly and several councils recommended or ordered the
usage--e.g., the Council of Agde In 506 A.D.

_Remarks._ The _Capitulum_ is said always except from Holy Thursday to
the Vespers of Saturday preceding Low Sunday, and in Requiem Offices. In
Compline it is said after the Hymn.

The _Capitulum_ of Lauds is ordinarily taken from the beginning of the
Epistle of the Mass of the day of the feast. Sext and None generally
have their _capitula_ drawn from the middle and end of the same Epistle
extract. Terce has generally the same words for the _Capitulum_, as
Vespers and Lauds, because it is the grandest and most sublime of the
little Hours. The _Capitulum_ is said without a blessing being sought,
because it is (in choir) read by the Hebdomadarius, who there represents
the person of Christ, just as the _Capitulum_ does too, and for Whom it
would not be consonant to ask a blessing. It concludes without _Tu
autem_, because these words are correlative of _Jube_. And since it is
such a short lesson it is easy to recite it without fault or sin, the
more so as it is read by the Hebdomadarius, who should be advanced in
perfection. It is short, whilst the lessons of Matins, the night Office,
are long, because the day is specially given to toil and the night to
contemplation. During the recital of this little lesson all turn to the
altar through respect for Christ, figured by the _Capitulum_. Sometimes
the words of the _Capitulum_ are from the Itala version and not from
the Vulgate.

_Psalms and Canticles of Lauds_. The Office of Lauds now consists of
four Psalms and a canticle, followed by a little chapter, a hymn,
versicle, antiphon, of Benedictus, the canticle, Benedictus and prayer.
One of the characteristics of Lauds is the canticle taken from the Old
Testament. Fourteen canticles taken from the Old Testament now find a
place in our Breviaries. Formerly, only seven canticles from the Old
Testament were given in the Psaltery (cf. _supra_, p. 149).

"If, according to the new distribution of the Psalter, the Psalms for
Lauds do not refer so directly to the symbolism of sunrise, they are
nevertheless more varied and are generally well chosen. The canticles
inserted among the Psalms have also been changed. The whole selection is
worthy of note. It contains, besides those given in the former
arrangement of the Psalter, others which are very beautiful and
admirably prayerful.

"The hymns for Lauds, all ancient and varying with the seasons, form a
fine collection. Their theme is one: the rising of the sun as a symbol
of Christ's resurrection, and the crowing of the cock, which arouses the
sluggish and calls all to work. Some of these hymns are of considerable
poetical merit: that for Sunday, _Aeterne Rerum conditor_, is a little
masterpiece.

"The 'Benedictus' corresponds with the _Magnificat_ of Vespers. Both are
sung with the same solemnity and are of the same importance; they form
as it were the culminating point of their respective Hours, and for
feast days the altar is incensed while they are chanted.

"The 'Benedictus' or Canticle of Zachary recalls the Precursor's mission
of proclaiming the Messiah and the new alliance. It is altogether
appropriate to the Office of daybreak, as ushering in the dawn of a new
era. The closing verse speaks of the light which the announcement of the
Messiah shed upon the nations 'sitting in darkness and in the shadow of
death'" (Dom Cabrol, Introduction to _Day Hours of the Church_).

"This Canticle of Zachary (St. Luke i. 68-79) naturally falls into two
parts. The first (verses 68 to 75, 'Benedictus Dominus ... diebus
nostris') is a song of thanksgiving for the fulfilment of the Messianic
hopes of the Jews, to which is given a Christian sentiment. The power,
which was of old in the family of David for the defence of the nation,
is being restored, and in a higher and more spiritual sense. The Jews
mourning under the Roman yoke prayed for deliverance through the house
of David. The 'deliverance,' a powerful salvation ('cornu salutis
nobis') was at hand so that the Jews were seeing the fulfilment of God's
promise made to Abraham, and this deliverance, this salvation was such
that 'we may serve Him without fear in holiness and justice, all our
days' (St. Luke i. 75).

"The second part of the canticle (verses 76-80, 'Et tu puer ... ad
dirigendos pedes nostros') is an address by Zachary to his own son, who
was to take an important part in the scheme of the powerful salvation
and deliverance by the Messiah. This canticle is known as the canticle
of joyous hope, hence its use at funerals at the moment of interment,
when words of thanksgiving for the Redemption are specially in place as
an expression of Christian hope" (_Catholic Encyclopedia_, art.
"Benedictus").

_Oratio_ (Title XXX.). The word _oratio_ has various meanings. In the
liturgy it is translated by the word "collect." The word "collect" means
either that the priest who celebrates Mass collects in a short form the
needs, the thanksgivings and the praises of the people, to offer them up
to God; or most probably "the original meaning seems to have been this:
it was used for the service held at a certain church on the days when
there was a station held somewhere else. The people gathered together
and became a collection at the first church; after certain prayers had
been said they went in procession to the station church. Just before
they started, the celebrant said a prayer, the _oratio ad collectam_
(_ad collectionem populi_), the name would then be the same as _oratio
super populum_, a title that still remains in our Missal, in Lent, for
instance, after the Post-Communion. This prayer, the collect, would be
repeated at the beginning of Mass at the station itself. Later writers
find other meanings for the name. Innocent III. says that in this prayer
the priest collects all the prayers of the faithful" (_De Sacr. Altar.
Mystic_. ii., 2). See also Benedict XIV. (_De SS. Missae Sacr_. ii.,
5,--Dr. A. Fortescue, _Cath. Encyl_., art. "collect").

_Antiquity of collects_. No one can say with certainty who the
composers of the collects were. All admit the antiquity of these
compositions. In the fourth century certain collects were believed to
come from apostolic times; indeed, the collects read in the Mass on Good
Friday, for Gentiles, Jews, heretics, schismatics, catechumens and
infidels bear intrinsic notes of their antiquity. Other liturgical
collects show that they were composed in the days of persecution. Others
show their ages by their accurate expression of Catholic doctrine
against, and their supplications for, heretics, Manicheans, Sabbelians,
Arians, Pelagians and Nestorians. St, Jerome in his Life of St. Hilarion
(291-371) writes, "Sacras Scriptures memoriter tenens, post orationes et
psalmos quasi Deo praesente recitabat." It is said that St. Gelasius (d.
496), St. Ambrose (d. 397), St, Gregory the Great (d. 604) composed
collects and corrected existing ones. The authorship and the period of
composition of many of the Breviary collects are matters of doubt and
difficulty. Even the date of the introduction of collects into the
Divine Office is doubtful. In the early Christian Church there seems to
have been one and only one prayer, the _Pater Noster_, in liturgical
use. St. Benedict laid it down in his rule that there should be none
