attack. But Bouchard made no attack. He merely wanted to exchange
"prisoners." He played a pretty trick on the Santa Barbara comandante in
negotiating for such exchange, and then, when the hour of delivery came,
it was found he had but one prisoner,--a poor drunken wretch whom the
authorities would have been glad to get rid of at any price.

In 1824 the Indian revolt, which is fully treated in the chapters on
Santa Ines and Purisima, reached Santa Barbara. While Padre Ripoll was
absent at the presidio, the neophytes armed themselves and worked
themselves into a frenzy. They claimed that they were in danger from the
Santa Ines rebels unless they joined the revolt, though they promised to
do no harm if only the soldiers were sent and kept away. Accordingly
Ripoll gave an order for the guard to withdraw, but the Indians insisted
that the soldiers leave their weapons. Two refused, whereupon they we're
savagely attacked and wounded. This so incensed Guerra that he marched
up from the presidio in full force, and a fight of several hours ensued,
the Indians shooting with guns and arrows from behind the pillars of the
corridors. Two Indians were killed and three wounded, and four of the
soldiers were wounded. When Guerra retired to the presidio, the Indians
stole all the clothing and other portable property they could carry
(carefully respecting everything, however, belonging to the church), and
fled to the hills. That same afternoon the troops returned and, despite
the padre's protest, sacked the Indians' houses and killed all the
stragglers they found, regardless of their guilt or innocence. The
Indians refused to return, and retreated further over the mountains to
the recesses of the Tulares. Here they were joined by escaped neophytes
from San Fernando and other Missions. The alarm spread to San
Buenaventura and San Gabriel, but few, if any, Indians ran away. In the
meantime the revolt was quelled at Santa Ines and Purisima, as
elsewhere recorded.

On the strength of reports that he heard, Governor Argueello recalled the
Monterey troops; but this appeared to be a mistake, for, immediately,
Guerra of Santa Barbara sent eighty men over to San Emigdio, where, on
April 9 and 11, severe conflicts took place, with four Indians killed,
and wounded on both sides. A wind and dust storm arising, the troops
returned to Santa Barbara.

In May the governor again took action, sending Captain Portilla with a
force of 130 men. The prefect Sarria and Padre Ripoll went along to make
as peaceable terms as possible, and a message which Sarria sent on ahead
doubtless led the insurgents to sue for peace. They said they were
heartily sorry for their actions and were anxious to return to Mission
life, but hesitated about laying down their arms for fear of summary
punishment. The gentiles still fomented trouble by working on the fears
of the neophytes, but owing to Argueello's granting a general pardon,
they were finally, in June, induced to return, and the revolt was at
an end.

After these troubles, however, the Mission declined rapidly in
prosperity. Though the buildings under Padre Ripoll were in excellent
condition, and the manufacturing industries were well kept up,
everything else suffered.

In 1817 a girls' school for whites was started at the presidio of Santa
Barbara, but nothing further is known of it. Several years later a
school was opened, and Diego Fernandez received $15 a month as its
teacher. But Governor Echeandia ordered that, as not a single scholar
attended, this expense be discontinued; yet he required the comandante
to compel parents to send their children to school.

In 1833 Presidente Duran, discussing with Governor Figueroa the question
of secularization, deprecated too sudden action, and suggested a partial
and experimental change at some of the oldest Missions, Santa Barbara
among the number.

When the decree from Mexico, came, however, this was one of the first
ten Missions to be affected thereby. Anastasio Carrillo was appointed
comisionado, and acted from September, 1833. His inventory in March,
1834, showed credits, $14,953; buildings, $22,936; furniture, tools,
goods in storehouse, vineyards, orchards, corrals, and animals,
$19,590; church, $16,000; sacristy, $1500; church ornaments, etc.,
$4576; library, $152; ranches, $30,961; total, $113,960, with a debt to
be deducted of $1000.

The statistics from 1786 to 1834, the whole period of the Mission's
history, show that there were 5679 baptisms, 1524 marriages, 4046
deaths. The largest population was 1792 in 1803. The largest number of
cattle was 5200 in 1809, of sheep, 11,066 in 1804.

Here, as elsewhere, the comisionados found serious fault with the pueblo
grog-shops. In 1837 Carrillo reports that he has broken up a place where
Manuel Gonzalez sold liquor to the Indians, and he calls upon the
comandante to suppress other places. In March, 1838, he complains that
the troops are killing the Mission cattle, but is told that General
Castro had authorized the officers to kill all the cattle needed without
asking permission. When the Visitador Hartwell was here in 1839 he found
Carrillo's successor Cota an unfit man, and so reported him. He finally
suspended him, and the Indians became more contented and industrious
under Padre Duran's supervision, though the latter refused to undertake
the temporal management of affairs.

Micheltorena's decree of 1843 affected Santa Barbara, in that it was
ordered returned to the control of the padres; but in the following year
Padre Duran reported that it had the greatest difficulty in supporting
its 287 souls. Pico's decree in 1845 retained the principal building for
the bishop and padres; but all the rest and the orchards and lands were
to be rented, which was accordingly done December 5, to Nicholas A. Den
and Daniel Hill for $1200 per year, the property being valued at
$20,288. Padre Duran was growing old, and the Indians were becoming more
careless and improvident; so, when Pico wrote him to give up the Mission
lands and property to the renters, he did so willingly, though he stated
that the estate owed him $1000 for money he had advanced for the use of
the Indians. The Indians were to receive one third of the rental, but
there is no record of a cent of it ever getting into their hands. June
10, 1846, Pico sold the Mission to Richard S. Den for $7500, though the
lessees seem to have kept possession until about the end of 1848. The
land commission confirmed Den's title, though the evidences are that it
was annulled in later litigation. Padre Duran died here early in 1846, a
month after Bishop Diego. Padre Gonzalez Rubio still remained for almost
thirty years longer to become the last of the old missionaries.

In 1853 a petition was presented to Rome, and Santa Barbara was erected
into a Hospice, as the beginning of an Apostolic College for the
education of Franciscan novitiates who are to go forth, wherever sent,
as missionaries. St. Anthony's College, the modern building near by, was
founded by the energy of Father Peter Wallischeck. It is for the
education of aspirants to the Franciscan Order. There are now
thirty-five students.

[Illustration: DOOR TO CEMETERY, SANTA BARBARA.]

[Illustration: MISSION BELL AT SANTA BARBARA.]

[Illustration: THE SACRISTY WALL, GARDEN AND TOWERS, MISSION SANTA
BARBARA.]

[Illustration: FACHADA OF MISSION LA PURISIMA CONCEPCION, NEAR LOMPOC,
CALIF]

Five of the early missionaries and three of later date are buried in the
crypt, under the floor of the sanctuary, in front of the high altar; and
Bishop Diego rests under the floor at the right-hand side of the altar.

The small cemetery, which is walled in and entered from the church, is
said to contain the bodies of 4000 Indians, as well as a number of
whites. In the northeast corner is the vault in which are buried the
members of the Franciscan community.

In the bell tower are two old bells made in 1818, as is evidenced by
their inscriptions, which read alike, as follows: "Manvel Vargas me
fecit ano d. 1818 Mision de Santa Barbara De la nveba
California"--"Manuel Vargas made me Anno Domini 1818. Mission of Santa
Barbara of New California." The first bell is fastened to its beam with
rawhide thongs; the second, with a framework of iron. Higher up is a
modern bell which is rung (the old ones being tolled only).

The Mission buildings surround the garden, into which no woman, save a
reigning queen or the wife of the President of the United States, is
allowed to enter. An exception was made in the case of the Princess
Louise when her husband was the Governor-general of Canada. The wife of
President Harrison also has entered. The garden, with its fine Italian
cypress, planted by Bishop Diego about 1842, and its hundred varieties
of semi-tropical flowers, in the center of which is a fountain where
goldfish play, affords a delightful place of study, quiet, and
meditation for the Franciscans.

It is well that the visitor should know that this old Mission, never so
abandoned and abused as the others, has been kept up in late years
entirely by the funds given to the Franciscan missionaries, who are now
its custodians, and it has no other income.

The Mission Library contains a large number of valuable old books
gathered from the other Missions at the time of secularization. There
are also kept here a large number of the old records from which Bancroft
gained much of his Mission intelligence, and which, recently, have been
carefully restudied by Father Zephyrin, the California historian of the
Franciscan Order. Father Zephyrin is a devoted student, and many results
of his zeal and kindness are placed before my readers in this volume,
owing to his generosity. His completed history of the Missions and
Missionaries of California is a monumental work.



CHAPTER XX

LA PURISIMA CONCEPCION

Although the date of the founding of this Mission is given as December
8, 1787,--for that was the day on which Presidente Lasuen raised the
cross, blessed the site, celebrated mass, and preached a dedicatory
sermon,--there was no work done for several months, owing to the coming
of the rainy season. In the middle of March, 1788, Sergeant Cota of
Santa Barbara, with a band of laborers and an escort, went up to prepare
the necessary buildings; and early in April Lasuen, accompanied by
Padres Vicente Fuster and Jose Arroita, followed. As _early_ as August
the roll showed an acquisition of seventy-nine neophytes. During the
first decade nearly a thousand baptisms were recorded, and the Mission
flourished in all departments. Large crops of wheat and grain were
raised, and live-stock increased rapidly. In 1804 the population
numbered 1522, the highest on record during its history, and in 1810 the
number of live-stock reported was over 20,000; but the unusual
prosperity that attended this Mission during its earlier years was
interrupted by a series of exceptional misfortunes.

The first church erected was crude and unstable, and fell rapidly into
decay. Scarcely a dozen years had passed, when it became necessary to
build a new one. This was constructed of adobe and roofed with tile. It
was completed in 1802, but although well built, it was totally destroyed
by an earthquake, as we shall see later on.

The Indians of this section were remarkably intelligent as well as
diligent, and during the first years of the Mission there were over
fifty rancherias in the district. According to the report of Padre
Payeras in 1810, they were docile and industrious. This indefatigable
worker, with the assistance of interpreters, prepared a Catechism and
Manual of Confession in the native language, which he found very useful
in imparting religious instruction and in uprooting the prevailing
idolatry. In a little over twenty years the entire population for many
leagues had been baptized, and were numbered among the converts.

This period of peace and prosperity was followed by sudden disaster. The
earthquake of 1812, already noted as the most severe ever known on the
Pacific Coast, brought devastation to Purisima. The morning of December
21 found padres and Indians rejoicing in the possession of the fruits of
their labor of years,--a fine church, many Mission buildings, and a
hundred houses built of adobe and occupied by the natives. A few hours
afterward little was left that was fit for even temporary use. The first
vibration, lasting four minutes, damaged the walls of the church. The
second shock, a half-hour later, caused the total collapse of nearly all
the buildings. Padre Payeras reported that "the earth opened in several
places, emitting water and black sand." This calamity was quickly
followed by torrents of rain, and the ensuing floods added to the
distress of the homeless inhabitants. The remains of this old Mission of
1802 are still to be seen near Lompoc, and on the hillside above is a
deep scar made by the earthquake, this doubtless being the crack
described by Padre Payeras. But nothing could daunt the courage or
quench the zeal of the missionaries. Rude huts were erected for
immediate needs, and, having selected a new and more advantageous
site--five or six miles away--across the river, they obtained the
necessary permission from the presidente, and at once commenced the
construction of a new church, and all the buildings needed for carrying
on the Mission. Water for irrigation and domestic purposes was brought
in cement pipes, made and laid under the direction of the padres, from
Salsperde Creek, three miles away. But other misfortunes were in store
for these unlucky people. During a drought in the winter of 1816-1817,
hundreds of sheep perished for lack of feed, and in 1818 nearly all the
neophytes' houses were destroyed by fire.

In 1823 the Mission lost one of its best friends in the death of Padre
Payeras. Had he lived another year it is quite possible his skill in
adjusting difficulties might have warded off the outbreak that occurred
among the Indians,--the famous revolt of 1824.

This revolt, which also affected Santa Ines and Santa Barbara (see their
respective chapters), had serious consequences at Purisima. After the
attack at Santa Ines the rebels fled to Purisima. In the meantime the
neophytes at this latter Mission, hearing of the uprising, had seized
the buildings. The guard consisted of Corporal Tapia with four or five
men. He bravely defended the padres and the soldiers' families through
the night, but surrendered when his powder gave out. One woman was
wounded. The rebels then sent Padres Ordaz and Tapia to Santa Ines to
warn Sergeant Carrillo not to come or the families would be killed.
Before an answer was received, the soldiers and their families were
permitted to retire to Santa Ines, while Padre Rodriguez remained, the
Indians being kindly disposed towards him. Four white men were killed in
the fight, and seven Indians.

Left now to themselves, and knowing that they were sure to be attacked
ere long, the Indians began to prepare for defense. They erected
palisades, cut loopholes in the walls of the church and other buildings,
and mounted one or two rusty old cannon. For nearly a month they were
not molested. This was the end of February.

In the meantime the governor was getting a force ready at Monterey to
send to unite with one under Guerra from Santa Barbara. On March 16
they were to have met, but owing to some mischance, the northern force
had to make the attack alone. Cavalry skirmishers were sent right and
left to cut off retreat, and the rest of the force began to fire on the
adobe walls from muskets and a four-pounder. The four hundred neophytes
within responded with yells of defiance and cannon, swivel-guns, and
muskets, as well as a cloud of arrows. In their inexperienced hands,
however, little damage was done with the cannon. By and by the Indians
attempted to fly, but were prevented by the cavalry. Now realizing their
defeat, they begged Padre Rodriguez to intercede for them, which he did.
In two hours and a half the conflict was over, three Spaniards being
wounded, one fatally, while there were sixteen Indians killed and a
large number wounded. As the governor had delegated authority to the
officers to summarily dispense justice, they condemned seven of the
Indians to death for the murder of the white men in the first conflict.
They were shot before the end of the month. Four of the revolt
ringleaders were sentenced to ten years of labor at the presidio and
then perpetual exile, while eight others were condemned to the presidio
for eight years.

There was dissatisfaction expressed with the penalties,--on the side of
the padres by Ripoll of Santa Barbara, who claimed that a general pardon
had been promised; and on the part of the governor, who thought his
officers had been too lenient.

An increased guard was left at Purisima after this affair, and it took
some little time before the Indians completely settled down again, as it
was known that the Santa Barbara Indians were still in revolt.

During all the years when contending with the destructive forces of
earthquake, fire, flood, and battle, to say nothing of those foes of
agriculture,--drought, frost, grasshoppers, and squirrels,--the material
results of native labor were notable. In 1819 they produced about
100,000 pounds of tallow. In 1821 the crops of wheat, barley, and corn
amounted to nearly 8000 bushels. Between 1822 and 1827 they furnished
the presidio with supplies valued at $12,921. The population, however,
gradually decreased until about 400 were left at the time of
secularization in 1835. The Purisima estate at this time was estimated
by the appraisers to be worth about $60,000. The inventory included a
library valued at $655 and five bells worth $1000. With the exception of
the church property this estate, or what remained of it, was sold in
1845 for $1110. Under the management of administrators appointed by the
government, the Mission property rapidly disappeared, lands were sold,
live-stock killed and scattered, and only the fragments of wreckage
remained to be turned over to the jurisdiction of the padres according
to the decree of Micheltorena in 1843. The following year an epidemic
of smallpox caused the death of the greater proportion of Indians still
living at Purisima, and the final act in the history of the once
flourishing Mission was reached In 1845, when, by order of Governor
Pico, the ruined estate was sold to John Temple for the paltry amount
stated above.

In regard to its present ownership and condition, a gentleman interested
writes:

     "The abandoned Mission is on ground which now belongs to the
     Union Oil Company of California. The building itself has been
     desecrated and damaged by the public ever since its
     abandonment. Its visitors apparently did not scruple to
     deface it in every possible way, and what could not be stolen
     was ruthlessly destroyed. It apparently was a pleasure to
     them to pry the massive roof-beams loose, in order to enjoy
     the crash occasioned by the breaking of the valuable tile.

     "On top of this the late series of earthquakes in that
     section threw down many of the brick pillars, and twisted the
     remainder so badly that the front of the building is a
     veritable wreck. During these earthquakes, which lasted
     several weeks, tile which could not be replaced for a
     thousand dollars were displaced and broken. To save the
     balance of the tile, as well as to avoid possible accidents
     to visitors, the secretary of the Oil Company had the
     remaining tile removed from the roof and piled up near the
     building for safety."



CHAPTER XXI

SANTA CRUZ

Lasuen found matters far easier for him in the founding of Missions than
did Serra in his later years. The viceroy agreed to pay $1000 each for
the expenses of the Missions of Santa Cruz and La Soledad, and $200 each
for the traveling expenses of the four missionaries needed. April 1,
1790, the guardian sent provisions and tools for Santa Cruz to the value
of $1021. Lasuen delayed the founding for awhile, however, as the
needful church ornaments were not at hand; but as the viceroy promised
them and ordered him to go ahead by borrowing the needed articles from
the other Missions, Lasuen proceeded to the founding, as I have
already related.

At the end of the year 1791 the neophytes numbered 84. In 1796 the
highest mark was reached with 523. In 1800 there were but 492. Up to the
end of that year there had been 949 baptisms, 271 couples married, and
477 buried. There were 2354 head of large stock, and 2083 small. In 1792
the agricultural products were about 650 bushels, as against 4300
in 1800.

[Illustration: RUINS OF MISSION LA PURISIMA CONCEPCION.]

[Illustration: MISSION SANTA CRUZ.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: RUINED WALLS OF MISSION LA SOLEDAD.]

The corner-stone of the church was laid February 27, 1793, and was
completed and formally dedicated May 10, 1794, by Padre Pena from
Santa Clara, aided by five other priests. Ensign Sal was present as
godfather, and duly received the keys. The neophytes, servants, and
troops looked on at the ceremonies with unusual interest, and the next
day filled the church at the saying of the first mass. The church was
about thirty by one hundred and twelve feet and twenty-five feet high.
The foundation walls to the height of three feet were of stone, the
front was of masonry, and the rest of adobes. The other buildings were
slowly erected, and in the autumn of 1796 a flouring-mill was built and
running. It was sadly damaged, however, by the December rains. Artisans
were sent to build the mill and instruct the natives, and later a smith
and a miller were sent to start it.

In 1798 the padre wrote very discouragingly. The establishment of the
villa or town of Brancifort, across the river, was not pleasing. A
