gives His wonder-working Spirit. Paul reminds the Galatians of this.
"God had not only brought you to faith by my preaching. He had also
sanctified you to bring forth the fruits of faith. And one of the fruits
of your faith was that you loved me so devotedly that you were willing
to pluck out your eyes for me." To love a fellow-man so devotedly as to
be ready to bestow upon him money, goods, eyes in order to secure his
salvation, such love is the fruit of the Holy Spirit.

"These products of the Spirit you enjoyed before the false apostles
misled you," the Apostle reminds the Galatians. "But you haven't
manifested any of these fruits under the regime of the Law. How does
it come that you do not grow the same fruits now? You no longer teach
truly; you do not believe boldly; you do not live well; you do not work
hard; you do not bear things patiently. Who has spoiled you that you no
longer love me; that you are not now ready to pluck out your eyes for
me? What has happened to cool your personal interest in me?"

The same thing happened to me. When I began to proclaim the Gospel,
there were many, very many who were delighted with our doctrine and had
a good opinion of us. And now? Now they have succeeded in making us so
odious to those who formerly loved us that they now hate us like poison.

Paul argues: "Your experience ought to teach you that the fruits of love
do not grow on the stump of the Law. You had not virtue prior to the
preaching of the Gospel and you have no virtues now under the regime of
the false apostles."

We, too, may say to those who misname themselves "evangelical" and flout
their new-found liberty: Have you put down the tyranny of the Pope and
obtained liberty in Christ through the Anabaptists and other fanatics?
Or have you obtained your freedom from us who preach faith in Christ
Jesus? If there is any honesty left in them they will have to confess
that their freedom dates from the preaching of the Gospel.


  VERSE 6. Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him
  for righteousness.

The Apostle next adduces the example of Abraham and reviews the
testimony of the Scriptures concerning faith. The first passage is taken
from Genesis 16:6: "And he believed in the Lord; and he counted it to
him for righteousness." The Apostle makes the most of this passage.
Abraham may have enjoyed a good standing with men for his upright life,
but not with God. In the sight of God, Abraham was a condemned sinner.
That he was justified before God was not due to his own exertions, but
due to his faith. The Scriptures expressly state: "Abraham believed in
the Lord; and he counted it to him for righteousness."

Paul places the emphasis upon the two words: Abraham believed. Faith
in God constitutes the highest worship, the prime duty, the first
obedience, and the foremost sacrifice. Without faith God forfeits His
glory, wisdom, truth, and mercy in us. The first duty of man is to
believe in God and to honor Him with his faith. Faith is truly the
height of wisdom, the right kind of righteousness, the only real
religion. This will give us an idea of the excellence of faith.

To believe in God as Abraham did is to be right with God because faith
honors God. Faith says to God: "I believe what you say." When we pay
attention to reason, God seems to propose impossible matters in the
Christian Creed. To reason it seems absurd that Christ should offer His
body and blood in the Lord's Supper; that Baptism should be the washing
of regeneration; that the dead shall rise; that Christ the Son of God
was conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary, etc. Reason shouts that
all this is preposterous. Are you surprised that reason thinks little
of faith? Reason thinks it ludicrous that faith should be the foremost
service any person can render unto God.

Let your faith supplant reason. Abraham mastered reason by faith in the
Word of God. Not as though reason ever yields meekly. It put up a fight
against the faith of Abraham. Reason protested that it was absurd to
think that Sarah who was ninety years old and barren by nature, should
give birth to a son. But faith won the victory and routed reason, that
ugly beast and enemy of God. Everyone who by faith slays reason, the
world's biggest monster, renders God a real service, a better service
than the religions of all races and all the drudgery of meritorious
monks can render.

Men fast, pray, watch, suffer. They intend to appease the wrath of God
and to deserve God's grace by their exertions. But there is no glory in
it for God, because by their exertions these workers pronounce God an
unmerciful slave driver, an unfaithful and angry Judge. They despise
God, make a liar out of Him, snub Christ and all His benefits; in short
they pull God from His throne and perch themselves on it.

Faith truly honors God. And because faith honors God, God counts faith
for righteousness.

Christian righteousness is the confidence of the heart in God through
Christ Jesus. Such confidence is accounted righteousness for Christ's
sake. Two things make for Christian righteousness: Faith in Christ,
which is a gift of God; and God's acceptance of this imperfect faith
of ours for perfect righteousness. Because of my faith in Christ, God
overlooks my distrust, the unwillingness of my spirit, my many other
sins. Because the shadow of Christ's wing covers me I have no fear
that God will cover all my sins and take my imperfections for perfect
righteousness.

God "winks" at my sins and covers them up. God says: "Because you
believe in My Son I will forgive your sins until death shall deliver you
from the body of sin."

Learn to understand the constitution of your Christian righteousness.
Faith is weak, but it means enough to God that He will not lay sin to
our charge. He will not punish nor condemn us for it. He will forgive
our sins as though they amount to nothing at all. He will do it not
because we are worthy of such mercy. He will do it for Jesus' sake in
whom we believe.

Paradoxically, a Christian is both right and wrong, holy and profane,
an enemy of God and a child of God. These contradictions no person can
harmonize who does not understand the true way of salvation. Under the
papacy we were told to toil until the feeling of guilt had left us. But
the authors of this deranged idea were frequently driven to despair
in the hour of death. It would have happened to me, if Christ had not
mercifully delivered me from this error.

We comfort the afflicted sinner in this manner: Brother, you can never
be perfect in this life, but you can be holy. He will say: "How can I be
holy when I feel my sins?" I answer: You feel sin? That is a good sign.
To realize that one is ill is a step, and a very necessary step, toward
recovery. "But how will I get rid of my sin?" he will ask. I answer:
See the heavenly Physician, Christ, who heals the broken-hearted. Do not
consult that Quackdoctor, Reason. Believe in Christ and your sins will
be pardoned. His righteousness will become your righteousness, and your
sins will become His sins.

On one occasion Jesus said to His disciples: "The Father loveth you."
Why? Not because the disciples were Pharisees, or circumcised, or
particularly attentive to the Law. Jesus said: "The Father loveth you,
because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. It
pleased you to know that the Father sent me into the world. And because
you believed it the Father loves you." On another occasion Jesus called
His disciples evil and commanded them to ask for forgiveness.

A Christian is beloved of God and a sinner. How can these two
contradictions be harmonized: I am a sinner and deserve God's wrath
and punishment, and yet the Father loves me? Christ alone can harmonize
these contradictions. He is the Mediator.

Do you now see how faith justifies without works? Sin lingers in us, and
God hates sin. A transfusion of righteousness therefore becomes vitally
necessary. This transfusion of righteousness we obtain from Christ
because we believe in Him.


  VERSE 7. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are
  the children of Abraham.

This is the main point of Paul's argument against the Jews: The children
of Abraham are those who believe and not those who are born of Abraham's
flesh and blood. This point Paul drives home with all his might because
the Jews attached saving value to the genealogical fact: "We are the
seed and children of Abraham."

Let us begin with Abraham and learn how this friend of God was justified
and saved. Not because he left his country, his relatives, his father's
house; not because he was circumcised; not because he stood ready to
sacrifice his own son Isaac in whom he had the promise of posterity.
Abraham was justified because he believed. Paul's argumentation runs
like this: "Since this is the unmistakable testimony of Holy Writ, why
do you take your stand upon circumcision and the Law? Was not Abraham,
your father, of whom you make so much, justified and saved without
circumcision and the Law by faith alone?" Paul therefore concludes:
"They which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham."

Abraham was the father of the faithful. In order to be a child of the
believing Abraham you must believe as he did. Otherwise you are merely
the physical offspring of the procreating Abraham, i.e., you were
conceived and born in sin unto wrath and condemnation.

Ishmael and Isaac were both the natural children of Abraham. By rights
Ishmael should have enjoyed the prerogatives of the firstborn, if
physical generation had any special value. Nevertheless he was left out
in the cold while Isaac was called. This goes to prove that the children
of faith are the real children of Abraham.

Some find fault with Paul for applying the term "faith" in Genesis 15:6
to Christ. They think Paul's use of the term too wide and general.
They think its meaning should be restricted to the context. They claim
Abraham's faith had no more in it than a belief in the promise of God
that he should have seed.

We reply: Faith presupposes the assurance of God's mercy. This assurance
takes in the confidence that our sins are forgiven for Christ's sake.
Never will the conscience trust in God unless it can be sure of God's
mercy and promises in Christ. Now all the promises of God lead back to
the first promise concerning Christ: "And I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy
head, and thou shalt bruise his heel." The faith of the fathers in the
Old Testament era, and our faith in the New Testament are one and the
same faith in Christ Jesus, although times and conditions may differ.
Peter acknowledged this in the words: "Which neither our fathers nor
we were able to bear? But we believe that through the grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they." (Acts l5: 10, 11.) And
Paul writes: "And did all drink the spiritual drink; for they drank of
that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." (I
Cor. 10:4.) And Christ Himself declared: "Your father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day: and he saw it and was glad." (John 8:56.) The faith of
the fathers was directed at the Christ who was to come, while ours rests
in the Christ who has come. Time does not change the object of true
faith, or the Holy Spirit. There has always been and always will be one
mind, one impression, one faith concerning Christ among true believers
whether they live in times past, now, or in times to come. We too
believe in the Christ to come as the fathers did in the Old Testament,
for we look for Christ to come again on the last day to judge the quick
and the dead.


  VERSE 7. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are
  the children of Abraham.

Paul is saying: "You know from the example of Abraham and from the plain
testimony of the Scriptures that they are the children of Abraham, who
have faith in Christ, regardless of their nationality, regardless of the
Law, regardless of works, regardless of their parentage. The promise was
made unto Abraham, 'Thou shalt be a father of many nations'; again, 'And
in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.'" To prevent the
Jews from misinterpreting the word "nations," the Scriptures are careful
to say "many nations." The true children of Abraham are the believers in
Christ from all nations.


  VERSE 8. And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the
  heathen through faith.

"Your boasting does not get you anywhere," says Paul to the Galatians,
"because the Sacred Scriptures foresaw and foretold long before the
Law was ever given, that the heathen should be justified by the blessed
'seed' of Abraham and not by the Law. This promise was made four hundred
and thirty years before the Law was given. Because the Law was given so
many years after Abraham, it could not abolish the promised blessing."
This argument is strong because it is based on the exact factor of time.
"Why should you boast of the Law, my Galatians, when the Law came four
hundred and thirty years after the promise?"

The false apostles glorified the Law and despised the promise made
unto Abraham, although it antedated the Law by many years. It was after
Abraham was accounted righteous because of his faith that the Scriptures
first make mention of circumcision. "The Scriptures," says Paul, "meant
to forestall your infatuation for the righteousness of the Law by
installing the righteousness of faith before circumcision and the Law
ever were ordained."


  VERSE 8. Preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall
  all nations be blessed.

The Jews misconstrue this passage. They want the term "to bless" to
mean "to praise." They want the passage to read: In thee shall all the
nations of the earth be praised. But this is a perversion of the
words of Holy Writ. With the words "Abraham believed" Paul describes a
spiritual Abraham, renewed by faith and regenerated by the Holy Ghost,
that he should be the spiritual father of many nations. In that way all
the Gentiles could be given to him for an inheritance.

The Scriptures ascribe no righteousness to Abraham except through faith.
The Scriptures speak of Abraham as he stands before God, a man justified
by faith. Because of his faith God extends to him the promise: "In thee
shall all nations be blessed."


  VERSE 9. So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful
  Abraham.

The emphasis lies on the words "with faithful Abraham." Paul
distinguishes between Abraham and Abraham. There is a working and there
is a believing Abraham. With the working Abraham we have nothing to do.
Let the Jews glory in the generating Abraham; we glory in the believing
Abraham of whom the Scriptures say that he received the blessing of
righteousness by faith, not only for himself but for all who believe as
he did. The world was promised to Abraham because he believed. The whole
world is blessed if it believes as Abraham believed.

The blessing is the promise of the Gospel. That all nations are to be
blessed means that all nations are to hear the Gospel. All nations are
to be declared righteous before God through faith in Christ Jesus. To
bless simply means to spread abroad the knowledge of Christ's salvation.
This is the office of the New Testament Church which distributes
the promised blessing by preaching the Gospel, by administering the
sacraments, by comforting the broken-hearted, in short, by dispensing
the benefits of Christ.

The Jews exhibited a working Abraham. The Pope exhibits a working
Christ, or an exemplary Christ. The Pope quotes Christ's saying recorded
in John 13:15, "I have given you an example, that ye should do as I
have done to you." We do not deny that Christians ought to imitate the
example of Christ; but mere imitation will not satisfy God. And bear
in mind that Paul is not now discussing the example of Christ, but
the salvation of Christ. That Abraham submitted to circumcision at the
command of God, that he was endowed with excellent virtues, that he
obeyed God in all things, was certainly admirable of him. To follow
the example of Christ, to love one's neighbor, to do good to them
that persecute you, to pray for one's enemies, patiently to bear
the ingratitude of those who return evil for good, is certainly
praiseworthy. But praiseworthy or not, such virtues do not acquit us
before God. It takes more than that to make us righteous before God. We
need Christ Himself, not His example, to save us. We need a redeeming,
not an exemplary Christ, to save us. Paul is here speaking of the
redeeming Christ and the believing Abraham, not of the model Christ or
the sweating Abraham.

The believing Abraham is not to lie buried in the grave. He is to be
dusted off and brought out before the world. He is to be praised to the
sky for his faith. Heaven and earth ought to know about him and about
his faith in Christ. The working Abraham ought to look pretty small next
