 ecclesiastical absolution, but in order to afford a symbol and
 assurance of the Divine pardon, in which the guilty man's grief should
 not be overwhelming, but that he should become reconciled to himself?
 What is meant by the Publican's going _down to his house_ justified,
 but that he felt at peace with himself and God?

 3. It is sorrow with God--here called godly sorrow; in the margin
 sorrowing according to God.

 God sees sin not in its consequences but in itself: a thing infinitely
 evil, even if the consequences were happiness to the guilty instead of
 misery. So sorrow according to God, is to see sin as God sees it. The
 grief of Peter was as bitter as that of Judas. He went out and wept
 bitterly; how bitterly none can tell but they who have learned to look
 on sin as God does. But in Peter's grief there was an element of hope;
 and that sprung precisely from this--that he saw God in it all.
 Despair of self did not lead to despair of God.

 This is the great, peculiar feature of this sorrow: God is there,
 accordingly self is less prominent. It is not a microscopic
 self-examination, nor a mourning in which self is ever uppermost: _my_
 character gone; the greatness of _my_ sin; the forfeiture of _my_
 salvation. The thought of God absorbs all that. I believe the feeling
 of true penitence would express itself in such words as these:--There
 _is_ a righteousness, though I have not attained it. There is a
 purity, and a love, and a beauty, though my life exhibits little of
 it. In that I can rejoice. Of that I can feel the surpassing
 loveliness. My doings? They are worthless, I cannot endure to think of
 them. I am not thinking of them. I have something else to think of.
 There, there; in that Life I see it. And so the Christian--gazing not
 on what he is, but on what he desires to be--dares in penitence to
 say, That righteousness is mine: dares, even when the recollection of
 his sin is most vivid and most poignant, to say with Peter, thinking
 less of himself than of God, and sorrowing as it were with God--"Lord,
 Thou knowest all things, Thou knowest that I love Thee."




 IX.

 _Preached August 4, 1850._

 SENSUAL AND SPIRITUAL EXCITEMENT.


   "Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of
    the Lord is. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be
    filled with the Spirit."--Ephesians v. 17, 18.

 There is evidently a connection between the different branches of this
 sentence--for ideas cannot be properly contrasted which have not some
 connection--but what that connection is, is not at first sight clear.
 It almost appears like a profane and irreverent juxtaposition to
 contrast fulness of the Spirit with fulness of wine. Moreover, the
 structure of the whole context is antithetical. Ideas are opposed to
 each other in pairs of contraries; for instance, "fools" is the exact
 opposite to "wise;" "unwise," as opposed to "understanding," its
 proper opposite.

 And here again, there must be the same true antithesis between
 drunkenness and spiritual fulness. The propriety of this opposition
 lies in the intensity of feeling produced in both, cases. There is one
 intensity of feeling produced by stimulating the senses, another by
 vivifying the spiritual life within. The one commences with impulses
 from without, the other is guarded by forces from within. Here then is
 the similarity, and here the dissimilarity, which constitutes the
 propriety of the contrast. One is ruin, the other salvation. One
 degrades, the other exalts. This contrast then is our subject for
 to-day.


 I. The effects are similar. On the day of Pentecost, when the first
 influences of the Spirit descended on the early Church, the effects
 resembled intoxication. They were full of the Spirit, and mocking
 bystanders said, "These men are full of new wine;" for they found
 themselves elevated into the ecstasy of a life higher than their
 own, possessed of powers which they could not control; they spoke
 incoherently and irregularly; to the most part of those assembled,
 unintelligibly.

 Now compare with this the impression produced upon savage
 nations--suppose those early ages in which the spectacle of
 intoxication was presented for the first time. They saw a man under
 the influence of a force different from and in some respects inferior
 to, their own. To them the bacchanal appeared a being half inspired;
 his frenzy seemed a thing for reverence and awe, rather than for
 horror and disgust; the spirit which possessed him must be they
 thought, divine; they deified it, worshipped it under different names
 as a god; even to a clearer insight the effects are wonderfully
 similar. It is almost proverbial among soldiers that the daring
 produced by wine is easily mistaken for the self-devotion of a brave
 heart.

 The play of imagination in the brain of the opium-eater is as free as
 that of genius itself, and the creations produced in that state by the
 pen or pencil are as wildly beautiful as those owed to the nobler
 influences. In years gone by, the oratory of the statesman in the
 senate has been kindled by semi-intoxication, when his noble
 utterances were set down by his auditors to the inspiration of
 patriotism.

 It is this very resemblance which deceives the drunkard: he is led on
 by his feelings as well as by his imagination. It is not the sensual
 pleasure of the glutton that fascinates him; it is those fine thoughts
 and those quickened sensibilities which were excited in that state,
 which he is powerless to produce out of his own being, or by his own
 powers, and which he expects to reproduce by the same means. The
 experience of our first parent is repeated in him: at the very moment
 when he expects to find himself as the gods, knowing good and evil, he
 discovers that he is unexpectedly degraded, his health wrecked, and
 his heart demoralized. Hence it is almost as often the finer as the
 baser spirits of our race which are found the victims of such
 indulgence. Many will remember while I speak, the names of the gifted
 of their species, the degraded men of genius who were the victims of
 these deceptive influences. The half-inspired painter, poet, musician,
 who began by soothing opiates to calm the over-excited nerves, or
 stimulate the exhausted brain, who mistook the sensation for somewhat
 half divine, and became morally and physically wrecks of manhood,
 degraded even in their mental conceptions. It was therefore, no mere
 play of words which induced the apostle to bring these two things
 together. That which might else seem irreverent appears to have been
 a deep knowledge of human nature; he contrasts, because his rule was
 to distinguish two things which are easily mistaken for each other.

 2. The second point of resemblance is the necessity of intense
 feeling. We have fulness--fulness, it may be, produced by outward
 stimulus, or else by an inpouring of the Spirit. What we want is life,
 "more life, and fuller." To escape from monotony, to get away from the
 life of mere routine and habits, to feel that we are alive--with more
 of surprise and wakefulness in our existence. To have less of the
 gelid, torpid, tortoise-like existence. "To feel the years before us."
 To be consciously existing.

 Now this desire lies at the bottom of many forms of life which are
 apparently as diverse as possible. It constitutes the fascination of
 the gambler's life: money is not what he wants--were he possessed of
 thousands to-day he would risk them all to-morrow--but it is that
 being perpetually on the brink of enormous wealth and utter ruin, he
 is compelled to realize at every moment the possibility of the
 extremes of life. Every moment is one of feeling. This too,
 constitutes the charm of all those forms of life in which the gambling
 feeling is predominant--where a sense of skill is blended with a
 mixture of chance. If you ask the statesman why it is, that possessed
 as he is of wealth, he quits his princely home for the dark
 metropolis, he would reply, "That he loves the excitement of a
 political existence." It is this too, which gives to the warrior's and
 the traveller's existence such peculiar reality; and it is this in a
 far lower form which stimulates the pleasure of a fashionable
 life--which sends the votaries of the world in a constant round from
 the capital to the watering place, and from the watering place to the
 capital; what they crave for is the power of feeling intensely.

 Now the proper and natural outlet for this feeling is the life of the
 Spirit. What is religion but fuller life? To live in the Spirit, what
 is it but to have keener feelings and mightier powers--to rise into a
 higher consciousness of life? What is religion's self but feeling? The
 highest form of religion is charity. Love is of God, and he that
 loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. This is an intense feeling,
 too intense to be excited, profound in its calmness, yet it rises at
 times in its higher flights into that ecstatic life which glances in a
 moment intuitively through ages. These are the pentecostal hours of
 our existence, when the Spirit comes as a mighty rushing wind, in
 cloven tongues of fire, filling the soul with God.


 II. The dissimilarity or contrast in St. Paul's idea. The one fulness
 begins from without, the other from within. The one proceeds from the
 flesh and then influences the emotions. The other reverses this order.
 Stimulants like wine, inflame the senses, and through them set the
 imaginations and feelings on fire; and the law of our spiritual being
 is, that that which begins with the flesh, sensualizes the
 Spirit--whereas that which commences in the region of the Spirit,
 spiritualizes the senses in which it subsequently stirs emotion. But
 the misfortune is that men mistake this law of their emotions; and the
 fatal error is, when having found spiritual feelings existing in
 connection, and associated with, fleshly sensations, men expect by the
 mere irritation of the emotions of the frame to reproduce those high
 and glorious feelings.

 You might conceive the recipients of the Spirit on the day of
 Pentecost acting under this delusion; it is conceiveable that having
 observed certain bodily phenomena--for instance, incoherent utterances
 and thrilled sensibilities coexisting with those sublime
 spiritualities--they might have endeavoured, by a repetition of those
 incoherencies, to obtain a fresh descent of the Spirit. In fact, this
 was exactly what was tried in after ages of the Church. In those
 events of church history which are denominated revivals, in the camp
 of the Methodist and the Ranter, a direct attempt was made to arouse
 the emotions by exciting addresses and vehement language. Convulsions,
 shrieks, and violent emotions, were produced, and the unfortunate
 victims of this mistaken attempt to produce the cause by the effect,
 fancied themselves, and were pronounced by others, converted. Now the
 misfortune is, that this delusion is the more easy from the fact that
 the results of the two kinds of causes resemble each other. You may
 galvanize the nerve of a corpse till the action of a limb startles the
 spectator with the appearance of life. It is not life, it is only a
 spasmodic hideous mimicry of life. Men having seen that the spiritual
 is always associated with forms, endeavour by reproducing the forms to
 recall spirituality; you do produce thereby a something that looks
 like spirituality, but it is a resemblance only. The worst case of all
 occurs in the department of the affections. That which begins in the
 heart ennobles the whole animal being, but that which begins in the
 inferior departments of our being is the most entire degradation and
 sensualizing of the soul.

 Now it is from this point of thought that we learn to extend the
 apostle's principle. Wine is but a specimen of a class of stimulants.
 All that begins from _without_ belongs to the same class. The stimulus
 may be afforded by almost any enjoyment of the senses. Drunkenness may
 come from anything wherein is excess: from over-indulgence in society,
 in pleasure, in music, and in the delight of listening to oratory,
 nay, even from the excitement of sermons and religious meetings. The
 prophet tells us of those who are drunken, and not with wine.

 The other point of difference is one of effect. Fulness of the Spirit
 calms; fulness produced by excitement satiates and exhausts. They who
 know the world of fashion tell us that the tone adopted there is,
 either to be, or to affect to be, sated with enjoyment, to be proof
 against surprise, to have lost all keenness of enjoyment, and to have
 all keenness of wonder gone. That which ought to be men's shame
 becomes their boast--unsusceptibility of any fresh emotion.

 Whether this be real or affected matters not; it is, in truth, the
 real result of the indulgence of the senses. The law is this: the
 "crime of sense is avenged by sense which wears with time;" for it has
 been well remarked that the terrific punishment attached to the
 habitual indulgence of the senses is, that the incitements to
 enjoyment increase in proportion as the power of enjoyment fades.

 Experience at last forbids even the hope of enjoyment; the sin of the
 intoxicated soul is loathed, detested, abhorred; yet it is done. The
 irritated sense, like an avenging fury, goads on with a restlessness
 of craving, and compels a reiteration of the guilt though it has
 ceased to charm.

 To this danger our own age is peculiarly exposed. In the earlier and
 simpler ages, the need of keen feeling finds a natural and safe outlet
 in compulsory exertions. For instance, in the excitement of real
 warfare, and in the necessity of providing the sustenance of life,
 warlike habits and healthy labour stimulate, without exhausting life.
 But in proportion as civilization advances, a large class of the
 community are exempted from the necessity of these, and thrown upon a
 life of leisure. Then it is that artificial life begins, and
 artificial expedients become necessary to sharpen the feelings amongst
 the monotony of existence; every amusement and all literature become
 more pungent in their character; life is no longer a thing proceeding
 from powers _within_, but sustained by new impulses from without.

 There is one peculiar form of this danger to which I would specially
 direct your attention. There is one nation in Europe which, more than
 any other, has been subjected to these influences. In ages of
 revolution, nations live fast; centuries of life are passed in fifty
 years of time. In such a state, individuals become subjected more or
 less to the influences which are working around them. Scarcely an
 enjoyment or a book can be met with which does not bear the impress of
 this intensity. Now, the particular danger to which I allude is French
 novels, French romances, and French plays. The overflowings of that
 cup of excitement have reached our shores. I do not say that these
 works contain anything coarse or gross--better if it were so: evil
 which comes in a form of grossness is not nearly so dangerous as that
 which comes veiled in gracefulness and sentiment. Subjects which are
 better not touched upon at all are discussed, examined, and exhibited
 in all the most seductive forms of imagery. You would be shocked at
 seeing your son in a fit of intoxication; yet, I say it solemnly,
 better that your son should reel through the streets in a fit of
 drunkenness, than that the delicacy of your daughter's mind should be
 injured, and her imagination inflamed with false fire. Twenty-four
 hours will terminate the evil in the one case. Twenty-four hours will
 not exhaust the effects of the other; you must seek the consequences
 at the end of many, many years.

 I speak that which I do know; and if the earnest warning of one who
 has seen the dangers of which he speaks realized, can reach the heart
 of one Christian parent, he will put a ban on all such works, and not
 suffer his children's hearts to be excited by a drunkenness which is
 worse than that of wine. For the worst of it is, that the men of our
 time are not yet alive to this growing evil; they are elsewhere--in
 their studies, counting-houses, professions--not knowing the food, or
 rather poison, on which their wives' and daughters' intellectual life
 is sustained. It is precisely those who are most unfitted to sustain
 the danger, whose feelings need restraint instead of spur, and whose
 imaginations are most inflammable, that are specially exposed to it.

 On the other hand, spiritual life calms while it fills. True it is
 that there are pentecostal moments when such life reaches the stage of
 ecstasy. But these were given to the Church to prepare her for
 suffering, to give her martyrs a glimpse of blessedness, which might
 sustain them afterwards in the terrible struggles of death. True it is
 that there are pentecostal hours when the soul is surrounded by a kind
 of glory, and we are tempted to make tabernacles upon the Mount, as if
 life were meant for rest; but out of that very cloud there comes a
 voice telling of the Cross, and bidding us descend into the common
 world again, to simple duties and humble life. This very principle
 seems to be contained in the text. The apostle's remedy for this
 artificial feeling is--"Speaking to one another in psalms and hymns,
 and spiritual songs."

 Strange remedy! Occupation fit for children--too simple far for men:
 as astonishing as the remedy prescribed by the prophet to Naaman--to
 wash in simple water, and be clean; yet therein lies a very important
 truth. In ancient medical phraseology, herbs possessed of healing
 natures were called simples: in God's laboratory, all things that heal
 are simple--all natural enjoyments--all the deepest--are simple too.
 At night, man fills his banquet-hall with the glare of splendour which
 fevers as well as fires the heart; and at the very same hour, as if by
 intended contrast, the quiet stars of God steal forth, shedding,
 together with the deepest feeling, the profoundest sense of calm. One
 from whose knowledge of the sources of natural feeling there lies
 almost no appeal, has said that to him,

    "The meanest flower that blows can give
     Thoughts that too often lie too deep for tears."

 This is exceedingly remarkable in the life of Christ. No contrast is
 more striking than that presented by the thought, that that deep and
 beautiful Life was spent in the midst of mad Jerusalem. Remember the
 Son of man standing quietly in the porches of Bethesda, when the
 streets all around were filled with the revelry of innumerable
 multitudes, who had come to be present at the annual feast. Remember
 Him pausing to weep over his country's doomed metropolis, unexcited,
