our anger, in so far as it adds to the unmeritedness of being
despised. For just as the higher a man's position is, the more
undeservedly he is despised; so the lower it is, the less reason he
has for despising. Thus a nobleman is angry if he be insulted by a
peasant; a wise man, if by a fool; a master, if by a servant.

If, however, the littleness or deficiency lessens the unmerited
contempt, then it does not increase but lessens anger. In this way
those who repent of their ill-deeds, and confess that they have done
wrong, who humble themselves and ask pardon, mitigate anger,
according to Prov. 15:1: "A mild answer breaketh wrath": because, to
wit, they seem not to despise, but rather to think much of those
before whom they humble themselves.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: There are two reasons why anger ceases at the sight of
death. One is because the dead are incapable of sorrow and sensation;
and this is chiefly what the angry seek in those with whom they are
angered. Another reason is because the dead seem to have attained to
the limit of evils. Hence anger ceases in regard to all who are
grievously hurt, in so far as this hurt surpasses the measure of just
retaliation.

Reply Obj. 3: To be despised by one's friends seems also a greater
indignity. Consequently if they despise us by hurting or by failing
to help, we are angry with them for the same reason for which we are
angry with those who are beneath us.
________________________

QUESTION 48

OF THE EFFECTS OF ANGER
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the effects of anger: under which head there are
four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether anger causes pleasure?

(2) Whether above all it causes heat in the heart?

(3) Whether above all it hinders the use of reason?

(4) Whether it causes taciturnity?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 48, Art. 1]

Whether Anger Causes Pleasure?

Objection 1: It would seem that anger does not cause pleasure.
Because sorrow excludes pleasure. But anger is never without sorrow,
since, as stated in _Ethic._ vii, 6, "everyone that acts from anger,
acts with pain." Therefore anger does not cause pleasure.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 5) that "vengeance
makes anger to cease, because it substitutes pleasure for pain":
whence we may gather that the angry man derives pleasure from
vengeance, and that vengeance quells his anger. Therefore on the
advent of pleasure, anger departs: and consequently anger is not an
effect united with pleasure.

Obj. 3: Further, no effect hinders its cause, since it is conformed
to its cause. But pleasure hinders anger as stated in _Rhet._ ii, 3.
Therefore pleasure is not an effect of anger.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 5) quotes the saying
that anger is "Sweet to the soul as honey to the taste" (Iliad,
xviii, 109, trl. Pope).

_I answer that,_ As the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 14), pleasures,
chiefly sensible and bodily pleasures, are remedies against sorrow:
and therefore the greater the sorrow or anxiety, the more sensible
are we to the pleasure which heals it, as is evident in the case of
thirst which increases the pleasure of drink. Now it is clear from
what has been said (Q. 47, AA. 1, 3), that the movement of anger
arises from a wrong done that causes sorrow, for which sorrow
vengeance is sought as a remedy. Consequently as soon as vengeance is
present, pleasure ensues, and so much the greater according as the
sorrow was greater. Therefore if vengeance be really present, perfect
pleasure ensues, entirely excluding sorrow, so that the movement of
anger ceases. But before vengeance is really present, it becomes
present to the angry man in two ways: in one way, by hope; because
none is angry except he hopes for vengeance, as stated above (Q. 46,
A. 1); in another way, by thinking of it continually, for to everyone
that desires a thing it is pleasant to dwell on the thought of what
he desires; wherefore the imaginings of dreams are pleasant.
Accordingly an angry man takes pleasure in thinking much about
vengeance. This pleasure, however, is not perfect, so as to banish
sorrow and consequently anger.

Reply Obj. 1: The angry man does not grieve and rejoice at the same
thing; he grieves for the wrong done, while he takes pleasure in the
thought and hope of vengeance. Consequently sorrow is to anger as its
beginning; while pleasure is the effect or terminus of anger.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument holds in regard to pleasure caused by the
real presence of vengeance, which banishes anger altogether.

Reply Obj. 3: Pleasure that precedes hinders sorrow from ensuing, and
consequently is a hindrance to anger. But pleasure felt in taking
vengeance follows from anger.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 48, Art. 2]

Whether Anger Above All Causes Fervor in the Heart?

Objection 1: It would seem that heat is not above all the effect of
anger. For fervor, as stated above (Q. 28, A. 5; Q. 37, A. 2),
belongs to love. But love, as above stated, is the beginning and
cause of all the passions. Since then the cause is more powerful than
its effect, it seems that anger is not the chief cause of fervor.

Obj. 2: Further, those things which, of themselves, arouse fervor,
increase as time goes on; thus love grows stronger the longer it
lasts. But in course of time anger grows weaker; for the Philosopher
says (Rhet. ii, 3) that "time puts an end to anger." Therefore fervor
is not the proper effect of anger.

Obj. 3: Further, fervor added to fervor produces greater fervor. But
"the addition of a greater anger banishes already existing anger," as
the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 3). Therefore anger does not cause
fervor.

_On the contrary,_ Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 16) that "anger
is fervor of the blood around the heart, resulting from an exhalation
of the bile."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 44, A. 1), the bodily
transmutation that occurs in the passions of the soul is
proportionate to the movement of the appetite. Now it is evident that
every appetite, even the natural appetite, tends with greater force
to repel that which is contrary to it, if it be present: hence we see
that hot water freezes harder, as though the cold acted with greater
force on the hot object. Since then the appetitive movement of anger
is caused by some injury inflicted, as by a contrary that is present;
it follows that the appetite tends with great force to repel the
injury by the desire of vengeance; and hence ensues great vehemence
and impetuosity in the movement of anger. And because the movement of
anger is not one of recoil, which corresponds to the action of cold,
but one of prosecution, which corresponds to the action of heat, the
result is that the movement of anger produces fervor of the blood and
vital spirits around the heart, which is the instrument of the soul's
passions. And hence it is that, on account of the heart being so
disturbed by anger, those chiefly who are angry betray signs thereof
in their outer members. For, as Gregory says (Moral. v, 30) "the
heart that is inflamed with the stings of its own anger beats quick,
the body trembles, the tongue stammers, the countenance takes fire,
the eyes grow fierce, they that are well known are not recognized.
With the mouth indeed he shapes a sound, but the understanding knows
not what it says."

Reply Obj. 1: "Love itself is not felt so keenly as in the absence of
the beloved," as Augustine observes (De Trin. x, 12). Consequently
when a man suffers from a hurt done to the excellence that he loves,
he feels his love thereof the more: the result being that his heart
is moved with greater heat to remove the hindrance to the object of
his love; so that anger increases the fervor of love and makes it to
be felt more.

Nevertheless, the fervor arising from heat differs according as it is
to be referred to love or to anger. Because the fervor of love has a
certain sweetness and gentleness; for it tends to the good that one
loves: whence it is likened to the warmth of the air and of the
blood. For this reason sanguine temperaments are more inclined to
love; and hence the saying that "love springs from the liver,"
because of the blood being formed there. On the other hand, the
fervor of anger has a certain bitterness with a tendency to destroy,
for it seeks to be avenged on the contrary evil: whence it is likened
to the heat of fire and of the bile, and for this reason Damascene
says (De Fide Orth. ii, 16) that it "results from an exhalation of
the bile whence it takes its name _chole_."

Reply Obj. 2: Time, of necessity, weakens all those things, the
causes of which are impaired by time. Now it is evident that memory
is weakened by time; for things which happened long ago easily slip
from our memory. But anger is caused by the memory of a wrong done.
Consequently the cause of anger is impaired little by little as time
goes on, until at length it vanishes altogether. Moreover a wrong
seems greater when it is first felt; and our estimate thereof is
gradually lessened the further the sense of present wrong recedes
into the past. The same applies to love, so long as the cause of love
is in the memory alone; wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii,
5) that "if a friend's absence lasts long, it seems to make men
forget their friendship." But in the presence of a friend, the cause
of friendship is continually being multiplied by time: wherefore the
friendship increases: and the same would apply to anger, were its
cause continually multiplied.

Nevertheless the very fact that anger soon spends itself proves the
strength of its fervor: for as a great fire is soon spent having
burnt up all the fuel; so too anger, by reason of its vehemence, soon
dies away.

Reply Obj. 3: Every power that is divided in itself is weakened.
Consequently if a man being already angry with one, becomes angry
with another, by this very fact his anger with the former is
weakened. Especially is this so if his anger in the second case be
greater: because the wrong done which aroused his former anger, will,
in comparison with the second wrong, which is reckoned greater, seem
to be of little or no account.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 48, Art. 3]

Whether Anger Above All Hinders the Use of Reason?

Objection 1: It would seem that anger does not hinder the use of
reason. Because that which presupposes an act of reason, does not
seem to hinder the use of reason. But "anger listens to reason," as
stated in _Ethic._ vii, 6. Therefore anger does not hinder reason.

Obj. 2: Further, the more the reason is hindered, the less does a man
show his thoughts. But the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 6) that "an
angry man is not cunning but is open." Therefore anger does not seem
to hinder the use of reason, as desire does; for desire is cunning,
as he also states (Ethic. vii, 6.).

Obj. 3: Further, the judgment of reason becomes more evident by
juxtaposition of the contrary: because contraries stand out more
clearly when placed beside one another. But this also increases
anger: for the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 2) that "men are more
angry if they receive unwonted treatment; for instance, honorable
men, if they be dishonored": and so forth. Therefore the same cause
increases anger, and facilitates the judgment of reason. Therefore
anger does not hinder the judgment of reason.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Moral. v, 30) that anger "withdraws
the light of understanding, while by agitating it troubles the mind."

_I answer that,_ Although the mind or reason makes no use of a bodily
organ in its proper act, yet, since it needs certain sensitive powers
for the execution of its act, the acts of which powers are hindered
when the body is disturbed, it follows of necessity that any
disturbance in the body hinders even the judgment of reason; as is
clear in the case of drunkenness or sleep. Now it has been stated (A.
2) that anger, above all, causes a bodily disturbance in the region
of the heart, so much as to effect even the outward members.
Consequently, of all the passions, anger is the most manifest
obstacle to the judgment of reason, according to Ps. 30:10: "My eye
is troubled with wrath."

Reply Obj. 1: The beginning of anger is in the reason, as regards the
appetitive movement, which is the formal element of anger. But the
passion of anger forestalls the perfect judgment of reason, as though
it listened but imperfectly to reason, on account of the commotion of
the heat urging to instant action, which commotion is the material
element of anger. In this respect it hinders the judgment of reason.

Reply Obj. 2: An angry man is said to be open, not because it is
clear to him what he ought to do, but because he acts openly, without
thought of hiding himself. This is due partly to the reason being
hindered, so as not to discern what should be hidden and what done
openly, nor to devise the means of hiding; and partly to the
dilatation of the heart which pertains to magnanimity which is an
effect of anger: wherefore the Philosopher says of the magnanimous
man (Ethic. iv, 3) that "he is open in his hatreds and his
friendships . . . and speaks and acts openly." Desire, on the other
hand, is said to lie low and to be cunning, because, in many cases,
the pleasurable things that are desired, savor of shame and
voluptuousness, wherein man wishes not to be seen. But in those
things that savor of manliness and excellence, such as matters of
vengeance, man seeks to be in the open.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (ad 1), the movement of anger begins in
the reason, wherefore the juxtaposition of one contrary with another
facilitates the judgment of reason, on the same grounds as it
increases anger. For when a man who is possessed of honor or wealth,
suffers a loss therein, the loss seems all the greater, both on
account of the contrast, and because it was unforeseen. Consequently
it causes greater grief: just as a great good, through being received
unexpectedly, causes greater delight. And in proportion to the
increase of the grief that precedes, anger is increased also.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 48, Art. 4]

Whether Anger Above All Causes Taciturnity?

Objection 1: It would seem that anger does not cause taciturnity.
Because taciturnity is opposed to speech. But increase in anger
conduces to speech; as is evident from the degrees of anger laid down
by Our Lord (Matt. 5:22): where He says: "Whosoever is angry with his
brother"; and " . . . whosoever shall say to his brother, 'Raca'";
and " . . . whosoever shall say to his brother, 'Thou fool.'"
Therefore anger does not cause taciturnity.

Obj. 2: Further, through failing to obey reason, man sometimes breaks
out into unbecoming words: hence it is written (Prov. 25:28): "As a
city that lieth open and is not compassed with walls, so is a man
that cannot refrain his own spirit in speaking." But anger, above
all, hinders the judgment of reason, as stated above (A. 3).
Consequently above all it makes one break out into unbecoming words.
Therefore it does not cause taciturnity.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Matt. 12:34): "Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaketh." But anger, above all, causes a
disturbance in the heart, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore above all
it conduces to speech. Therefore it does not cause taciturnity.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Moral. v, 30) that "when anger does
not vent itself outwardly by the lips, inwardly it burns the more
fiercely."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3; Q. 46, A. 4), anger both
follows an act of reason, and hinders the reason: and in both
respects it may cause taciturnity. On the part of the reason, when
the judgment of reason prevails so far, that although it does not
curb the appetite in its inordinate desire for vengeance, yet it
curbs the tongue from unbridled speech. Wherefore Gregory says
(Moral. v, 30): "Sometimes when the mind is disturbed, anger, as if
in judgment, commands silence." On the part of the impediment to
reason because, as stated above (A. 2), the disturbance of anger
reaches to the outward members, and chiefly to those members which
reflect more distinctly the emotions of the heart, such as the eyes,
face and tongue; wherefore, as observed above (A. 2), "the tongue
stammers, the countenance takes fire, the eyes grow fierce."
Consequently anger may cause such a disturbance, that the tongue is
altogether deprived of speech; and taciturnity is the result.

Reply Obj. 1: Anger sometimes goes so far as to hinder the reason
from curbing the tongue: but sometimes it goes yet farther, so as to
paralyze the tongue and other outward members.

And this suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: The disturbance of the heart may sometimes superabound
to the extend that the movements of the outward members are hindered
by the inordinate movement of the heart. Thence ensue taciturnity and
immobility of the outward members; and sometimes even death. If,
however, the disturbance be not so great, then "out of the abundance
of the heart" thus disturbed, the mouth proceeds to speak.
________________________

TREATISE ON HABITS (QQ. 49-54)
________________________

QUESTION 49

OF HABITS IN GENERAL, AS TO THEIR SUBSTANCE
(In Four Articles)

After treating of human acts and passions, we now pass on to the
consideration of the principles of human acts, and firstly of
intrinsic principles, secondly of extrinsic principles. The intrinsic
principle is power and habit; but as we have treated of powers in the
First Part (Q. 77, seqq.), it remains for us to consider them in general:
in the second place we shall consider virtues and vices and other like
habits, which are the principles of human acts.

Concerning habits in general there are four points to consider: First,
the substance of habits; second, their subject; third, the cause of
their generation, increase, and corruption; fourth, how they are
distinguished from one another.

Under the first head, there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether habit is a quality?

(2) Whether it is a distinct species of quality?

(3) Whether habit implies an order to an act?

(4) Of the necessity of habit.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 49, Art. 1]

Whether Habit Is a Quality?

Objection 1: It would seem that habit is not a quality. For Augustine
says (QQ. lxxxiii, qu. 73): "this word 'habit' is derived from the
verb 'to have.'" But "to have" belongs not only to quality, but also
to the other categories: for we speak of ourselves as "having"
quantity and money and other like things. Therefore habit is not a
quality.

Obj. 2: Further, habit is reckoned as one of the predicaments; as may
be clearly seen in the _Book on the Predicaments_ (Categor. vi). But
one predicament is not contained under another. Therefore habit is
not a quality.

Obj. 3: Further, "every habit is a disposition," as is stated in the
_Book of the Predicaments_ (Categor. vi). Now disposition is "the
order of that which has parts," as stated in _Metaph._ v, text. 24.
But this belongs to the predicament Position. Therefore habit is not
a quality.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says in the Book of Predicaments
(Categor. vi) that "habit is a quality which is difficult to change."

_I answer that,_ This word _habitus_ (habit) is derived from _habere_
(to have). Now habit is taken from this word in two ways; in one way,
inasmuch as man, or any other thing, is said to "have" something; in
another way, inasmuch as a particular thing has a relation (_se
habet_) either in regard to itself, or in regard to something else.

Concerning the first, we must observe that "to have," as said in
regard to anything that is "had," is common to the various
predicaments. And so the Philosopher puts "to have" among the
"post-predicaments," so called because they result from the various
predicaments; as, for instance, opposition, priority, posterity, and
such like. Now among things which are had, there seems to be this
distinction, that there are some in which there is no medium between
the "haver" and that which is had: as, for instance, there is no
medium between the subject and quality or quantity. Then there are
some in which there is a medium, but only a relation: as, for
instance, a man is said to have a companion or a friend. And,
further, there are some in which there is a medium, not indeed an
action or passion, but something after the manner of action or
passion: thus, for instance, something adorns or covers, and
something else is adorned or covered: wherefore the Philosopher says
(Metaph. v, text. 25) that "a habit is said to be, as it were, an
action or a passion of the haver and that which is had"; as is the
case in those things which we have about ourselves. And therefore
these constitute a special genus of things, which are comprised under
the predicament of "habit": of which the Philosopher says (Metaph. v,
text. 25) that "there is a habit between clothing and the man who is
clothed."

But if "to have" be taken according as a thing has a relation in
regard to itself or to something else; in that case habit is a
quality; since this mode of having is in respect of some quality: and
of this the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text. 25) that "habit is a
disposition whereby that which is disposed is disposed well or ill,
and this, either in regard to itself or in regard to another: thus
health is a habit." And in this sense we speak of habit now.
Wherefore we must say that habit is a quality.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument takes "to have" in the general sense: for
thus it is common to many predicaments, as we have said.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument takes habit in the sense in which we
understand it to be a medium between the haver, and that which is
had: and in this sense it is a predicament, as we have said.

Reply Obj. 3: Disposition does always, indeed, imply an order of that
which has parts: but this happens in three ways, as the Philosopher
goes on at once to says (Metaph. v, text. 25): namely, "either as to
place, or as to power, or as to species." "In saying this," as
Simplicius observes in his _Commentary on the Predicaments,_ "he
includes all dispositions: bodily dispositions, when he says 'as  to
place,'" and this belongs to the predicament "Position," which is the
order of parts in a place: "when he says 'as to power,' he includes
all those dispositions which are in course of formation and not yet
arrived at perfect usefulness," such as inchoate science and virtue:
"and when he says, 'as to species,' he includes perfect dispositions,
which are called habits," such as perfected science and virtue.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 49, Art. 2]

Whether Habit Is a Distinct Species of Quality?

Objection 1: It would seem that habit is not a distinct species of
quality. Because, as we have said (A. 1), habit, in so far as it is a
quality, is "a disposition whereby that which is disposed is disposed
well or ill." But this happens in regard to any quality: for a thing
happens to be well or ill disposed in regard also to shape, and in
like manner, in regard to heat and cold, and in regard to all such
things. Therefore habit is not a distinct species of quality.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says in the _Book of the
Predicaments_ (Categor. vi), that heat and cold are dispositions or
habits, just as sickness and health. Therefore habit or disposition
is not distinct from the other species of quality.

Obj. 3: Further, "difficult to change" is not a difference belonging
to the predicament of quality, but rather to movement or passion.
Now, no genus should be contracted to a species by a difference of
another genus; but "differences should be proper to a genus," as the
Philosopher says in _Metaph._ vii, text. 42. Therefore, since habit
is "a quality difficult to change," it seems not to be a distinct
species of quality.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says in the _Book of the
Predicaments_ (Categor. vi) that "one species of quality is habit
and disposition."

_I answer that,_ The Philosopher in the _Book of Predicaments_
(Categor. vi) reckons disposition and habit as the first species of
quality. Now Simplicius, in his _Commentary on the Predicaments,_
explains the difference of these species as follows. He says "that
some qualities are natural, and are in their subject in virtue of its
nature, and are always there: but some are adventitious, being caused
from without, and these can be lost. Now the latter," i.e. those
which are adventitious, "are habits and dispositions, differing in
the point of being easily or difficultly lost. As to natural
qualities, some regard a thing in the point of its being in a state
of potentiality; and thus we have the second species of quality:
while others regard a thing which is in act; and this either deeply
rooted therein or only on its surface. If deeply rooted, we have the
third species of quality: if on the surface, we have the fourth
species of quality, as shape, and form which is the shape of an
animated being." But this distinction of the species of quality seems
unsuitable. For there are many shapes, and passion-like qualities,
which are not natural but adventitious: and there are also many
dispositions which are not adventitious but natural, as health,
beauty, and the like. Moreover, it does not suit the order of the
species, since that which is the more natural is always first.

Therefore we must explain otherwise the distinction of dispositions
and habits from other qualities. For quality, properly speaking,
implies a certain mode of substance. Now mode, as Augustine says
(Gen. ad lit. iv, 3), "is that which a measure determines": wherefore
it implies a certain determination according to a certain measure.
Therefore, just as that in accordance with which the material
potentiality (_potentia materiae_) is determined to its substantial
being, is called quality, which is a difference affecting the
substance, so that, in accordance with the potentiality of the
subject is determined to its accidental being, is called an
accidental quality, which is also a kind of difference, as is clear
from the Philosopher (Metaph. v, text. 19).

Now the mode o[r] determination of the subject to accidental being
may be taken in regard to the very nature of the subject, or in
regard to action, and passion resulting from its natural principles,
which are matter and form; or again in regard to quantity. If we take
the mode or determination of the subject in regard to quantity, we
shall then have the fourth species of quality. And because quantity,
considered in itself, is devoid of movement, and does not imply the
notion of good or evil, so it does not concern the fourth species of
quality whether a thing be well or ill disposed, nor quickly or
slowly transitory.

But the mode o[r] determination of the subject, in regard to action
or passion, is considered in the second and third species of quality.
And therefore in both, we take into account whether a thing be done
with ease or difficulty; whether it be transitory or lasting. But in
them, we do not consider anything pertaining to the notion of good or
evil: because movements and passions have not the aspect of an end,
whereas good and evil are said in respect of an end.

On the other hand, the mode or determination of the subject, in
regard to the nature of the thing, belongs to the first species of
quality, which is habit and disposition: for the Philosopher says
(Phys. vii, text. 17), when speaking of habits of the soul and of the
body, that they are "dispositions of the perfect to the best; and by
perfect I mean that which is disposed in accordance with its nature."
And since the form itself and the nature of a thing is the end and
the cause why a thing is made (Phys. ii, text. 25), therefore in the
first species we consider both evil and good, and also
changeableness, whether easy or difficult; inasmuch as a certain
nature is the end of generation and movement. And so the Philosopher
(Metaph. v, text. 25) defines habit, a "disposition whereby someone
is disposed, well or ill"; and in _Ethic._ ii, 4, he says that by
"habits we are directed well or ill in reference to the passions."
For when the mode is suitable to the thing's nature, it has the
aspect of good: and when it is unsuitable, it has the aspect of evil.
And since nature is the first object of consideration in anything,
for this reason habit is reckoned as the first species of quality.

Reply Obj. 1: Disposition implies a certain order, as stated above
(A. 1, ad 3). Wherefore a man is not said to be disposed by some
quality except in relation to something else. And if we add "well or
ill," which belongs to the essential notion of habit, we must
consider the quality's relation to the nature, which is the end. So
in regard to shape, or heat, or cold, a man is not said to be well or
ill disposed, except by reason of a relation to the nature of a
thing, with regard to its suitability or unsuitability. Consequently
even shapes and passion-like qualities, in so far as they are
considered to be suitable or unsuitable to the nature of a thing,
belong to habits or dispositions: for shape and color, according to
their suitability to the nature of thing, concern beauty; while heat
and cold, according to their suitability to the nature of a thing,
concern health. And in this way heat and cold are put, by the
Philosopher, in the first species of quality.

Wherefore it is clear how to answer the second objection: though some
give another solution, as Simplicius says in his _Commentary on the
Predicaments._

Reply Obj. 3: This difference, "difficult to change," does not
distinguish habit from the other species of quality, but from
disposition. Now disposition may be taken in two ways; in one way, as
the genus of habit, for disposition is included in the definition of
habit (Metaph. v, text. 25): in another way, according as it is
divided against habit. Again, disposition, properly so called, can be
divided against habit in two ways: first, as perfect and imperfect
within the same species; and thus we call it a disposition, retaining
the name of the genus, when it is had imperfectly, so as to be easily
lost: whereas we call it a habit, when it is had perfectly, so as not
to be lost easily. And thus a disposition becomes a habit, just as a
boy becomes a man. Secondly, they may be distinguished as diverse
species of the one subaltern genus: so that we call dispositions,
those qualities of the first species, which by reason of their very
nature are easily lost, because they have changeable causes; e.g.
sickness and health: whereas we call habits those qualities which, by
reason of their very nature, are not easily changed, in that they
have unchangeable causes, e.g. sciences and virtues. And in this
sense, disposition does not become habit. The latter explanation
seems more in keeping with the intention of Aristotle: for in order
to confirm this distinction he adduces the common mode of speaking,
according to which, when a quality is, by reason of its nature,
easily changeable, and, through some accident, becomes difficultly
changeable, then it is called a habit: while the contrary happens in
regard to qualities, by reason of their nature, difficultly
changeable: for supposing a man to have a science imperfectly, so as
to be liable to lose it easily, we say that he is disposed to that
science, rather than that he has the science. From this it is clear
that the word "habit" implies a certain lastingness: while the word
"disposition" does not.

Nor does it matter that thus to be easy and difficult to change are
specific differences (of a quality), although they belong to passion
and movement, and not the genus of quality. For these differences,
though apparently accidental to quality, nevertheless designate
differences which are proper and essential to quality. In the same
way, in the genus of substance we often take accidental instead of
substantial differences, in so far as by the former, essential
principles are designated.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 49, Art. 3]

Whether Habit Implies Order to an Act?

Objection 1: It would seem that habit does not imply order to an act.
For everything acts according as it is in act. But the Philosopher
says (De Anima iii, text 8), that "when one is become knowing by
habit, one is still in a state of potentiality, but otherwise than
before learning." Therefore habit does not imply the relation of a
principle to an act.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is put in the definition of a thing,
belongs to it essentially. But to be a principle of action, is put in
the definition of power, as we read in _Metaph._ v, text. 17.
Therefore to be the principle of an act belongs to power essentially.
Now that which is essential is first in every genus. If therefore,
habit also is a principle of act, it follows that it is posterior to
power. And so habit and disposition will not be the first species of
quality.

Obj. 3: Further, health is sometimes a habit, and so are leanness and
beauty. But these do not indicate relation to an act. Therefore it is
not essential to habit to be a principle of act.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Bono Conjug. xxi) that "habit
is that whereby something is done when necessary." And the
Commentator says (De Anima iii) that "habit is that whereby we act
when we will."

_I answer that,_ To have relation to an act may belong to habit, both
in regard to the nature of habit, and in regard to the subject in
which the habit is. In regard to the nature of habit, it belongs to
every habit to have relation to an act. For it is essential to habit
to imply some relation to a thing's nature, in so far as it is
suitable or unsuitable thereto. But a thing's nature, which is the
end of generation, is further ordained to another end, which is
either an operation, or the product of an operation, to which one
attains by means of operation. Wherefore habit implies relation not
only to the very nature of a thing, but also, consequently, to
operation, inasmuch as this is the end of nature, or conducive to the
end. Whence also it is stated (Metaph. v, text. 25) in the definition
of habit, that it is a disposition whereby that which is disposed, is
well or ill disposed either in regard to itself, that is to its
nature, or in regard to something else, that is to the end.

But there are some habits, which even on the part of the subject in
which they are, imply primarily and principally relation to an act.
For, as we have said, habit primarily and of itself implies a
relation to the thing's nature. If therefore the nature of a thing,
in which the habit is, consists in this very relation to an act, it
follows that the habit principally implies relation to an act. Now it
is clear that the nature and the notion of power is that it should be
a principle of act. Wherefore every habit is subjected in a power,
implies principally relation to an act.

Reply Obj. 1: Habit is an act, in so far as it is a quality: and in
this respect it can be a principle of operation. It is, however, in a
state of potentiality in respect to operation. Wherefore habit is
called first act, and operation, second act; as it is explained in
_De Anima_ ii, text. 5.

Reply Obj. 2: It is not the essence of habit to be related to power,
but to be related to nature. And as nature precedes action, to which
power is related, therefore habit is put before power as a species of
quality.

Reply Obj. 3: Health is said to be a habit, or a habitual
disposition, in relation to nature, as stated above. But in so far as
nature is a principle of act, it consequently implies a relation to
act. Wherefore the Philosopher says (De Hist. Animal. x, 1), that
man, or one of his members, is called healthy, "when he can perform
the operation of a healthy man." And the same applies to other habits.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 49, Art. 4]

Whether Habits Are Necessary?

Objection 1: It would seem that habits are not necessary. For by
habits we are well or ill disposed in respect of something, as stated
above. But a thing is well or ill disposed by its form: for in
respect of its form a thing is good, even as it is a being. Therefore
there is no necessity for habits.

Obj. 2: Further, habit implies relation to an act. But power implies
sufficiently a principle of act: for even the natural powers, without
any habits, are principles of acts. Therefore there was no necessity
for habits.

Obj. 3: Further, as power is related to good and evil, so also is
habit: and as power does not always act, so neither does habit.
Given, therefore, the powers, habits become superfluous.

_On the contrary,_ Habits are perfections (Phys. vii, text. 17). But
perfection is of the greatest necessity to a thing: since it is in
the nature of an end. Therefore it is necessary that there should be
habits.

_I answer that,_ As we have said above (AA. 2, 3), habit implies a
disposition in relation to a thing's nature, and to its operation or
end, by reason of which disposition a thing is well or ill disposed
thereto. Now for a thing to need to be disposed to something else,
three conditions are necessary. The first condition is that which is
disposed should be distinct from that to which it is disposed; and
so, that it should be related to it as potentiality is to act.
Whence, if there is a being whose nature is not composed of
potentiality and act, and whose substance is its own operation, which
itself is for itself, there we can find no room for habit and
disposition, as is clearly the case in God.

The second condition is, that that which is in a state of
potentiality in regard to something else, be capable of determination
in several ways and to various things. Whence if something be in a
state of potentiality in regard to something else, but in regard to
that only, there we find no room for disposition and habit: for such
a subject from its own nature has the due relation to such an act.
Wherefore if a heavenly body be composed of matter and form, since
that matter is not in a state of potentiality to another form, as we
said in the First Part (Q. 56, A. 2) there is no need for disposition
or habit in respect of the form, or even in respect of operation,
since the nature of the heavenly body is not in a state of
potentiality to more than one fixed movement.

The third condition is that in disposing the subject to one of those
things to which it is in potentiality, several things should occur,
capable of being adjusted in various ways: so as to dispose the
subject well or ill to its form or to its operation. Wherefore the
simple qualities of the elements which suit the natures of the
elements in one single fixed way, are not called dispositions or
habits, but "simple qualities": but we call dispositions or habits,
such things as health, beauty, and so forth, which imply the
adjustment of several things which may vary in their relative
adjustability. For this reason the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text.
24, 25) that "habit is a disposition": and disposition is "the order
of that which has parts either as to place, or as to potentiality, or
as to species," as we have said above (A. 1, ad 3). Wherefore, since
there are many things for whose natures and operations several things
must concur which may vary in their relative adjustability, it
follows that habit is necessary.

Reply Obj. 1: By the form the nature of a thing is perfected: yet the
subject needs to be disposed in regard to the form by some
disposition. But the form itself is further ordained to operation,
which is either the end, or the means to the end. And if the form is
limited to one fixed operation, no further disposition, besides the
form itself, is needed for the operation. But if the form be such
that it can operate in diverse ways, as the soul; it needs to be
disposed to its operations by means of habits.

Reply Obj. 2: Power sometimes has a relation to many things: and then
it needs to be determined by something else. But if a power has not a
relation to many things, it does not need a habit to determine it, as
we have said. For this reason the natural forces do not perform their
operations by means of habits: because they are of themselves
determined to one mode of operation.

Reply Obj. 3: The same habit has not a relation to good and evil, as
will be made clear further on (Q. 54, A. 3): whereas the same power
has a relation to good and evil. And, therefore, habits are necessary
that the powers be determined to good.
________________________

QUESTION 50

OF THE SUBJECT OF HABITS
(In Six Articles)

We consider next the subject of habits: and under this head there are
six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there is a habit in the body?

(2) Whether the soul is a subject of habit, in respect of its essence
or in respect of its power?

(3) Whether in the powers of the sensitive part there can be a habit?

(4) Whether there is a habit in the intellect?

(5) Whether there is a habit in the will?

(6) Whether there is a habit in separate substances?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 50, Art. 1]

Whether There Is a Habit in the Body?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is not a habit in the body.
For, as the Commentator says (De Anima iii), "a habit is that whereby
we act when we will." But bodily actions are not subject to the will,
since they are natural. Therefore there can be no habit in the body.

Obj. 2: Further, all bodily dispositions are easy to change. But
habit is a quality, difficult to change. Therefore no bodily
disposition can be a habit.

Obj. 3: Further, all bodily dispositions are subject to change. But
change can only be in the third species of quality, which is divided
against habit. Therefore there is no habit in the body.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says in the _Book of Predicaments_
(De Categor. vi) that health of the body and incurable disease are
called habits.

_I answer that,_ As we have said above (Q. 49, AA. 2 seqq.), habit is
a disposition of a subject which is in a state of potentiality either
to form or to operation. Therefore in so far as habit implies
disposition to operation, no habit is principally in the body as its
subject. For every operation of the body proceeds either from a
natural quality of the body or from the soul moving the body.
Consequently, as to those operations which proceed from its nature,
the body is not disposed by a habit: because the natural forces are
determined to one mode of operation; and we have already said (Q. 49,
A. 4) that it is when the subject is in potentiality to many things
that a habitual disposition is required. As to the operations which
proceed from the soul through the body, they belong principally to
the soul, and secondarily to the body. Now habits are in proportion
to their operations: whence "by like acts like habits are formed"
(Ethic. ii, 1, 2). And therefore the dispositions to such operations
are principally in the soul. But they can be secondarily in the body:
to wit, in so far as the body is disposed and enabled with
promptitude to help in the operations of the soul.

If, however, we speak of the disposition of the subject to form, thus
a habitual disposition can be in the body, which is related to the
soul as a subject is to its form. And in this way health and beauty
and such like are called habitual dispositions. Yet they have not the
nature of habit perfectly: because their causes, of their very nature,
are easily changeable.

On the other hand, as Simplicius reports in his _Commentary on the
Predicaments,_ Alexander denied absolutely that habits or
dispositions of the first species are in the body: and held that the
first species of quality belonged to the soul alone. And he held that
Aristotle mentions health and sickness in the _Book on the
Predicaments_ not as though they belonged to the first species of
quality, but by way of example: so that he would mean that just as
health and sickness may be easy or difficult to change, so also are
all the qualities of the first species, which are called habits and
dispositions. But this is clearly contrary to the intention of
Aristotle: both because he speaks in the same way of health and
sickness as examples, as of virtue and science; and because in
_Phys._ vii, text. 17, he expressly mentions beauty and health among
habits.

Reply Obj. 1: This objection runs in the sense of habit as a
disposition to operation, and of those actions of the body which are
from nature: but not in the sense of those actions which proceed from
the soul, and the principle of which is the will.

Reply Obj. 2: Bodily dispositions are not simply difficult to change
on account of the changeableness of their bodily causes. But they may
be difficult to change by comparison to such a subject, because, to
wit, as long as such a subject endures, they cannot be removed; or
because they are difficult to change, by comparison to other
dispositions. But qualities of the soul are simply difficult to
change, on account of the unchangeableness of the subject. And
therefore he does not say that health which is difficult to change is
a habit simply: but that it is "as a habit," as we read in the Greek
[*_isos hexin_ (Categor. viii)]. On the other hand, the qualities of
the soul are called habits simply.

Reply Obj. 3: Bodily dispositions which are in the first species of
quality, as some maintained, differ from qualities of the third
species, in this, that the qualities of the third species consist in
some "becoming" and movement, as it were, wherefore they are called
passions or passible qualities. But when they have attained to
perfection (specific perfection, so to speak), they have then passed
into the first species of quality. But Simplicius in his _Commentary_
disapproves of this; for in this way heating would be in the third
species, and heat in the first species of quality; whereas Aristotle
puts heat in the third.

Wherefore Porphyrius, as Simplicius reports (Commentary), says that
passion or passion-like quality, disposition and habit, differ in
bodies by way of intensity and remissness. For when a thing receives
heat in this only that it is being heated, and not so as to be able
to give heat, then we have passion, if it is transitory; or
passion-like quality if it is permanent. But when it has been brought
to the point that it is able to heat something else, then it is a
disposition; and if it goes so far as to be firmly fixed and to
become difficult to change, then it will be a habit: so that
disposition would be a certain intensity of passion or passion-like
quality, and habit an intensity or disposition. But Simplicius
disapproves of this, for such intensity and remissness do not imply
diversity on the part of the form itself, but on the part of the
diverse participation thereof by the subject; so that there would be
no diversity among the species of quality. And therefore we must say
otherwise that, as was explained above (Q. 49, A. 2, ad 1), the
adjustment of the passion-like qualities themselves, according to
their suitability to nature, implies the notion of disposition: and
so, when a change takes place in these same passion-like qualities,
which are heat and cold, moisture and dryness, there results a change
as to sickness and health. But change does not occur in regard to
like habits and dispositions, primarily and of themselves.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 50, art. 2]

Whether the Soul Is the Subject of Habit in Respect of Its Essence or
in Respect of Its Power?

Objection 1: It would seem that habit is in the soul in respect of
its essence rather than in respect of its powers. For we speak of
dispositions and habits in relation to nature, as stated above (Q.
49, A. 2). But nature regards the essence of the soul rather than the
powers; because it is in respect of its essence that the soul is the
nature of such a body and the form thereof. Therefore habits are in
the soul in respect of its essence and not in respect of its powers.

Obj. 2: Further, accident is not the subject of accident. Now habit
is an accident. But the powers of the soul are in the genus of
accident, as we have said in the First Part (Q. 77, A. 1, ad 5).
Therefore habit is not in the soul in respect of its powers.

Obj. 3: Further, the subject is prior to that which is in the
subject. But since habit belongs to the first species of quality, it
is prior to power, which belongs to the second species. Therefore
habit is not in a power of the soul as its subject.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher (Ethic. i, 13) puts various habits
in the various powers of the soul.

_I answer that,_ As we have said above (Q. 49, AA. 2, 3), habit
implies a certain disposition in relation to nature or to operation.
If therefore we take habit as having a relation to nature, it cannot
be in the soul--that is, if we speak of human nature: for the soul
itself is the form completing the human nature; so that, regarded in
this way, habit or disposition is rather to be found in the body by
reason of its relation to the soul, than in the soul by reason of its
relation to the body. But if we speak of a higher nature, of which
man may become a partaker, according to 2 Pet. 1, "that we may be
partakers of the Divine Nature": thus nothing hinders some habit,
namely, grace, from being in the soul in respect of its essence, as
we shall state later on (Q. 110, A. 4).

On the other hand, if we take habit in its relation to operation, it
is chiefly thus that habits are found in the soul: in so far as the
soul is not determined to one operation, but is indifferent to many,
which is a condition for a habit, as we have said above (Q. 49, A.
4). And since the soul is the principle of operation through its
powers, therefore, regarded in this sense, habits are in the soul in
respect of its powers.

Reply Obj. 1: The essence of the soul belongs to human nature, not as
a subject requiring to be disposed to something further, but as a
form and nature to which someone is disposed.

Reply Obj. 2: Accident is not of itself the subject of accident. But
since among accidents themselves there is a certain order, the
subject, according as it is under one accident, is conceived as the
subject of a further accident. In this way we say that one accident
is the subject of another; as superficies is the subject of color, in
which sense power is the subject of habit.

Reply Obj. 3: Habit takes precedence of power, according as it
implies a disposition to nature: whereas power always implies a
relation to operation, which is posterior, since nature is the
principle of operation. But the habit whose subject is a power, does
not imply relation to nature, but to operation. Wherefore it is
posterior to power. Or, we may say that habit takes precedence of
power, as the complete takes precedence of the incomplete, and as act
takes precedence of potentiality. For act is naturally prior to
potentiality, though potentiality is prior in order of generation and
time, as stated in _Metaph._ vii, text. 17; ix, text. 13.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 50, Art. 3]

Whether There Can Be Any Habits in the Powers of the Sensitive Part?

Objection 1: It would seem that there cannot be any habits in the
powers of the sensitive part. For as the nutritive power is an
irrational part, so is the sensitive power. But there can be no
habits in the powers of the nutritive part. Therefore we ought not to
put any habit in the powers of the sensitive part.

Obj. 2: Further, the sensitive parts are common to us and the brutes.
But there are not any habits in brutes: for in them there is no will,
which is put in the definition of habit, as we have said above (Q.
49, A. 3). Therefore there are no habits in the sensitive powers.

Obj. 3: Further, the habits of the soul are sciences and virtues: and
just as science is related to the apprehensive power, so it virtue
related to the appetitive power. But in the sensitive powers there
are no sciences: since science is of universals, which the sensitive
powers cannot apprehend. Therefore, neither can there be habits of
virtue in the sensitive part.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 10) that "some
virtues," namely, temperance and fortitude, "belong to the irrational
part."

_I answer that,_ The sensitive powers can be considered in two ways:
first, according as they act from natural instinct: secondly,
according as they act at the command of reason. According as they act
from natural instinct, they are ordained to one thing, even as nature
is; but according as they act at the command of reason, they can be
ordained to various things. And thus there can be habits in them, by
which they are well or ill disposed in regard to something.

Reply Obj. 1: The powers of the nutritive part have not an inborn
aptitude to obey the command of reason, and therefore there are no
habits in them. But the sensitive powers have an inborn aptitude to
obey the command of reason; and therefore habits can be in them: for
in so far as they obey reason, in a certain sense they are said to be
rational, as stated in _Ethic._ i, 13.

Reply Obj. 2: The sensitive powers of dumb animals do not act at the
command of reason; but if they are left to themselves, such animals
act from natural instinct: and so in them there are no habits
ordained to operations. There are in them, however, certain
dispositions in relation to nature, as health and beauty. But whereas
by man's reason brutes are disposed by a sort of custom to do things
in this or that way, so in this sense, to a certain extent, we can
admit the existence of habits in dumb animals: wherefore Augustine
says (QQ. lxxxiii, qu. 36): "We find the most untamed beasts,
deterred by fear of pain, from that wherein they took the keenest
pleasure; and when this has become a custom in them, we say that they
are tame and gentle." But the habit is incomplete, as to the use of
the will, for they have not that power of using or of refraining,
which seems to belong to the notion of habit: and therefore, properly
speaking, there can be no habits in them.

Reply Obj. 3: The sensitive appetite has an inborn aptitude to be
moved by the rational appetite, as stated in _De Anima_ iii, text.
57: but the rational powers of apprehension have an inborn aptitude
to receive from the sensitive powers. And therefore it is more
suitable that habits should be in the powers of sensitive appetite
than in the powers of sensitive apprehension, since in the powers of
sensitive appetite habits do not exist except according as they act
at the command of the reason. And yet even in the interior powers of
sensitive apprehension, we may admit of certain habits whereby man
has a facility of memory, thought or imagination: wherefore also the
Philosopher says (De Memor. et Remin. ii) that "custom conduces much
to a good memory": the reason of which is that these powers also are
moved to act at the command of the reason.

On the other hand the exterior apprehensive powers, as sight, hearing
and the like, are not susceptible of habits, but are ordained to
their fixed acts, according to the disposition of their nature, just
as the members of the body, for there are no habits in them, but
rather in the powers which command their movements.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 50, Art. 4]

Whether There Is Any Habit in the Intellect?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are no habits in the intellect.
For habits are in conformity with operations, as stated above (A. 1).
But the operations of man are common to soul and body, as stated in
_De Anima_ i, text. 64. Therefore also are habits. But the intellect
is not an act of the body (De Anima iii, text. 6). Therefore the
intellect is not the subject of a habit.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever is in a thing, is there according to the
mode of that in which it is. But that which is form without matter,
is act only: whereas what is composed of form and matter, has
potentiality and act at the same time. Therefore nothing at the same
time potential and actual can be in that which is form only, but only
in that which is composed of matter and form. Now the intellect is
form without matter. Therefore habit, which has potentiality at the
same time as act, being a sort of medium between the two, cannot be
in the intellect; but only in the _conjunction,_ which is composed of
soul and body.

Obj. 3: Further, habit is a disposition whereby we are well or ill
disposed in regard to something, as is said (Metaph. v, text. 25).
But that anyone should be well or ill disposed to an act of the
intellect is due to some disposition of the body: wherefore also it
is stated (De Anima ii, text. 94) that "we observe men with soft
flesh to be quick witted." Therefore the habits of knowledge are not
in the intellect, which is separate, but in some power which is the
act of some part of the body.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 2, 3, 10) puts
science, wisdom and understanding, which is the habit of first
principles, in the intellective part of the soul.

_I answer that,_ concerning intellective habits there have been
various opinions. Some, supposing that there was only one _possible_
[*See First Part, Q. 79, A. 2, ad 2] intellect for all men, were
bound to hold that habits of knowledge are not in the intellect
itself, but in the interior sensitive powers. For it is manifest that
men differ in habits; and so it was impossible to put the habits of
knowledge directly in that, which, being only one, would be common to
all men. Wherefore if there were but one single "possible" intellect
of all men, the habits of science, in which men differ from one
another, could not be in the "possible" intellect as their subject,
but would be in the interior sensitive powers, which differ in
various men.

Now, in the first place, this supposition is contrary to the mind of
Aristotle. For it is manifest that the sensitive powers are rational,
not by their essence, but only by participation (Ethic. i, 13). Now
the Philosopher puts the intellectual virtues, which are wisdom,
science and understanding, in that which is rational by its essence.
Wherefore they are not in the sensitive powers, but in the intellect
itself. Moreover he says expressly (De Anima iii, text. 8, 18) that
when the "possible" intellect "is thus identified with each thing,"
that is, when it is reduced to act in respect of singulars by the
intelligible species, "then it is said to be in act, as the knower is
said to be in act; and this happens when the intellect can act of
itself," i.e. by considering: "and even then it is in potentiality in
a sense; but not in the same way as before learning and discovering."
Therefore the "possible" intellect itself is the subject of the habit
of science, by which the intellect, even though it be not actually
considering, is able to consider. In the second place, this
supposition is contrary to the truth. For as to whom belongs the
operation, belongs also the power to operate, belongs also the habit.
But to understand and to consider is the proper act of the intellect.
Therefore also the habit whereby one considers is properly in the
intellect itself.

Reply Obj. 1: Some said, as Simplicius reports in his
_Commentary on the Predicaments,_ that, since every operation of man is
to a certain extent an operation of the _conjunctum,_ as the
Philosopher says (De Anima i, text. 64); therefore no habit is in the
soul only, but in the _conjunctum._ And from this it follows that no
habit is in the intellect, for the intellect is separate, as ran the
argument, given above. But the argument is not cogent. For habit is not
a disposition of the object to the power, but rather a disposition of
the power to the object: wherefore the habit needs to be in that power
which is principle of the act, and not in that which is compared to
the power as its object.

Now the act of understanding is not said to be common to soul and
body, except in respect of the phantasm, as is stated in _De Anima_,
text. 66. But it is clear that the phantasm is compared as object to
the passive intellect (De Anima iii, text. 3, 39). Whence it follows
that the intellective habit is chiefly on the part of the intellect
itself; and not on the part of the phantasm, which is common to soul
and body. And therefore we must say that the "possible" intellect is
the subject of habit, which is in potentiality to many: and this
belongs, above all, to the "possible" intellect. Wherefore the
"possible" intellect is the subject of intellectual habits.

Reply Obj. 2: As potentiality to sensible being belongs to
corporeal matter, so potentiality to intellectual being belongs to the
"possible" intellect. Wherefore nothing forbids habit to be in the
"possible" intellect, for it is midway between pure potentiality and
perfect act.

Reply Obj. 3: Because the apprehensive powers inwardly prepare
their proper objects for the _possible intellect,_ therefore it is by
the good disposition of these powers, to which the good disposition of
the body cooperates, that man is rendered apt to understand. And so in
a secondary way the intellective habit can be in these powers. But
principally it is in the "possible" intellect.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 50, Art. 5]

Whether Any Habit Is in the Will?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is not a habit in the will. For
the habit which is in the intellect is the intelligible species, by
means of which the intellect actually understands. But the will does
not act by means of species. Therefore the will is not the subject of
habit.

Obj. 2: Further, no habit is allotted to the active intellect, as
there is to the "possible" intellect, because the former is an active
power. But the will is above all an active power, because it moves
all the powers to their acts, as stated above (Q. 9, A. 1). Therefore
there is no habit in the will.

Obj. 3: Further, in the natural powers there is no habit, because, by
reason of their nature, they are determinate to one thing. But the
will, by reason of its nature, is ordained to tend to the good which
reason directs. Therefore there is no habit in the will.

_On the contrary,_ Justice is a habit. But justice is in the will;
for it is "a habit whereby men will and do that which is just"
(Ethic. v, 1). Therefore the will is the subject of a habit.

_I answer that,_ Every power which may be variously directed to act,
needs a habit whereby it is well disposed to its act. Now since the
will is a rational power, it may be variously directed to act. And
therefore in the will we must admit the presence of a habit whereby
it is well disposed to its act. Moreover, from the very nature of
habit, it is clear that it is principally related to the will;
inasmuch as habit "is that which one uses when one wills," as stated
above (A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: Even as in the intellect there is a species which is
the likeness of the object; so in the will, and in every appetitive
power there must be something by which the power is inclined to its
object; for the act of the appetitive power is nothing but a certain
inclination, as we have said above (Q. 6, A. 4; Q. 22, A. 2). And
therefore in respect of those things to which it is inclined
sufficiently by the nature of the power itself, the power needs no
quality to incline it. But since it is necessary, for the end of
human life, that the appetitive power be inclined to something fixed,
to which it is not inclined by the nature of the power, which has a
relation to many and various things, therefore it is necessary that,
in the will and in the other appetitive powers, there be certain
qualities to incline them, and these are called habits.

Reply Obj. 2: The active intellect is active only, and in no way
passive. But the will, and every appetitive power, is both mover and
moved (De Anima iii, text. 54). And therefore the comparison between
them does not hold; for to be susceptible of habit belongs to that
which is somehow in potentiality.

Reply Obj. 3: The will from the very nature of the power is inclined
to the good of the reason. But because this good is varied in many
ways, the will needs to be inclined, by means of a habit, to some
fixed good of the reason, in order that action may follow more
promptly.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 50, Art. 6]

Whether There Are Habits in the Angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are no habits in the angels.
For Maximus, commentator of Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii), says: "It is
not proper to suppose that there are intellectual (i.e. spiritual)
powers in the divine intelligences (i.e. in the angels) after the
manner of accidents, as in us: as though one were in the other as in
a subject: for accident of any kind is foreign to them." But every
habit is an accident. Therefore there are no habits in the angels.

Obj. 2: Further, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv): "The holy
dispositions of the heavenly essences participate, above all other
things, in God's goodness." But that which is of itself (_per se_) is
prior to and more powerful than that which is by another (_per
aliud_). Therefore the angelic essences are perfected of themselves
unto conformity with God, and therefore not by means of habits. And
this seems to have been the reasoning of Maximus, who in the same
passage adds: "For if this were the case, surely their essence would
not remain in itself, nor could it have been as far as possible
deified of itself."

Obj. 3: Further, habit is a disposition (Metaph. v, text. 25). But
disposition, as is said in the same book, is "the order of that which
has parts." Since, therefore, angels are simple substances, it seems
that there are no dispositions and habits in them.

_On the contrary,_ Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. vii) that the angels
of the first hierarchy are called: "Fire-bearers and Thrones and
Outpouring of Wisdom, by which is indicated the godlike nature of
their habits."

_I answer that,_ Some have thought that there are no habits in the
angels, and that whatever is said of them, is said essentially.
Whence Maximus, after the words which we have quoted, says: "Their
dispositions, and the powers which are in them, are essential,
through the absence of matter in them." And Simplicius says the same
in his _Commentary on the Predicaments:_ "Wisdom which is in the soul
is its habit: but that which is in the intellect, is its substance.
For everything divine is sufficient of itself, and exists in itself."

Now this opinion contains some truth, and some error. For it is
manifest from what we have said (Q. 49, A. 4) that only a being in
potentiality is the subject of habit. So the above-mentioned
commentators considered that angels are immaterial substances, and
that there is no material potentiality in them, and on that account,
excluded from them habit and any kind of accident. Yet since though
there is no material potentiality in angels, there is still some
potentiality in them (for to be pure act belongs to God alone),
therefore, as far as potentiality is found to be in them, so far may
habits be found in them. But because the potentiality of matter and
the potentiality of intellectual substance are not of the same kind.
Whence, Simplicius says in his _Commentary on the Predicaments_ that:
"The habits of the intellectual substance are not like the habits
here below, but rather are they like simple and immaterial images
which it contains in itself."

However, the angelic intellect and the human intellect differ with
regard to this habit. For the human intellect, being the lowest in
the intellectual order, is in potentiality as regards all
intelligible things, just as primal matter is in respect of all
sensible forms; and therefore for the understanding of all things, it
needs some habit. But the angelic intellect is not as a pure
potentiality in the order of intelligible things, but as an act; not
indeed as pure act (for this belongs to God alone), but with an
admixture of some potentiality: and the higher it is, the less
potentiality it has. And therefore, as we said in the First Part (Q.
55, A. 1), so far as it is in potentiality, so far is it in need of
habitual perfection by means of intelligible species in regard to its
proper operation: but so far as it is in act, through its own essence
it can understand some things, at least itself, and other things
according to the mode of its substance, as stated in _De Causis:_ and
the more perfect it is, the more perfectly will it understand.

But since no angel attains to the perfection of God, but all are
infinitely distant therefrom; for this reason, in order to attain to
God Himself, through intellect and will, the angels need some habits,
being as it were in potentiality in regard to that Pure Act.
Wherefore Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. vii) that their habits are
"godlike," that is to say, that by them they are made like to God.

But those habits that are dispositions to the natural being are not
in angels, since they are immaterial.

Reply Obj. 1: This saying of Maximus must be understood of material
habits and accidents.

Reply Obj. 2: As to that which belongs to angels by their essence,
they do not need a habit. But as they are not so far beings of
themselves, as not to partake of Divine wisdom and goodness,
therefore, so far as they need to partake of something from without,
so far do they need to have habits.

Reply Obj. 3: In angels there are no essential parts: but
there are potential parts, in so far as their intellect is perfected
by several species, and in so far as their will has a relation to
several things.
________________________

QUESTION 51

OF THE CAUSE OF HABITS, AS TO THEIR FORMATION
(In Four Articles)

We must next consider the cause of habits: and firstly, as to their
formation; secondly, as to their increase; thirdly, as to their
diminution and corruption. Under the first head there are four points
of inquiry:

(1) Whether any habit is from nature?

(2) Whether any habit is caused by acts?

(3) Whether any habit can be caused by one act?

(4) Whether any habits are infused in man by God?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 51, Art. 1]

Whether Any Habit Is from Nature?

Objection 1: It would seem that no habit is from nature. For the use
of those things which are from nature does not depend on the will.
But habit "is that which we use when we will," as the Commentator
says on _De Anima_ iii. Therefore habit is not from nature.

Obj. 2: Further, nature does not employ two where one is sufficient.
But the powers of the soul are from nature. If therefore the habits
of the powers were from nature, habit and power would be one.

Obj. 3: Further, nature does not fail in necessaries. But habits are
necessary in order to act well, as we have stated above (Q. 49, A.
4). If therefore any habits were from nature, it seems that nature
would not fail to cause all necessary habits: but this is clearly
false. Therefore habits are not from nature.

_On the contrary,_ In _Ethic._ vi, 6, among other habits, place is
given to understanding of first principles, which habit is from
nature: wherefore also first principles are said to be known
naturally.

_I answer that,_ One thing can be natural to another in two ways.
First in respect of the specific nature, as the faculty of laughing
is natural to man, and it is natural to fire to have an upward
tendency. Secondly, in respect of the individual nature, as it is
natural to Socrates or Plato to be prone to sickness or inclined to
health, in accordance with their respective temperaments. Again, in
respect of both natures, something may be called natural in two ways:
first, because it entirely is from the nature; secondly, because it
is partly from nature, and partly from an extrinsic principle. For
instance, when a man is healed by himself, his health is entirely
from nature; but when a man is healed by means of medicine, health
is partly from nature, partly from an extrinsic principle.

Thus, then, if we speak of habit as a disposition of the subject in
relation to form or nature, it may be natural in either of the
foregoing ways. For there is a certain natural disposition demanded
by the human species, so that no man can be without it. And this
disposition is natural in respect of the specific nature. But since
such a disposition has a certain latitude, it happens that different
grades of this disposition are becoming to different men in respect
of the individual nature. And this disposition may be either entirely
from nature, or partly from nature, and partly from an extrinsic
principle, as we have said of those who are healed by means of art.

But the habit which is a disposition to operation, and whose subject
is a power of the soul, as stated above (Q. 50, A. 2), may be natural
whether in respect of the specific nature or in respect of the
individual nature: in respect of the specific nature, on the part of
the soul itself, which, since it is the form of the body, is the
specific principle; but in respect of the individual nature, on the
part of the body, which is the material principle. Yet in neither way
does it happen that there are natural habits in man, so that they be
entirely from nature. In the angels, indeed, this does happen, since
they have intelligible species naturally impressed on them, which
cannot be said of the human soul, as we have said in the First Part
(Q. 55, A. 2; Q. 84, A. 3).

There are, therefore, in man certain natural habits, owing their
existence, partly to nature, and partly to some extrinsic principle:
in one way, indeed, in the apprehensive powers; in another way, in
the appetitive powers. For in the apprehensive powers there may be a
natural habit by way of a beginning, both in respect of the specific
nature, and in respect of the individual nature. This happens with
regard to the specific nature, on the part of the soul itself: thus
the understanding of first principles is called a natural habit. For
it is owing to the very nature of the intellectual soul that man,
having once grasped what is a whole and what is a part, should at
once perceive that every whole is larger than its part: and in like
manner with regard to other such principles. Yet what is a whole, and
what is a part--this he cannot know except through the intelligible
species which he has received from phantasms: and for this reason,
the Philosopher at the end of the _Posterior Analytics_ shows that
knowledge of principles comes to us from the senses.

But in respect of the individual nature, a habit of knowledge is
natural as to its beginning, in so far as one man, from the
disposition of his organs of sense, is more apt than another to
understand well, since we need the sensitive powers for the operation
of the intellect.

In the appetitive powers, however, no habit is natural in its
beginning, on the part of the soul itself, as to the substance of the
habit; but only as to certain principles thereof, as, for instance,
the principles of common law are called the "nurseries of virtue."
The reason of this is because the inclination to its proper objects,
which seems to be the beginning of a habit, does not belong to the
habit, but rather to the very nature of the powers.

But on the part of the body, in respect of the individual nature,
there are some appetitive habits by way of natural beginnings. For
some are disposed from their own bodily temperament to chastity or
meekness or such like.

Reply Obj. 1: This objection takes nature as divided against reason
and will; whereas reason itself and will belong to the nature of man.

Reply Obj. 2: Something may be added even naturally to the nature of
a power, while it cannot belong to the power itself. For instance,
with regard to the angels, it cannot belong to the intellective power
itself capable of knowing all things: for thus it would have to be
the act of all things, which belongs to God alone. Because that by
which something is known, must needs be the actual likeness of the
thing known: whence it would follow, if the power of the angel knew
all things by itself, that it was the likeness and act of all things.
Wherefore there must needs be added to the angels' intellective
power, some intelligible species, which are likenesses of things
understood: for it is by participation of the Divine wisdom and not
by their own essence, that their intellect can be actually those
things which they understand. And so it is clear that not everything
belonging to a natural habit can belong to the power.

Reply Obj. 3: Nature is not equally inclined to cause all the various
kinds of habits: since some can be caused by nature, and some not, as
we have said above. And so it does not follow that because some
habits are natural, therefore all are natural.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 51, Art. 2]

Whether Any Habit Is Caused by Acts?

Objection 1: It would seem that no habit is caused by acts. For habit
is a quality, as we have said above (Q. 49, A. 1). Now every quality
is caused in a subject, according to the latter's receptivity. Since
then the agent, inasmuch as it acts, does not receive but rather
gives: it seems impossible for a habit to be caused in an agent by
its own acts.

Obj. 2: Further, the thing wherein a quality is caused is moved to
that quality, as may be clearly seen in that which is heated or
cooled: whereas that which produces the act that causes the quality,
moves, as may be seen in that which heats or cools. If therefore
habits were caused in anything by its own act, it would follow that
the same would be mover and moved, active and passive: which is
impossible, as stated in Physics iii, 8.

Obj. 3: Further, the effect cannot be more noble than its cause. But
habit is more noble than the act which precedes the habit; as is
clear from the fact that the latter produces more noble acts.
Therefore habit cannot be caused by an act which precedes the habit.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 1, 2) teaches that
habits of virtue and vice are caused by acts.

_I answer that,_ In the agent there is sometimes only the active
principle of its act: for instance in fire there is only the active
principle of heating. And in such an agent a habit cannot be caused
by its own act: for which reason natural things cannot become
accustomed or unaccustomed, as is stated in _Ethic._ ii, 1. But a
certain agent is to be found, in which there is both the active and
the passive principle of its act, as we see in human acts. For the
acts of the appetitive power proceed from that same power according
as it is moved by the apprehensive power presenting the object: and
further, the intellective power, according as it reasons about
conclusions, has, as it were, an active principle in a self-evident
proposition. Wherefore by such acts habits can be caused in their
agents; not indeed with regard to the first active principle, but
with regard to that principle of the act, which principle is a mover
moved. For everything that is passive and moved by another, is
disposed by the action of the agent; wherefore if the acts be
multiplied a certain quality is formed in the power which is passive
and moved, which quality is called a habit: just as the habits of
moral virtue are caused in the appetitive powers, according as they
are moved by the reason, and as the habits of science are caused in
the intellect, according as it is moved by first propositions.

Reply Obj. 1: The agent, as agent, does not receive anything. But
in so far as it moves through being moved by another, it receives
something from that which moves it: and thus is a habit caused.

Reply Obj. 2: The same thing, and in the same respect, cannot be
mover and moved; but nothing prevents a thing from being moved by
itself as to different respects, as is proved in Physics viii, text.
28, 29.

Reply Obj. 3: The act which precedes the habit, in so far as
it comes from an active principle, proceeds from a more excellent
principle than is the habit caused thereby: just as the reason is a
more excellent principle than the habit of moral virtue produced in
the appetitive power by repeated acts, and as the understanding of
first principles is a more excellent principle than the science of
conclusions.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 51, Art. 3]

Whether a Habit Can Be Caused by One Act?

Objection 1: It would seem that a habit can be caused by one act. For
demonstration is an act of reason. But science, which is the habit of
one conclusion, is caused by one demonstration. Therefore habit can
be caused by one act.

Obj. 2: Further, as acts happen to increase by multiplication so do
they happen to increase by intensity. But a habit is caused by
multiplication of acts. Therefore also if an act be very intense, it
can be the generating cause of a habit.

Obj. 3: Further, health and sickness are habits. But it happens that
a man is healed or becomes ill, by one act. Therefore one act can
cause a habit.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher (Ethic. i, 7): "As neither does
one swallow nor one day make spring: so neither does one day nor a
short time make a man blessed and happy." But "happiness is an
operation in respect of a habit of perfect virtue" (Ethic. i, 7, 10,
13). Therefore a habit of virtue, and for the same reason, other
habits, is not caused by one act.

_I answer that,_ As we have said already (A. 2), habit is caused by
act, because a passive power is moved by an active principle. But in
order that some quality be caused in that which is passive the active
principle must entirely overcome the passive. Whence we see that
because fire cannot at once overcome the combustible, it does not
enkindle at once; but it gradually expels contrary dispositions, so
that by overcoming it entirely, it may impress its likeness on it.
Now it is clear that the active principle which is reason, cannot
entirely overcome the appetitive power in one act: because the
appetitive power is inclined variously, and to many things; while the
reason judges in a single act, what should be willed in regard to
various aspects and circumstances. Wherefore the appetitive power is
not thereby entirely overcome, so as to be inclined like nature to
the same thing, in the majority of cases; which inclination belongs
to the habit of virtue. Therefore a habit of virtue cannot be caused
by one act, but only by many.

But in the apprehensive powers, we must observe that there are two
passive principles: one is the _possible_ (See First Part, Q. 79, A.
2, ad 2) intellect itself; the other is the intellect which Aristotle
(De Anima iii, text. 20) calls "passive," and is the "particular
reason," that is the cogitative power, with memory and imagination.
With regard then to the former passive principle, it is possible for
a certain active principle to entirely overcome, by one act, the
power of its passive principle: thus one self-evident proposition
convinces the intellect, so that it gives a firm assent to the
conclusion, but a probable proposition cannot do this. Wherefore a
habit of opinion needs to be caused by many acts of the reason, even
on the part of the "possible" intellect: whereas a habit of science
can be caused by a single act of the reason, so far as the _possible_
intellect is concerned. But with regard to the lower apprehensive
powers, the same acts need to be repeated many times for anything to
be firmly impressed on the memory. And so the Philosopher says (De
Memor. et Remin. 1) that "meditation strengthens memory." Bodily
habits, however, can be caused by one act, if the active principle is
of great power: sometimes, for instance, a strong dose of medicine
restores health at once.

Hence the solutions to the objections are clear.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 51, Art. 4]

Whether Any Habits Are Infused in Man by God?

Objection 1: It would seem that no habit is infused in man by God.
For God treats all equally. If therefore He infuses habits into some,
He would infuse them into all: which is clearly untrue.

Obj. 2: Further, God works in all things according to the mode which
is suitable to their nature: for "it belongs to Divine providence to
preserve nature," as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv). But habits are
naturally caused in man by acts, as we have said above (A. 2).
Therefore God does not cause habits to be in man except by acts.

Obj. 3: Further, if any habit be infused into man by God, man can by
that habit perform many acts. But "from those acts a like habit is
caused" (Ethic. ii, 1, 2). Consequently there will be two habits of
the same species in the same man, one acquired, the other infused.
Now this seems impossible: for the two forms of the same species
cannot be in the same subject. Therefore a habit is not infused into
man by God.

_On the contrary,_ it is written (Ecclus. 15:5): "God filled him with
the spirit of wisdom and understanding." Now wisdom and understanding
are habits. Therefore some habits are infused into man by God.

_I answer that,_ Some habits are infused by God into man, for two
reasons.

The first reason is because there are some habits by which man is
disposed to an end which exceeds the proportion of human nature,
namely, the ultimate and perfect happiness of man, as stated above
(Q. 5, A. 5). And since habits need to be in proportion with that to
which man is disposed by them, therefore is it necessary that those
habits, which dispose to this end, exceed the proportion of human
nature. Wherefore such habits can never be in man except by Divine
infusion, as is the case with all gratuitous virtues.

The other reason is, because God can produce the effects of second
causes, without these second causes, as we have said in the First
Part (Q. 105, A. 6). Just as, therefore, sometimes, in order to show
His power, He causes health, without its natural cause, but which
nature could have caused, so also, at times, for the manifestation of
His power, He infuses into man even those habits which can be caused
by a natural power. Thus He gave to the apostles the science of the
Scriptures and of all tongues, which men can acquire by study or by
custom, but not so perfectly.

Reply Obj. 1: God, in respect of His Nature, is the same to all, but
in respect of the order of His Wisdom, for some fixed motive, gives
certain things to some, which He does not give to others.

Reply Obj. 2: That God works in all according to their mode, does not
hinder God from doing what nature cannot do: but it follows from this
that He does nothing contrary to that which is suitable to nature.

Reply Obj. 3: Acts produced by an infused habit, do not cause a
habit, but strengthen the already existing habit; just as the
remedies of medicine given to a man who is naturally health, do not
cause a kind of health, but give new strength to the health he had
before.
________________________

QUESTION 52

OF THE INCREASE OF HABITS
(In Three Articles)

We have now to consider the increase of habits; under which head
there are three points of inquiry:

(1) Whether habits increase?

(2) Whether they increase by addition?

(3) Whether each act increases the habit?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 52, Art. 1]

Whether Habits Increase?

Objection 1: It would seem that habits cannot increase. For increase
concerns quantity (Phys. v, text. 18). But habits are not in the
genus [of] quantity, but in that of quality. Therefore there can be
no increase of habits.

Obj. 2: Further, habit is a perfection (Phys. vii, text. 17, 18). But
since perfection conveys a notion of end and term, it seems that it
cannot be more or less. Therefore a habit cannot increase.

Obj. 3: Further, those things which can be more or less are subject
to alteration: for that which from being less hot becomes more hot,
is said to be altered. But in habits there is no alteration, as is
proved in _Phys._ vii, text. 15, 17. Therefore habits cannot increase.

_On the contrary,_ Faith is a habit, and yet it increases: wherefore
the disciples said to our Lord (Luke 17:5): "Lord, increase our
faith." Therefore habits increase.

_I answer that,_ Increase, like other things pertaining to quantity,
is transferred from bodily quantities to intelligible spiritual
things, on account of the natural connection of the intellect with
corporeal things, which come under the imagination. Now in corporeal
quantities, a thing is said to be great, according as it reaches the
perfection of quantity due to it; wherefore a certain quantity is
reputed great in man, which is not reputed great in an elephant. And
so also in forms, we say a thing is great because it is perfect. And
since good has the nature of perfection, therefore "in things which
are great, but not in quantity, to be greater is the same as to be
better," as Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 8).

Now the perfection of a form may be considered in two ways: first, in
respect of the form itself: secondly, in respect of the participation
of the form by its subject. In so far as we consider the perfections
of a form in respect of the form itself, thus the form is said to be
"little" or "great": for instance great or little health or science.
But in so far as we consider the perfection of a form in respect of
the participation thereof by the subject, it is said to be "more" or
"less": for instance more or less white or healthy. Now this
distinction is not to be understood as implying that the form has a
being outside its matter or subject, but that it is one thing to
consider the form according to its specific nature, and another to
consider it in respect of its participation by a subject.

In this way, then, there were four opinions among philosophers
concerning intensity and remission of habits and forms, as Simplicius
relates in his _Commentary on the Predicaments._ For Plotinus and the
other Platonists held that qualities and habits themselves were
susceptible of more or less, for the reason that they were material
and so had a certain want of definiteness, on account of the infinity
of matter. Others, on the contrary, held that qualities and habits of
themselves were not susceptible of more or less; but that the things
affected by them (_qualia_) are said to be more or less, in respect
of the participation of the subject: that, for instance, justice is
not more or less, but the just thing. Aristotle alludes to this
opinion in the _Predicaments_ (Categor. vi). The third opinion was
that of the Stoics, and lies between the two preceding opinions. For
they held that some habits are of themselves susceptible of more and
less, for instance, the arts; and that some are not, as the virtues.
The fourth opinion was held by some who said that qualities and
immaterial forms are not susceptible of more or less, but that
material forms are.

In order that the truth in this matter be made clear, we must observe
that [that], in respect of which a thing receives its species, must
be something fixed and stationary, and as it were indivisible: for
whatever attains to that thing, is contained under the species, and
whatever recedes from it more or less, belongs to another species,
more or less perfect. Wherefore, the Philosopher says (Metaph. viii,
text. 10) that species of things are like numbers, in which addition
or subtraction changes the species. If, therefore, a form, or
anything at all, receives its specific nature in respect of itself,
or in respect of something belonging to it, it is necessary that,
considered in itself, it be something of a definite nature, which can
be neither more nor less. Such are heat, whiteness or other like
qualities which are not denominated from a relation to something
else: and much more so, substance, which is _per se_ being. But those
things which receive their species from something to which they are
related, can be diversified, in respect of themselves, according to
more or less: and nonetheless they remain in the same species, on
account of the oneness of that to which they are related, and from
which they receive their species. For example, movement is in itself
more intense or more remiss: and yet it remains in the same species,
on account of the oneness of the term by which it is specified. We
may observe the same thing in health; for a body attains to the
nature of health, according as it has a disposition suitable to an
animal's nature, to which various dispositions may be suitable; which
disposition is therefore variable as regards more or less, and withal
the nature of health remains. Whence the Philosopher says (Ethic. x,
2, 3): "Health itself may be more or less: for the measure is not the
same in all, nor is it always the same in one individual; but down to
a certain point it may decrease and still remain health."

Now these various dispositions and measures of health are by way of
excess and defect: wherefore if the name of health were given to the
most perfect measure, then we should not speak of health as greater
or less. Thus therefore it is clear how a quality or form may
increase or decrease of itself, and how it cannot.

But if we consider a quality or form in respect of its participation
by the subject, thus again we find that some qualities and forms are
susceptible of more or less, and some not. Now Simplicius assigns the
cause of this diversity to the fact that substance in itself cannot
be susceptible of more or less, because it is _per se_ being. And
therefore every form which is participated substantially by its
subject, cannot vary in intensity and remission: wherefore in the
genus of substance nothing is said to be more or less. And because
quantity is nigh to substance, and because shape follows on quantity,
therefore is it that neither in these can there be such a thing as
more or less. Whence the Philosopher says (Phys. vii, text. 15) that
when a thing receives form and shape, it is not said to be altered,
but to be made. But other qualities which are further removed from
quantity, and are connected with passions and actions, are
susceptible of more or less, in respect of their participation by the
subject.

Now it is possible to explain yet further the reason of this
diversity. For, as we have said, that from which a thing receives its
species must remain indivisibly fixed and constant in something
indivisible. Wherefore in two ways it may happen that a form cannot
be participated more or less. First because the participator has its
species in respect of that form. And for this reason no substantial
form is participated more or less. Wherefore the Philosopher says
(Metaph. viii, text. 10) that, "as a number cannot be more or less,
so neither can that which is in the species of substance," that is,
in respect of its participation of the specific form: "but in so far
as substance may be with matter," i.e. in respect of material
dispositions, "more or less are found in substance."

Secondly this may happen from the fact that the form is essentially
indivisible: wherefore if anything participate that form, it must
needs participate it in respect of its indivisibility. For this
reason we do not speak of the species of number as varying in respect
of more or less; because each species thereof is constituted by an
indivisible unity. The same is to be said of the species of
continuous quantity, which are denominated from numbers, as
two-cubits-long, three-cubits-long, and of relations of quantity, as
double and treble, and of figures of quantity, as triangle and
