
    (2). Knowledge. ('Ilm). He has knowledge of all things hidden or
    manifest, whether in heaven or on earth. He knows the number of the
    leaves of the trees, of the grains of wheat and of sand. Events past
    and future are known to Him. He knows what enters into the heart of man
    and what he utters with his mouth. He alone, except those to whom He
    has revealed them, knows the invisible things. He is free from
    forgetfulness, negligence and error. His knowledge is eternal: it is
    not posterior to His essence.

    (3). Power. (Qudrat). He is Almighty. If He wills, He can raise the
    dead, make stones talk, trees walk, annihilate the heavens and the
    earth and recreate of gold or of silver thousands similar to those
    destroyed. He can transport a man in a moment of time from the east to
    the west, or from the west to the east, or to the seventh heaven. His
    power is eternal a priori and a posteriori. It is not posterior to His
    essence.

    {118}

    (4). Will (Iradah). He can do what He wills, and whatever He wills
    comes to pass. He is not obliged to act. Everything, good or evil, in
    this world exists by His will. He wills the faith of the believer and
    the piety of the religious. If He were to change His will there would
    be neither a true believer nor a pious man. He willeth also the
    unbelief of the unbeliever and the irreligion of the wicked and,
    without that will, there would neither be unbelief nor irreligion. All
    we do we do by His will: what He willeth not does not come to pass. If
    one should ask why God does not will that all men should believe we
    answer: "We have no right to enquire about what God wills and does. He
    is perfectly free to will and to do what He pleases." In creating
    unbelievers, in willing that they should remain in that state; in
    making serpents, scorpions and pigs: in willing, in short, all that is
    evil God has wise ends in view which it is not necessary that we should
    know. We must acknowledge that the will of God is eternal and that it
    is not posterior to His essence.

    (5). Hearing. (Sama'). He hears all sounds whether low or loud. He
    hears without an ear for His attributes are not like those of men.

    (6). Seeing. (Basr). He sees all things, even the steps of a black ant
    on a black stone in a dark night; yet He has no eye as men have.

    (7). Speech. (Kalam). He speaks, but not with a tongue as men do. He
    speaks to some of His servants without the intervention of another,
    even as He spoke to Moses, and to Muhammad on the night of the
    ascension to heaven. He speaks to others by the instrumentality of
    Gabriel, and this is the usual way in which He communicates His will to
    the prophets. It follows from this that the Quran is the word of God,
    and is eternal and uncreated.

These are the "haft sifat," or seven attributes of God. There is unanimity
of opinion as to the number of attributes, but not as regards their nature
and the extent of the knowledge concerning them to which men can attain.
Thus some say that the knowledge of God is the first thing to acquire; but
Imam Shafa'i and the Mutazilites say that a man must first attain to the
_idea_ of the knowledge of God. The meaning of the expression "Knowledge of
God" is the ascertaining the truth of His existence, and of His positive
and privative attributes, as far as the human understanding can enter into
these matters. The unity is not a mere numerical unity but absolute, for
the number one is the first of a series and implies a second, but God has
not a {119} second. He is "singular without anything like Him, separate
having no equal;" for, "had there been either in heaven or earth gods
beside God, both surely had gone to ruin." (Sura xxi. 22). God is not a
substance, for substance has accidents, but God has none: otherwise His
nature would be that of "dependent existence." God is without parts, for
otherwise he would not exist till all the parts were formed, and His
existence would depend on the parts, that is, on something beside Himself.

The orthodox strictly prohibit the discussion of minute particulars, for
say they, "just as the eye turning to the brightness of the sun finds
darkness intervene to prevent all observation, so the understanding finds
itself bewildered if it attempts to pry into the nature of God." The
Prophet said: "We did not know the reality of the knowledge of Thee;" and
to his followers he gave this advice: "Think of God's gifts, not of His
nature: certainly you have no power for that." The Khalif Akbar is reported
to have said: "to be helpless in the search of knowledge is knowledge and
to enquire into the nature of God is Shirk (infidelity)."[104] A moderate
acquaintance with Muslim theology shows that neither the injunction of the
Prophet nor the warning of the Khalif has been heeded.

According to the early Muslims, the Companions and their followers,
enquiries into the nature of God and His attributes were not lawful. The
Prophet knowing what was good for men, had plainly revealed the way of
salvation and had taught them:--

 "Say: He is God alone:
  God the eternal!
  He begetteth not, and He is not begotten;
  And there is none like unto Him." (Sura cxii)

This was sufficient for them to know of the mystery of the Godhead. God is
far beyond the reach of the human {120} understanding. He alone embraces
all in His comprehension. Men should therefore mistrust their own
perceptive faculties and notions and should obey the inspired legislator
Muhammad, who loving them better than they love themselves, and knowing
better than they do what is truly useful, has revealed both what they ought
to believe and what they ought to do. It is true that men must exercise
their reason, but they must not do so with regard to the divine
attributes.[105]

Dogma is divided into two portions, usul and faru'--(_i.e._, roots and
branches.) The former include the doctrine about God; the latter, as the
name implies, consist of truths which result from the acceptance of the
former. The orthodox belief is that reason has only to do with the "faru',"
for the usul being founded on the Quran and Sunnat have an objective basis.

Differences of opinion about various branches of the "faru'," led to
discussions which did not stop there but went on to the "usul," and so
paved the way for the rise of scholastic theology ('Ilm-i-kalam.) I have
already in the chapter on the exegesis of the Quran explained the
difference in meaning between muhkam (obvious) verses and mutashabih
(intricate) ones. This difference lies at the very foundation of the
present subject. It is, therefore, necessary to enter a little into detail.

The question turns very much on the interpretation of the 5th verse of the
3rd Sura: "He it is who hath sent down to thee 'the Book.' Some of its
signs are of themselves perspicuous (muhkam): these are the basis of the
{121} Book--and others are figurative (mutashabih.) But they whose hearts
are given to err, follow its figures, craving discord, craving an
interpretation; yet none knoweth its interpretation but God. And the stable
in knowledge say, 'We believe in it: it is all from our Lord.' But none
will bear this in mind, save men endued with understanding." Here it is
clearly stated (1) that no one except God can know the interpretation of
mutashabih verses, and (2) that wise men though they know not their
interpretation, yet believe them all. Many learned men, however, say that
the full stop should not be placed after the word "God" but after
"knowledge," and so this portion of the verse would read thus: "None
knoweth its interpretation but God and the stable in knowledge. They say:
'we believe, &c.'" On this slight change in punctuation, which shows that
the 'stable in knowledge' can interpret the mutashabih verses, opposite
schools of theology have arisen in Islam.

The latter reading opens the way to a fearless investigation of subjects
which all the early Muslims avoided as beyond their province. In the early
days of Islam it was held that all parts of the Quran, except the muhkam
verses and the purely narrative portions, were mutashabih; that is, all
verses which related to the attributes of God, to the existence of angels
and genii, to the appearance of Antichrist, the period and signs of the day
of judgment, and generally all matters which are beyond the daily
experience of mankind. It was strongly felt that not only must there be no
discussion on them,[106] but no attempt should be made to understand or act
on them. Ibn 'Abbas, a Companion, says: "One must believe the mutashabih
verses, but not take them for a rule of conduct." Ibn Jubair was once {122}
asked to put the meaning of the Quran into writing. He became angry and
said: "I should rather be palsied in one-half of my body than do so."[107]
'Ayesha said: "Avoid those persons who dispute about the meaning of the
Quran, for they are those whom God has referred to in the words, 'whose
hearts are given to err.'"

The first reading is the one adopted by the Ashab, the Tabi'in and the
Taba-i-Tabi'in and the great majority of Commentators. The Sunnis
generally, and, according to the testimony of Fakr-ud-din Razi (A.H.
544-606), the Shafa'i sect are of the same opinion.

Those who take the opposite view are the Commentators Mujahid (died A.H.
101), Rabi' bin Ans and others. The scholastic theologians[108]
(Mutakalliman) generally adopt the latter reading.[109] They argued thus:
how could men believe what they did not know; to which their opponents
answered, that the act of belief in the unknown is the very thing here
praised by God. The scholastics then enquired why, since the Quran was sent
to be a guide and direction to men, were not all its verses muhkam? The
answer was, that the Arabs acknowledged two kinds of eloquence. One kind
was to arrange words and ideas in a plain and simple style so that the
meaning might be at once apparent, the other was to speak in figurative
language. Now, if the Quran had not contained both these styles of
composition, it could not have claimed the position it does as a book
absolutely perfect in form as well as in matter.[110]

Bearing in mind this fundamental difference of opinion, we can now pass on
to the consideration of the attributes.

{123} The essential attributes are Life, Knowledge, Power, Will, for
without these the others could not exist. Then the attributes of Hearing,
Seeing, Speech give us a further idea of perfection. These are the
"Sifat-i-Sabutiah," or affirmative attributes, the privation of which would
imply loss; there are also Sifat-i-Salbiah, or privative attributes, such
as--God has no form, is not limited by place, has no equal, &c. The acts of
sitting, rising, descending, the possession of face, hands, eyes, &c.,
being connected with the idea of corporeal existences imply imperfection
and apparently contradict the doctrine of "exemption" (tenzih) according to
which God is, in virtue of His essence, in no way like the creatures He has
made. This was a difficulty, but the four great Imams all taught that it
was impious to enquire into these matters for all such allusions were
mutashabih. "The Imam Hanbal and other early divines followed in the path
of the early Muslims and said: 'We believe in the Book and the Sunnat, and
do not desire explanations. We know that the High God is not to be compared
to any created object: nor any creature with Him.'"[111] Imam As-Shafa'i
said that a man who enquired into such matters should be tied to a stake,
and carried about, and that the following proclamation should be made
before him: "This is the reward of him who left the Quran and the
Traditions for the study of scholastic theology." Imam Hanbal says:
"Whosoever moves his hand when he reads in the Quran the words, 'I have
created with my hand,' ought to have his hand cut off; and whoever
stretches forth his finger in repeating the saying of Muhammad, 'The heart
of the believer is between two fingers of the Merciful,' deserves to have
his finger cut off." At-Tirmizi when consulted about the statement of the
Prophet that God had descended to the lowest of the seven heavens, said:
"The descent is intelligible, the manner how is unknown; the belief therein
{124} is obligatory; and the asking about it is a blameable innovation."
But all such attempts to restrain discussion and investigation failed.

The two main points in the discussion of this question are (1) whether the
attributes of God are internal or external, whether they are part of His
essence or not, and (2) whether they are eternal or not.

The two leading Sects were the Sifatians (or Attributists) and the
Mutazilites. The Sifatians whom the early orthodox Muslims follow, taught
that the attributes of God are eternally inherent in His essence without
separation or change. Every attribute is conjoined with Him as life with
knowledge, or knowledge with power. They also taught that the mutashabih
verses were not to be explained, and such were those which seemed to show a
resemblance between God and His creatures. So at first they did not attempt
to give the meaning of the terms, "hands, eyes, face, &c.," when applied to
God. They simply accepted them as they stood. In course of time, as will be
seen, differences of opinion on this point led to some sub-divisions of
this sect.

The Mutazilites were the great opponents of the Sifatians. They rejected
the idea of eternal attributes, saying that eternity was the formal
attribute of the essence of God. "If," said they, "we admit the eternal
existence of an attribute then we must recognize the multiplicity of
eternal existences." They also rejected the attributes of hearing, seeing
and speech, as these were accidents proper to corporeal existences. They
looked upon the divine attributes as mental abstractions, and not as having
a real existence in the divine essence. The Mutazilites were emphatically
the Free thinkers of Islam. The origin of the sect was as follows: Al
Hasan, a famous divine, was one day seated in the Mosque at Basra when a
discussion arose on the question whether a believer who committed a mortal
sin became thereby an unbeliever. The Kharigites (Ante p. 76) {125}
affirmed that it was so. The orthodox denied this, saying that, though
guilty of sin, yet that as he believed rightly he was not an infidel.[112]
One of the scholars Wasil Ibn Ata, (who was born at Madina A.H. 80), then
rose up and said: "I maintain that a Muslim who has committed a mortal sin
should be regarded neither as a believer nor an unbeliever, but as
occupying a middle station between the two." He then retired to another
part of the Mosque where he was joined by his friend 'Umr Ibn Obaid and
others. They resumed the discussion. A learned man, named Katada, entering
the Mosque, went up to them, but on finding that they were not the party in
which Al Hasan was, said 'these are the Seceders (Al-Mutazila).' Al Hasan
soon expelled them from his school. Wasil then founded a school of his own
of which, after the death of his master, 'Umr Ibn Obaid became the head.

Wasil felt that a believer, though sinful, did not merit the same degree of
punishment as an infidel, and thus starting off on the question of
_degrees_ of punishment, he soon opened up the whole subject of man's
responsibility and the question of free-will. This soon brought him into
conflict with the orthodox on the subject of predestination and that again
to the subject of the inspiration, the interpretation and the eternity of
the Quran, and of the divine attributes. His followers rejected the
doctrine of the "divine right" of the Imam, and held that the entire body
of the Faithful had the right to elect the most suitable person, who need
not necessarily be a man of the Quraish tribe, to fill that office. The
principles of logic and the teaching of philosophy were brought to bear on
the precepts of religion. According to Shahrastani the Mutazilites hold:--

    "That God is eternal; and that eternity is the peculiar property of His
    essence; but they deny the existence of any eternal attributes (as
    distinct from His nature). For they say, He is Omniscient as to {126}
    His nature; Living as to His nature; Almighty as to His nature; but not
    through any knowledge, power or life existing in Him as eternal
    attributes; for knowledge, power and life are part of His essence,
    otherwise, if they are to be looked upon as eternal attributes of the
    Deity, it will give rise to a multiplicity of eternal entities."

    "They maintain that the knowledge of God is as much within the province
    of reason as that of any other entity; that He cannot be beheld with
    the corporeal sight; and with the exception of Himself everything else
    is liable to change or to suffer extinction. They also maintain that
    Justice is the animating principle of human actions: Justice according
    to them being the dictates of Reason and the concordance of the
    ultimate results of this conduct of man with such dictates."

    "Again, they hold that there is no eternal law as regards human
    actions; that the divine ordinances which regulate the conduct of men
    are the results of growth and development; that God has commanded and
    forbidden, promised and threatened by a law which grew gradually. At
    the same time, say they, he who works righteousness merits rewards and
    he who works evil deserves punishment. They also say, that all
    knowledge is attained through reason, and must necessarily be so
    obtained. They hold that the cognition of good and evil is also within
    the province of reason; that nothing is known to be right or wrong
    until reason has enlightened us as to the distinction; and that
    thankfulness for the blessings of the Benefactor is made obligatory by
    reason, even before the promulgation of any law upon the subject. They
    also maintain that man has perfect freedom; is the author of his
    actions both good and evil, and deserves reward or punishment hereafter
    accordingly."

During the reigns of the 'Abbasside Khalifs Mamun, Mutasim and Wathik
(198-232 A.H.) at Baghdad, the Mutazilites were in high favour at Court,
Under the 'Abbasside dynasty[113] the ancient Arab Society was
revolutionized, Persians filled the most important offices of State;
Persian doctrines took the place of Arab ones. The orthodox suffered bitter
persecution. The story of that persecution will be told later on. The
Khalif Wathik at length relented. {127} An old man, heavily chained, was
one day brought into his presence. The prisoner obtained permission to put
a few questions to Ahmad Ibn Abu Da,ud, a Mutazilite and the President of
the Court of Inquisition. The following dialogue took place. "Ahmad," said
the prisoner, "what is the dogma which you desire to have established."
"That the Quran is created," replied Ahmad. "This dogma, then, is without
doubt an essential part of religion, insomuch that the latter cannot
without it be said to be complete?" "Certainly." "Has the Apostle of God
taught this to men or has he left them free?" "He has left them free." "Was
the Apostle of God acquainted with this dogma or not?" "He was acquainted
with it." "Wherefore, then, do you desire to impose a belief regarding
which the Apostle of God has left men free to think as they please?" Ahmad
remaining silent, the old man turned to Wathik and said, "O Prince of
Believers, here is my first position made good." Then turning to Ahmad, he
said, "God has said, 'This day have I perfected religion for you, and have
filled up the measures of my favours upon you; and it is my pleasure that
Islam be your religion.' (Sura v. 5). But according to you Islam is not
perfected unless we adopt this doctrine that the Quran is created. Which
now is most worthy of credence--God, when He declares Islam to be complete
and perfect, or you when you announce the contrary?" Ahmad was still
silent. "Prince of Believers," said the old man, "there is my second point
made good." He continued, "Ahmad, how do you explain the following words of
God in His Holy Book?--'O Apostle! proclaim all that hath been sent down to
thee from thy Lord; for if thou dost not, thou hast not proclaimed His
message at all.' Now this doctrine that you desire to spread among the
Faithful, has the Apostle taught it, or has he abstained from doing so?"
Ahmad remained silent. The old man resumed, "Prince of Believers, such is
my third argument." Then turning to Ahmad he said: "If the Prophet was
acquainted with the doctrine {128} which you desire to impose upon us, had
he the right to pass by it in silence?" "He had the right." "And did the
same right appertain to Abu Bakr, Omar, Osman and 'Ali?" "It did," "Prince
of Believers," said the prisoner, "God will, in truth, be severe on us, if
He deprives us of a liberty which He accorded to the Prophet and his
Companions." The Khalif assented, and at once restored the old man to
liberty. So ended one of the fiercest persecutions the orthodox have ever
had to endure, but so also ended the attempt to break through the barriers
of traditionalism.[114] The next Khalif, Al Mutawakhil, a ferocious and
cruel man, restored the orthodox party to place and power. He issued a
fatva (decree) declaring that the dogma that the Quran was created was an
utter falsehood. He instituted severe measures against Christians, Jews,
Shia'hs and Mutazilites. Ahmad Ibn Abu Da,ud was one of the first to be
disgraced. Heresy and latitudinarianism were banished.

The final blow to the Mutazilites, however, came not from the Khalif but a
little later on from Abu Hasan-al-Ash'ari (270-340 A.H.)
