of Rama, and who delighted the heart of the world; and who was as the
sun in regard to the lotus face of Sita, and also to that
darkness--Ravana. Therefore, O heroic son of Kunti, let not thy meeting
with me be fruitless. Do thou with fraternal feeling ask of me a boon, O
Bharata. If this be thy wish, that going to Varanavata, I may destroy
the insignificant sons of Dhritarashtra--even this will I immediately
do. Or if this be thy wish that, that city may be ground by me with
rocks, or that I may bind Duryodhana and bring him before thee, even
this will I do to-day, O thou of mighty strength.'"

Vaisampayana said, "Hearing those words of that high-souled one,
Bhimasena with a cheerful heart answered Hanuman, saying, 'O foremost of
monkeys, I take all this as already performed by thee. Good happen to
thee. O mighty-armed one! I ask of thee this,--be thou well pleased with
me. O powerful one, on thy having become our protector, the Pandavas
have found help. Even by thy prowess shall we conquer all foes.' Thus
addressed, Hanuman said unto Bhimasena, 'From fraternal feeling and
affection, I will do good unto thee, by diving into the army of thy foes
copiously furnished with arrows and javelins. And, O highly powerful
one, O hero, when thou shall give leonine roars, then shall I with my
own, add force to shouts. Remaining on the flagstaff of Arjuna's car
will I emit fierce shouts that will damp the energy of thy foes. Thereby
ye will slay them easily.' Having said this unto Pandu's son, and also
pointed him out the way. Hanuman vanished at that spot."


SECTION CLI

Vaisampayana said, "When that foremost of monkeys had gone away, Bhima,
the best of strong men, began to range the huge Gandhamadana along that
path. And he went on, thinking of Hanuman's body and splendour
unrivalled on earth, and also of the greatness and dignity of
Dasaratha's son. And proceeding in search of the place filled with
lotuses of that kind, Bhima beheld romantic woods, and groves, and
rivers, and lakes graced with trees bearing blossoms, and flowery
woodlands variegated with various flowers. And, O Bharata, he beheld
herds of mad elephants besmeared with mud, resembling masses of pouring
clouds. And that graceful one went on with speed, beholding by the
wayside woods wherein there stood with their mates deer of quick
glances, holding the grass in their mouths. And fearless from prowess,
Bhimasena, as if invited by the breeze-shaken trees of the forest ever
fragrant with flowers, bearing delicate coppery twigs, plunged into the
mountainous regions inhabited by buffaloes, bears and leopards. And on
the way, he passed by lotus-lakes haunted by maddened black-bees, having
romantic descents and woods, and on account of the presence of
lotus-buds, appearing as if they had joined their hands (before Bhima).
And having for his provisions on the journey the words of Draupadi,
Bhima went on with speed, his mind and sight fixed on the blooming
slopes of the mountain. And when the sun passed the meridian, he saw in
the forest scattered over with deer, a mighty river filled with fresh
golden lotuses. And being crowded with swans and Karandavas, and graced
with Chakravakas, the river looked like a garland of fresh lotuses put
on by the mountain. And in that river that one of great strength found
the extensive assemblage of Saugandhika lotuses, effulgent as the rising
sun, and delightful to behold. And beholding it, Pandu's son thought
within himself that his object had been gained, and also mentally
presented himself before his beloved worn out by exile."


SECTION CLII

Vaisampayana said, "Having reached that spot, Bhimasena saw in the
vicinity of the Kailasa cliff, that beautiful lotus lake surrounded by
lovely woods, and guarded by the Rakshasas. And it sprang from the
cascades contiguous to the abode of Kuvera. And it was beautiful to
behold, and was furnished with a wide-spreading shade and abounded in
various trees and creepers and was covered with green lilies. And this
unearthly lake was filled with golden lotuses, and swarmed with diverse
species of birds. And its banks were beautiful and devoid of mud. And
situated on the rocky elevation this expanse of excellent water was
exceedingly fair. And it was the wonder of the world and healthful and
of romantic sight. In that lake the son of Kunti saw, the water of
ambrosial taste and cool and light and clear and fresh; and the Pandava
drank of it profusely. And that unearthly receptacle of waters was
covered with celestial Saugandhika lotuses, and was also spread over
with beautiful variegated golden lotuses of excellent fragrance having
graceful stalks of _lapis lazulis_. And swayed by swans and Karandavas,
these lotuses were scattering fresh farina. And this lake was the
sporting region of the high-souled Kuvera, the king of the Yakshas. And
it was held in high regard by the Gandharvas, the Apsaras and the
celestials. And it was frequented by the celestial sages and the Yakshas
and the Kimpurushas and the Rakshasas and the Kinnaras; and it was
well-protected by Kuvera. And as soon as he beheld that river and that
unearthly lake, Kunti's son, Bhimasena of mighty strength became
exceedingly delighted. And agreeably to the mandate of their king,
hundreds and thousands of Rakshasas, named Krodhavasas, were guarding
that lake, wearing uniforms and armed with various weapons. And as that
repressor of foes, Kunti's son, the heroic Bhima of dreadful prowess,
clad in deer-skins and wearing golden armlets and equipped with weapons
and girding his sword on, was fearlessly proceeding, with the view of
gathering the lotus, those (Rakshasas) saw him and immediately began to
address each other, shouting forth, 'It behoveth you to enquire for the
errand on which this foremost of men, clad in deer skins, and equipped
with arms, hath come.' Then they all approached the effulgent Vrikodara
of mighty arms and asked, 'Who art thou? Thou shouldst answer our
questions. We see thee in the guise of an ascetic and yet armed with
weapons. O thou of mighty intelligence, do thou unfold unto us the
object with which thou hast come (hither).'"


SECTION CLIII

"Bhima said, 'I am the son of Pandu, and next by birth to Yudhishthira
the just, and my name is Bhimasena. O Rakshasas, I have come with my
brothers to the jujube named Visala. At that place, Panchali saw an
excellent Saugandhika lotus, which, of a certainty, was carried thither
by the wind from this region. She wisheth to have those flowers in
abundance. Know ye, ye Rakshasas, that I am engaged in fulfilling the
desire of my wedded wife of faultless features, and have come hither to
procure the flowers.' Thereat the Rakshasas said, 'O foremost of men,
this spot is dear unto Kuvera, and it is his sporting region. Men
subject to death cannot sport here. O Vrikodara, the celestial sages,
and the gods taking the permission of the chief of the Yakshas, drink of
this lake, and sport herein. And, O Pandava, the Gandharvas and the
Apsaras also divert themselves in this lake. That wicked person who,
disregarding the lord of treasures, unlawfully attempteth to sport here,
without doubt, meeteth with destruction. Disregarding him, thou seekest
to take away the lotuses from this place by main force. Why then dost
thou say that thou art the brother of Yudhishthira the just? First,
taking the permission of the lord of Yakshas, do thou drink of this lake
and take away the flowers. If thou dost not do this, thou shall not be
able even to glance at a single lotus.' Bhimasena said, 'Ye Rakshasas, I
do not see the lord of wealth here. And even if I did see that mighty
king, I would not beseech him: Kshatriyas never beseech (any body). This
is the eternal morality; and I by no means wish to forsake the Kshatriya
morality. And, further this lotus-lake hath sprung from the cascades of
the mountain; it hath not been excavated in the mansion of Kuvera.
Therefore it belongeth equally to all creatures with Vaisravana. In
regard to a thing of such a nature, who goeth to beseech another?'"

Vaisampayana said, "Having said this unto the Rakshasas, the
mighty-armed and exceedingly unforbearing Bhimasena of great strength
plunged into the lotus-lake. Thereat that powerful one was forbidden by
the Rakshasas, saying, 'Do not do this;' and they from all sides began
to abuse him in anger. But slighting these Rakshasas, that mighty one of
dreadful prowess plunged (farther and farther). Now they all prepared
for opposing him. And with eyes rolling, they upraised their arms, and
rushed in wrath at Bhimasena, exclaiming, 'Seize him! Bind him! Hew him!
We shall cook Bhimasena, and eat him up!' Thereupon that one of great
force, taking his ponderous and mighty mace inlaid with golden plates,
like unto the mace of Yama himself, turned towards those, and then said,
'Stay!' At this, they darted at him with vehemence, brandishing lances,
and axes, and other weapons. And wishing to destroy Bhima, the dreadful
and fierce Krodhavasas surrounded Bhima on all sides. But that one,
being endued with strength, had been begotten by Vayu in the womb of
Kunti; and he was heroic and energetic, and the slayer of foes, and ever
devoted to virtue and truth, and incapable of being vanquished by
enemies through prowess. Accordingly this high-souled Bhima defeating
all the manoeuvres of the foes, and breaking their arms, killed on the
banks of the lake more than a hundred, commencing with the foremost. And
then witnessing his prowess and strength, and the force of his skill,
and also the might of his arms, and unable to bear (the onset), those
prime heroes all of a sudden fled on all sides in bands.

"Beaten and pierced by Bhimasena, those Krodhavasas quitted the field of
battle, and in confusion quickly fled towards the Kailasa cliff,
supporting themselves in the sky. Having thus by the exercise of his
prowess defeated those hosts, even as Sakra had defeated the armies of
Daityas and Danavas, he (Bhima), now that he had conquered the enemy,
plunged into the lake and began to gather the lotuses, with the object
of gaining his purpose. And as he drank of the waters, like unto nectar,
his energy and strength were again fully restored; and he fell to
plucking and gathering Saugandhika lotuses of excellent fragrance. On
the other hand, the Krodhavasas, being driven by the might of Bhima and
exceedingly terrified, presented themselves before the lord of wealth,
and gave an exact account of Bhima's prowess and strength in fight.
Hearing their words, the god (Kuvera) smiled and then said, 'Let Bhima
take for Krishna as many lotuses as he likes. This is already known to
me.' Thereupon taking the permission of the lord of wealth, those
(Rakshasas) renouncing anger, went to that foremost of the Kurus, and in
that lotus-lake beheld Bhima alone, disporting in delight."


SECTION CLIV

Vaisampayana said, "Then, O best of the Bharatas, Bhima began to collect
those rare unearthly, variegated and fresh flowers in abundance.

"And it came to pass that a high and violent wind, piercing to the
touch, and blowing about gravels, arose, portending battle. And
frightful meteors began to shoot, with thundering sounds. And being
enveloped by darkness, the sun became pale, his rays being obscured. And
on Bhima displaying his prowess, dreadful sounds of explosion rang
through the sky. And the earth began to tremble, and dust fell in
showers. And the points of the heavens became reddened. And beasts and
birds began to cry in shrill tones. And every thing became enveloped in
darkness; and nothing could be distinguished. And other evil omens
besides these appeared there. Witnessing these strange phenomena,
Dharma's son Yudhishthira, the foremost of speakers, said, 'Who is it
that will overcome us? Ye Pandavas who take delight in battle, good
betide you! Do ye equip yourselves. From what I see, I infer that the
time for the display of our prowess hath drawn nigh.' Having said this,
the king looked around. Then not finding Bhima, that represser of foes,
Dharma's son, Yudhishthira, enquired of Krishna and the twins standing
near regarding his brother, Bhima, the doer of dreadful deeds in battle,
saying, 'O Panchali, is Bhima intent upon performing some great feat, or
hath that one delighting in daring deeds already achieved some brave
deed? Portending some great danger, these omens have appeared all
around, indicating a fearful battle.' When Yudhishthira said this, his
beloved queen, the high-minded Krishna of sweet smiles, answered him, in
order to remove his anxiety. 'O king, that Saugandhika lotus which
to-day had been brought by the wind, I had out of love duly shown unto
Bhimasena; and I had also said unto that hero, If thou canst find many
of this species, procuring even all of them, do thou return speedily,--O
Pandava, that mighty armed one, with the view of gratifying my desire,
may have gone towards the north-east to bring them.' Having heard these
words of hers, the king said unto the twins, 'Let us together follow the
path taken by Vrikodara. Let the Rakshasas carry those Brahmanas that
are fatigued and weak. O Ghatotkacha, O thou like unto a celestial, do
thou carry Krishna. I am convinced and it is plain that Bhima hath dived
into the forest; for it is long since he hath gone, and in speed he
resembleth the wind, and in clearing over the ground, he is swift like
unto Vinata's son, and he will ever leap into the sky, and alight at his
will. O Rakshasas, we shall follow him through your prowess. He will not
at first do any wrong to the Siddhas versed in the Vedas.' O best of the
Bharatas, saying, 'So be it,' Hidimva's son and the other Rakshasas who
knew the quarter where the lotus lake of Kuvera was situated, started
cheerfully with Lomasa, bearing the Pandavas, and many of the Brahmanas.
Having shortly reached that spot, they saw that romantic lake covered
with Saugandhika and other lotuses and surrounded by beautiful woods.
And on its shores they beheld the high-souled and vehement Bhima, as
also the slaughtered Yakshas of large eyes, with their bodies, eyes,
arms and thighs smashed, and their heads crushed. And on seeing the
high-souled Bhima, standing on the shore of that lake in an angry mood,
and with steadfast eyes, and biting his lip, and stationed on the shore
of the lake with his mace upraised by his two hands, like unto Yama with
his mace in his hand at the time of the universal dissolution,
Yudhishthira the just, embraced him again and again, and said in sweet
words, 'O Kaunteya, what hast thou done? Good betide thee! If thou
wishest to do good unto me, thou shouldst never again commit such a rash
act, nor offend the gods.' Having thus instructed the son of Kunti, and
taken the flowers those god-like ones began to sport in that very lake.
At this instant, the huge-bodied warders of the gardens, equipped with
rocks for weapons, presented themselves at the spot. And seeing
Yudhishthira the just and the great sage Lomasa and Nakula and Sahadeva
and also the other foremost of Brahmanas, they all bowed themselves down
in humility. And being pacified by Yudhishthira the just, the Rakshasas
became satisfied. And with the knowledge of Kuvera, those foremost of
Kurus for a short time dwelt pleasantly at that spot on the slopes of
the Gandhamadana, expecting Arjuna."


SECTION CLV

Vaisampayana said, "Once upon a time Yudhishthira, while living at that
place, addressed Krishna, his brother, and the Brahmanas, saying, 'By us
have been attentively seen one after another sacred and auspicious
_tirthas_, and woods, delightful to beheld, which had ere this been
visited by the celestials and the high-souled sages, and which had been
worshipped by the Brahmanas. And in various sacred asylums we have
performed ablutions with Brahmanas, and have heard from them the lives
and acts of many sages, and also of many royal sages of yore, and other
pleasant stories. And with flowers and water have the gods been
worshipped by us. And with offerings of fruits and roots as available at
each place we have gratified the _pitris_. And with the high-souled ones
have we performed ablutions in all sacred and beautiful mountains and
lakes, and also in the highly sacred ocean. And with the Brahmanas we
have bathed in the Ila, and in the Saraswati, and in the Sindhu, and in
the Yamuna, and in the Narmada, and in various other romantic _tirthas_.
And having passed the source of the Ganga, we have seen many a lovely
hill and the Himalaya mountains, inhabited by various species of birds,
and also the jujube named Visala, where there is the hermitage of Nara
and Narayana. And (finally) we have beheld this unearthly lake, held in
veneration by the Siddhas, the gods and the sages. In fact, O foremost
of Brahmanas, we have one by one carefully seen all celebrated and
sacred spots in company with the high-souled Lomasa. Now, O Bhima, how
shall we repair to the sacred abode of Vaisravana, inhabited by the
Siddhas? Do thou think of the means of entering (the same).'"

Vaisampayana said, "When that king had said this, an aerial voice spake,
saying. 'Thou will not be able to go to that inaccessible spot. By this
very way, do thou repair from this region of Kuvera to the place whence
thou hadst come even to the hermitage of Nara and Narayana, known by the
name of Vadari. Thence, O Kaunteya, thou wilt repair to the hermitage of
Vrishaparva, abounding in flowers and fruit, and inhabited by the
Siddhas and the Charanas. Having passed that, O Partha, thou wilt
proceed to the hermitage of Arshtishena, and from thence thou wilt behold
the abode of Kuvera.' Just at that moment the breeze became fresh, and
gladsome and cool and redolent of unearthly fragrance; and it showered
blossoms, And on hearing the celestial voice from the sky, they all were
amazed,--more specially those earthly _rishis_ and the Brahmanas. On
hearing this mighty marvel, the Brahmana Dhaumya, said, 'This should not
be gainsaid. O Bharata, let this be so.' Thereupon, king Yudhishthira
obeyed him. And having returned to the hermitage of Nara and Narayana,
he began to dwell pleasantly, surrounded by Bhimasena and his other
brothers, Panchali, and the Brahmanas."


SECTION CLVI

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus dwelling with the Brahmanas in that best
of mountains, in expectation of Arjuna's return, when the Pandavas had
grown confident and when all those Rakshasas together with Bhima's son
had departed, one day while Bhimasena was away, a Rakshasa all of a
sudden carried off Yudhishthira the just and the twins and Krishna. That
Rakshasa (in the guise of a Brahmana) had constantly remained in the
company of the Pandavas, alleging that he was a high-class Brahmana,
skilled in counsel, and versed in all the _Sastras_. His object was to
possess himself of the bows, the quivers and the other material
implements belonging to the Pandavas; and he had been watching for an
opportunity of ravishing Draupadi. And that wicked and sinful one was
named Jatasura. And, O king of kings, Pandu's son (Yudhishthira) had
been supporting him, but knew not that wretch like unto a fire covered
with ashes.

"And once on a day while that represser of foes, Bhimasena, was out
hunting, he (the Rakshasa), seeing Ghatotkacha and his followers scatter
in different directions and seeing those vow-observing great _rishis_,
of ascetic wealth, viz., Lomasa and the rest, away for bathing and
collecting flowers, assumed a different form, gigantic and monstrous and
frightful; and having secured all the arms (of the Pandavas) as also
Draupadi, that wicked one fled away taking the three Pandavas. Thereupon
that son of Pandu, Sahadeva, extricated himself with exertion, and by
force snatched the sword named Kausika from the grasp of the enemy and
began to call Bhimasena, taking the direction in which that mighty one
had gone. And on being carried off Yudhishthira the just, addressed him
(that Rakshasa), saying, 'O stupid one, thy merit decreaseth (even by
this act of thine). Dost thou not pay heed unto the established order of
nature? Whether belonging to the human race, or to the lower orders, all
pay regard to virtue,--more specially the Rakshasas. In the first
instance, they knew virtue better than others. Having considered all
these, thou ought to adhere to virtue. O Rakshasa, the gods, the
_pitris_, the Siddhas, the _rishis_, the Gandharvas, the brutes and even
the worms and ants depend for their lives on men; and thou too liveth
through that agency. If prosperity attendeth the human race, thy race
also prospereth; and if calamities befall the former, even the
celestials suffer grief. Being gratified by offerings, do the gods
thrive. O Rakshasa, we are the guardians, governors and preceptors of
kingdoms. If kingdoms become unprotected, whence can proceed prosperity
and happiness? Unless there be offence, a Rakshasa should not violate a
king. O man-eating one, we have committed no wrong, ever so little.
Living on _vighasa_, we serve the gods and others to the best of our
power. And we are ever intent upon bowing down to our superiors and
Brahmanas. A friend, and one confiding, and he whose food hath been
partaken of, and he that hath afforded shelter, should never be injured.
Thou hast lived in our place happily, being duly honoured. And, O
evil-minded one, having partaken of our food, how canst thou carry us
off? And as thy acts are so improper and as thou hast grown in age
without deriving any benefit and as thy propensities are evil, so thou
deservest to die for nothing, and for nothing wilt thou die to-day. And
if thou beest really evil-disposed and devoid of all virtue, do thou
render us back our weapons and ravish Draupadi after fight. But if
through stupidity thou must do this deed, then in the world thou wilt
only reap demerit and infamy. O Rakshasa, by doing violence to this
female of the human race, thou hast drunk poison, after having shaken
the vessel.' Thereupon, Yudhishthira made himself ponderous to the
Rakshasa. And being oppressed with the weight, he could not proceed
rapidly as before. Then addressing Draupadi, Nakula and Sahadeva,
Yudhishthira said, 'Do ye not entertain any fear of this wretched
Rakshasa, I have checked his speed. The mighty-armed son of the Wind-god
may not be far away; and on Bhima coming up at the next moment, the
Rakshasa will not live.' O king, staring at the Rakshasa bereft of
sense, Sahadeva addressed Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, saying, 'What
can be more meritorious for a Kshatriya than to fall in fight, or defeat
a foe? O repressor of foes, we will fight and either this one will slay
us, or we shall slay him, O mighty-armed one. Verily this is the place
and time, O king. And, O thou of unfailing prowess, the time hath come
for the display of our Kshatriya virtue. It behoveth us to attain heaven
either by gaining victory or being slain. If the sun sets to-day, the
Rakshasa living yet, O Bharata, I will not any more say that I am a
Kshatriya. Ho! Ho! Rakshasa, say! I am Pandu's son, Sahadeva. Either,
after having killed me, carry off this lady, or being slain, lie
senseless here.'

"Madri's son, Sahadeva, was speaking thus, when Bhimasena made his
appearance, with a mace in his hand, like unto Vasava himself wielding
the thunder-bolt. And here he saw his two brothers and the noble-minded
Draupadi (on the shoulders of the demon), and Sahadeva on the ground
rebuking the Rakshasa and also that stupid Rakshasa himself deprived of
sense by Fate, going round in different directions through bewilderment
caused by Destiny. And finding his brothers and Draupadi being carried
off, Bhima of mighty strength was fired with wrath, and addressed the
Rakshasa, saying, 'I had ere this found thee out for a wicked wight from
thy scrutiny of our weapons; but as I had no apprehension of thee, so I
had not slain thee at that time. Thou wert in the disguise of a
Brahmana--nor didst thou say anything harsh unto us. And thou didst take
delight in pleasing us. And thou also didst not do us wrong. And,
furthermore, thou wert our guest. How could I, therefore, slay thee, who
wert thus innocent of offence, and who wert in the disguise of a
Brahmana? He that knowing such a one to be even a Rakshasa, slayeth him,
goes to hell. Further, thou canst not be killed before the time cometh.
Surely to-day thou hast reached the fullness of thy time in as much as
thy mind hath been thus turned by the wonder-performing Fate towards
carrying off Krishna. By committing thyself to this deed, thou hast
swallowed up the hook fastened to the line of Fate. So like unto a fish
in water, whose mouth hath been hooked, how canst thou live to-day? Thou
shall not have to go whither thou intendest to, or whither thou hadst
already gone mentally; but thou shall go whither have repaired Vaka and
Hidimva.'

"Thus addressed by Bhima, the Rakshasa in alarm put them down; and being
forced by Fate, approached for fight. And with his lips trembling in
anger he spake unto Bhima, saying, 'Wretch! I have not been bewildered;
I had been delaying for thee. Today will I offer oblations of thy blood
to those Rakshasas who, I had heard, have been slain by thee in fight.'
Thus addressed, Bhima, as if bursting with wrath, like unto Yama himself
at the time of the universal dissolution, rushed towards the Rakshasa,
licking the corners of his mouth and staring at him as he struck his own
arms with the hands. And seeing Bhima waiting in expectation of fight,
the Rakshasa also darted towards him in anger, like unto Vali towards
the wielder of the thunderbolt, repeatedly gaping and licking the
corners of his mouth. And when a dreadful wrestling ensued between those
two, both the sons of Madri, waxing exceeding wroth rushed forward; but
Kunti's son, Vrikodara, forbade them with a smile and said, 'Witness ye!
I am more than a match for this Rakshasa. By my own self and by my
brothers, and by my merit, and by my good deeds, and by my sacrifices,
do I swear that I shall slay this Rakshasa.' And after this was said,
those two heroes, the Rakshasa and Vrikodara challenging each other,
caught each other by the arms. And they not forgiving each other, then
there ensued a conflict between the infuriated Bhima and the Rakshasa,
like unto that between a god and a demon. And repeatedly uprooting
trees, those two of mighty strength struck each other, shouting and
roaring like two masses of clouds. And those foremost of athletes, each
wishing to kill the other, and rushing at the other with vehemence,
broke down many a gigantic tree by their thighs. Thus that encounter
with trees, destructive of plants, went on like unto that between the
two brothers Vali and Sugriva--desirous of the possession of a single
woman. Brandishing trees for a moment, they struck each other with them,
shouting incessantly. And when all the trees of the spot had been pulled
down and crushed into fibres by them endeavouring to kill each other,
then, O Bharata, those two of mighty strength, taking up rocks, began to
fight for a while, like unto a mountain and a mighty mass of clouds. And
not suffering each other, they fell to striking each other with hard and
large crags, resembling vehement thunder-bolts. Then from strength
defying each other, they again darted at each other, and grasping each
other by their arms, began to wrestle like unto two elephants. And next
they dealt each other fierce blows. And then those two mighty ones began
to make chattering sounds by gnashing their teeth. And at length, having
clenched his fist like a five-headed snake, Bhima with force dealt a
blow on the neck of the Rakshasa. And when struck by that fist of Bhima,
the Rakshasa became faint, Bhimasena stood, catching hold of that
exhausted one. And then the god-like mighty-armed Bhima lifted him with
his two arms, and dashing him with force on the ground, the son of Pandu
smashed all his limbs. And striking him with his elbow, he severed from
his body the head with bitten lips and rolling eyes, like unto a fruit
from its stem. And Jatasura's head being severed by Bhimasena's might,
he fell besmeared with gore, and having bitten lips. Having slain
Jatasura, Bhima presented himself before Yudhishthira, and the foremost
Brahmanas began to eulogise him (Bhima) even as the Marutas (eulogise)
Vasava."


SECTION CLVII

Vaisampayana continued, "On that Rakshasa having been slain, that lord,
the royal son of Kunti, returned to the hermitage of Narayana and began
to dwell there. And once on a time, remembering his brother Jaya
(Arjuna), Yudhishthira summoned all his brothers, together with Draupadi
and said these words, 'We have passed these four years peacefully
ranging the woods. It hath been appointed by Vibhatsu that about the
fifth year he will come to that monarch of mountains, the excellent
cliff Sweta, ever graced with festivities held by blooming plants and
maddened Kokilas and black bees, and peacocks, and chatakas and
inhabited by tigers, and boars and buffaloes, and gavayas, and deer, and
ferocious beasts; and sacred; and lovely with blown lotuses of a hundred
and a thousand petals, and blooming lilies and blue lilies and
frequented by the celestials and the Asuras. And we also, eagerly
anxious of meeting him on his arrival have made up our minds to repair
thither. Partha of unrivalled prowess hath appointed with me, saying, "I
shall remain abroad for five years, with the object of learning military
science." In the place like unto the region of the gods, shall we behold
the wielder of Gandiva arrive after having obtained the weapons.' Having
said this, the Pandava summoned the Brahmanas, and the sons of Pritha
having gone round the ascetics of rigid austerities and thereby pleased
them, informed them of the matter mentioned above. Thereupon the
Brahmanas gave their assent, saying, 'This shall be attended by
prosperity and welfare. O foremost of the Bharatas, these troubles shall
result in happiness. O pious one, gaining the earth by the Kshatriya
virtue, thou shall govern it.' Then in obedience to these words of the
ascetics, that represser of foes, Yudhishthira, set out with his
brothers and those Brahmanas, followed by the Rakshasa and protected by
Lomasa. And that one of mighty energy, and of staunch vows, with his
brothers, at places went on foot and at others were carried by the
Rakshasas. Then king Yudhishthira, apprehending many troubles, proceeded
towards the north abounding in lions and tigers and elephants. And
beholding on the way the mountain Mainaka and the base of the
Gandhamadana and that rocky mass Sweta and many a crystal rivulet higher
and higher up the mountain, he reached on the seventeenth day the sacred
slopes of the Himalayas. And, O king, not far from the Gandhamadana,
Pandu's son beheld on the sacred slopes of the Himavan covered with
various trees and creepers the holy hermitage of Vrishaparva surrounded
by blossoming trees growing near the cascades. And when those repressers
of foes, the sons of Pandu, had recovered from fatigue, they went to the
royal sage, the pious Vrishaparva and greeted him. And that royal sage
received with affection those foremost of Bharatas, even as his own
sons. And those repressers of foes passed there seven nights, duly
regarded. And when the eighth day came, taking the permission of that
sage celebrated over the worlds, they prepared to start on their
journey. And having one by one introduced unto Vrishapava those
Brahmanas, who, duly honoured, remained in his charge as friends; and
having also entrusted the highsouled Vrishaparva with their remaining
robes, the sons of Pandu, O king, left in the hermitage of Vrishaparva
their sacrificial vessels together with their ornaments and jewels. And
wise and pious and versed in every duty and having a knowledge of the
past as well as the future, that one gave instructions unto those best
of the Bharatas, as unto his own sons. Then taking his permission those
high-souled ones set out towards the north. And as they set out the
magnanimous Vrishaparva followed them to a certain distance. Then having
entrusted the Pandavas unto the care of the Brahmanas and instructed and
blessed them and given directions concerning their course, Vrishaparva
of mighty energy retraced his steps.

"Then Kunti's son, Yudhishthira of unfailing prowess, together with his
brothers, began to proceed on foot along the mountain path, inhabited by
various kinds of beasts. And having dwelt at the mountain slopes,
densely overgrown with trees, Pandu's son on the fourth day reached the
Sweta mountain, like unto a mighty mass of clouds, abounding in streams
and consisting of a mass of gold and gems. And taking the way directed
by Vrishaparva, they reached one by one the intended places, beholding
various mountains. And over and over they passed with ease many
inaccessible rocks and exceedingly impassable caves of the mountain. And
Dhaumya and Krishna and the Parthas and the mighty sage Lomasa went on
in a body and none grew tired. And those highly fortunate ones arrived
at the sacred and mighty mountain resounding with the cries of birds and
beasts and covered with various trees and creepers and inhabited by
monkeys, and romantic and furnished with many lotus-lakes and having
marshes and extensive forests. And then with their down standing erect,
they saw the mountain Gandhamadana, the abode of Kimpurushas, frequented
by Siddhas and Charanas and ranged by Vidyadharis and Kinnaris and
inhabited by herds of elephants and thronged with lions and tigers and
resounding with the roars of Sarabhas and attended by various beasts.
And the war-like sons of Pandu gradually entered into the forest of the
Gandhamadana, like unto the Nandana gardens, delightful to the mind and
heart and worthy of being inhabited and having beautiful groves. And as
those heroes entered with Draupadi and the high-souled Brahmanas, they
heard notes uttered by the mouths of birds, exceedingly sweet and
graceful to the ear and causing delight and dulcet and broken by reason
of excess of animal spirits. And they saw various trees bending under
the weight of fruits in all seasons, and ever bright with flowers--such
as mangoes and hog-plums and bhavyas and pomegranates, citrons and jacks
and lakuchas and plantains and aquatic reeds and parvatas and champakas
and lovely kadamvas and vilwas, wood-apples and rose-apples and kasmaris
and jujubes and figs and glomerous figs and banians and aswatthas and
khirikas and bhall atakas and amalkas and bibhitakas and ingudas and
karamardas and tindukas of large fruits--these and many others on the
slopes of the Gandhamadana, clustered with sweet and nectarine fruits.
And besides these, they beheld champakas and asokas and ketakas and
vakulas and punnagas and saptaparnas and karnikaras, and patals, and
beautiful kutajas and mandaras, and lotuses, and parijatas, and
kovidaras and devadarus, and salas, and palmyra palms, and tamalas, and
pippalas, and salmalis and kinsukas, and singsapas, and saralas and
these were inhabited by Chakoras, and wood-peckers and chatakas, and
