_Do you mean by this that God is a person?_

The word _person_ affords a large margin for misapprehension, as well as
definition. In French the equivalent word is _personne_. In Spanish,
Italian, and Latin, it is _persona_. The Latin verb _personare_ is
compounded of the prefix _per_ (through) and _sonare_ (to sound).

In law, Blackstone applies the word _personal_ to _bodily presence_, in
distinction from one's appearance (in court, for example) by deputy or
proxy.

Other definitions of _person_, as given by Webster, are "a living soul; a
self-conscious being; a moral agent; especially, a living human being,
a corporeal man, woman, or child; an individual of the human race." He
adds, that among Trinitarian Christians the word stands for one of the
three subjects, or agents, constituting the Godhead.

In Christian Science we learn that God is definitely individual, and
not a _person_, as that word is used by the best authorities, if our
lexicographers are right in defining _person_ as especially a finite
_human being_; but God is personal, if by _person_ is meant
infinite Spirit.

We do not conceive rightly of God, if we think of Him as less than
infinite. The human person is finite; and therefore I prefer to retain
the proper sense of Deity by using the phrase _an individual_ God, rather
than _a personal_ God; for there is and can be but one infinite individual
Spirit, whom mortals have named God.

Science defines the individuality of God as supreme good, Life, Truth,
Love. This term enlarges our sense of Deity, takes away the trammels
assigned to God by finite thought, and introduces us to higher definitions.


_Is healing the sick the whole of Science?_

Healing physical sickness is the smallest part of Christian Science. It
is only the bugle-call to thought and action, in the higher range of
infinite goodness. The emphatic purpose of Christian Science is the
healing of sin; and this task, sometimes, may be harder than the cure
of disease; because, while mortals love to sin, they do not love to be
sick. Hence their comparative acquiescence in your endeavors to heal
them of bodily ills, and their obstinate resistance to all efforts to
save them from sin through Christ, spiritual Truth and Love, which redeem
them, and become their Saviour, through the flesh, from the flesh,--the
material world and evil.

This Life, Truth, and Love--this trinity of good--was individualized,
to the perception of mortal sense, in the man Jesus. His history is
emphatic in our hearts, and it lives more because of his spiritual
than his physical healing. His example is, to Christian Scientists,
what the models of the masters in music and painting are to artists.

Genuine Christian Scientists will no more deviate morally from that
divine digest of Science called the Sermon on the Mount, than they will
manipulate invalids, prescribe drugs, or deny God. Jesus' healing was
spiritual in its nature, method, and design. He wrought the cure of
disease through the divine Mind, which gives all true volition, impulse,
and action; and destroys the mental error made manifest physically, and
establishes the opposite manifestation of Truth upon the body in harmony
and health.


_By the individuality of God, do you mean that God has a finite form?_

No. I mean the infinite and divine Principle of all being, the
ever-present I AM, filling all space, including in itself all Mind,
the one Father-Mother God. Life, Truth, and Love are this trinity
in unity, and their universe is spiritual, peopled with perfect beings,
harmonious and eternal, of which our material universe and men are the
counterfeits.


_Is God the Principle of all science, or only of Divine or
Christian Science?_

Science is Mind manifested. It is not material; neither is it of
human origin.

All true Science represents a moral and spiritual force, which holds
the earth in its orbit. This force is Spirit, that can "bind the sweet
influences of the Pleiades," and "loose the bands of Orion."

There is no material science, if by that term you mean material
intelligence. God is infinite Mind, hence there is no other Mind.
Good is Mind, but evil is not Mind. Good is not in evil, but in
God only. Spirit is not in matter, but in Spirit only. Law is not
in matter, but in Mind only.


_Is there no matter?_

