 "God Almighty! King of nations! earth Thy footstool, heaven Thy throne!
 Thine the greatness, power, and glory, Thine the kingdom, Lord, alone!
 Life and death are in Thy keeping, and Thy will ordaineth all:
 From the armies of Thy heavens to an unseen insect's fall.

 "Reigning, guiding, all-commanding, ruling myriad worlds of light;
 Now exalting, now abasing, none can stay Thy hand of might!
 Working all things by Thy power, by the counsel of Thy will.
 Thou art God! enough to know it, and to hear Thy word: 'Be still!'

 "In Thy sovereignty rejoicing, we Thy children bow and praise,
 For we know that kind and loving, just and true, are all Thy ways.
 While Thy heart of sovereign mercy, and Thy arm of sovereign might,
 For our great and strong salvation in Thy sovereign grace unite."

    --FRANCES RIDLEY HAVERGAL.


The Area of the Storm.

Goodness arouses evil. Faithfulness to Christ stirs opposition. This is
a commonplace. A piece of white-hot metal plunged into cold water makes
a great fuss. Two areas of sharply different temperatures in the
atmosphere above us coming suddenly together make a storm.

Purity entering an atmosphere of impurity and insisting on staying, and
on keeping pure, creates a lively disturbance. The tempter was aroused
to his subtlest effort when Jesus appeared. There is no such demoniac
activity recorded as when Jesus walked among men.

So crowning a king arouses opposition, if there be opposition. And the
active taking of the reins of government has intensified the opposition
when it was strong enough to make a stand. The striking illustration of
this in the Bible is King David. After Saul's death the men of Judah
anointed David king. That was the signal for an immediate attack by the
chief of the forces of Saul's house. And this was succeeded by a long
war, before David was acknowledged as king over all Israel. The
clearing-up storm in his realm lasted a good while before good weather
came.

Here in this Revelation scene we have been looking at our Lord Jesus is
represented as stepping forward to take possession of His realm. It is
natural to expect a storm. This will be a signal to the opposition to
rally all its power. But there can be no question about the outcome of
such a set-to. That storm proves to be a clearing-up storm in the realm.
It is to be followed by such fine moral weather as has not been known
before. But the storm itself proves to be a terrific one for the earth
while it lasts.

The greater part of this little end-book is taken up with a description
of that storm. But before we turn to this book itself and its storm, we
want to get our bearings a bit, so as to understand better what is here.
Revelation is the knot in the end of a big bunch of threads. We shall
understand the knot better by knowing more about the threads before they
are tied into the knot.

The storm area proves to be very large. It takes in the whole earth. The
Bible is a big book in its outlook and grasp. It deals with the whole
earth, and the whole race. The thoughtful Bible student comes to have a
broad outlook, as well as a close lookout about his own front and back
doors.

It is fascinating to study the geography of the Bible. We talk about the
world growing smaller. That refers of course to the rapidity of
transit. It is only within a few hundred years that we have learned of
the earth being round. The Bible map includes practically the whole
world as we have come to know it.

The centre of the world as seen on this map may seem a little
surprising. We Americans _feel_ that the centre of things is here. The
Englishman _knows_ that it is in London; and lately the Germans have had
the same exclusive sort of knowledge about Berlin. The Chinese has long
called his country "the Middle Kingdom," in the sense of its being the
central kingdom about which the rest of the world revolves. But here the
centre is seen to be on the boundary line, practically, between Orient
and Occident, reaching out an embracing arm to each.

We have a broad division of the earth into East and West. The
differences between the two, in civilization, mode of thought, religion,
language, and so on, are so radical as to make it seem that there was no
point of contact. At least this has been emphasized much by western
writers on the East. We are disturbed just now here in the far West over
the Oriental, Chinese Japanese and Indian crossing the _far_ boundary
line between Orient and Occident and coming into the United States and
Canada.

Yet East and West have always overlapped at the _middle_ boundary line.
There is a great mixture of races in the strip where the eastern edge of
the West and the western edge of the East come together. It is the strip
running roughly north and south where Russia's western border and
Turkey's touch Germany and Austria and Greece, including the
never-at-rest Balkan Peninsula. Constantinople sits on the dividing line
between East and West, with the worst of both civilizations within her
confines. Here the hemispheres touch and their life currents intermingle
and flow together.

Scientific research seems to find good evidence that all our European
civilization, which of course means American too, may have been brought
over by Eastern immigrants from central Asia long ages ago, Asia coming
into Europe. Perhaps we Westerners would not despise the Easterners so
contemptuously and patronizingly if we knew how much we are probably
indebted to them for our civilization as well as for our Hebrew and
Christian faith, our Bible, and the Christian restraining bulwarks of
our common life.

The old common point of contact between Orient and Occident was the
strip of land forming the western edge of the Orient at the eastern end
of the Mediterranean. Palestine has been for centuries the common
roadway of all nations, East and West. No bit of earth has been so
tramped and trampled by the feet of all nations and races. This has been
the battlefield of the nations through long centuries. The ends of the
earth have met here. It is interesting that the waters that wash its
western shore are called the Mediterranean Sea, that is, the
_middle-of-the-earth_ sea.

Here then is the centre of the map. It is the centre of all things in
the Bible. And it has proven to be at the centre of human action through
history, attested by the very name given to the chief body of water
there.

Jerusalem, the capital city of this Palestine strip, was the centre of a
world power in the early ages. It has been the world capital. And it has
in turn been fought over and conquered by every world power. No city has
been a world centre of action during as long a stretch of time, and to
as many different nations.

Out from this centre the action of the Bible reaches north to Russia,
south to Africa (Ethiopia), east to China (Sinim, Isaiah xlix. 12), and
west to Spain. That practically includes the world of our day. America
is of course merely a transplanted seedling of Europe.

Those great Hebrew leaders called prophets had a world outlook. They
were world messengers. It is intensely interesting to take a piece of
paper, and pencil a rough map of the nations named in their messages,
notably Isaiah,[107] Jeremiah,[108] Ezekiel,[109] and Daniel.[110]
Beginning at Jerusalem and Israel they reach first this way, then that,
up and down, back and forth, until the whole world of action of that day
has been touched. They were men of world size. They had a world outlook
and a world message.

But then God's man always has. The world outlook of Jesus was
tremendous. And every true disciple of Jesus Christ has the world
outlook. Grace broadens as well as refining. It is one of the endless
outworkings of sin that tends toward that narrowing provincialism which
everywhere hinders so much, and so intensely.

Now in this world map in the Bible geography two cities stand out beyond
all others, Jerusalem and Babylon; Jerusalem the centre of God's people
and of God's plans, Babylon the centre of the opposing worldly power.
These are the two outstanding cities of the Bible world.

Between these two there is an enmity and warfare that is practically
continuous. Jerusalem comes to be the typical of God's people and power
and kingdom. Babylon stands out likewise as typical of the power and
kingdom always and innately opposed to God and to His people. The
conflict between the two seems irrepressible and irreconcilable. It is
never out of view.

Babylon has been the centre, under successive dynasties, of a world
empire, including not only part of Asia, but reaching west to Europe and
south to Africa. It sat practically in the connecting strip of Orient
and Occident, ruling over both. In the dim dawn of history a
God-ignoring, and so really a God-defying and man-exalting movement,
centred in the city called Babel. And from that time on that city, and
its successor Babylon, have seemed as though possessed with a spirit of
antagonism to God and His people. It is as though it were the earthly
headquarters of the blasphemous unseen evil forces.

This is a simple bit of geography lesson in the Old Testament. This is
the map that lies ever open in these older pages, with its two capital
cities marked large. And this indicates the area of the storm, and the
two central points where its outburst will centre.


Studying the Weather Forecast.

It is interesting to find a weather forecast of this storm. The old
Hebrew prophets were close students of national and world-wide weather
conditions, and much given to making forecasts of impending storms. Even
in the New Testament there is this distinct prophetic or foretelling
strain running throughout. The father of John the Baptist is told of his
son's birth; and Mary, of the unusual birth of her divine Son. The
disciples are told of the coming of the Holy Spirit. And Agabus tells of
a great famine coming. In these instances the fulfilment follows soon
after the event is foretold.

The destruction of Jerusalem, foretold by Christ, had at least a part of
its fulfilment in the terrible Titus siege of 70 A.D. Our Lord said that
He would return to earth in great glory, and that there would come a
great tribulation to all the earth, and repeated the old prophecy of a
restoration of the Hebrew kingdom. These have not yet occurred.

But the book of the Revelation is distinctively the prophetic book of
the New Testament. It deals almost entirely with events that are yet to
come. It would be natural that it would fit into the prophetic parts of
the Old Testament. So that one who is somewhat familiar with the
prophetic books of the Old naturally comes more intelligently to this
prophetic book of the New.

It is true that most of us have a sense of bewilderment about prophecy.
We seem to feel that it requires great scholarship and profound study,
and that an understanding of it is not possible to the common run of
Christians. And so we largely leave it out as not understandable.

Yet prophecy is simply God's plans for the future, together with a
revelation of other events which are not in His plan, but which He sees
will happen in the future. In it He tells us what He means us to
understand. And more than this, our understanding will have practical
bearing on our attitude toward evil and compromise. It will affect our
faith, making it steadier, especially when evil seems triumphant and
overbearing. It will make our prayer more intelligent and confident.

There are certain things we all know. As we read back into these pages
we know that the break-up of the Jewish nation, which began with the
Babylonian Captivity, came to a terrible climax in a complete break-up
after the rejection of Christ. We know that the other nations commonly
called Gentiles (_i.e._, the nations) have had supremacy in the earth.
Israel was at one time acknowledged as the great world power, with many
subject nations, in Solomon's time.

But Gentile supremacy begins back in the time of these Old Testament
pages. There is to-day practically no belief that this will ever be
changed, except perhaps by a stray Jew here and there, who still holds
to his old Bible, and except by those Christians who discern God's plan,
and believe both in Him and in it.

In the absence of an understanding of that plan of God, it has been
common to apply all the glowing prophetic Hebrew promises to the Church.
The result has been that Israel and the Kingdom have been confused in
our minds with the Church. And this has become the commonplace in the
common Church consciousness.

It is quite possible for the person of average good sense to get
something of a simple, broad grasp of the prophetic books. It involves
reading _repeatedly_ so as to get familiar with the contents, and
_rapidly_ so as not to get too much absorbed in details.

It is needful to use a common-sense interpretation in getting at the
meaning. It is a simple law that one principle of interpretation should
be applied uniformly and consistently to all parts of any one document.
If I say arbitrarily, "this part is rhetorical; it doesn't mean just
what it says, but something else; and this _other_ part means just what
it says," clearly I am reading my own ideas and prejudices into the
book.

It is much slower, and takes more pains and patience, to keep at it
until all parts gradually clear up to us, first this bit, then that,
until part fits part, and all hang together. But there is great
fascination in it, and one's reverence for this revelation of God's Word
grows deeper.

Of course there is rhetorical language here as everywhere. "The Lord is
my shepherd" is clearly rhetorical. For God is not a shepherd, and I am
not a sheep, but a man. But under this simple, clearly rhetorical
language the tender, personal relationship God bears to me is
beautifully expressed. That such language _is_ rhetorical is clear to
every mind alike.

And there is a picture language here, such as speaking of purity of
character as "white garments." The honest, earnest, unprejudiced seeker
after truth quickly recognizes these, and learns to become skilled in
discerning what is meant. We come to see that Israel means Israel, not
the Church. Jerusalem means that city in Judea, and so on.

Of course it is needful that there be an _openmindedness_, a _humble,
teachable spirit_, willing to accept the real truth, no matter how it
may shake up one's prejudices and prearranged schemes of thought. And,
above all, there should be a constant _prayerfulness_ of spirit, to
learn just what our God is seeking to have us know. Of course there are
depths here for the scholarly, profound minds. But we ordinary folk can
get a simple, clear grasp of God's plan and revealed insight into the
future if we go at it in this thoughtful, prayerful way. And it will be
a great help to us to do so.


Three Great Unfulfilled Events.

Let us take a swift glance at these prophetic books of the Old
Testament. It helps to remember the natural way in which these prophetic
books grew up. These prophets were preachers and teachers. Here are some
people going up to the temple service one day in Jerusalem. As they get
near the temple they notice a little knot of people standing yonder at a
corner listening to a man talking earnestly. Isaiah, fresh from the
presence of God, is talking out of a burning heart to the crowd.

A visitor from another part of the land says curiously to his companion,
"What's that?" The other replies: "Oh, it's only Isaiah talking to the
people. He is a good man, that Isaiah, a well-meaning, earnest man, but
a little too intense, I fear." And they pass on to the temple service.
By and by Isaiah stops. The moving congregation scatters. He slips
quietly down to his house, and under the Spirit's holy, brooding
presence writes down a part of what he has been saying. So there grew up
the rolls to which his name is attached.

In some such simple, natural way these prophetic books grew up, always
under the Holy Spirit's guidance and control. They are full of intense
fire, and of the homely talk of street and market and fireside. There
are two sorts of these prophets, the preachers like Elijah and Elisha
and those who wrote as well as spoke, and whose names are preserved in
these books.

There are seventeen of these little books. They fall easily into four
groups. The _first group_ contains those belonging in the time before
the nation was exiled. It is a period of about one hundred and fifty
years, roughly, beginning in the prosperous reign of Uzziah and running
up to the time when the nation was taken captive to Babylon. Isaiah is
the most prominent prophet of this period, and with him are Hosea,
Micah, and Amos, all of whom may have been personally acquainted; and
also Zephaniah and Habakkuk.

The _second_ is _the exile group_, Jeremiah preaching in Judah, before
and during the siege, and to the remnant left behind in the land; and
Ezekiel and Daniel bearing their witness among the exiles in the foreign
land.

The _third group_ is made up of those who witnessed after the people are
allowed to return to their own land again. The writer of the second part
of Isaiah probably preached to the people as the opportunity came to
return to Jerusalem.[111] Haggai and Zachariah stirred up the returned
people to rebuild the temple. Joel and Malachi witnessed probably a
little later in the same period.

The _fourth_ is the _foreign group_. Obadiah sends a message to the
neighbouring nation of Edom; and Jonah and Nahum are sent with messages
to Nineveh. If one will try to make a picture of these people and events
by reading the historical books, and then watch and listen as the
prophets talk, it will do much to make these prophetic books full of the
native atmosphere in which they grew up.

Now there are three things that gradually come to stand out in these
prophetic books. Much of what is being said is of immediate application.
It refers plainly to affairs being lived out then. Then certain things
are plainly fulfilled in the coming of Christ. And again there is a
great deal that clearly has never been fulfilled but is still future. It
is the latter part that naturally is of intensest interest.

Now in this latter part, dealing with the future, _three things_ stand
out clear and sharp above the rest. There is to be judgment upon Israel
for their iniquities. The changes on this are rung again and again. And
this stands out as much in the preaching of the Captivity time, and of
the Return, as before the Captivity. But in the midst of severest
judgment there will be a _remnant spared_. The tree is cut down, but
the stump is spared; and there is life in the stump. But above these
there stand out these three things.

_The first thing_ stands out big. It is the thing the nation never
forgot. The believing Hebrew still clings to it. The wailers at the wall
of Jerusalem to-day never forget it. It is this: there is to be a
_future time of great glory for the nation of Israel in their own loved
land_.[112] The kingdom is to be restored, but with a glory
indescribably greater than ever known. This is the bright golden thread,
thick and strong, running through from end to end.
