grace that they bestowed upon her the realm of Folkvang and the great
hall Sessrymnir (the roomy-seated), where they assured her she could
easily accommodate all her guests.


    "Folkvang 'tis called,
    Where Freyja has right
    To dispose of the hall-seats.
    Every day of the slain
    She chooses the half,
    And leaves half to Odin."

            Norse Mythology (R. B. Anderson).



Queen of the Valkyrs

Although goddess of love, Freya was not soft and pleasure-loving only,
for the ancient Northern races believed that she had very martial
tastes, and that as Valfreya she often led the Valkyrs down to the
battlefields, choosing and claiming one half the heroes slain. She
was therefore often represented with corselet and helmet, shield
and spear, the lower part of her body only being clad in the usual
flowing feminine garb.

Freya transported the chosen slain to Folkvang, where they were duly
entertained. There also she welcomed all pure maidens and faithful
wives, that they might enjoy the company of their lovers and husbands
after death. The joys of her abode were so enticing to the heroic
Northern women that they often rushed into battle when their loved
ones were slain, hoping to meet with the same fate; or they fell upon
their swords, or were voluntarily burned on the same funeral pyre as
the remains of their beloved.

As Freya was believed to lend a favourable ear to lovers' prayers,
she was often invoked by them, and it was customary to compose in
her honour love-songs, which were sung on all festive occasions,
her very name in Germany being used as the verb "to woo."



Freya and Odur

Freya, the golden-haired and blue-eyed goddess, was also, at times,
considered as a personification of the earth. As such she married Odur,
a symbol of the summer sun, whom she dearly loved, and by whom she
had two daughters, Hnoss and Gersemi. These maidens were so beautiful
that all things lovely and precious were called by their names.

While Odur lingered contentedly at her side, Freya was smiling
and perfectly happy; but, alas! the god was a rover at heart, and,
wearying of his wife's company, he suddenly left home and wandered far
out into the wide world. Freya, sad and forsaken, wept abundantly,
and her tears fell upon the hard rocks, which softened at their
contact. We are told even that they trickled down to the very centre
of the stones, where they were transformed to gold. Some tears fell
into the sea and were changed into translucent amber.

Weary of her widowed condition, and longing to clasp her beloved in her
arms once more, Freya finally started out in search of him, passing
through many lands, where she became known by different names, such
as Mardel, Horn, Gefn, Syr, Skialf, and Thrung, inquiring of all she
met whether her husband had passed that way, and shedding everywhere
so many tears that gold is to be found in all parts of the earth.


    "And Freya next came nigh, with golden tears;
    The loveliest Goddess she in Heaven, by all
    Most honour'd after Frea, Odin's wife.
    Her long ago the wandering Oder took
    To mate, but left her to roam distant lands;
    Since then she seeks him, and weeps tears of gold.
    Names hath she many; Vanadis on earth
    They call her, Freya is her name in Heaven."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).


Far away in the sunny South, under the flowering myrtle-trees,
Freya found Odur at last, and her love being restored to her, she
was happy and smiling once again, and as radiant as a bride. It is
perhaps because Freya found her husband beneath the flowering myrtle,
that Northern brides, to this day, wear myrtle in preference to the
conventional orange wreath of other climes.

Hand in hand, Odur and Freya now gently wended their way home once
more, and in the light of their happiness the grass grew green, the
flowers bloomed, and the birds sang, for all Nature sympathised as
heartily with Freya's joy as it had mourned with her when she was
in sorrow.


    "Out of the morning land,
    Over the snowdrifts,
    Beautiful Freya came
    Tripping to Scoring.
    White were the moorlands,
    And frozen before her;
    Green were the moorlands,
    And blooming behind her.
    Out of her gold locks
    Shaking the spring flowers,
    Out of her garments
    Shaking the south wind,
    Around in the birches
    Awaking the throstles,
    And making chaste housewives all
    Long for their heroes home,
    Loving and love-giving,
    Came she to Scoring."

            The Longbeards' Saga (Charles Kingsley).


The prettiest plants and flowers in the North were called Freya's hair
or Freya's eye dew, while the butterfly was called Freya's hen. This
goddess was also supposed to have a special affection for the fairies,
whom she loved to watch dancing in the moonbeams, and for whom she
reserved her daintiest flowers and sweetest honey. Odur, Freya's
husband, besides being considered a personification of the sun,
was also regarded as an emblem of passion, or of the intoxicating
pleasures of love; so the ancients declared that it was no wonder
his wife could not be happy without him.



Freya's Necklace

Being goddess of beauty, Freya, naturally, was very fond of the
toilet, of glittering adornments, and of precious jewels. One day,
while she was in Svart-alfa-heim, the underground kingdom, she saw
four dwarfs fashioning the most wonderful necklace she had ever
seen. Almost beside herself with longing to possess this treasure,
which was called Brisinga-men, and was an emblem of the stars, or of
the fruitfulness of the earth, Freya implored the dwarfs to give it to
her; but they obstinately refused to do so unless she would promise
to grant them her favour. Having secured the necklace at this price,
Freya hastened to put it on, and its beauty so enhanced her charms that
she wore it night and day, and only occasionally could be persuaded
to lend it to the other divinities. Thor, however, wore this necklace
when he personated Freya in Joetun-heim, and Loki coveted and would
have stolen it, had it not been for the watchfulness of Heimdall.

Freya was also the proud possessor of a falcon garb, or falcon plumes,
which enabled the wearer to flit through the air as a bird; and this
garment was so invaluable that it was twice borrowed by Loki, and
was used by Freya herself when she went in search of the missing Odur.


    "Freya one day
    Falcon wings took, and through space hied away;
    Northward and southward she sought her
    Dearly-loved Odur."

            Frithiof Saga, Tegner (Stephens's tr.).


As Freya was also considered the goddess of fruitfulness, she was
sometimes represented as riding about with her brother Frey in the
chariot drawn by the golden-bristled boar, scattering, with lavish
hands, fruits and flowers to gladden the hearts of mankind. She had a
chariot of her own, however, in which she generally travelled. This
was drawn by cats, her favourite animals, the emblems of caressing
fondness and sensuality, or the personifications of fecundity.


    "Then came dark-bearded Nioerd, and after him
    Freyia, thin robed, about her ankles slim
    The gray cats playing."

            Lovers of Gudrun (William Morris).


Frey and Freya were held in such high honour throughout the North
that their names, in modified forms, are still used for "master"
and "mistress," and one day of the week is called Freya's day,
or Friday, by the English-speaking race. Freya's temples were very
numerous indeed, and were long maintained by her votaries, the last,
in Magdeburg, Germany, being destroyed by order of Charlemagne.



Story of Ottar and Angantyr

The Northern people were wont to invoke Freya not only for success
in love, prosperity, and increase, but also, at times, for aid
and protection. This she vouchsafed to all who served her truly,
as appeared in the story of Ottar and Angantyr, two men who, after
disputing for some time concerning their rights to a certain piece of
property, laid their quarrel before the Thing. That popular assembly
decreed that the man who could prove that he had the longest line of
noble ancestors should be declared the winner, and a special day was
appointed to investigate the genealogy of each claimant.

Ottar, unable to remember the names of more than a few of his
progenitors, offered sacrifices to Freya, entreating her aid. The
goddess graciously heard his prayer, and appearing before him, she
changed him into a boar, and rode off upon his back to the dwelling of
the sorceress Hyndla, a most renowned witch. By threats and entreaties,
Freya compelled the old woman to trace Ottar's genealogy back to
Odin, and to name every individual in turn, with a synopsis of his
achievements. Then, fearing lest her votary's memory should be unable
to retain so many details, Freya further compelled Hyndla to brew a
potion of remembrance, which she gave him to drink.


    "He shall drink
    Delicious draughts.
    All the gods I pray
    To favour Ottar."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Thus prepared, Ottar presented himself before the Thing on the
appointed day, and glibly reciting his pedigree, he named so many
more ancestors than Angantyr could recollect, that he was easily
awarded possession of the property he coveted.


    "A duty 'tis to act
    So that the young prince
    His paternal heritage may have
    After his kindred."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).



The Husbands of Freya

Freya was so beautiful that all the gods, giants, and dwarfs longed for
her love and in turn tried to secure her as wife. But Freya scorned
the ugly giants and refused even Thrym, when urged to accept him
by Loki and Thor. She was not so obdurate where the gods themselves
were concerned, if the various mythologists are to be believed, for
as the personification of the earth she is said to have wedded Odin
(the sky), Frey (the fruitful rain), Odur (the sunshine), &c., until
it seems as if she deserved the accusation hurled against her by the
arch-fiend Loki, of having loved and wedded all the gods in turn.



Worship of Freya

It was customary on solemn occasions to drink Freya's health with
that of the other gods, and when Christianity was introduced in the
North this toast was transferred to the Virgin or to St. Gertrude;
Freya herself, like all the heathen divinities, was declared a demon
or witch, and banished to the mountain peaks of Norway, Sweden,
or Germany, where the Brocken is pointed out as her special abode,
and the general trysting-place of her demon train on Valpurgisnacht.


    Chorus of Witches.

    "On to the Brocken the witches are flocking--
    Merry meet--merry part--how they gallop and drive,
    Yellow stubble and stalk are rocking,
    And young green corn is merry alive,
    With the shapes and shadows swimming by.
    To the highest heights they fly,
    Where Sir Urian sits on high--
    Throughout and about,
    With clamour and shout,
    Drives the maddening rout,
    Over stock, over stone;
    Shriek, laughter, and moan,
    Before them are blown."

            Goethe's Faust (Anster's tr.).


As the swallow, cuckoo, and cat were held sacred to Freya in heathen
times, these creatures were supposed to have demoniacal attributes,
and to this day witches are always depicted with coal-black cats
beside them.






CHAPTER XI: ULLER


The God of Winter

Uller, the winter-god, was the son of Sif, and the stepson of Thor. His
father, who is never mentioned in the Northern sagas, must have been
one of the dreaded frost giants, for Uller loved the cold and delighted
in travelling over the country on his broad snowshoes or glittering
skates. This god also delighted in the chase, and pursued his game
through the Northern forests, caring but little for ice and snow,
against which he was well protected by the thick furs in which he
was always clad.

As god of hunting and archery, he is represented with a quiver full of
arrows and a huge bow, and as the yew furnishes the best wood for the
manufacture of these weapons, it is said to have been his favourite
tree. To have a supply of suitable wood ever at hand ready for use,
Uller took up his abode at Ydalir, the vale of yews, where it was
always very damp.


    "Ydalir it is called,
    Where Ullr has
    Himself a dwelling made."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


As winter-god, Uller, or Oller, as he was also called, was considered
second only to Odin, whose place he usurped during his absence in
the winter months of the year. During this period he exercised full
sway over Asgard and Midgard, and even, according to some authorities,
took possession of Frigga, Odin's wife, as related in the myth of Vili
and Ve. But as Uller was very parsimonious, and never bestowed any
gifts upon mankind, they gladly hailed the return of Odin, who drove
his supplanter away, forcing him to take refuge either in the frozen
North or on the tops of the Alps. Here, if we are to believe the poets,
he had built a summer house into which he retreated until, knowing
Odin had departed once more, he again dared appear in the valleys.

Uller was also considered god of death, and was supposed to ride in
the Wild Hunt, and at times even to lead it. He is specially noted
for his rapidity of motion, and as the snowshoes used in Northern
regions are sometimes made of bone, and turned up in front like the
prow of a ship, it was commonly reported that Uller had spoken magic
runes over a piece of bone, changing it into a vessel, which bore
him over land or sea at will.

As snowshoes are shaped like a shield, and as the ice with which he
yearly enveloped the earth acts as a shield to protect it from harm
during the winter, Uller was surnamed the shield-god, and he was
specially invoked by all persons about to engage in a duel or in a
desperate fight.

In Christian times, his place in popular worship was taken by
St. Hubert, the hunter, who, also, was made patron of the first month
of the year, which began on November 22, and was dedicated to him as
the sun passed through the constellation of Sagittarius, the bowman.

In Anglo-Saxon, Uller was known as Vulder; but in some parts of Germany
he was called Holler and considered to be the husband of the fair
goddess Holda, whose fields he covered with a thick mantle of snow,
to make them more fruitful when the spring came.

By the Scandinavians, Uller was said to have married Skadi, Nioerd's
divorced wife, the female personification of winter and cold, and their
tastes were so congenial that they lived in perfect harmony together.



Worship of Uller

Numerous temples were dedicated to Uller in the North, and on his
altars, as well as on those of all the other gods, lay a sacred ring
upon which oaths were sworn. This ring was said to have the power of
shrinking so violently as to sever the finger of any premeditated
perjurer. The people visited Uller's shrine, especially during the
months of November and December, to entreat him to send a thick
covering of snow over their lands, as earnest of a good harvest; and
as he was supposed to send out the glorious flashes of the aurora
borealis, which illumine the Northern sky during its long night,
he was considered nearly akin to Balder, the personification of light.

According to other authorities, Uller was Balder's special friend,
principally because he too spent part of the year in the dismal depths
of Nifl-heim, with Hel, the goddess of death. Uller was supposed to
endure a yearly banishment thither, during the summer months, when
he was forced to resign his sway over the earth to Odin, the summer
god, and there Balder came to join him at Midsummer, the date of his
disappearance from Asgard, for then the days began to grow shorter, and
the rule of light (Balder) gradually yielded to the ever encroaching
power of darkness (Hodur).






CHAPTER XII: FORSETI


The God of Justice and Truth

Son of Balder, god of light, and of Nanna, goddess of immaculate
purity, Forseti was the wisest, most eloquent, and most gentle of all
the gods. When his presence in Asgard became known, the gods awarded
him a seat in the council hall, decreed that he should be patron of
justice and righteousness, and gave him as abode the radiant palace
Glitnir. This dwelling had a silver roof, supported on pillars of gold,
and it shone so brightly that it could be seen from a great distance.


    "Glitner is the tenth;
    It is on gold sustained,
    And also with silver decked.
    There Forseti dwells
    Throughout all time,
    And every strife allays."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Here, upon an exalted throne, Forseti, the lawgiver, sat day after
day, settling the differences of gods and men, patiently listening
to both sides of every question, and finally pronouncing sentences
so equitable that none ever found fault with his decrees. Such were
this god's eloquence and power of persuasion that he always succeeded
in touching his hearers' hearts, and never failed to reconcile even
the most bitter foes. All who left his presence were thereafter sure
to live in peace, for none dared break a vow once made to him, lest
they should incur his just anger and be smitten immediately unto death.


    "Forsete, Balder's high-born son,
      Hath heard mine oath;
    Strike dead, Forset', if e'er I'm won
      To break my troth."

            Viking Tales of the North (R. B. Anderson).


As god of justice and eternal law, Forseti was supposed to preside
over every judicial assembly; he was invariably appealed to by all
who were about to undergo a trial, and it was said that he rarely
failed to help the deserving.



The Story of Heligoland

In order to facilitate the administration of justice throughout their
land it is related that the Frisians commissioned twelve of their
wisest men, the Asegeir, or elders, to collect the laws of the various
families and tribes composing their nation, and to compile from them
a code which should be the basis of uniform laws. The elders, having
painstakingly finished their task of collecting this miscellaneous
information, embarked upon a small vessel, to seek some secluded spot
where they might conduct their deliberations in peace. But no sooner
had they pushed away from shore than a tempest arose, which drove
their vessel far out to sea, first on this course and then on that,
until they entirely lost their bearings. In their distress the twelve
jurists called upon Forseti, begging him to help them to reach land
once again, and the prayer was scarcely ended when they perceived, to
their utter surprise, that the vessel contained a thirteenth passenger.

Seizing the rudder, the newcomer silently brought the vessel round,
steering it towards the place where the waves dashed highest, and in
an incredibly short space of time they came to an island, where the
steersman motioned them to disembark. In awestruck silence the twelve
men obeyed; and their surprise was further excited when they saw the
stranger fling his battle-axe, and a limpid spring gush forth from
the spot on the greensward where it fell. Imitating the stranger, all
drank of this water without a word; then they sat down in a circle,
marvelling because the newcomer resembled each one of them in some
particular, but yet was very different from any one of them in general
aspect and mien.

Suddenly the silence was broken, and the stranger began to speak in
