The greatest part of this little book was composed several years
ago, at the request of a friend, who has been long engaged in the
work of catechising a very great number of children of all kinds,
and with abundant skill and success. So that you will find here
nothing that savours of a party: the children of high and low
degree, of the Church of England or Dissenters, baptized in infancy
or not, may all join together in these songs. And as I have
endeavoured to sink the language to the level of a child's
understanding, and yet to keep it (if possible) above contempt; so I
have designed to profit all (if possible) and offend none. I hope
the more general the sense is, these composures may be of the more
universal use and service.

I have added at the end an attempt or two of _Sonnets_ on _Moral
Subjects_ for children, with an air of pleasantry, to provoke some
fitter pen to write a little book of them. My talent doth not lie
that way, and a man on the borders of the grave has other work.
Besides, if I had health or leisure to lay out this way, it should
be employ'd in finishing the _Psalms_, which I have so long promised
the world.

May the Almighty God make you faithful in this important work of
education: may he succeed your cares with his abundant graces, that
the rising generation of Great Britain may be a glory amongst the
nations, a pattern to the Christian world, and a blessing to the
earth.



Divine Songs

For

Children.


Song 1.
_A General Song of Praise to God_.

1 How glorious is our Heavenly King,
Who reigns above the sky!
How shall a child presume to sing
His dreadful majesty?

2 How great his power is none can tell,
Nor think how large his grace;
Not men below, nor saints that dwell
On high before his face.

3 Not angels that stand round the Lord
Can search his secret will;
But they perform his heavenly word,
And sing his praises still.

4 Then let me join this holy train,
And my first offerings bring;
Th' eternal God will not disdain
To hear an infant sing.

5 My heart resolves, my tongue obeys,
And angels shall rejoice
To hear their mighty Maker's praise
Sound from a feeble voice.


Song 2.
_Praise for Creation and Providence_.

1 I sing th' almighty power of God,
That made the mountains rise,
That spread the flowing seas abroad,
And built the lofty skies.

2 I sing the wisdom that ordain'd
The sun to rule the day;
The moon shines full at his command,
And all the stars obey.

3 I sing the goodness of the Lord,
That fill'd the earth with food;
He form'd the creatures with his Word,
And then pronounced them good.

4 Lord, how thy wonders are display'd
Where'er I turn mine eye,
If I survey the ground I tread,
Or gaze upon the sky.

5 There's not a plant or flower below
But makes thy glories known;
And clouds arise and tempests blow
By order from thy throne.

6 Creatures (as num'rous as they be)
Are subject to thy care:
There's not a place where we can flee,
But God is present there.

7 In heaven he shines with beams of love,
With wrath in hell beneath:
'Tis on his earth I stand or move,
And 'tis his air I breathe.

8 His hand is my perpetual guard,
He keeps me with his eye:
Why should I then forget the Lord
Who is for ever nigh?


Song 3.
_Praise to God for our Redemption_.

1 Blest be the wisdom and the power,
The justice and the grace,
That join'd in council to restore
And save our ruin'd race!

2 Our father eat forbidden fruit,
And from his glory fell;
And we, his children, thus were brought
To death, and near to hell.

3 Blest be the Lord, that sent his Son
To take our flesh and blood;
He for our lives gave up his own,
To make our peace with God.

4 He honour'd all his Father's laws,
Which we have disobey'd;
He bore our sins upon the cross,
And our full ransom paid.

5 Behold him rising from the grave;
Behold him rais'd on high:
He pleads his merits there to save
Transgressors doom'd to die.

6 There on a glorious throne, he reigns,
And by his power divine
Redeems us from the slavish chains
Of Satan, and of sin.

7 Thence shall the Lord to judgment come,
And, with a sovereign voice,
Shall call, and break up every tomb,
While waking saints rejoice.

8 O may I then with joy appear
Before the Judge's face,
And, with the blest assembly there,
Sing his redeeming grace!


Song 4.
_Praise for Mercies Spiritual and Temporal_.

1 Whene'er I take my walks abroad,
How many poor I see?
What shall I render to my God
For all his gifts to me?

2 Not more than others I deserve,
Yet God hath given me more;
For I have food, while others starve,
Or beg from door to door.

3 How many children in the street
Half naked I behold?
While I am clothed from head to feet,
And cover'd from the cold.

4 While some poor wretches scarce can tell
Where they may lay their head,
I have a home wherein to dwell,
And rest upon my bed.

5 While others early learn to swear,
And curse, and lie, and steal,
Lord, I am taught thy name to fear,
And do thy holy will.

6 Are these thy favours, day by day
To me above the rest?
Then let me love thee more than they,
And try to serve thee best.


Song 5.
_Praise for Birth and Education in a Christian Land_.

1 Great God, to thee my voice I raise,
To thee my youngest hours belong;
I would begin my life with praise,
Till growing years improve the song.

2 'Tis to thy soveraign grace I owe,
That I was born on Brittish ground,
Where streams of heavenly mercy flow,
And words of sweet salvation sound.

