The true Christian is not only justified by faith in Christ, but is also
made a temple and habitation of Christ and of the Holy Spirit. To this end
the good Spirit of God purifies his heart by faith: and it is fit that
Christ should live in his temple, together with his love, humility and
meekness. 1 Cor. 6:19; Eph. 3:17; Acts 15:9. To this end also thy Redeemer
has bestowed upon thee his Holy Spirit, that he might create in thee a new
heart, and endue thee with so cheerful and ready a mind, as to do the will
of God freely, without any unwillingness or compulsion. Jer. 31:32, 33;
Heb. 10:16. This new and holy obedience proceeds not from the law, or any
legal commandment; but from a lively faith. Hence, "the law is not made
for a righteous man" (1 Tim. 1:9), to _compel_ him to do good; though it
is in other respects an excellent rule by which to regulate a Christian's
life and manners. For a true and living faith does everything freely and
of its own accord: it renews the man, it purifies the heart, it produces
fervent love to our neighbor, it hopes and considers such things as are
not yet seen. Faith prays, praises, fears, and confesses God. It is also
patient, humble, merciful, loving, meek, easy to be reconciled,
compassionate, and peaceful. Faith readily forgives offences; hungers and
thirsts after righteousness; embraces God with all his grace, and Christ
with all his merit; and obtains a complete remission of all sins. Now if
any one does not perceive in his heart these fruits of the Spirit, and the
indwelling of Christ by faith, let him humbly entreat the Lord, and that
with tears and groans, that he may obtain them. I would not be understood,
however, as saying that a Christian in this life could attain to perfect
and absolute holiness; for even the greatest saints are still sensible of
their infirmities; of which the book of Psalms and the Lord's Prayer fully
convince us. God therefore requires that our righteousness, by which we
are to please him, should be entirely apprehended by faith; and lest we
should act the hypocrite he wills that his righteousness should be stamped
on our very heart, and on the inmost centre of our souls; and likewise
that all the fruits of faith and righteousness should proceed from a
living and sound principle seated within the mind. According to this
inward and leading principle, God judges all our works, whether they be
true and genuine, or false and hypocritical.

2. Here again, we do not assert that perfection can be found in this
present world, but only require that a Christian should walk in newness of
life, and approve himself by such works as are cleared from guile and
hypocrisy. For it is by no means possible that the fruits of the Spirit
enumerated by St. Paul, in Gal. 5:22, 23, should not be found in that man
in whom the Spirit of God himself dwells (Gal. 5:22); or that a good tree
should not be known by its fruits, though they may not be altogether so
perfect and angelic as could be wished, but be stained and often obscured
by various frailties and imperfections. Nevertheless, all hypocrisy and
insincerity, are utterly to be banished from a regenerate state; nor are
the fruits of a Christian to proceed from an empty profession, or a
lifeless appearance of things, but possess truth and reality. I do not
deny, on the one hand, that the Christian Church may be fitly compared to
a hospital crowded with all manner of sick; or to a house inhabited by
sinners as well as by saints. I believe also that many, like feeble
children, have not yet attained to the ability of walking alone; but that
they gradually learn to walk steadily. Hence it is necessary to "bear one
another's burdens" (Gal. 6:2), and never rashly to judge or condemn those
who by reason of their weakness halt behind. Rom. 14:1. We ought rather to
restore in the spirit of meekness those that stumble, and with great
tenderness to rectify what is amiss in them. Thus we learn to read our own
imperfections in the infirmities of our brother. But on the other hand,
Christians ought to labor to make continual advances in the spiritual
life. They ought not to continue always in a state of infancy and
weakness, how difficult soever it be to conquer the carnal mind that
obstructs our growth. They ought to be fervent in the practice of
"charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned" (1 Tim. 1:5); and bear this in perpetual remembrance, that all
outward performances are valued by God according to the inward disposition
of the heart. If the heart be good, thou mayest then be assured, that
whatever thou doest is also good before God: but if the heart be evil,
corrupt, and envious, then all thy works are evil and hateful. Such as
thou art inwardly, and in thy heart, such art thou accounted to be before
God; and such are thy prayers, thy public worship, thy giving of alms, thy
receiving the Sacrament, and all thy other performances.

3. Whosoever therefore is willing to try his own faith and inward
condition, should set before his eyes the Ten Commandments (as by Christ
himself interpreted) (Matt. 5 and 6), and learn to judge of his actions by
his heart. By such an impartial trial, he will clearly perceive whether
what he does be acceptable or unacceptable to God, and whether he bring
forth the genuine fruits of that inward righteousness which is by faith.
Phil. 1:11. For example, thou considerest that thou dost not defile
thyself with any external idolatry. Now, in keeping from idols thou doest
surely well; but I would have thee farther inquire, whether thou also
abhorrest all manner of _internal_ idolatry? Or whether thou hast set up
an inward idol in some secret corner of the heart, to which thou payest
thy vows? Ezek. 14:3, 4. Examine thyself whether thou art _within_, what
thou professest to be _without_? See whether thy heart be not set upon the
world, upon avarice, and pride? If so, then thou art assuredly guilty of
most dangerous idolatry; for the creature has engrossed those noble
affections which should be entirely surrendered to the Creator, and
dedicated to him alone. Thou assurest us that thou art punctual in saying
thy prayers, and in praising God; and that thou dost not neglect to offer
up thy thanks for benefits received at his hands; but didst thou ever
consider, whether thou cursest in thy heart, whilst thou prayest with thy
lips? Whether thou contradictest by thy actions what thou expressest in
thy words? If so, thy prayer will prove but a worthless performance, and
all thy thanks and praises will be trifling and vain. Thou tellest us how
strictly thou keepest the sabbath-day. In this truly thou doest well; but
look on the inward frame of thy soul. Dost thou celebrate the true sabbath
in thy heart? Dost thou rest from evil thoughts and wicked desires? Is thy
heart devoted to God, and freed from noise and clamor, that God himself
may work in it? Thou attendest divine service at church; it is well done;
but see that thou carry not with thee to church the canker-worm of pride
and vanity. This would convert thy service into mere formality, and all
thy performances into an empty show. Thou yieldest external obedience to
God and to thy superiors; but does that which passes within thy soul agree
with this exterior conduct? Is everything done with an upright and willing
mind? Dost thou act from a principle of love, or of fear only? If it be
fear that constrains thee to an external compliance, then know assuredly
that thy obedience is no more than hypocrisy. Thou defilest not thy hands
with blood and slaughter, and thinkest thyself free from the crime of
murder. But take a view of thy heart: for when the heart burns with wrath
and anger, and when this, as a flame, flashes out upon thy face; when thy
inward wrath breaks out into reproaches and curses, saying to thy brother,
_Raca_, and _Thou fool_; then surely thou art become guilty of the
judgment, of the council, and of everlasting fire. Matt. 5:22. What
therefore will it avail thee that thy hand is unpolluted with blood,
whilst thy heart accuses thee of hatred and murder? 1 John 3:15. For
within, in the heart, the murderer, the adulterer, the thief, and the
liar, are harbored. Here it is that thou must look for the beast, the evil
lust, and the root of all malice and mischief: which, if it be not
destroyed by serious repentance, by true contrition and conversion, by
faith and the blood of Christ, it is impossible that thou shouldest do so
much as one work acceptable to God; who judges of all thy actions by the
inward temper and disposition of the heart.

4. Of this Christ himself gives us an example from the commandment "Thou
shalt not kill," saying, "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee; leave there thy gift
before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother."
Matt. 5:21-26. That is, it will not at all avail thee to pray, to
sacrifice, to worship God, and to take the Sacrament; yea, all thy actions
will be converted into so many sins, because God regards the heart only,
and not the outward performance. Hence St. Paul commands us to "lift up
holy hands without wrath and doubting." 1 Tim. 2:8. And St. Peter enjoins
married persons to beware of anger, and to dwell together in love and
harmony, as heirs together of the grace of life, "that their prayers be
not hindered." 1 Peter 3:7. Nay, the Lord Jesus himself strongly exhorts
us to brotherly reconciliation, by the three following arguments. Matt.
5:25, 26.

(_a_) The first is, "Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in
the way with him;" that is, whilst thou art on this side of eternity: for
our life indeed is nothing else but a perpetual motion towards death and
the grave. If in this life thou art not freed from the bonds of wrath,
thou shalt remain a captive to them, yea, to the devil himself, throughout
all eternity.

(_b_) The second argument is, "lest at any time the adversary deliver thee
to the judge." It is an awful thing to be summoned to the tribunal of God,
and before so tremendous a judgment-seat, to plead our cause against an
accusing adversary. Whereas, whatever is pardoned, settled, and forgiven
in this life, the same will also be forgiven and eternally pardoned in the
next. Whence we may gather how much God regards the love of our neighbor,
since he will have it by no means separated from the love of himself; and
therefore refuses to admit of our love to him, unless it be linked to that
of our neighbor. And why? Because God is Love itself, and loveth man as
his own soul.

(_c_) The third argument is, "lest thou be cast into prison, whence thou
canst not come out till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing." It is
agreeable to the divine justice, so to deal with us there, as we have
dealt with our neighbor here; and "with that measure we have meted withal,
to measure to us again." Luke 6:38. Wherefore if thou refusest to forgive
any brother his faults, the judgment of God is this: That in like manner
no sin shall be remitted to thee. This will prove a burden heavy indeed.
For the man that dies in this bitter, irreconcilable temper, must, in
hell, continue a debtor to all eternity, and this without any hope or
prospect of ever lessening the debts which he has here contracted.

5. Thus the Son of God, has by this example, taught us that we must judge
of the worth of our outward works, nay, of all our religion, by the inward
disposition or principle that sways the heart. But perhaps thou still
continuest to flatter thyself, and to say, "I am baptized into Christ; I
have the pure word of God; I hear it; I receive the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper; I also believe and confess all the articles of the
Christian faith: wherefore it cannot be, but that my life and actions must
be pleasing to God; I am a Christian in truth, and in the right way to be
saved." This, alas! is the general, but false reasoning of many in these
days, who regard their outward performances as constituting true
righteousness. It might do well enough, if the heart did but agree with
their profession: for without this, all is mere trifling, and a dead,
hypocritical show. Look therefore into this, and learn to judge of thyself
by the inward frame of thy soul. Thou boastest indeed, that thou art a
Christian; and an excellent name it is; but dost thou consider, whether
thy heart and thy actions agree with a name so sacred? Hast thou received
the unction from above, and art thou possessed of the fruits of the
Spirit, that demonstrate a Christian? 1 John 2:27. If these be wanting,
thou wilt prove in the end but a false and spurious Christian. Thou
assertest, further, that thou art baptized; and so indeed thou art! But
search the state of thy heart, and inquire whether thou livest in the new
birth, in daily repentance, and an unwearied mortification of the old man.
See whether thou bringest forth fruit answerable to the baptismal
covenant, in which thou art engaged? Thou sayest that thou hast the
oracles of God committed to thee, and that thou hearest and readest them:
but inspect thy heart, and consider whether the Word be converted into thy
life and spirit, as bodily food passes into thy flesh and blood? Whether
thou hast lived up to its direction, and expressed the effect of it in thy
conduct? If thou contentest thyself with the bare _hearing_ thereof, thou
must know that this will never yield eternal salvation, and that thou
deceivest thyself in a matter of infinite importance. For this reason has
the Lord compared the kingdom of Heaven to leaven, which gradually spreads
itself through the whole lump, and converts every part into its own
nature; thereby to set forth that powerful influence which the Word ought
to have upon our will and affections. Truly, "not every one that saith,
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven; but he that doeth the
will of the Father which is in heaven." Matt. 7:21. Thou thinkest that
thou dost a service when with zeal thou defendest the purity of the
doctrine: and truly therein thou doest well. Nevertheless, I would have
thee inquire, whether by the purity of the doctrine, and thy defence of
it, thou hast also attained a true purity of the _heart_. Do we not find
many rigid defenders of the pure doctrine, who in their lives are the most
unclean of men, full of pride, bitterness, and covetousness? Alas, the
name of God itself, is made a common shelter for all manner of vices,
which screen themselves under the same, with impunity. Thou affirmest that
thou often receivest the Lord's Supper. This is right; but search thine
own heart. Thou hast often received the flesh and blood of Christ in this
Sacrament: why then do the flesh and blood of Adam live and reign in thee?
Should not the life of Christ shine forth in thy whole conduct? Should not
his love, his humility, and meekness, diffuse themselves through all thy
manners? Where is the advantage, if thou receivest Christ in the
Sacrament, and deniest him in thy life and actions? Thou sayest, that thou
believest and confessest all the articles of the Christian faith. It is
well! but have recourse to the touchstone of the _heart_. That is only a
true faith, which unites man with God, and God with man; by which God
dwells, lives, and operates in man. If these effects be wanting in thee,
thy faith is false, and so far from uniting thee with God, it sets thee at
a greater distance from him. This, however, is not to be understood of the
faith of weak and feeble Christians, which is often so clouded, as to
render it hard to perceive its life and motion. For even a weak _faith_,
though it be like smoking flax, has in it the properties of a strong
faith, though it cannot exert itself with equal strength and energy. It
heartily cleaves to God, and brings forth fruit amidst all those
infirmities with which it struggles. But I would have it understood of
faith in general, and of the trial and fruits of it, that, if thou
believest in Christ, then Christ must certainly live in thee by faith, or
thine will prove but an empty, naked profession. If thou believest that
Christ suffered death for thy sins, thou must also die with him to the
same (Gal. 2:20), and renounce the world, with all its pride and avarice.
Rom. 6:2. If this effect do not follow, then truly thou believest not in
Christ. If thou believest that Christ was crucified for the sins of the
world, _thou_ must with him be crucified to the same. If thou refusest to
comply with this, thou canst not be a living member of Christ, nor be
united with him by faith. If thou believest that Christ is risen from the
dead, it is thy duty to rise spiritually with him, and firmly adhere to
him, thy Head and Saviour. In a word, the birth, cross, passion, death,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, must, after a spiritual manner, be
transacted in thee. And this is the blessed effect of faith, and the
influence it has on believing souls. Wherever this effect is wanting,
there is nothing but a lifeless image of faith, with which men miserably
deceive themselves. So if thou believest in the Holy Spirit, the same
Spirit in whom thou believest, must of necessity dwell and reign in thy
heart, and enlighten and sanctify it. For, "as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." Rom. 8:14.

6. Therefore, dear Christian! let not your religion be confined to bare
externals, but see that it proceed from the more inward recesses of a
heart endued with a true, living, and active faith, and with an unfeigned,
inward, and daily repentance. If you put away from you this inward life,
this faith, and this repentance, you strip your religion of all essential
goodness, and, instead of a living principle, which ought to be
established in the mind, you carry about an empty, insignificant name,
which will avail you nothing in that day, wherein God will judge all
things according to the inward frame of the heart. But if you are truly
affected with a sense of your inward wants and impurities, then flee
without delay to the healing fountain of grace! Draw and drink, pray and
knock, seek and cry, "Lord, have mercy upon me!" Then your heart shall be
cured, your sin covered, and your transgression cancelled.




Chapter V.


  Showing That The Evidence Of True Christianity Does Not Consist In The
 Knowledge And The Hearing Of God's Word, But That He Is A Christian, In
 Whose Life God's Word Is Manifested, And Who Beseeches God In Sincerity
That This Word, As A Divine Seed, May Be Quickened In Him, And Bear Fruit.


    _The gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation to every
    one that believeth._--ROM. 1:16.


The way by which we are to arrive at true and substantial wisdom, and
become friends of God, is to submit ourselves to the discipline of
repentance, and to lead a life conformable to the Word of God. Such a life
as this cannot fail to be attended with true illumination of the mind, and
an increase of all divine graces; nay, with so close an alliance with God
himself, as to make us "partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust." 2 Peter 1:4. An example of
this we have in Enoch, who having "walked with God, was not, for God took
him" to himself. Gen. 5:24. To such a holy life as this David aspired with
the utmost fervor of spirit, proposing two means by which to obtain it:
the first, _fervent prayer_; and the second, _a diligent practice of the
word of God_. "I cried," says he, "with my whole heart; hear me, O Lord: I
will keep thy statutes. I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy
testimonies." Ps. 119:145, 146.

2. These words set forth the difficulties which he encounters who seeks to
be a true Christian, and to keep the word of God in holiness of life. For
flesh and blood naturally strive against the word of God, and that
holiness of life which it requires: and are, besides, inconstant and weak,
and prone to yield to the enticements of the world. The devil on all
occasions hinders our progress, and opposes our endeavors on every side.
This is followed by a multitude of evil examples, and the persecutions
which wicked men raise in opposition to those souls that enter upon
another course of life. Against obstinate evils, such as these, all the
strength of the soul is to be opposed. This we learn from the example of
David, who cried unto the Lord _with his whole heart_, in order that he
might better digest the Word, and by leading such a life as that Word
requires, continue in the favor of God. This ought also to be our main
concern; the favor of God being infinitely preferable to all that the
world affords. Whoever pleases God, and is His friend, most effectually
secures himself thereby from the malice of all his enemies. Hence _serious
and fervent prayer_ is, as I said before, the first step to a holy life.
The second means to obtain a holy life, is expressed in the following
words of the same Psalm: "I prevented the dawning of the morning, and
cried: I hoped in thy word. Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I
might meditate in thy word." Ps. 119:147, 148. Here the Psalmist declares
the earnest study, love, and affection, which are due to the word of God;
as also the time best suited for meditating in it, namely, the morning.
The faculties of the mind are then more strong and vigorous than at other
times; and are best disposed for searching into divine subjects. The truth
of this is at that season most feelingly perceived, when the soul,
afflicted by sadness and deep spiritual temptations, "watches for the
morning" (Ps. 130:6), and with "waking eyes" (Ps. 77:4), expects help from
the Lord. She is then "as a sparrow alone upon the house top," as a lonely
owl in the desert (Ps. 102:6, 7); and "so weary with groaning" (Ps. 6:6),
as to be almost ready to expire.

3. This is that exercise of the cross, or school of affliction, in which
all saints are most effectually trained for a happy eternity. Whoever is
not inured to this sort of trials, can know but little of God and of his
word. In this exercise, all the natural powers of soul and life consume
away, that God alone may become our strength and support. By such inward
trials as these, the carnal life is likewise more and more weakened, and
the quickening power of God and of his word, perceived with the greater
effect and experience. And truly, all our efforts ought to centre in this,
that the external hearing and reading of the divine word be practically
applied to the mind, and improved into Christian experience.

4. This doctrine, therefore, I would have firmly rooted in thy mind,
namely, that not the reading or hearing, but the doing and practising of
the word, demonstrates the true Christian. James 1:22. Without this
practical improvement, hearing and reading will be of no great advantage.
For the word was not committed to us, that it might be read and known
only, but that it might be reduced to practice. As a medicine gives no
relief to the patient who hears of, or looks upon it, but at the same time
refuses to take it; so the word, though a remedy for our diseased nature,
can yet cure no man, or restore him from death to life, whilst he refuses
to take what the word prescribes. Therefore, in order to this, fervent and
constant prayer (according to the example set us by David), will be
requisite in order to enable us to conform our life and actions to the
divine word. What advantage is it to an artist that he knows an art, if he
never practises it? Will not his supine and careless neglect reduce him at
length to poverty? And what will it avail us to _know_ the word of God,
and not _do_ it? "That servant," says our Saviour, "which knew his lord's
will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes." Luke 12:47. And St. Peter affirms, that "it
had been better for such not to have known the way of righteousness, than,
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
them." 2 Peter 2:21. As a father does not own him for a son, who in
everything acts in a manner contrary to his will, so not words, but the
life and actions, are marks and indications of a child of God, according
to that saying of our Saviour: "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do
the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me,--this did not Abraham.--Ye
are of your father the devil." John 8:39, 40, 44. Why should a barren and
fruitless tree take up any room in the garden, when it only incumbers the
ground on which it grows? It is surely fit for nothing, but to be cast
into the fire, as is represented in the parable of the barren fig-tree.
Luke 13:6, 7. As it would be foolish to give to a raven the name of a
swan, to which it has no resemblance; so if the men of this world should
be called by the name of true Christians, whilst so little of a Christian
temper appears in their life and manners, I think it would be justly
counted egregious folly. It is not by words, but by deeds and actions,
that we are to judge of a Christian's state, according to that saying of
St. Paul: "The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power." 1 Cor. 4:20.
Such is the condition of most men at this day, that those who make the
strongest pretences to the Christian name, do nothing but that which is
contrary to the Christian spirit. They are like the people at Rome,
concerning whom Laurentius Valla exclaimed when reading these words of our
Lord, "Blessed are the merciful, blessed are the peacemakers," etc. (Matt.
5:7-9), "_Surely either these words are not true, or we are no
Christians._" Man is corrupted to such a degree, that even not a few brute
creatures visibly surpass him in some good quality. The dove excels him in
harmlessness (Matt. 10:16); the ant in industry (Prov. 6:6); the stork in
a careful provision for her young; the dog in love and fidelity; the ox
and the ass in knowledge of their master (Isa. 1:3); the sheep in meekness
(Isa. 53:7); the lion in generosity and clemency towards weak animals; the
cock in watchfulness; and the serpent in wisdom. On the contrary, man in
his natural state exceeds all the beasts in mischief. He is more fierce
than a wolf; more crafty than a fox; more vain than a peacock; more
voracious than a swine; more pestilent than a viper; fiercer than a bear.
Indeed, the Lord Jesus himself terms Herod a _fox_ (Luke 13:32); John the
Baptist applies the name of _vipers_ to the Pharisees (Matt. 3:7); and St.
Paul that of _lion_ to Nero. 2 Tim. 4:17. Truly, those vices and
mischiefs, which go single and unaccompanied in brutes, are oftentimes
crowded together in one natural man. So that the human body is very
significantly called by the apostle, "the body of sin" (Rom. 6:6), as
being full of sins, and infected with all manner of defilements. Not to
mention, that there is no creature so bad and pernicious, but that it may
be still of some use to men. The foxes and wolves, for instance, with
their skins, secure men from the injuries of a rigorous season. But, alas!
what good is there to be found in a man abandoned to the conduct of an
unregenerate nature? "Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart is
only evil continually" (Gen. 6:5; 8:21); as is more than once expressed in
Scripture. He exercises his reason to practise fraud; he wastes his body
with pride and lewdness; and is both inwardly and outwardly corrupted, so
that all his members are justly called the "instruments" or weapons "of
unrighteousness." Rom. 6:13. Hence it is, that the Sacred Scriptures
represent our nature in colors so dark and odious, as may strike terror
into every man that reads them. "There is none righteous, no, not one:
there is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God.
They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable;
there is none that doeth good, no, not one. Their throat is an open
sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is
under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; their
feet are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in their ways;
and the way of peace have they not known; there is no fear of God before
their eyes." Rom. 3:10-18; Ps. 14.

5. Behold here the deplorable image of the natural man! Behold the
abomination that is common to us all! And now tell me how a man can see
the kingdom of God, unless he be born again from above, or, as St. Paul
expresses it, "unless he be renewed in the spirit of his mind: putting on
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness?" Eph. 4:23; Col. 3:10. And the same apostle says, "But ye have
not so learned Christ; if so be that ye have heard him, and have been
taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus." Eph. 4:20, 21. Yea, he says,
"They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts." Gal. 5:24. Alas! if those belong not to Christ, who do not mortify
the members of unrighteousness, but live in the pollutions of sin, then
they surely must belong to the devil, and cannot inherit the kingdom of
heaven, since they do not crucify the flesh. For whosoever desires to
please God, must become "a new creature" in Christ (2 Cor. 5:17); "in whom
neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature." Gal. 6:15. Now, since these are the terms on which our eternal
welfare depends, let it be our main concern, that we more and more
vanquish sin in our mortal bodies, and that we be members, not of Satan,
but of Jesus Christ. Let us earnestly endeavor, that the divine Word may
gain ground, and bear fruit in our souls. Let us strive to render our
lives acceptable to God, so that, being preserved by his grace to the end,
we may continue "vessels of mercy, and not of wrath." Rom. 9:22, 23.

6. It is for this reason that David so heartily wishes to lead a holy
life, conformably to the word of God: "I cried," says he, "with my whole
heart; hear me, O Lord; I will keep thy statutes" (Ps. 119:145): for since
our conversion is entirely from above, it follows, that a holy life must
be obtained by continual prayer and supplication. "Heal me, O Lord," says
the prophet, "and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for
thou art my praise." Jer. 17:14; 31:18. And David says again, "I cried
unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies." Ps. 119:146. Sin
and the kingdom of Satan are, indeed, so strong and powerful in man, that
it is in vain to attempt their conquest without the divine aid and
assistance.

7. Let us therefore shake off all sloth and negligence, and let us acquit
ourselves diligently, in a matter of so great importance. David himself
further adds, "I prevented (_that is_, I came before) the dawning of the
morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word. Mine eyes prevent (_or_,
anticipate) the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word." Ps.
119:147, 148. And very appropriate are the words of the prophet on this
account: "He wakeneth me morning by morning: he wakeneth mine ear to hear
as the learned." Isa. 50:4. With which those of Solomon agree: "I sleep,
but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knocketh." Song
5:2.

8. In these and the like sentences of Scripture, we may view the fatherly
care, and condescending love of our merciful God; since his delight is to
be conversant with the sons of men, to speak with them and to instruct
them. Hence he appointed his Son to be our heavenly Teacher and Master; of
which the Lord Jesus himself gave a visible image when he was found in the
temple in the midst of the doctors, and astonished the hearers with "his
understanding and answers." Luke 2:47. This was done by our Saviour, not
merely on account of the Jewish temple, which is now destroyed; but rather
on account of the Christian Church itself, which is the true and heavenly
Jerusalem, taught and instructed by his Word and Spirit. It was also done
with reference to the temple of our heart, in which he will teach,
comfort, enlighten, and sanctify us. Here he will pray, ask questions, and
answer them; and speak in holy thoughts, and devout meditations. And in
this the prophetical office of Christ consists. Hence also he replied to
his mother in these words: "How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that
I must be about my father's business?" (Luke 2:49), meaning that office
which was conferred upon him by his Father. This office he now performs at
the right hand of God, as our true and only High priest; and upon earth he
discharges it by his _word_; by means of which he also inwardly preaches
in our hearts by his Holy Spirit and gracious illumination. Without this,
the outward preaching must prove barren and unfruitful, according to the
words of the apostle: "I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the
increase. So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
watereth; but God that giveth the increase." 1 Cor. 3:6, 7.




Chapter VI.


The Perfection And Salvation Of Men Depend On Union With Christ By Faith;
  But To This They Can Contribute Nothing, Whereas They Rather Interfere
 With The Grace Of God By Their Perverse Will; But Christ, And He Alone,
                       Accomplishes The Work In Us.


    _Without me ye can do nothing._--JOHN 15:5.


As man by his apostasy from God, through ambition and self-love, was
separated from him, and fell from the perfection in which he was created,
so he must of necessity return to his original tranquillity and happiness,
by a _union_ with God; in which the whole of human perfection consists. It
was therefore necessary, that the Son of God should become man, in order
that human nature, being again united to God, might thereby be restored to
its primitive integrity and perfection. As the divine and human natures
are united in the one Person of Christ, so must we all, through grace, be
united to him by faith, as to our eternal and sovereign Good. In this
manner it pleased God to rectify the exceeding corruption of our nature by
the abounding goodness of his grace. This union is declared by the Son of
God himself: "I will betroth thee," says he, "unto me for ever, in loving
kindness and in mercies." Hos. 2:19. For since our nature is infected and
corrupted by _sin_, which is the greatest of evils, it could not be
restored and healed but by GOD himself, the sovereign Good.

2. Now as the union of the divine and the human natures in Christ is
eternal, and is never to be dissolved, insomuch that even death itself
could not break asunder so sacred a bond: so Christ our Head is to be so
firmly united with his faithful members, that neither life nor death may
ever be able to separate them from him. This is also declared by the
prophet Hosea, in the Person of Christ: "I will," says he, "betroth thee
unto me for ever."

3. This union by faith, is of the highest necessity, because "our
iniquities have separated between us and our God." Isa. 59:2. And this
deplorable state will continue to all eternity, unless Christ dwell in us
here by faith. Moreover, we are not able to do the least good, unless
Christ himself work it in us. Hence, says the apostle, "Not I, but the
grace of God which is with me." 1 Cor. 15:10. And the Lord himself says:
"Without me ye can do nothing" (John 15:5); the truth of which he
illustrates by the beautiful parable of the vine and the branches. Whence
it naturally follows, that if we are, or do, any good at all, it is
altogether to be ascribed to God alone; according to what is said by the
prophet: "Thou hast wrought all our works in us" (Isa. 26:12); and by
another: "I am like a green fir-tree. From me is thy fruit found." Hos.
14:8.

4. O man! consider therefore, what thou art, and what thou canst do. What
hast thou been able to contribute to thy restoration and the renovation of
thy depraved nature? Surely nothing. As thou couldst not afford any help
toward thy bodily birth, nor create thyself; so neither canst thou bring
any assistance towards thy new birth or regeneration. Thou canst indeed
lose, corrupt, and destroy thyself; but to renew, to restore, to heal, to
justify, and to quicken thyself, is a work entirely beyond thy strength.
Couldest thou contribute anything that God might become man? No. There is
nothing therefore that thou canst arrogate to thyself, or ascribe to thy
own ability. Indeed, the more a man attributes to his own will, strength,
and ability, the more effectually does he obstruct divine grace, and the
renewal of his corrupted nature. Let us therefore wholly renounce our own
strength, our own wisdom, our own will, and self-love, that, being thus
resigned to God alone, we may suffer his power freely to work in us, so
that nothing may, in the least, oppose the will and operations of the
Lord.

5. Until thou art brought to this, O Christian, that thy mind becomes
merely passive, and that thou purely _sufferest_ the operation and will of
God, it is evident, that God is impeded by thee, so that he cannot unite
himself with thy soul; or by true renovation of thy corrupt nature
establish his image there. For our own will, self-love, ambition, the
opinion of our own wisdom, and whatever we arrogantly claim to ourselves,
are so many impediments, why God cannot freely operate in us, and effect
his good will. For as a man's own will more and more corrupts and depraves
him; so the will of God more and more perfects and restores him.

6. Hence, it was said by Bonaventura, that "the highest perfection of
religion, consists in renouncing our own will." And by Augustine, "If _to
love God_ is the greatest good to man, _to love himself_ must needs be his
greatest evil. And, if such is the nature of good, that it diffuses and
communicates itself; of necessity self-love must be a great evil, since it
engrosses to itself both its own and the goods of others, and will not
part with any of them." Of this even the pagan Seneca himself was not
ignorant when he said: "That only is an accession to virtue, which is a
denial of thy own will." And again: "Unless thou departest from thyself,
thou canst not approach God, who is above thee."

7. Our _own will_ is nothing else but a defection or apostasy from God.
Defection verily is easy, smooth, and pleasant; but the recovery from it
is bitter, troublesome, and difficult; yea, even beyond all the power of
the creature. For man, by his own strength, can neither return, nor in any
wise help himself, whether in will or deed. Man's will is captive, and his
works are dead. Christ alone is able to help, in the beginning, the
progress, and the end. He lays before us two means, the _law_ and the
_gospel_; or _repentance_ and _remission_ of sin. Through the _law_, in
the first place, thou must die with Christ, and by true sorrow and
brokenness of heart sacrifice thy own will. Thou must become as nothing in
thine own eyes, and resign thyself wholly to Christ. Then grace and
forgiveness of sin are conferred through the _gospel_, and man, that was
dead before, is made alive by faith. Whence it appears, that no man can by
his own strength convert and quicken himself. For it is absolutely
necessary that he hate, deny, and lose himself; that he be displeased
with, and die unto, himself; and that his hope be placed entirely in God
alone, by whose grace he expects to live.

8. But even this self-hatred, denial, and mortification, are not the
effect of our own will and ability. "It is not," says St. Paul, "of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy."
Rom. 9:16. It is God therefore alone who operates all this in us by his
grace, and by the power of his good Spirit: so that our justification is
not derived from any creature whatsoever, but from God alone, whose work
and gift it is. For the most dangerous enemy any man has, is _himself_;
insomuch that we have great reason to implore the Lord to deliver us from
ourselves and all that we have by nature, and then to bestow that which
flows from his grace. By our own strength we are not able to perform the
least good, if God, himself, even after conversion, do not graciously
operate in us. Who is there that can endue us with love and mercy, but
God, who is LOVE itself, and from whom all other graces proceed?
Therefore, Christ _alone_ is our help and support, when the help of men
cannot avail. But after all, be the condition ever so low to which man has
been brought by the fall of Adam, he is now raised again by Christ, and
even exalted to a higher degree than he possessed before. But of this more
shall be said in Chapter XI.




Chapter VII.


Showing That In Order To Understand The True Nature Of Repentance, We Must
Necessarily Know The Distinction Between The Old And The New Man; Or, How
In Us Adam Must Die, And Christ Live; Or, How In Us The Old Man Must Die,
                          And The New Man Live.


    _We know this, that our old man is crucified with Christ, that the
    body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
    serve sin._--ROM. 6:6.


In every Christian there is found a twofold man, opposed, like their
fruits, to one another. This will more fully appear from the following
statement:

Adam,             Christ.
Old man,          New man.
Outward man,      Inward man.
Old birth,        New birth.
Flesh,            Spirit.
Nature,           Grace.
Reason,           Faith.
Darkness,         Light.
Tree of death,    Tree of life.
Evil fruit,       Good fruit.
Sin,              Righteousness.
Damnation,        Salvation.
Death,            Life.
Old Jerusalem,    New Jerusalem.
Kingdom of the    Kingdom of God.
devil,
Seed of the       Seed of God.
serpent,
Natural man,      Spiritual man.
Image of the      Image of the
earthly,          heavenly.

The truth of this statement, the Scriptures, as well as experience,
abundantly confirm. The former speak largely of the old man and the new,
of the inward and outward man. See Eph. 4:24; Col. 3:9; 2 Cor. 4:16. They
teach also that the Spirit of God is in us: Rom. 8:11; 1 Cor. 3:16; 6:19;
2 Cor. 5:5; Eph. 1:13. And likewise Christ, Gal. 2:20; 2 Cor. 13:5.
_Experience_, moreover, demonstrates the same. Hither may also be referred
that striving and struggling of the flesh and Spirit, from which even the
saints are not free. Rom. 7:23. Likewise there belong here the different
fruits of the flesh and Spirit reckoned up by St. Paul. Gal. 5:19-23. This
point is therefore clearly stated in Scripture, and too certain to be
called in question by any Christian. It is the hinge, as it were, on which
all the Scripture moves, and the foundation on which the true knowledge of
man depends. Out of the same fountain issue true repentance, or the death
of Adam, and the life of Christ in us. For no sooner does Adam die in us,
but there perishes with him all that is originally derived from him; the
old outward man, the old birth, the flesh, nature, corrupt reason,
darkness, the tree of death, evil fruits, sin, death, damnation, the seed
of the serpent, the natural man, the earthly image, the old Jerusalem, and
the kingdom of Satan. But as long as Adam lives, there also live and reign
with him the old man, and the carnal birth, the flesh, nature, corrupt
reason, darkness, and the whole train of evils before mentioned, being all
comprised under the kingdom of Satan, and subject to damnation, and to the
curse everlasting. But if, on the other hand, Christ live in any one, then
verily there live and reign with him the new and inward man, the new
birth, the Spirit, grace, faith, light, the tree of life, good fruits,
righteousness, life, happiness, the seed of God, the spiritual man, the
heavenly image, the new Jerusalem, and the kingdom of God. All which
proceed from the divine blessing, and tend to eternal salvation. Here is a
matter of importance, namely, so to order one's life and conduct, that
Christ the new or second Adam, and not the old Adam, may live and reign in
us.

2. Therefore it is necessary for a man to watch, to fast, to pray, fight,
and strive; and, as St. Paul expresses it, to examine himself if Christ be
in him. 2 Cor. 13:5. He is to work out his salvation with fear and
trembling. Phil. 2:12. He is to enter through the strait gate and the
narrow way in Christ. Matt. 7:13. That is, man must now hate and deny
himself, forsake all (Luke 14:26), and die unto sin. Rom. 6:2. This surely
is not to be effected, as the delicate Christians of this age imagine, by
any careless and slight application of mind, but by an inward and profound
sorrow, contrition, and brokenness of heart, together with groans and
tears that cannot be uttered. These inward exercises, and acts of
devotion, are most feelingly set forth by David in his Penitential Psalms,
which abound with expressions of this nature. Ps. 6; 32; 38; 51; 102; 130;
143. The apostle calls it a crucifying of the flesh with the affections
and lusts thereof. Gal. 5:24. Whoever attains to this state, in him verily
Christ lives, and he reciprocally in Christ by faith. Then Christ conquers
and reigns in man, whose faith is become "the victory that overcometh the
world." 1 John 5:4.

3. But since the world, which thou art to strive against, is not _without_
thee, but _within_ thee, it follows, that it is also to be conquered not
without, but within thee. For what is the world, but "the lust of the
flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life?" 1 John 2:16. As
these are in thee, so in thee they are to be subdued, that thus thou
mayest worthily bear the name and character of a true child of God. "For
whatsoever is born of God, overcometh the world" (1 John 5:4); and if thou
overcomest, and gainest the victory over thy great enemy the world, thou
art then a child of light (Eph. 5:8), a member of Christ (1 Cor. 12:27;
Eph. 5:30), and the temple of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 6:19. Thou art now a
good tree (Matt. 12:33), that freely and without constraint, yea, with
joy, love, and pleasure, bringeth forth fruit to the glory of God. Matt.
5:16.

4. But if thou livest in Adam, and Adam reigns in thee, then thou art not
a child of God, nor born again of him. For since thou art overcome by the
world, and since the prince thereof rules in thee by pride, ambition, and
self-love, thou art on this very account to be numbered amongst the
children of the devil. John 8:44. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God." Rom. 8:14. And, on the contrary, as many
as are led by Satan, they likewise are his children; yea, they are the
very members of Satan, sons of darkness, a habitation of unclean spirits,
an accursed Babylon, full of impure and of abominable beasts; as it is
represented by the ancient prophets (Isa. 13:21; Rev. 18:2); but
particularly by the prophet Ezekiel. He being brought in spirit into the
temple at Jerusalem, beheld two remarkable things: one whereof was, "every
form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the
house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about;" and secondly (which
was still more detestable), "seventy men of the ancients of the house of
Israel, worshipping these beasts and images, and offering them incense."
Ezek. 8:10, 11.

5. Behold, O man, a lively representation here given of thy depraved,
brutish, and beastly heart! If thou wilt but enter into this temple of thy
heart, thou shalt surely find therein vast numbers of foul, detestable
creatures, images, and idols, fashioned and represented by all manner of
corrupt and impure thoughts in the carnal mind, imagination, and memory.
Moreover (and this is the greatest evil of all), though these idols and
horrid abominations should be utterly banished from the heart, and this
detestable evil, by which man is made the habitation of unclean and
pestilential reptiles, should, by all means, be destroyed by repentance,
by mortification of the flesh, and by penitential tears and humiliation;
yet, instead of doing that, thou lovest these serpents, adorest these vile
monsters, and servest and caressest them. Alas! thou but little regardest
that Christ is cast out of thy soul by these abominations, and is utterly
banished from thy heart; and that by this means thou deprivest thyself of
the supreme and eternal Good, losing the Holy Spirit with all his
excellent gifts and graces. O miserable man! thou exceedingly grievest
when any outward trouble befalls thee, or when thou losest anything in the
world that is dear to thee; why then is it, that thou art not at all
concerned at the loss even of CHRIST himself, and at the deplorable state
of thy soul and body, which are both become a habitation of malignant
spirits!

6. If these things be seriously pondered and laid to heart, we shall soon
understand what Adam and Christ are; and how they live and act in men. To
this head we may also refer the following observations. First, In Adam we
are ALL naturally equal, nor is one better than another; since we are all,
both as to body and soul, equally polluted and corrupted, so that it is
affirmed by St. Paul, not only of Jews and Gentiles, but even of all men
in general, that "there is no difference." Rom. 3:22. Hence it is also
true, that in the sight of God, no man is better than the most profligate
criminal. For though that perverse temper which is natural to all, does
not equally in all break out into works, yet God judges all men by the
inward state of the heart, that poisoned fountain of all sin. Nor is there
any sin so heinous, which man by nature would not freely commit, were he
not strongly restrained by divine grace. For by the bent of our nature we
are but too much inclined to pollute ourselves with all manner of
wickedness (Jer. 13:23); and if the inclination be not always attended
with the external effect itself, it is wholly to be attributed to the
grace of God, and not to any strength or prudence of our own. Gen. 20:6.
This consideration should excite us to the practice of true humility, and
to an unfeigned fear of God; and at the same time restrain us from rashly
despising our fellow-creatures, lest, by reflecting on others, we
ourselves split upon the dangerous rock of carnal presumption. Secondly,
it is proper to observe, that as in Adam we are all equally bad with
regard to the corruption of nature; so by Christ we are all made equally
just and holy; no man receiving for himself any prerogative of a peculiar
righteousness in the sight of God. For since Christ is our perfection, our
"wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption" (1 Cor. 1:30;
6:11), we, who in _Adam_ are alike, are also alike in _Christ_. For as in
_Adam_ by nature we are all one man and one body, infected with the foul
contagion of disobedience and sin, so all true Christians are as one man
in _Christ_, and make up one body, completely purified and sanctified by
faith, and the blood of Christ.

7. This truth is a remedy against _spiritual pride_, namely, that none
should account himself better before God than others, though perhaps
adorned with greater gifts, and endowments. For even these are no less
bestowed on him of pure grace, than are righteousness and salvation
themselves. Upon this principle of pure grace, be careful to keep thy mind
constantly fixed. If thou dost so, then this grace shall protect thee
against the dangerous snares of pride and arrogance; and as, on the one
hand, it will convince thee of thy own misery and poverty in spirit, so,
on the other, it will give thee a most lively insight into Christ, and
into the exceeding riches of grace, offered through him to all mankind.




Chapter VIII.


Showing How Graciously God Invites Us To Repentance, And How Necessary It
                    Is That It Should Not Be Delayed.


    _Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the
    angels of God over one sinner that repenteth._--LUKE 15:10.


God, who is of infinite mercy, in order that he might the better soften
our hard and stony hearts, and turn them from the world, ourselves, and
the devil, unto himself (Acts 26:18), has, in his Word, variously
represented and set before our eyes man's conversion and repentance.

2. Among other ways of impressing it on our minds, the two parables of the
_Lost Sheep_ and of the _Prodigal Son_ (Luke, chap. 15), are exceedingly
affecting, and are so abundant in divine consolation, that it is scarcely
possible seriously to think upon them without tears. Therein our Saviour
describes three different hearts. Of these the first is, the impenitent
heart of a sinner; the second, the contrite heart of a penitent; the
third, the heart of God, full of mercy and paternal affection.

3. The _first_ he describes under the similitude of a degenerate son,
wastefully spending his substance and inheritance, and at last reduced to
such necessity, as to wish to fill his belly with the husks which the
swine did eat. By this figure all mankind in their natural state are
shadowed forth; who, as so many degenerate sons, have squandered away the
heavenly inheritance by continual riot and wickedness. That is, they have
lost their original righteousness, holiness, innocency, and the beautiful
image of God, in which they were at first created (Eph. 4:24), and are now
by their own fault become the bond-slaves of sin, of the devil, and of
death. And to complete their ruin, finding no relief, rest, or comfort, in
any human performances and laws (which answer to the husks in the parable)
they must of necessity perish with endless famine and misery, unless they
speedily have recourse unto the grace of their Heavenly Father.

4. The _second_ heart, which is that of a repenting sinner, is set forth
in these words: "How many hired servants of my Father have bread enough,
and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise, and go to my Father,
and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy son." In this account we have
a very moving description of true repentance. By the Prodigal's coming to
himself, is signified sorrow for sin; that is, when a man, on the one
hand, reflects upon his own misery, and considers how, from being a child
of God, he is become, as it were, a brute beast (2 Pet. 2:12), an unclean
swine, a man void of reason, earthly and sensual; and, on the other,
mindful of his divine origin, turns his thoughts entirely upon his Father,
repents, acknowledges his offences, and says, "Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and before thee;" and have offended both God and man. This
he immediately confirms by a sincere contempt of himself, expressed in
these words: "and am no more worthy to be called thy son." Moreover,
_faith_, which is the other part of repentance, is exhibited to us in his
actual _arising_ and _returning_ to his father's house. He assumed
confidence to repair to his home, and firmly persuaded himself that his
father would receive him, if not as a son, at least as one of his hired
servants. "For," says he, "I am no more worthy to be called thy son; make
me as one of thy hired servants." This plainly shows the sure hope he
entertained, that his father would yield to his entreaties, and receive
him into his favor.

5. And now I come, _thirdly_, to draw the character of the paternal heart
of God, set forth in the parable.

I. _When the son was yet a great way off, his father saw him._ Behold the
prevenient mercy of our Heavenly Father, who graciously looks for his
prodigal children. Ps. 79:8; Isa. 30:18, 19; Ps. 32:8.

II. _And was moved with compassion._ Hereby is represented his mercy
waiting to be gracious to us.

III. _And ran and fell on his neck._ Here is mercy receiving into favor.

IV. _And kissed him._ This exhibits mercy ready to administer consolation
to the returning sinner. Micah 7:19; Isa. 66:13.

V. _Bring forth, says he, the best robe, and put it on him_ (Isa. 61:10).
This has relation to Christ, and points out his righteousness, and
_justifying_ grace. Rom. 8:33.

VI. _And put a ring on his hand._ Hereby is signified the Holy Spirit, the
pledge of sonship (Gal. 4:6; Eph. 1:5), the seal of intimate favor and
union; and it also represents to us the espousing mercy of the Lord.

VII. _And shoes on his feet._ This denotes a new and holy walk in Christ,
resulting from the Divine power, and the grace of the Holy Spirit; which
are the peculiar effects of preserving mercy. 1 Peter 1:5; Ps. 84:11.

VIII. _Bring hither the fatted calf._ By this feast is represented the joy
of angels, or rejoicing and _crowning_ mercy, described by the holy
Psalmist, and the prophet Isaiah. Ps. 63:5; 103:5; Isa. 65:13.

6. What strong and endearing arguments are here offered by the goodness of
God inviting us to sincere repentance! Let us, then, seriously consider
some of the main _inducements_ to true repentance, of which seven shall be
proposed at present.

                  -------------------------------------

I. The boundless mercy of God.

II. The kindness of Christ, and his inestimable merit.

III. The awful threatenings and punishments that are laid before us.

IV. Death.

V. The last judgment.

VI. Hell. And

VII. Everlasting joy.

I. THE MERCY OF GOD.

7. "If thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek
him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. When thou art in
tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter
days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his
voice; (for the Lord thy God is a merciful God); he will not forsake thee,
neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers, which he
sware unto them." Deut. 4:29-31. What tender affection, as of the heart of
a father, have we here presented to us! And how just and reasonable is it,
that it should move us to repentance! For how numerous and _great_ soever
our sins may be, the mercy of God is still _greater_, according to the
words of the Psalmist: "With the Lord there is mercy; and with him is
plenteous redemption. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities."
Ps. 130:7, 8. And again: "According unto the multitude of thy tender
mercies, blot out my transgressions." Ps. 51:1. Nor are our sins so filthy
and abominable, but God can make them white as snow. "Though your sins,"
says the prophet, "be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow." Isa.
1:18. And the Psalmist says: "Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean;
wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow." Ps. 51:7. Neither are they so
various and manifold, but that they are surpassed by the riches of divine
grace, according to the apostle: "In Christ we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace."
Eph. 1:7. And what we read in Exodus teaches the same: "The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth; forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin." Exod. 34:6, 7. Nor
are they so strong and powerful, but God can destroy them, and throw them
into the depth of the sea, as he did unto Pharaoh and all his host. "He
will subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the
depths of the sea." Micah 7:19. Nor, finally, are they so mortal and
pestilential, but God can heal them, as the prophet assures us: "The
wicked shall not fall by his wickedness in the day that he turneth from
it." Ezek. 33:12.

II. THE KINDNESS OF CHRIST.

8. How kindly and affectionately Christ Jesus receives sinners, he himself
abundantly declares in the Gospel: "They that be whole," says he, "need
not a physician, but they that are sick. I am not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance." Matt. 9:12, 13. "The Son of man is
come to seek and to save that which was lost." Luke 19:10. Of this
