JN. BULLARD, JR.

       *       *       *       *       *

To JASPER CORNING, Esq., AND OTHERS:

GENTLEMEN--The sermon which you have requested, prepared without a
single thought of its publication, and amid a pressure of other
duties, I submit to your disposal;--governed more by your judgment
than my own, in reference to its fitness for the press.

Yours, very truly,
I.S. SPENCER.

Brooklyn, Nov. 26, 1850.




SERMON.


     Titus, III. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to
     principalities and powers to obey magistrates, to be ready
     for every good work.

     Ro. xiii. 1-7. Let every soul be subject unto the higher
     powers. For there is no power but of God, the powers that be,
     are ordained of God. Whosoever, therefore, resisteth the
     power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and they that resist
     shall receive to themselves damnation: (harm, loss, or ruin).
     For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.
     Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is
     good and thou shalt have praise of the same: for he is the
     minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which
     is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for
     he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon
     him that doeth evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
     only for wrath, but also for conscience' sake. For, for this
     cause pay ye tribute also, for they are God's ministers,
     attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore
     to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to
     whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor to whom honor.


There are two great classes of human duty. One of them embraces
duties which we owe to God, the other embraces duties which we owe
to men.

This classification of duties received the sanction of Jesus Christ,
when he spake of _loving the Lord our God with all our heart_, as
the spirit and sum of the one class of duties, and of _loving our
neighbor as ourselves_, as the spirit and sum of the other class of
duties. It had also been previously taught at Mount Sinai, when God
gave to Moses the two tables of the law--the one enjoining our duty
to God, the other enjoining our duty to man.

This classification of duties is not arbitrary. It is founded on
truth and nature. Men have relations to God, as their Creator,
Upholder, Governor, Redeemer, and rightful Judge; and they are bound
to recognize these relations, and feel and act accordingly. Men hold
relations to one another, as parents, children, citizens, rulers,
and subjects; and they are bound to recognize these relations, and
feel and act accordingly. Such is the will of God. Such is the law
of God. There can be no holiness in man aside from conformity to the
will of God in this thing.

This principle is carried out in all the teachings of the New
Testament, with an emphasis and a plainness which no candid and
unprejudiced mind can fail to understand. Jesus Christ has
incorporated it into his sermon on the mount in many particulars,
wherein he insists upon our social duties, while he teaches
religion. He preached this principle when he said, "render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are God's." He practised on this principle when he made the fish
bring in his mouth the tribute-money which, as a citizen, he owed to
the government of the country,--a government a thousandfold more
oppressive than ours.

It would be a fundamental error, if we were to maintain, that
_religion_ has nothing to do with the regulation of our conduct
towards one another,--as parents, as children, as magistrates,
subjects and citizens; but that it has left all that field of duty
to be regulated by the individual preferences of men. It has not
done so. Social duties come as really within the field of
_religious_ obligation, as any other duties. "The fifth commandment
requireth the preserving the honor and performing the duties
belonging to every one in their several places and relations, as
superiors, inferiors, and equals." As men, in any relationship we
hold, neighbors, citizens of the state, children, parents, or any
other earthly connection, religion extends its authority over us;
and our conduct in each one of these relationships constitutes a
part of our holiness or our sin.

God has not seen fit to enact special or particular laws for us, to
regulate our conduct in all respects, as here associated with one
another, and owing duties to one another, as neighbors, citizens of
the commonwealth, husbands, wives, and children. He has himself
enacted only _general_ laws for us,--laid down great general
principles, under the authority and light of which, he has left men
to regulate the particulars as they please, by the governments which
they establish.--only not contravening his great general principles
and laws.

He has himself made _all_ the laws which are needful, and all
which can be justly obligatory upon us in respect to _divine
worship_,--such duties as praise, prayer, preaching the gospel, and
observing the sacramental ordinances;--and no human authority may
either repeal these laws or add to them. But in respect to the
duties which we owe to our neighbor, that is, to our fellow-man, in
any relation he holds to us or can ever hold; God has left the most
of these duties to the authoritative decision of human governments.
He has thus made a difference betwixt these two classes of duties.
The reason for this difference seems to be this; namely, man's
wisdom can reach farther in ascertaining what is fit or right
betwixt him and his fellow-man, than in ascertaining what is fit or
right betwixt him and his God: and consequently, man can legislate
in respect to property, and other matters of human right, but not in
respect to prayer, and other matters of the first class of duties.
Moreover, in respect to worship, God is himself one of the parties.
The parties are not man and man, as they are in all social duties;
but they are man and God:--and therefore, it would seem but fit and
natural, that God should legislate _exclusively_ in respect to the
duties which we owe to _Him_, and more specifically, than in respect
to the duties which we owe to one another. Hence, we find it so.
