knowledge of the only true God, and of Jesus Christ, whom He has sent.
Surely from such an understanding of Science, such knowing, the vision of
sin is wholly excluded.

Nevertheless, at the present crude hour, no wise men or women will rudely
or prematurely agitate a theme involving the All of infinity.

Rather will they rejoice in the small understanding they have already
gained of the wholeness of Deity, and work gradually and gently up toward
the perfect thought divine. This meekness will increase their apprehension
of God, because their mental struggles and pride of opinion will
proportionately diminish.

Every one should be encouraged not to accept any personal opinion on so
great a matter, but to seek the divine Science of this question of Truth by
following upward individual convictions, undisturbed by the frightened
sense of any need of attempting to solve every Life-problem in a day.

"Great is the mystery of godliness," says Paul; and _mystery_ involves the
unknown. No stubborn purpose to force conclusions on this subject will
unfold in us a higher sense of Deity; neither will it promote the Cause of
Truth or enlighten the individual thought.

Let us respect the rights of conscience and the liberty of the sons of God,
so letting our "moderation be known to all men." Let no enmity, no
untempered controversy, spring up between Christian Science students and
Christians who wholly or partially differ from them as to the nature of sin
and the marvellous unity of man with God shadowed forth in scientific
thought. Rather let the stately goings of this wonderful part of Truth be
left to the supernal guidance.

"These are but parts of Thy ways," says Job; and the whole is greater than
its parts. Our present understanding is but "the seed within itself," for
it is divine Science, "bearing fruit after its kind."

Sooner or later the whole human race will learn that, in proportion as the
spotless selfhood of God is understood, human nature will be renovated, and
man will receive a higher selfhood, derived from God, and the redemption of
mortals from sin, sickness, and death be established on everlasting
foundations.

The Science of physical harmony, as now presented to the people in divine
light, is radical enough to promote as forcible collisions of thought as
the age has strength to bear. Until the heavenly law of health, according
to Christian Science, is firmly grounded, even the thinkers are not
prepared to answer intelligently leading questions about God and sin, and
the world is far from ready to assimilate such a grand and all-absorbing
verity concerning the divine nature and character as is embraced in the
theory of God's blindness to error and ignorance of sin. No wise mother,
though a graduate of Wellesley College, will talk to her babe about the
problems of Euclid.

Not much more than a half-century ago the assertion of universal salvation
provoked discussion and horror, similar to what our declarations about sin
and Deity must arouse, if hastily pushed to the front while the platoons of
Christian Science are not yet thoroughly drilled in the plainer manual of
their spiritual armament. "Wait patiently on the Lord;" and in less than
another fifty years His name will be magnified in the apprehension of this
new subject, as already He is glorified in the wide extension of belief in
the impartial grace of God,--shown by the changes at Andover Seminary and
in multitudes of other religious folds.

Nevertheless, though I thus speak, and from my heart of hearts, it is due
both to Christian Science and myself to make also the following statement:
When I have most clearly seen and most sensibly felt that the infinite
recognizes no disease, this has not separated me from God, but has so bound
me to Him as to enable me instantaneously to heal a cancer which had eaten
its way to the jugular vein.

In the same spiritual condition I have been able to replace dislocated
joints and raise the dying to instantaneous health. People are now living
who can bear witness to these cures. Herein is my evidence, from on high,
that the views here promulgated on this subject are correct.

Certain self-proved propositions pour into my waiting thought in connection
with these experiences; and here is one such conviction: that an
acknowledgment of the perfection of the infinite Unseen confers a power
nothing else can. An incontestable point in divine Science is, that because
God is All, a realization of this fact dispels even the sense or
consciousness of sin, and brings us nearer to God, bringing out the highest
phenomena of the All-Mind.




Seedtime and Harvest


Let another query now be considered, which gives much trouble to many
earnest thinkers before Science answers it.


_Is anything real of which the physical senses are cognizant?_

Everything is as real as you make it, and no more so. What you see, hear,
feel, is a mode of consciousness, and can have no other reality than the
sense you entertain of it.

It is dangerous to rest upon the evidence of the senses, for this evidence
is not absolute, and therefore not real, in our sense of the word. All that
is beautiful and good in your individual consciousness is permanent. That
which is not so is illusive and fading. My insistence upon a proper
understanding of the unreality of matter and evil arises from their
deleterious effects, physical, moral, and intellectual, upon the race.

All forms of error are uprooted in Science, on the same basis whereby
sickness is healed,--namely, by the establishment, through reason,
revelation, and Science, of the nothingness of every claim of error, even
the doctrine of heredity and other physical causes. You demonstrate the
process of Science, and it proves my view conclusively, that mortal mind
is the cause of all disease. Destroy the mental sense of the disease, and
the disease itself disappears. Destroy the sense of sin, and sin itself
disappears.

Material and sensual consciousness are mortal. Hence they must, some time
and in some way, be reckoned unreal. That time has partially come, or my
words would not have been spoken. Jesus has made the way plain,--so plain
that all are without excuse who walk not in it; but this way is not the
path of physical science, human philosophy, or mystic psychology.

The talent and genius of the centuries have wrongly reckoned. They have not
based upon revelation their arguments and conclusions as to the source and
resources of being,--its combinations, phenomena, and outcome,--but have
built instead upon the sand of human reason. They have not accepted the
simple teaching and life of Jesus as the only true solution of the
perplexing problem of human existence.

Sometimes it is said, by those who fail to understand me, that I
_monopolize_; and this is said because ideas akin to mine have been held by
a few spiritual thinkers in all ages. So they have, but in a far different
form. Healing has gone on continually; yet healing, as I teach it, has not
been practised since the days of Christ.

What is the cardinal point of the difference in my metaphysical system?
This: that _by knowing the unreality of disease, sin, and death_, you
demonstrate the allness of God. This difference wholly separates my system
from all others. The reality of these so-called existences I deny, because
they are not to be found in God, and this system is built on Him as the
sole cause. It would be difficult to name any previous teachers, save Jesus
and his apostles, who have thus taught.

If there be any _monopoly_ in my teaching, it lies in this utter reliance
upon the one God, to whom belong all things.

Life is God, or Spirit, the supersensible eternal. The universe and man are
the spiritual phenomena of this one infinite Mind. Spiritual phenomena
never converge toward aught but infinite Deity. Their gradations are
spiritual and divine; they cannot collapse, or lapse into their opposites,
for God is their divine Principle. They live, because He lives; and they
are eternally perfect, because He is perfect, and governs them in the Truth
of divine Science, whereof God is the Alpha and Omega, the centre and
circumference.

To attempt the calculation of His mighty ways, from the evidence before the
material senses, is fatuous. It is like commencing with the minus sign, to
learn the principle of positive mathematics.

God was not in the whirlwind. He is not the blind force of a material
universe. Mortals must learn this; unless, pursued by their fears, they
would endeavor to hide from His presence under their own falsities, and
call in vain for the mountains of unholiness to shield them from the
penalty of error.

Jesus taught us to walk _over_, not _into_ or _with_, the currents of
matter, or mortal mind. His teachings beard the lions in their dens. He
turned the water into wine, he commanded the winds, he healed the
sick,--all in direct opposition to human philosophy and so-called natural
science. He annulled the laws of matter, showing them to be laws of mortal
mind, not of God. He showed the need of changing this mind and its abortive
laws. He demanded a change of consciousness and evidence, and effected this
change through the higher laws of God. The palsied hand moved, despite the
boastful sense of physical law and order. Jesus stooped not to human
consciousness, nor to the evidence of the senses. He heeded not the taunt,
"That withered hand looks very real and feels very real;" but he cut off
this vain boasting and destroyed human pride by taking away the material
evidence. If his patient was a theologian of some bigoted sect, a
physician, or a professor of natural philosophy,--according to the ruder
sort then prevalent,--he never thanked Jesus for restoring his senseless
hand; but neither red tape nor indignity hindered the divine process. Jesus
required neither cycles of time nor thought in order to mature fitness for
perfection and its possibilities. He said that the kingdom of heaven is
here, and is included in Mind; that while ye say, There are yet four
months, and _then_ cometh the harvest, I say, Look up, not down, for your
fields are already white for the harvest; and gather the harvest by mental,
not material processes. The laborers are few in this vineyard of
Mind-sowing and reaping; but let them apply to the waiting grain the
curving sickle of Mind's eternal circle, and bind it with bands of Soul.




The Deep Things of God


Science reverses the evidence of the senses in theology, on the same
principle that it does in astronomy. Popular theology makes God tributary
to man, coming at human call; whereas the reverse is true in Science. Men
must approach God reverently, doing their own work in obedience to divine
law, if they would fulfil the intended harmony of being.

The principle of music knows nothing of discord. God is harmony's selfhood.
His universal laws, His unchangeableness, are not infringed in ethics any
more than in music. To Him there is no moral inharmony; as we shall learn,
proportionately as we gain the true understanding of Deity. If God could be
conscious of sin, His infinite power would straightway reduce the universe
to chaos.
