
 THE LAWFUL AND UNLAWFUL USE OF LAW. (A FRAGMENT.)

 1 TIM. i. 8.--"But we know that the law is good, if a man
   use it lawfully."                                               246


 SERMON XX.

 Preached February 21, 1853.

 THE PRODIGAL AND HIS BROTHER.

 LUKE xv. 31, 32.--"And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever
   with me, and all that I have is thine. It was meet that we should
   make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is
   alive again; was lost, and is found."                           253


 SERMON XXI.

 Preached May 15, 1853.

 JOHN'S REBUKE OF HEROD.

 LUKE iii. 19, 20.--"But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved
   by him for Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, and for all the
   evils which Herod had done, added yet this above all, that he shut
   up John in prison."                                             270




 SERMONS.




 I.

 _Preached April 28, 1850._

 THE TONGUE.


   "Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasteth great things.
    Behold, how great a matter a little fire kindleth! And the tongue
    is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among our
    members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the
    course of nature; and it is set on fire of hell."--St. James iii.
    5-6.

 In the development of Christian Truth a peculiar office was assigned
 to the Apostle James.

 It was given to St. Paul to proclaim Christianity as the spiritual law
 of liberty, and to exhibit Faith as the most active principle within
 the breast of man. It was St. John's to say that the deepest quality
 in the bosom of Deity is Love; and to assert that the life of God in
 Man is Love. It was the office of St. James to assert the necessity of
 Moral Rectitude; his very name marked him out peculiarly for this
 office: he was emphatically called, "the Just:" integrity was his
 peculiar characteristic. A man singularly honest, earnest, real.
 Accordingly, if you read through his whole epistle, you will find it
 is, from first to last, one continued vindication of the first
 principles of morality against the _semblances_ of religion.

 He protested against the censoriousness which was found connected with
 peculiar claims of religious feelings. "If any man among you seem to
 be religious and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own
 heart, this man's religion is vain." He protested against that spirit
 which had crept into the Christian Brotherhood, truckling to the rich,
 and despising the poor. "If ye have respect of persons ye commit sin,
 and are convinced of the law as transgressors." He protested against
 that sentimental fatalism which induced men to throw the blame of
 their own passions upon God. "Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am
 tempted of God; for God cannot tempt to evil; neither tempteth He any
 man." He protested against that unreal religion of excitement which
 diluted the earnestness of real religion in the enjoyment of
 listening. "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only; deceiving
 your own souls." He protested against that trust in the correctness of
 theological doctrine which neglected the cultivation of character.
 "What doth it profit, if a man _say_ that he hath faith, and have not
 works? Can faith save him?"

 Read St. James's epistle through, this is the mind breathing through
 it all:--all this _talk_ about religion, and spirituality--words,
 words, words--nay, let us have _realities_.

 It is well known that Luther complained of this epistle, that it did
 not contain the Gospel; for men who are hampered by a system will
 say--even of an inspired Apostle--that he does not teach the Gospel if
 their own favourite doctrine be not the central subject of his
 discourse; but St. James's reply seems spontaneously to suggest itself
 to us. The Gospel! how can we speak of the Gospel, when the first
 principles of _morality_ are forgotten? when Christians are excusing
 themselves, and slandering one another? How can the superstructure of
 Love and Faith be built, when the very foundations of human
 character--Justice, Mercy, Truth--have not been laid?

   1st. The license of the tongue.
   2nd. The guilt of that license.

 The first license given to the tongue is slander. I am not of course,
 speaking now of that species of slander against which the law of libel
 provides a remedy, but of that of which the Gospel alone takes
 cognisance; for the worst injuries which man can do to man, are
 precisely those which are too delicate for _law_ to deal with. We
 consider therefore not the calumny which is reckoned such by the
 moralities of an earthly court, but that which is found guilty by the
 spiritualities of the courts of heaven--that is, the mind of God.

 Now observe, this slander is compared in the text to poison--"the
 tongue is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison." The deadliest
 poisons are those for which no test is known: there are poisons so
 destructive that a single drop insinuated into the veins produces
 death in three seconds, and yet no chemical science can separate that
 virus from the contaminated blood, and show the metallic particles of
 poison glittering palpably, and say, "Behold, it is there!"

 In the drop of venom which distils from the sting of the smallest
 insect, or the spikes of the nettle-leaf, there is concentrated the
 quintessence of a poison so subtle that the microscope cannot
 distinguish it, and yet so virulent that it can inflame the blood,
 irritate the whole constitution, and convert day and night into
 restless misery.

 In St. James's day, as now, it would appear that there were idle men
 and idle women, who went about from house to house, dropping slander
 as they went, and yet you could not take up that slander and detect
 the falsehood there. You could not evaporate the truth in the slow
 process of the crucible, and then show the residuum of falsehood
 glittering and visible. You could not fasten upon any word or
 sentence, and say that it was calumny; for in order to constitute
 slander it is not necessary that the word spoken should be false--half
 truths are often more calumnious than whole falsehoods. It is not even
 necessary that a word should be distinctly uttered; a dropped lip, an
 arched eyebrow, a shrugged shoulder, a significant look, an
 incredulous expression of countenance, nay, even an emphatic silence,
 may do the work: and when the light and trifling thing which has done
 the mischief has fluttered off, the venom is left behind, to work and
 rankle, to inflame hearts, to fever human existence, and to poison
 human society at the fountain springs of life. Very emphatically was
 it said by one whose whole being had smarted under such affliction,
 "Adder's poison is under their lips."

 The second license given to the tongue is in the way of persecution:
 "therewith curse we men which are made after the similitude of God."
 "We!"--men who bear the name of Christ--curse our brethren! Christians
 persecuted Christians. Thus even in St. James's age that spirit had
 begun, the monstrous fact of Christian persecution; from that day it
 has continued, through long centuries, up to the present time. The
 Church of Christ assumed the office of denunciation, and except in the
 first council, whose object was not to strain, but to relax the bonds
 of brotherhood, not a council has met for eighteen centuries which has
 not guarded each profession of belief by the too customary formula,
 "If any man maintain otherwise than this, let him be accursed."

 Myriad, countless curses have echoed through those long ages; the
 Church has forgotten her Master's spirit and called down fire from
 heaven. A fearful thought to consider this as the spectacle on which
 the eye of God has rested. He looks down upon the creatures He has
 made, and hears everywhere the language of religious
 imprecations:--and after all, who is proved right by curses?

 The Church of Rome hurls her thunders against Protestants of every
 denomination: the Calvinist scarcely recognises the Arminian as a
 Christian: he who considers himself as the true Anglican, excludes
 from the Church of Christ all but the adherents of his own orthodoxy;
 every minister and congregation has its small circle, beyond which all
 are heretics: nay even among that sect which is most lax as to the
 dogmatic forms of truth, we find the Unitarian of the old school
 denouncing the spiritualism of the new and rising school.

 This is the state of things to which we are arrived. Sisters of
 Charity refuse to permit an act of charity to be done by a Samaritan;
 ministers of the Gospel fling the thunderbolts of the Lord; ignorant
 hearers catch and exaggerate the spirit,--boys, girls, and women
 shudder as one goes by, perhaps more holy than themselves, who adores
 the same God, believes in the same Redeemer, struggles in the same
 life-battle, and all this because they have been taught to look upon
 him as an enemy of God.

 There is a class of religious persons against whom this vehemence has
 been especially directed. No one who can read the signs of the times
 can help perceiving that we are on the eve of great changes, perhaps a
 disruption of the Church of England. Unquestionably there has been a
 large secession to the Church of Rome.

 Now what has been the position of those who are about to take this
 step? They have been taunted with dishonest reception of the wages of
 the Church; a watch has been set over them: not a word they uttered in
 private, or in public, but was given to the world by some religious
 busy-body; there was not a visit which they paid, not a foolish dress
 which they adopted, but became the subject of bitter scrutiny and
 malevolent gossip. For years the religious press has denounced them
 with a vehemence as virulent, but happily more impotent than that of
 the Inquisition. There has been an anguish and an inward struggle
 little suspected, endured by men who felt themselves outcasts in their
 own society, and naturally looked for a home elsewhere.

 We congratulate ourselves that the days of persecution are gone by;
 but persecution is that which affixes penalties upon _views held_,
 instead of upon _life led_. Is persecution _only_ fire and sword? But
 suppose a man of sensitive feeling says, The sword is less sharp to me
 than the slander: fire is less intolerable than the refusal of
 sympathy!

 Now let us bring this home; you rejoice that the faggot and the stake
 are given up;--_you_ never persecuted--you leave that to the wicked
 Church of Rome. Yes, you never burned a human being alive--you never
 clapped your hands as the death-shriek proclaimed that the lion's fang
 had gone home into the most vital part of the victim's frame; but did
 you never rob him of his friends?--gravely shake your head and
 oracularly insinuate that he was leading souls to hell?--chill the
 affections of his family?--take from him his good name? Did you never
 with delight see his Church placarded as the Man of Sin, and hear the
 platform denunciations which branded it with the spiritual
 abominations of the Apocalypse? Did you never find a malicious
 pleasure in repeating all the miserable gossip with which religious
 slander fastened upon his daily acts, his words, and even his
 uncommunicated thoughts? Did you never forget that for a man to "work
 out his own salvation with fear and trembling" is a matter difficult
 enough to be laid upon a human spirit, without intruding into the most
 sacred department of another's life--that namely, which lies between
 himself and God? Did you never say that "it was to be wished he should
 go to Rome," until at last life became intolerable,--until he was
 thrown more and more in upon himself; found himself, like his
 Redeemer, in this world alone, but unable like his Redeemer, calmly to
 repose upon the thought that his Father was with him? Then a stern
 defiant spirit took possession of his soul, and there burst from his
 lips, or heart, the wish for _rest_--rest at any cost,--peace
 anywhere, if even it is to be found only in the bosom of the Church of
 Rome!


 II. The guilt of this license.

 The first evil consequence is the harm that a man does himself: "so is
 the tongue among the members, that it defiles the whole body." It is
 not very obvious, in what way a man does himself harm by calumny. I
 will take the simplest form in which this injury is done; it effects a
 dissipation of spiritual energy. There are two ways in which the steam
 of machinery may find an outlet for its force: it may work, and if so
 it works silently; or it may escape, and that takes place loudly, in
 air and noise. There are two ways in which the spiritual energy of a
 man's soul may find its vent: it may express itself in action,
 silently; or in words, noisily: but just so much of force as is thrown
 into the one mode of expression, is taken from the other.

 Few men suspect how much mere talk fritters away spiritual
 energy,--that which should be spent in action, spends itself in words.
 The fluent boaster is not the man who is steadiest before the enemy;
 it is well said to him that his courage is better kept till it is
 wanted. Loud utterance of virtuous indignation against evil from the
 platform, or in the drawing-room, do not characterize the spiritual
 giant: so much indignation as is expressed, has found vent, is wasted,
 is taken away from the work of coping with evil; the man has so much
 less left. And hence he who restrains that love of talk, lays up a
 fund of spiritual strength.

 With large significance, St. James declares, "If any man offend not in
 word, the same is a perfect man, able also to bridle the whole body."
 He is entire, powerful, because he has not spent his strength. In
 these days of loud profession, and bitter, fluent condemnation, it is
 well for us to learn the divine force of silence. Remember Christ in
 the Judgment Hall, the very Symbol and Incarnation of spiritual
 strength; and yet when revilings were loud around Him and charges
 multiplied, "He held His peace."

 2. The next feature in the guilt of calumny is its uncontrollable
 character: "the tongue can no man tame." You cannot arrest a
 calumnious tongue, you cannot arrest the calumny itself; you may
 refute a slanderer, you may trace home a slander to its source, you
 may expose the author of it, you may by that exposure give a lesson so
 severe as to make the repetition of the offence appear impossible; but
 the fatal habit is incorrigible: to-morrow the tongue is at work
 again.

 Neither can you stop the consequences of a slander; you may publicly
 prove its falsehood, you may sift every atom, explain and annihilate
 it, and yet, years after you had thought that all had been disposed of
 for ever, the mention of a name wakes up associations in the mind of
 some one who heard the calumny, but never heard or never attended to
 the refutation, or who has only a vague and confused recollection of
 the whole, and he asks the question doubtfully, "But were there not
 some suspicious circumstances connected with him?"

 It is like the Greek fire used in ancient warfare, which burnt
 unquenched beneath the water, or like the weeds which when you have
 extirpated them in one place are sprouting forth vigorously in another
 spot, at the distance of many hundred yards; or, to use the metaphor
 of St. James himself, it is like the wheel which catches fire as it
 goes, and burns with a fiercer conflagration as its own speed
 increases; "it sets on fire the whole course of nature" (literally,
 the wheel of nature). You may tame the wild beast, the conflagration
 of the American forest will cease when all the timber and the dry
 underwood is consumed; but you cannot arrest the progress of that
 cruel word which you uttered carelessly yesterday or this
 morning,--which you will utter perhaps, before you have passed from
 this church one hundred yards: that will go on slaying, poisoning,
 burning beyond your own control, now and for ever.

 3. The third element of guilt lies in the unnaturalness of calumny.
 "My brethren, these things ought not so to be;" _ought not_--that is,
 they are unnatural. That this is St. James's meaning is evident from
 the second illustration which follows: "Doth a fountain send forth at
 the same place, sweet water and bitter?" "Can the fig tree, my
 brethren, bear olive berries, or a vine, figs?"

 There is apparently in these metaphors little that affords an argument
 against slander; the motive which they suggest would appear to many
 far-fetched and of small cogency; but to one who looks on this world
 as a vast whole, and who has recognised the moral law as only a part
 of the great law of the universe, harmoniously blending with the
 whole, illustrations such as these are the most powerful of all
 arguments. The truest definition of evil is that which represents it
 as something contrary to nature: evil is evil, because it is
 unnatural; a vine which should bear olive berries, an eye to which
 blue seems yellow, would be diseased: an unnatural mother, an
 unnatural son, an unnatural act, are the strongest terms of
