What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that we will neither take our neighbor's
money or property, nor acquire it by fraud or by selling him poorly
made products, but will help him improve and protect his property and
career.

The Eighth Commandment

You must not tell lies about your neighbor. (Exodus 20:16 )

What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that we will not deceive by lying,
betraying, slandering or ruining our neighbor's reputation, but will
defend him, say good things about him, and see the best side of
everything he does.

The Ninth Commandment

You must not desire your neighbor's house. (Exodus 20:17)

What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that we will not attempt to trick our
neighbor out of his inheritance or house, take it by pretending to have
a right to it, etc. but help him to keep & improve it.

The Tenth Commandment

You must not desire your neighbor's wife, servant, maid, animals or
anything that belongs to him. (Exodus 20:17)

What does this mean?

We must fear and love God, so that we will not release our neighbor's
cattle, take his employees from him or seduce his wife, but urge them
to stay and do what they ought to do.

The Conclusion to the Commandments

What does God say to us about all these commandments?

This is what He says:
"I am the Lord Your God. I am a jealous God. I plague the grandchildren
and great-grandchildren of those who hate me with their ancestor's sin.
But I make whole those who love me for a thousand generations." (Exodus
20:5)

What does it mean?

God threatens to punish everyone who breaks these commandments. We
should be afraid of His anger because of this and not violate such
commandments. But He promises grace and all good things to those who
keep such commandments. Because of this, we, too, should love Him,
trust Him, and willingly do what His commandments require.

II. The Creed
The Simple Way a Father Should Present it to His Household

The First Article
On Creation

I believe in God the Almighty Father, Creator of Heaven and Earth.

What does this mean?

I believe that God created me, along with all creatures. He gave to me:
my body and soul, my eyes, ears and all the other parts of my body, my
mind and all my senses. He preserves them as well. He gives me clothing
and shoes, food and drink, house and land, wife and children, fields,
animals and all I own. Every day He abundantly provides everything I
need to nourish this body and life. He protects me against all danger.
he shields and defends me from all evil. He does all this because of
His pure, fatherly and divine goodness and His mercy, not because I've
earned it or deserved it. For all of this, I must thank Him, praise
Him, serve Him and obey Him. Yes, this is true!

The Second Article
On Redemption

And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord, Who was conceived by the
Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, died and was buried, descended to Hell, on the third day
rose again from the dead, ascended to Heaven and sat down at the right
hand of God the Almighty Father. From there He will come to judge the
living and the dead.

What does this mean?

I believe that Jesus Christ is truly God, born of the Father in
eternity and also truly man, born of the Virgin Mary. He is my Lord! He
redeemed me, a lost and condemned person, bought and won me from all
sins, death and the authority of the Devil. It did not cost Him gold or
silver, but His holy, precious blood, His innocent body--His death!
Because of this, I am His very own, will live under Him in His kingdom
and serve Him righteously, innocently and blessedly forever, just as He
is risen from death, lives and reigns forever. Yes, this is true.

The Third Article
On Becoming Holy

I believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy Christian Church, the community
