connected with that institution. For two or three years he read law at
Hillsborough, in the office of Franklin Pierce, afterwards President of the
United States; but later Albert spent a year in the office of the Hon.
Richard Fletcher of Boston. He was consequently admitted to the bar in two
States, Massachusetts and New Hampshire. In 1837 he succeeded to the
law-office which Mr. Pierce had occupied, and was soon elected to the
Legislature of his native State, where he served the public interests
faithfully for two consecutive years. Among other important bills which
were carried through the Legislature by his persistent energy was one for
the abolition of imprisonment for debt.

In 1841 he received further political preferment, by nomination to
Congress on a majority vote of seven thousand,--it was the largest vote of
the State; but he passed away at the age of thirty-one, after a short
illness, before his election. His noble political antagonist, the Hon.
Isaac Hill, of Concord, wrote of my brother as follows:--

    Albert Baker was a young man of uncommon promise. Gifted with the
    highest order of intellectual powers, he trained and schooled them
    by intense and almost incessant study throughout his short life.
    He was fond of investigating abstruse and metaphysical principles,
    and he never forsook them until he had explored their every nook
    and corner, however hidden and remote. Had life and health been
    spared to him, he would have made himself one of the most
    distinguished men in the country. As a lawyer he was able and
    learned, and in the successful practice of a very large business.
    He was noted for his boldness and firmness, and for his powerful
    advocacy of the side he deemed right. His death will be deplored,
    with the most poignant grief, by a large number of friends, who
    expected no more than they realized from his talents and
    acquirements. This sad event will not be soon forgotten. It
    blights too many hopes; it carries with it too much of sorrow and
    loss. It is a public calamity.




VOICES NOT OUR OWN


Many peculiar circumstances and events connected with my childhood throng
the chambers of memory. For some twelve months, when I was about eight
years old, I repeatedly heard a voice, calling me distinctly by name, three
times, in an ascending scale. I thought this was my mother's voice, and
sometimes went to her, beseeching her to tell me what she wanted. Her
answer was always, "Nothing, child! What do you mean?" Then I would say,
"Mother, who _did_ call me? I heard somebody call _Mary_, three times!"
This continued until I grew discouraged, and my mother was perplexed and
anxious.

One day, when my cousin, Mehitable Huntoon, was visiting us, and I sat in a
little chair by her side, in the same room with grandmother,--the call
again came, so loud that Mehitable heard it, though I had ceased to notice
it. Greatly surprised, my cousin turned to me and said, "Your mother is
calling you!" but I answered not, till again the same call was thrice
repeated. Mehitable then said sharply, "Why don't you go? your mother is
calling you!" I then left the room, went to my mother, and once more asked
her if she had summoned me? She answered as always before. Then I earnestly
declared my cousin had heard the voice, and said that mother wanted me.
Accordingly she returned with me to grandmother's room, and led my cousin
into an adjoining apartment. The door was ajar, and I listened with bated
breath. Mother told Mehitable all about this mysterious voice, and asked if
she really did hear Mary's name pronounced in audible tones. My cousin
answered quickly, and emphasized her affirmation.

That night, before going to rest, my mother read to me the Scriptural
narrative of little Samuel, and bade me, when the voice called again, to
reply as he did, "Speak, Lord; for Thy servant heareth." The voice came;
but I was afraid, and did not answer. Afterward I wept, and prayed that God
would forgive me, resolving to do, next time, as my mother had bidden me.
When the call came again I did answer, in the words of Samuel, but never
again to the material senses was that mysterious call repeated.

    Is it not much that I may worship Him,
      With naught my spirit's breathings to control,
    And feel His presence in the vast and dim
      And whispering woods, where dying thunders roll
    From the far cataracts? Shall I not rejoice
    That I have learned at last to know His voice
      From man's?--I will rejoice! My soaring soul
    Now hath redeemed her birthright of the day,
    And won, through clouds, to Him, her own unfettered way!
                                              --MRS. HEMANS.




EARLY STUDIES


My father was taught to believe that my brain was too large for my body and
so kept me much out of school, but I gained book-knowledge with far less
labor than is usually requisite. At ten years of age I was as familiar with
Lindley Murray's Grammar as with the Westminster Catechism; and the latter
I had to repeat every Sunday. My favorite studies were natural philosophy,
logic, and moral science. From my brother Albert I received lessons in the
ancient tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. My brother studied Hebrew during
his college vacations. After my discovery of Christian Science, most of the
knowledge I had gleaned from schoolbooks vanished like a dream.

Learning was so illumined, that grammar was eclipsed. Etymology was divine
history, voicing the idea of God in man's origin and signification. Syntax
was spiritual order and unity. Prosody, the song of angels, and no earthly
or inglorious theme.




GIRLHOOD COMPOSITION


From childhood I was a verse-maker. Poetry suited my emotions better than
prose. The following is one of my girlhood productions.

ALPHABET AND BAYONET

    If fancy plumes aerial flight,
      Go fix thy restless mind
    On learning's lore and wisdom's might,
      And live to bless mankind.
    The sword is sheathed, 'tis freedom's hour,
      No despot bears misrule,
    Where knowledge plants the foot of power
      In our God-blessed free school.

    Forth from this fount the streamlets flow,
      That widen in their course.
    Hero and sage arise to show
      Science the mighty source,
    And laud the land whose talents rock
      The cradle of her power,
    And wreaths are twined round Plymouth Rock,
      From erudition's bower.

    Farther than feet of chamois fall,
      Free as the generous air,
    Strains nobler far than clarion call
      Wake freedom's welcome, where
    Minerva's silver sandals still
      Are loosed, and not effete;
    Where echoes still my day-dreams thrill,
      Woke by her fancied feet.




THEOLOGICAL REMINISCENCE


At the age of twelve[A] I was admitted to the Congregational (Trinitarian)
Church, my parents having been members of that body for a half-century. In
connection with this event, some circumstances are noteworthy. Before this
step was taken, the doctrine of unconditional election, or predestination,
greatly troubled me; for I was unwilling to be saved, if my brothers and
sisters were to be numbered among those who were doomed to perpetual
banishment from God. So perturbed was I by the thoughts aroused by this
erroneous doctrine, that the family doctor was summoned, and pronounced me
stricken with fever.

My father's relentless theology emphasized belief in a final judgment-day,
in the danger of endless punishment, and in a Jehovah merciless towards
unbelievers; and of these things he now spoke, hoping to win me from
dreaded heresy.

My mother, as she bathed my burning temples, bade me lean on God's love,
which would give me rest, if I went to Him in prayer, as I was wont to do,
seeking His guidance. I prayed; and a soft glow of ineffable joy came over
me. The fever was gone, and I rose and dressed myself, in a normal
condition of health. Mother saw this, and was glad. The physician
marvelled; and the "horrible decree" of predestination--as John Calvin
rightly called his own tenet--forever lost its power over me.

When the meeting was held for the examination of candidates for membership,
I was of course present. The pastor was an old-school expounder of the
strictest Presbyterian doctrines. He was apparently as eager to have
unbelievers in these dogmas lost, as he was to have elect believers
converted and rescued from perdition; for both salvation and condemnation
depended, according to his views, upon the good pleasure of infinite Love.
However, I was ready for his doleful questions, which I answered without a
tremor, declaring that never could I unite with the church, if assent to
this doctrine was essential thereto.

Distinctly do I recall what followed. I stoutly maintained that I was
willing to trust God, and take my chance of spiritual safety with my
brothers and sisters,--not one of whom had then made any profession of
religion,--even if my creedal doubts left me outside the doors. The
minister then wished me to tell him when I had experienced a change of
heart; but tearfully I had to respond that I could not designate any
precise time. Nevertheless he persisted in the assertion that I _had_ been
truly regenerated, and asked me to say how I felt when the new light dawned
within me. I replied that I could only answer him in the words of the
Psalmist: "Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my
thoughts: and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting."

This was so earnestly said, that even the oldest church-members wept. After
the meeting was over they came and kissed me. To the astonishment of many,
the good clergyman's heart also melted, and he received me into their
communion, and my protest along with me. My connection with this religious
body was retained till I founded a church of my own, built on the basis of
Christian Science, "Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone."

In confidence of faith, I could say in David's words, "I will go in the
strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of Thy righteousness, even of
Thine only. O God, Thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I
declared Thy wondrous works." (Psalms lxxi. 16, 17.)

In the year 1878 I was called to preach in Boston at the Baptist Tabernacle
of Rev. Daniel C. Eddy, D.D.,--by the pastor of this church. I accepted the
invitation and commenced work.

The congregation so increased in number the pews were not sufficient to
seat the audience and benches were used in the aisles. At the close of my
engagement we parted in Christian fellowship, if not in full unity of
doctrine.

Our last vestry meeting was made memorable by eloquent addresses from
persons who feelingly testified to having been healed through my preaching.
Among other diseases cured they specified cancers. The cases described had
been treated and given over by physicians of the popular schools of
medicine, but I had not heard of these cases till the persons who divulged
their secret joy were healed. A prominent churchman agreeably informed the
congregation that many others present had been healed under my preaching,
but were too timid to testify in public.

One memorable Sunday afternoon, a soprano,--clear, strong,
sympathetic,--floating up from the pews, caught my ear. When the meeting
was over, two ladies pushing their way through the crowd reached the
platform. With tears of joy flooding her eyes--for she was a mother--one of
them said, "Did you hear my daughter sing? Why, she has not sung before
since she left the choir and was in consumption! When she entered this
church one hour ago she could not speak a loud word, and now, oh, thank
God, she is healed!"

It was not an uncommon occurrence in my own church for the sick to be
healed by my sermon. Many pale cripples went into the church leaning on
crutches who went out carrying them on their shoulders. "And these signs
shall follow them that believe."

The charter for The Mother Church in Boston was obtained June, 1879,[B] and
the same month the members, twenty-six in number, extended a call to Mary
B.G. Eddy to become their pastor. She accepted the call, and was ordained
A.D. 1881.




THE COUNTRY-SEAT

Written in youth, while visiting a family friend in the beautiful suburbs
of Boston.


    Wild spirit of song,--midst the zephyrs at play
    In bowers of beauty,--I bend to thy lay,
    And woo, while I worship in deep sylvan spot,
    The Muses' soft echoes to kindle the grot.
    Wake chords of my lyre, with musical kiss,
    To vibrate and tremble with accents of bliss.

    Here morning peers out, from her crimson repose,
    On proud Prairie Queen and the modest Moss-rose;
    And vesper reclines--when the dewdrop is shed
    On the heart of the pink--in its odorous bed;
    But Flora has stolen the rainbow and sky,
    To sprinkle the flowers with exquisite dye.

    Here fame-honored hickory rears his bold form,
    And bares a brave breast to the lightning and storm,
    While palm, bay, and laurel, in classical glee,
    Chase tulip, magnolia, and fragrant fringe-tree;
    And sturdy horse-chestnut for centuries hath given
    Its feathery blossom and branches to heaven.

    Here is life! Here is youth! Here the poet's world-wish,--
    Cool waters at play with the gold-gleaming fish;
    While cactus a mellower glory receives
    From light colored softly by blossom and leaves;
    And nestling alder is whispering low,
    In lap of the pear-tree, with musical flow.[C]
