you.

S: O men! eat the lawful and good things out of what is in the earth,
and do not follow the footsteps of the Shaitan; surely he is your open
enemy.

002.169
Y: For he commands you what is evil and shameful, and that ye should say
of Allah that of which ye have no knowledge.

P: He enjoineth upon you only the evil and the foul, and that ye should
tell concerning Allah that which ye know not.

S: He only enjoins you evil and indecency, and that you may speak
against Allah what you do not know.

002.170
Y: When it is said to them: "Follow what Allah hath revealed:" They say:
"Nay! we shall follow the ways of our fathers." What! even though their
fathers Were void of wisdom and guidance?

P: And when it is said unto them: Follow that which Allah hath revealed,
they say: We follow that wherein we found our fathers. What! Even
though their fathers were wholly unintelligent and had no guidance?

S: And when it is said to them, Follow what Allah has revealed, they
say: Nay! we follow what we found our fathers upon. What! and though
their fathers had no sense at all, nor did they follow the right way.

002.171
Y: The parable of those who reject Faith is as if one were to shout Like
a goat-herd, to things that listen to nothing but calls and cries:
Deaf, dumb, and blind, they are void of wisdom.

P: The likeness of those who disbelieve (in relation to the messenger)
is as the likeness of one who calleth unto that which heareth naught
except a shout and cry. Deaf, dumb, blind, therefore they have no
sense.

S: And the parable of those who disbelieve is as the parable of one who
calls out to that which hears no more than a call and a cry; deaf, dumb
(and) blind, so they do not understand.

002.172
Y: O ye who believe! Eat of the good things that We have provided for
you, and be grateful to Allah, if it is Him ye worship.

P: O ye who believe! Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided
you, and render thanks to Allah if it is (indeed) He Whom ye worship.

S: O you who believe! eat of the good things that We have provided you
with, and give thanks to Allah if Him it is that you serve.

002.173
Y: He hath only forbidden you dead meat, and blood, and the flesh of
swine, and that on which any other name hath been invoked besides that
of Allah. But if one is forced by necessity, without wilful
disobedience, nor transgressing due limits,- then is he guiltless. For
Allah is Oft-Forgiving Most Merciful.

P: He hath forbidden you only carrion, and blood, and swineflesh, and
that which hath been immolated to (the name of) any other than Allah.
But he who is driven by necessity, neither craving nor transgressing,
it is no sin for him. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: He has only forbidden you what dies of itself, and blood, and flesh
of swine, and that over which any other (name) than (that of) Allah has
been invoked; but whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring, nor
exceeding the limit, no sin shall be upon him; surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

002.174
Y: Those who conceal Allah's revelations in the Book, and purchase for
them a miserable profit,- they swallow into themselves naught but Fire;
Allah will not address them on the Day of Resurrection. Nor purify
them: Grievous will be their penalty.

P: Lo! those who hide aught of the Scripture which Allah hath revealed
and purchase a small gain therewith, they eat into their bellies
nothing else than fire. Allah will not speak to them on the Day of
Resurrection, nor will He make them grow. Theirs will be a painful
doom.

S: Surely those who conceal any part of the Book that Allah has revealed
and take for it a small price, they eat nothing but fire into their
bellies, and Allah will not speak to them on the day of resurrection,
nor will He purify them, and they shall have a painful chastisement.

002.175
Y: They are the ones who buy Error in place of Guidance and Torment in
place of Forgiveness. Ah! what boldness (They show) for the Fire!

P: Those are they who purchase error at the price of guidance, and
torment at the price of pardon. How constant are they in their strife
to reach the Fire!

S: These are they who buy error for the right direction and chastisement
for forgiveness; how bold they are to encounter fire.

002.176
Y: (Their doom is) because Allah sent down the Book in truth but those
who seek causes of dispute in the Book are in a schism Far (from the
purpose).

P: That is because Allah hath revealed the Scripture with the truth. Lo!
those who find (a cause of) disagreement in the Scripture are in open
schism.

S: This is because Allah has revealed the Book with the truth; and
surely those who go against the Book are in a great opposition.

002.177
Y: It is not righteousness that ye turn your faces Towards east or West;
but it is righteousness- to believe in Allah and the Last Day, and the
Angels, and the Book, and the Messengers; to spend of your substance,
out of love for Him, for your kin, for orphans, for the needy, for the
wayfarer, for those who ask, and for the ransom of slaves; to be
steadfast in prayer, and practice regular charity; to fulfil the
contracts which ye have made; and to be firm and patient, in pain (or
suffering) and adversity, and throughout all periods of panic. Such are
the people of truth, the Allah-fearing.

P: It is not righteousness that ye turn your faces to the East and the
West; but righteous is he who believeth in Allah and the Last Day and
the angels and the Scripture and the prophets; and giveth wealth, for
love of Him, to kinsfolk and to orphans and the needy and the wayfarer
and to those who ask, and to set slaves free; and observeth proper
worship and payeth the poor-due. And those who keep their treaty when
they make one, and the patient in tribulation and adversity and time of
stress. Such are they who are sincere. Such are the Allah-fearing.

S: It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards the East and
the West, but righteousness is this that one should believe in Allah
and the last day and the angels and the Book and the prophets, and give
away wealth out of love for Him to the near of kin and the orphans and
the needy and the wayfarer and the beggars and for (the emancipation
of) the captives, and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate; and the
performers of their promise when they make a promise, and the patient
in distress and affliction and in time of conflicts-- these are they
who are true (to themselves) and these are they who guard (against
evil).

002.178
Y: O ye who believe! the law of equality is prescribed to you in cases
of murder: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, the woman
for the woman. But if any remission is made by the brother of the
slain, then grant any reasonable demand, and compensate him with
handsome gratitude, this is a concession and a Mercy from your Lord.
After this whoever exceeds the limits shall be in grave penalty.

P: O ye who believe! Retaliation is prescribed for you in the matter of
the murdered; the freeman for the freeman, and the slave for the slave,
and the female for the female. And for him who is forgiven somewhat by
his (injured) brother, prosecution according to usage and payment unto
him in kindness. This is an alleviation and a mercy from your Lord. He
who transgresseth after this will have a painful doom.

S: O you who believe! retaliation is prescribed for you in the matter of
the slain, the free for the free, and the slave for the slave, and the
female for the female, but if any remission is made to any one by his
(aggrieved) brother, then prosecution (for the bloodwit) should be made
according to usage, and payment should be made to him in a good manner;
this is an alleviation from your Lord and a mercy; so whoever exceeds
the limit after this he shall have a painful chastisement.

002.179
Y: In the Law of Equality there is (saving of) Life to you, O ye men of
understanding; that ye may restrain yourselves.

P: And there is life for you in retaliation, O men of understanding,
that ye may ward off (evil).

S: And there is life for you in (the law of) retaliation, O men of
understanding, that you may guard yourselves.

002.180
Y: It is prescribed, when death approaches any of you, if he leave any
goods that he make a bequest to parents and next of kin, according to
reasonable usage; this is due from the Allah-fearing.

P: It is prescribed for you, when death approacheth one of you, if he
leave wealth, that he bequeath unto parents and near relatives in
kindness. (This is) a duty for all those who ward off (evil).

S: Bequest is prescribed for you when death approaches one of you, if he
leaves behind wealth for parents and near relatives, according to
usage, a duty (incumbent) upon those who guard (against evil).

002.181
Y: If anyone changes the bequest after hearing it, the guilt shall be on
those who make the change. For Allah hears and knows all things.

P: And whoso changeth (the will) after he hath heard it - the sin
thereof is only upon those who change it. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: Whoever then alters it after he has heard it, the sin of it then is
only upon those who alter it; surely Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

002.182
Y: But if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the
testator, and makes peace between (The parties concerned), there is no
wrong in him: For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: But he who feareth from a testator some unjust or sinful clause, and
maketh peace between the parties, (it shall be) no sin for him. Lo!
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: But he who fears an inclination to a wrong course or an act of
disobedience on the part of the testator, and effects an agreement
between the parties, there is no blame on him. Surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

002.183
Y: O ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed to you as it was prescribed
to those before you, that ye may (learn) self-restraint,-

P: O ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, even as it was
prescribed for those before you, that ye may ward off (evil);

S: O you who believe! fasting is prescribed for you, as it was
prescribed for those before you, so that you may guard (against evil).

002.184
Y: (Fasting) for a fixed number of days; but if any of you is ill, or on
a journey, the prescribed number (Should be made up) from days later.
For those who can do it (With hardship), is a ransom, the feeding of
one that is indigent. But he that will give more, of his own free
will,- it is better for him. And it is better for you that ye fast, if
ye only knew.

P: (Fast) a certain number of days; and (for) him who is sick among you,
or on a journey, (the same) number of other days; and for those who can
afford it there is a ransom: the feeding of a man in need - but whoso
doeth good of his own accord, it is better for him: and that ye fast is
better for you if ye did but know -

S: For a certain number of days; but whoever among you is sick or on a
journey, then (he shall fast) a (like) number of other days; and those
who are not able to do it may effect a redemption by feeding a poor
man; so whoever does good spontaneously it is better for him; and that
you fast is better for you if you know.

002.185
Y: Ramadhan is the (month) in which was sent down the Qur'an, as a guide
to mankind, also clear (Signs) for guidance and judgment (Between right
and wrong). So every one of you who is present (at his home) during
that month should spend it in fasting, but if any one is ill, or on a
journey, the prescribed period (Should be made up) by days later. Allah
intends every facility for you; He does not want to put to
difficulties. (He wants you) to complete the prescribed period, and to
glorify Him in that He has guided you; and perchance ye shall be
grateful.

P: The month of Ramadan in which was revealed the Qur'an, a guidance for
mankind, and clear proofs of the guidance, and the Criterion (of right
and wrong). And whosoever of you is present, let him fast the month,
and whosoever of you is sick or on a journey, (let him fast the same)
number of other days. Allah desireth for you ease; He desireth not
hardship for you; and (He desireth) that ye should complete the period,
and that ye should magnify Allah for having guided you, and that
peradventure ye may be thankful.

S: The month of Ramazan is that in which the Quran was revealed, a
guidance to men and clear proofs of the guidance and the distinction;
therefore whoever of you is present in the month, he shall fast
therein, and whoever is sick or upon a journey, then (he shall fast) a
(like) number of other days; Allah desires ease for you, and He does
not desire for you difficulty, and (He desires) that you should
complete the number and that you should exalt the greatness of Allah
for His having guided you and that you may give thanks.

002.186
Y: When My servants ask thee concerning Me, I am indeed close (to them):
I listen to the prayer of every suppliant when he calleth on Me: Let
them also, with a will, Listen to My call, and believe in Me: That they
may walk in the right way.

P: And when My servants question thee concerning Me, then surely I am
nigh. I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he crieth unto Me. So
let them hear My call and let them trust in Me, in order that they may
be led aright.

S: And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me, so they
should answer My call and believe in Me that they may walk in the right
way.

002.187
Y: Permitted to you, on the night of the fasts, is the approach to your
wives. They are your garments and ye are their garments. Allah knoweth
what ye used to do secretly among yourselves; but He turned to you and
forgave you; so now associate with them, and seek what Allah Hath
ordained for you, and eat and drink, until the white thread of dawn
appear to you distinct from its black thread; then complete your fast
Till the night appears; but do not associate with your wives while ye
are in retreat in the mosques. Those are Limits (set by) Allah:
Approach not nigh thereto. Thus doth Allah make clear His Signs to men:
that they may learn self-restraint.

P: It is made lawful for you to go in unto your wives on the night of
the fast. They are raiment for you and ye are raiment for them. Allah
is Aware that ye were deceiving yourselves in this respect and He hath
turned in mercy toward you and relieved you. So hold intercourse with
them and seek that which Allah hath ordained for you, and eat and drink
until the white thread becometh distinct to you from the black thread
of the dawn. Then strictly observe the fast till nightfall and touch
them not, but be at your devotions in the mosques. These are the limits
imposed by Allah, so approach them not. Thus Allah expoundeth His
revelation to mankind that they may ward off (evil).

S: It is made lawful to you to go into your wives on the night of the
fast; they are an apparel for you and you are an apparel for them;
Allah knew that you acted unfaithfully to yourselves, so He has turned
to you (mercifully) and removed from you (this burden); so now be in
contact with them and seek what Allah has ordained for you, and eat and
drink until the whiteness of the day becomes distinct from the
blackness of the night at dawn, then complete the fast till night, and
have not contact with them while you keep to the mosques; these are the
limits of Allah, so do not go near them. Thus does Allah make clear His
communications for men that they may guard (against evil).

002.188
Y: And do not eat up your property among yourselves for vanities, nor
use it as bait for the judges, with intent that ye may eat up
wrongfully and knowingly a little of (other) people's property.

P: And eat not up your property among yourselves in vanity, nor seek by
it to gain the hearing of the judges that ye may knowingly devour a
portion of the property of others wrongfully.

S: And do not swallow up your property among yourselves by false means,
neither seek to gain access thereby to the judges, so that you may
swallow up a part of the property of men wrongfully while you know.

002.189
Y: They ask thee concerning the New Moons. Say: They are but signs to
mark fixed periods of time in (the affairs of) men, and for Pilgrimage.
It is no virtue if ye enter your houses from the back: It is virtue if
ye fear Allah. Enter houses through the proper doors: And fear Allah:
That ye may prosper.

P: They ask thee, (O Muhammad), of new moons, say: They are fixed
seasons for mankind and for the pilgrimage. It is not righteousness
that ye go to houses by the backs thereof (as do the idolaters at
certain seasons), but the righteous man is he who wardeth off (evil).
So go to houses by the gates thereof, and observe your duty to Allah,
that ye may be successful.

S: They ask you concerning the new moon. Say: They are times appointed
for (the benefit of) men, and (for) the pilgrimage; and it is not
righteousness that you should enter the houses at their backs, but
righteousness is this that one should guard (against evil); and go into
the houses by their doors and be careful (of your duty) to Allah, that
you may be successful.

002.190
Y: Fight in the cause of Allah those who fight you, but do not
transgress limits; for Allah loveth not transgressors.

P: Fight in the way of Allah against those who fight against you, but
begin not hostilities. Lo! Allah loveth not aggressors.

S: And fight in the way of Allah with those who fight with you, and do
not exceed the limits, surely Allah does not love those who exceed the
limits.

002.191
Y: And slay them wherever ye catch them, and turn them out from where
they have Turned you out; for tumult and oppression are worse than
slaughter; but fight them not at the Sacred Mosque, unless they (first)
fight you there; but if they fight you, slay them. Such is the reward
of those who suppress faith.

P: And slay them wherever ye find them, and drive them out of the places
whence they drove you out, for persecution is worse than slaughter. And
fight not with them at the Inviolable Place of Worship until they first
attack you there, but if they attack you (there) then slay them. Such
is the reward of disbelievers.

S: And kill them wherever you find them, and drive them out from whence
they drove you out, and persecution is severer than slaughter, and do
not fight with them at the Sacred Mosque until they fight with you in
it, but if they do fight you, then slay them; such is the recompense of
the unbelievers.

002.192
Y: But if they cease, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: But if they desist, then lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: But if they desist, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

002.193
Y: And fight them on until there is no more Tumult or oppression, and
there prevail justice and faith in Allah; but if they cease, Let there
be no hostility except to those who practise oppression.

P: And fight them until persecution is no more, and religion is for
Allah. But if they desist, then let there be no hostility except
against wrong-doers.

S: And fight with them until there is no persecution, and religion
should be only for Allah, but if they desist, then there should be no
hostility except against the oppressors.

002.194
Y: The prohibited month for the prohibited month,- and so for all things
prohibited,- there is the law of equality. If then any one transgresses
the prohibition against you, Transgress ye likewise against him. But
fear Allah, and know that Allah is with those who restrain themselves.

P: The forbidden month for the forbidden month, and forbidden things in
retaliation. And one who attacketh you, attack him in like manner as he
attacked you. Observe your duty to Allah, and know that Allah is with
those who ward off (evil).

S: The Sacred month for the sacred month and all sacred things are
(under the law of) retaliation; whoever then acts aggressively against
you, inflict injury on him according to the injury he has inflicted on
you and be careful (of your duty) to Allah and know that Allah is with
those who guard (against evil).

002.195
Y: And spend of your substance in the cause of Allah, and make not your
own hands contribute to (your) destruction; but do good; for Allah
loveth those who do good.

P: Spend your wealth for the cause of Allah, and be not cast by your own
hands to ruin; and do good. Lo! Allah loveth the beneficent.

S: And spend in the way of Allah and cast not yourselves to perdition
with your own hands, and do good (to others); surely Allah loves the
doers of good.

002.196
Y: And complete the Hajj or 'umra in the service of Allah. But if ye are
prevented (From completing it), send an offering for sacrifice, such as
ye may find, and do not shave your heads until the offering reaches the
place of sacrifice. And if any of you is ill, or has an ailment in his
scalp, (Necessitating shaving), (He should) in compensation either
fast, or feed the poor, or offer sacrifice; and when ye are in peaceful
conditions (again), if any one wishes to continue the 'umra on to the
hajj, He must make an offering, such as he can afford, but if he cannot
afford it, He should fast three days during the hajj and seven days on
his return, Making ten days in all. This is for those whose household
is not in (the precincts of) the Sacred Mosque. And fear Allah, and
know that Allah Is strict in punishment.

P: Perform the pilgrimage and the visit (to Makka) for Allah. And if ye
are prevented, then send such gifts as can be obtained with ease, and
shave not your heads until the gifts have reached their destination.
And whoever among you is sick or hath an ailment of the head must pay a
ransom of fasting or almsgiving or offering. And if ye are in safety,
then whosoever contenteth himself with the visit for the pilgrimage
(shall give) such gifts as can be had with ease. And whosoever cannot
find (such gifts), then a fast of three days while on the pilgrimage,
and of seven when ye have returned; that is, ten in all. That is for
him whoso folk are not present at the Inviolable Place of Worship.
Observe your duty to Allah, and know that Allah is severe in
punishment.

S: And accomplish the pilgrimage and the visit for Allah, but if, you
are prevented, (send) whatever offering is easy to obtain, and do not
shave your heads until the offering reaches its destination; but
whoever among you is sick or has an ailment of the head, he (should
effect) a compensation by fasting or alms or sacrificing, then when you
are secure, whoever profits by combining the visit with the pilgrimage
(should take) what offering is easy to obtain; but he who cannot find
(any offering) should fast for three days during the pilgrimage and for
seven days when you return; these (make) ten (days) complete; this is
for him whose family is not present in the Sacred Mosque, and be
careful (of your duty) to Allah, and know that Allah is severe in
requiting (evil).

002.197
Y: For Hajj are the months well known. If any one undertakes that duty
therein, Let there be no obscenity, nor wickedness, nor wrangling in
the Hajj. And whatever good ye do, (be sure) Allah knoweth it. And take
a provision (With you) for the journey, but the best of provisions is
right conduct. So fear Me, O ye that are wise.

P: The pilgrimage is (in) the well-known months, and whoever is minded
to perform the pilgrimage therein (let him remember that) there is (to
be) no lewdness nor abuse nor angry conversation on the pilgrimage. And
whatsoever good ye do Allah knoweth it. So make provision for
yourselves (hereafter); for the best provision is to ward off evil.
Therefore keep your duty unto Me, O men of understanding.

S: The pilgrimage is (performed in) the well-known months; so whoever
determines the performance of the pilgrimage therein, there shall be no
intercourse nor fornication nor quarrelling amongst one another; and
whatever good you do, Allah knows it; and make provision, for surely
the provision is the guarding of oneself, and be careful (of your duty)
to Me, O men of understanding.

002.198
Y: It is no crime in you if ye seek of the bounty of your Lord (during
pilgrimage). Then when ye pour down from (Mount) Arafat, celebrate the
praises of Allah at the Sacred Monument, and celebrate His praises as
He has directed you, even though, before this, ye went astray.

P: It is no sin for you that ye seek the bounty of your Lord (by
trading). But, when ye press on in the multitude from 'Arafat, remember
Allah by the sacred monument. Remember Him as He hath guided you,
although before ye were of those astray.

S: There is no blame on you in seeking bounty from your Lord, so when
you hasten on from "Arafat", then remember Allah near the Holy
Monument, and remember Him as He has guided you, though before that you
were certainly of the erring ones.

002.199
Y: Then pass on at a quick pace from the place whence it is usual for
the multitude so to do, and ask for Allah's forgiveness. For Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Then hasten onward from the place whence the multitude hasteneth
onward, and ask forgiveness of Allah. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Then hasten on from the Place from which the people hasten on and ask
the forgiveness of Allah; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

002.200
Y: So when ye have accomplished your holy rites, celebrate the praises
of Allah, as ye used to celebrate the praises of your fathers,- yea,
with far more Heart and soul. There are men who say: "Our Lord! Give us
(Thy bounties) in this world!" but they will have no portion in the
Hereafter.

P: And when ye have completed your devotions, then remember Allah as ye
remember your fathers or with a more lively remembrance. But of mankind
is he who saith: "Our Lord! Give unto us in the world," and he hath no
portion in the Hereafter.

S: So when you have performed your devotions, then laud Allah as you
lauded your fathers, rather a greater lauding. But there are some
people who say, Our Lord! give us in the world, and they shall have no
resting place.

002.201
Y: And there are men who say: "Our Lord! Give us good in this world and
good in the Hereafter, and defend us from the torment of the Fire!"

P: And of them (also) is he who saith: "Our Lord! Give unto us in the
world that which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and
guard us from the doom of Fire."

S: And there are some among them who say: Our Lord! grant us good in
this world and good in the hereafter, and save us from the chastisement
of the fire.

002.202
Y: To these will be allotted what they have earned; and Allah is quick
in account.

P: For them there is in store a goodly portion out of that which they
have earned. Allah is swift at reckoning.

S: They shall have (their) portion of what they have earned, and Allah
is swift in reckoning.

002.203
Y: Celebrate the praises of Allah during the Appointed Days. But if any
one hastens to leave in two days, there is no blame on him, and if any
one stays on, there is no blame on him, if his aim is to do right. Then
fear Allah, and know that ye will surely be gathered unto Him.

P: Remember Allah through the appointed days. Then whoso hasteneth (his
departure) by two days, it is no sin for him, and whoso delayeth, it is
no sin for him; that is for him who wardeth off (evil). Be careful of
your duty to Allah, and know that unto Him ye will be gathered.

S: And laud Allah during the numbered days; then whoever hastens off in
two days, there is no blame on him, and whoever remains behind, there
is no blame on him, (this is) for him who guards (against evil), and be
careful (of your duty) to Allah, and know that you shall be gathered
together to Him.

002.204
Y: There is the type of man whose speech about this world's life May
dazzle thee, and he calls Allah to witness about what is in his heart;
yet is he the most contentious of enemies.

P: And of mankind there is he whoso conversation on the life of this
world pleaseth thee (Muhammad), and he calleth Allah to witness as to
that which is in his heart; yet he is the most rigid of opponents.

S: And among men is he whose speech about the life of this world causes
you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his
heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries.

002.205
Y: When he turns his back, His aim everywhere is to spread mischief
through the earth and destroy crops and cattle. But Allah loveth not
mischief.

P: And when he turneth away (from thee) his effort in the land is to
make mischief therein and to destroy the crops and the cattle; and
Allah loveth not mischief.

S: And when he turns back, he runs along in the land that he may cause
mischief in it and destroy the tilth and the stock, and Allah does not
love mischief-making.

002.206
Y: When it is said to him, "Fear Allah", He is led by arrogance to
(more) crime. Enough for him is Hell;-An evil bed indeed (To lie on)!

P: And when it is said unto him: Be careful of thy duty to Allah, pride
taketh him to sin. Hell will settle his account, an evil resting-place.

S: And when it is said to him, guard against (the punishment of) Allah;
pride carries him off to sin, therefore hell is sufficient for him; and
certainly it is an evil resting place.

002.207
Y: And there is the type of man who gives his life to earn the pleasure
of Allah: And Allah is full of kindness to (His) devotees.

P: And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of
Allah; and Allah hath compassion on (His) bondmen.

S: And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah;
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants.

002.208
Y: O ye who believe! Enter into Islam whole-heartedly; and follow not
the footsteps of the evil one; for he is to you an avowed enemy.

P: O ye who believe! Come, all of you, into submission (unto Him); and
follow not the footsteps of the devil. Lo! he is an open enemy for you.

S: O you who believe! enter into submission one and all and do not
follow the footsteps of Shaitan; surely he is your open enemy.

002.209
Y: If ye backslide after the clear (Signs) have come to you, then know
that Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

P: And if ye slide back after the clear proofs have come unto you, then
know that Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: But if you slip after clear arguments have come to you, then know
that Allah is Mighty, Wise.

002.210
Y: Will they wait until Allah comes to them in canopies of clouds, with
angels (in His train) and the question is (thus) settled? but to Allah
do all questions go back (for decision).

P: Wait they for naught else than that Allah should come unto them in
the shadows of the clouds with the angels? Then the case would be
already judged. All cases go back to Allah (for judgment).

S: They do not wait aught but that Allah should come to them in the
shadows of the clouds along with the angels, and the matter has
(already) been decided; and (all) matters are returned to Allah.

002.211
Y: Ask the Children of Israel how many clear (Signs) We have sent them.
But if any one, after Allah's favour has come to him, substitutes
(something else), Allah is strict in punishment.

P: Ask of the Children of Israel how many a clear revelation We gave
them! He who altereth the grace of Allah after it hath come unto him
(for him), lo! Allah is severe in punishment.

S: Ask the Israelites how many a clear sign have We given them; and
whoever changes the favor of Allah after it has come to him, then
surely Allah is severe in requiting (evil).

002.212
Y: The life of this world is alluring to those who reject faith, and
they scoff at those who believe. But the righteous will be above them
on the Day of Resurrection; for Allah bestows His abundance without
measure on whom He will.

P: Beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve; they
make a jest of the believers. But those who keep their duty to Allah
will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. Allah giveth without
stint to whom He will.

S: The life of this world is made to seem fair to those who disbelieve,
and they mock those who believe, and those who guard (against evil)
shall be above them on the day of resurrection; and Allah gives means
of subsistence to whom he pleases without measure.

002.213
Y: Mankind was one single nation, and Allah sent Messengers with glad
tidings and warnings; and with them He sent the Book in truth, to judge
between people in matters wherein they differed; but the People of the
Book, after the clear Signs came to them, did not differ among
themselves, except through selfish contumacy. Allah by His Grace Guided
the believers to the Truth, concerning that wherein they differed. For
Allah guided whom He will to a path that is straight.

P: Mankind were one community, and Allah sent (unto them) prophets as
bearers of good tidings and as warners, and revealed therewith the
Scripture with the truth that it might judge between mankind concerning
that wherein they differed. And only those unto whom (the Scripture)
was given differed concerning it, after clear proofs had come unto
them, through hatred one of another. And Allah by His Will guided those
who believe unto the truth of that concerning which they differed.
Allah guideth whom He will unto a straight path.

S: (All) people are a single nation; so Allah raised prophets as bearers
of good news and as warners, and He revealed with them the Book with
truth, that it might judge between people in that in which they
differed; and none but the very people who were given it differed about
it after clear arguments had come to them, revolting among themselves;
so Allah has guided by His will those who believe to the truth about
which they differed and Allah guides whom He pleases to the right path.

002.214
Y: Or do ye think that ye shall enter the Garden (of bliss) without such
(trials) as came to those who passed away before you? they encountered
suffering and adversity, and were so shaken in spirit that even the
Messenger and those of faith who were with him cried: "When (will come)
the help of Allah?" Ah! Verily, the help of Allah is (always) near!

P: Or think ye that ye will enter paradise while yet there hath not come
unto you the like of (that which came to) those who passed away before
you? Affliction and adversity befell them, they were shaken as with
earthquake, till the messenger (of Allah) and those who believed along
with him said: When cometh Allah's help? Now surely Allah's help is
nigh.

S: Or do you think that you would enter the garden while yet the state
of those who have passed away before you has not come upon you;
distress and affliction befell them and they were shaken violently, so
that the Messenger and those who believed with him said: When will the
help of Allah come? Now surely the help of Allah is nigh!

002.215
Y: They ask thee what they should spend (In charity). Say: Whatever ye
spend that is good, is for parents and kindred and orphans and those in
want and for wayfarers. And whatever ye do that is good,- Allah knoweth
it well.

P: They ask thee, (O Muhammad), what they shall spend. Say: that which
ye spend for good (must go) to parents and near kindred and orphans and
the needy and the wayfarer. And whatsoever good ye do, lo! Allah is
Aware of it.

S: They ask you as to what they should spend. Say: Whatever wealth you
spend, it is for the parents and the near of kin and the orphans and
the needy and the wayfarer, and whatever good you do, Allah surely
knows it.

002.216
Y: Fighting is prescribed for you, and ye dislike it. But it is possible
that ye dislike a thing which is good for you, and that ye love a thing
which is bad for you. But Allah knoweth, and ye know not.

P: Warfare is ordained for you, though it is hateful unto you; but it
may happen that ye hate a thing which is good for you, and it may
happen that ye love a thing which is bad for you. Allah knoweth, ye
know not.

S: Fighting is enjoined on you, and it is an object of dislike to you;
and it may be that you dislike a thing while it is good for you, and it
may be that you love a thing while it is evil for you, and Allah knows,
while you do not know.

002.217
Y: They ask thee concerning fighting in the Prohibited Month. Say:
"Fighting therein is a grave (offence); but graver is it in the sight of
Allah to prevent access to the path of Allah, to deny Him, to prevent
access to the Sacred Mosque, and drive out its members." Tumult and
oppression are worse than slaughter. Nor will they cease fighting you
until they turn you back from your faith if they can. And if any of you
turn back from their faith and die in unbelief, their works will bear
no fruit in this life and in the Hereafter; they will be companions of
the Fire and will abide therein.

P: They question thee (O Muhammad) with regard to warfare in the sacred
month. Say: Warfare therein is a great (transgression), but to turn
(men) from the way of Allah, and to disbelieve in Him and in the
Inviolable Place of Worship, and to expel His people thence, is a
greater sin with Allah; for persecution is worse than killing. And they
will not cease from fighting against you till they have made you
renegades from your religion, if they can. And whoso becometh a
renegade and dieth in his disbelief: such are they whose works have
fallen both in the world and the Hereafter. Such are rightful owners of
the Fire: they will abide therein.

S: They ask you concerning the sacred month about fighting in it. Say:
Fighting in it is a grave matter, and hindering (men) from Allah's way
and denying Him, and (hindering men from) the Sacred Mosque and turning
its people out of it, are still graver with Allah, and persecution is
graver than slaughter; and they will not cease fighting with you until
they turn you back from your religion, if they can; and whoever of you
turns back from his religion, then he dies while an unbeliever-- these
it is whose works shall go for nothing in this world and the hereafter,
and they are the inmates of the fire; therein they shall abide.

002.218
Y: Those who believed and those who suffered exile and fought (and
strove and struggled) in the path of Allah,- they have the hope of the
Mercy of Allah: And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Lo! those who believe, and those who emigrate (to escape the
persecution) and strive in the way of Allah, these have hope of Allah's
mercy. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Surely those who believed and those who fled (their home) and strove
hard in the way of Allah these hope for the mercy of Allah and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

002.219
Y: They ask thee concerning wine and gambling. Say: "In them is great
sin, and some profit, for men; but the sin is greater than the profit."
They ask thee how much they are to spend; Say: "What is beyond your
needs." Thus doth Allah Make clear to you His Signs: In order that ye
may consider-

P: They question thee about strong drink and games of chance. Say: In
both is great sin, and (some) utility for men; but the sin of them is
greater than their usefulness. And they ask thee what they ought to
spend. Say: that which is superfluous. Thus Allah maketh plain to you
(His) revelations, that haply ye may reflect.

S: They ask you about intoxicants and games of chance. Say: In both of
them there is a great sin and means of profit for men, and their sin is
greater than their profit. And they ask you as to what they should
spend. Say: What you can spare. Thus does Allah make clear to you the
communications, that you may ponder,

002.220
Y: (Their bearings) on this life and the Hereafter. They ask thee
concerning orphans. Say: "The best thing to do is what is for their
good; if ye mix their affairs with yours, they are your brethren; but
Allah knows the man who means mischief from the man who means good. And
if Allah had wished, He could have put you into difficulties: He is
indeed Exalted in Power, Wise."

P: Upon the world and the Hereafter. And they question thee concerning
orphans. Say: To improve their lot is best. And if ye mingle your
affairs with theirs, then (they are) your brothers. Allah knoweth him
who spoileth from him who improveth. Had Allah willed He could have
overburdened you. Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: On this world and the hereafter. And they ask you concerning the
orphans Say: To set right for them (their affairs) is good, and if you
become co-partners with them, they are your brethren; and Allah knows
the mischief-maker and the pacemaker, and if Allah had pleased, He
would certainly have caused you to fall into a difficulty; surely Allah
is Mighty, Wise.

002.221
Y: Do not marry unbelieving women (idolaters), until they believe: A
slave woman who believes is better than an unbelieving woman, even
though she allures you. Nor marry (your girls) to unbelievers until
they believe: A man slave who believes is better than an unbeliever,
even though he allures you. Unbelievers do (but) beckon you to the
Fire. But Allah beckons by His Grace to the Garden (of bliss) and
forgiveness, and makes His Signs clear to mankind: That they may
celebrate His praise.

P: Wed not idolatresses till they believe; for lo! a believing bondwoman
is better than an idolatress though she please you; and give not your
daughters in marriage to idolaters till they believe, for lo! a
believing slave is better than an idolater though he please you. These
invite unto the Fire, and Allah inviteth unto the Garden, and unto
forgiveness by His grace, and expoundeth His revelations to mankind
that haply they may remember.

S: And do not marry the idolatresses until they believe, and certainly a
believing maid is better than an idolatress woman, even though she
should please you; and do not give (believing women) in marriage to
idolaters until they believe, and certainly a believing servant is
better than an idolater, even though he should please you; these invite
to the fire, and Allah invites to the garden and to forgiveness by His
will, and makes clear His communications to men, that they may be
mindful.

002.222
Y: They ask thee concerning women's courses. Say: They are a hurt and a
pollution: So keep away from women in their courses, and do not
approach them until they are clean. But when they have purified
themselves, ye may approach them in any manner, time, or place ordained
for you by Allah. For Allah loves those who turn to Him constantly and
He loves those who keep themselves pure and clean.

P: They question thee (O Muhammad) concerning menstruation. Say: It is
an illness, so let women alone at such times and go not in unto them
till they are cleansed. And when they have purified themselves, then go
in unto them as Allah hath enjoined upon you. Truly Allah loveth those
who turn unto Him, and loveth those who have a care for cleanness.

S: And they ask you about menstruation. Say: It is a discomfort;
therefore keep aloof from the women during the menstrual discharge and
do not go near them until they have become clean; then when they have
cleansed themselves, go in to them as Allah has commanded you; surely
Allah loves those who turn much (to Him), and He loves those who purify
themselves.

002.223
Y: Your wives are as a tilth unto you; so approach your tilth when or
how ye will; but do some good act for your souls beforehand; and fear
Allah. And know that ye are to meet Him (in the Hereafter), and give
(these) good tidings to those who believe.

P: Your women are a tilth for you (to cultivate) so go to your tilth as
ye will, and send (good deeds) before you for your souls, and fear
Allah, and know that ye will (one day) meet Him. Give glad tidings to
believers, (O Muhammad).

S: Your wives are a tilth for you, so go into your tilth when you like,
and do good beforehand for yourselves, and be careful (of your duty) to
Allah, and know that you will meet Him, and give good news to the
believers.

002.224
Y: And make not Allah's (name) an excuse in your oaths against doing
good, or acting rightly, or making peace between persons; for Allah is
One Who heareth and knoweth all things.

P: And make not Allah, by your oaths, a hindrance to your being
righteous and observing your duty unto Him and making peace among
mankind. Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: And make not Allah because of your swearing (by Him) an obstacle to
your doing good and guarding (against evil) and making peace between
men, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

002.225
Y: Allah will not call you to account for thoughtlessness in your oaths,
but for the intention in your hearts; and He is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Forbearing.

P: Allah will not take you to task for that which is unintentional in
your oaths. But He will take you to task for that which your hearts
have garnered. Allah is Forgiving, Clement.

S: Allah does not call you to account for what is vain in your oaths,
but He will call you to account for what your hearts have earned, and
Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing.

002.226
Y: For those who take an oath for abstention from their wives, a waiting
for four months is ordained; if then they return, Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Those who forswear their wives must wait four months; then, if they
change their mind, lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Those who swear that they will not go in to their wives should wait
four months; so if they go back, then Allah is surely Forgiving,
Merciful.

002.227
Y: But if their intention is firm for divorce, Allah heareth and knoweth
all things.

P: And if they decide upon divorce (let them remember that) Allah is
Hearer, Knower.

S: And if they have resolved on a divorce, then Allah is surely Hearing,
Knowing.

002.228
Y: Divorced women shall wait concerning themselves for three monthly
periods. Nor is it lawful for them to hide what Allah Hath created in
their wombs, if they have faith in Allah and the Last Day. And their
husbands have the better right to take them back in that period, if
they wish for reconciliation. And women shall have rights similar to
the rights against them, according to what is equitable; but men have a
degree (of advantage) over them. And Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

P: Women who are divorced shall wait, keeping themselves apart, three
(monthly) courses. And it is not lawful for them that they should
conceal that which Allah hath created in their wombs if they are
believers in Allah and the Last Day. And their husbands would do better
to take them back in that case if they desire a reconciliation. And
they (women) have rights similar to those (of men) over them in
kindness, and men are a degree above them. Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: And the divorced women should keep themselves in waiting for three
courses; and it is not lawful for them that they should conceal what
Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and the last
day; and their husbands have a better right to take them back in the
meanwhile if they wish for reconciliation; and they have rights similar
to those against them in a just manner, and the men are a degree above
them, and Allah is Mighty, Wise.

002.229
Y: A divorce is only permissible twice: after that, the parties should
either hold Together on equitable terms, or separate with kindness. It
is not lawful for you, (Men), to take back any of your gifts (from your
wives), except when both parties fear that they would be unable to keep
the limits ordained by Allah. If ye (judges) do indeed fear that they
would be unable to keep the limits ordained by Allah, there is no blame
on either of them if she give something for her freedom. These are the
limits ordained by Allah; so do not transgress them if any do
transgress the limits ordained by Allah, such persons wrong (Themselves
as well as others).

P: Divorce must be pronounced twice and then (a woman) must be retained
in honour or released in kindness. And it is not lawful for you that ye
take from women aught of that which ye have given them; except (in the
case) when both fear that they may not be able to keep within the
limits (imposed by) Allah. And if ye fear that they may not be able to
keep the limits of Allah, in that case it is no sin for either of them
if the woman ransom herself. These are the limits (imposed by) Allah.
Transgress them not. For whoso transgresseth Allah's limits: such are
wrong-doers.

S: Divorce may be (pronounced) twice, then keep (them) in good
fellowship or let (them) go with kindness; and it is not lawful for you
to take any part of what you have given them, unless both fear that
they cannot keep within the limits of Allah; then if you fear that they
cannot keep within the limits of Allah, there is no blame on them for
what she gives up to become free thereby. These are the limits of
Allah, so do not exceed them and whoever exceeds the limits of Allah
these it is that are the unjust.

002.230
Y: So if a husband divorces his wife (irrevocably), He cannot, after
that, re-marry her until after she has married another husband and He
has divorced her. In that case there is no blame on either of them if
they re-unite, provided they feel that they can keep the limits
ordained by Allah. Such are the limits ordained by Allah, which He
makes plain to those who understand.

P: And if he hath divorced her (the third time), then she is not lawful
unto him thereafter until she hath wedded another husband. Then if he
(the other husband) divorce her it is no sin for both of them that they
come together again if they consider that they are able to observe the
limits of Allah. These are the limits of Allah. He manifesteth them for
people who have knowledge.

S: So if he divorces her she shall not be lawful to him afterwards until
she marries another husband; then if he divorces her there is no blame
on them both if they return to each other (by marriage), if they think
that they can keep within the limits of Allah, and these are the limits
of Allah which He makes clear for a people who know.

002.231
Y: When ye divorce women, and they fulfil the term of their ('Iddat),
either take them back on equitable terms or set them free on equitable
terms; but do not take them back to injure them, (or) to take undue
advantage; if any one does that; He wrongs his own soul. Do not treat
Allah's Signs as a jest, but solemnly rehearse Allah's favours on you,
and the fact that He sent down to you the Book and Wisdom, for your
instruction. And fear Allah, and know that Allah is well acquainted
with all things.

P: When ye have divorced women, and they have reached their term, then
retain them in kindness or release them in kindness. Retain them not to
their hurt so that ye transgress (the limits). He who doeth that hath
wronged his soul. Make not the revelations of Allah a laughing-stock
(by your behaviour), but remember Allah's grace upon you and that which
He hath revealed unto you of the Scripture and of wisdom, whereby He
doth exhort you. Observe your duty to Allah and know that Allah is
Aware of all things.

S: And when you divorce women and they reach their prescribed time, then
either retain them in good fellowship or set them free with liberality,
and do not retain them for injury, so that you exceed the limits, and
whoever does this, he indeed is unjust to his own soul; and do not take
Allah's communications for a mockery, and remember the favor of Allah
upon you, and that which He has revealed to you of the Book and the
Wisdom, admonishing you thereby; and be careful (of your duty to)
Allah, and know that Allah is the Knower of all things.

002.232
Y: When ye divorce women, and they fulfil the term of their ('Iddat), do
not prevent them from marrying their (former) husbands, if they
mutually agree on equitable terms. This instruction is for all amongst
you, who believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is (the course Making
for) most virtue and purity amongst you and Allah knows, and ye know
not.

P: And when ye have divorced women and they reach their term, place not
difficulties in the way of their marrying their husbands if it is
agreed between them in kindness. This is an admonition for him among
you who believeth in Allah and the Last Day. That is more virtuous for
you, and cleaner. Allah knoweth; ye know not.

S: And when you have divorced women and they have ended-- their term (of
waiting), then do not prevent them from marrying their husbands when
they agree among themselves in a lawful manner; with this is admonished
he among you who believes in Allah and the last day, this is more
profitable and purer for you; and Allah knows while you do not know.

002.233
Y: The mothers shall give suck to their offspring for two whole years,
if the father desires to complete the term. But he shall bear the cost
of their food and clothing on equitable terms. No soul shall have a
burden laid on it greater than it can bear. No mother shall be Treated
unfairly on account of her child. Nor father on account of his child,
an heir shall be chargeable in the same way. If they both decide on
weaning, by mutual consent, and after due consultation, there is no
blame on them. If ye decide on a foster-mother for your offspring,
there is no blame on you, provided ye pay (the mother) what ye offered,
on equitable terms. But fear Allah and know that Allah sees well what
ye do.

P: Mothers shall suckle their children for two whole years; (that is)
for those who wish to complete the suckling. The duty of feeding and
clothing nursing mothers in a seemly manner is upon the father of the
child. No-one should be charged beyond his capacity. A mother should
not be made to suffer because of her child, nor should he to whom the
child is born (be made to suffer) because of his child. And on the
(father's) heir is incumbent the like of that (which was incumbent on
the father). If they desire to wean the child by mutual consent and
(after) consultation, it is no sin for them; and if ye wish to give
your children out to nurse, it is no sin for you, provide that ye pay
what is due from you in kindness. Observe your duty to Allah, and know
that Allah is Seer of what ye do.

S: And the mothers should suckle their children for two whole years for
him who desires to make complete the time of suckling; and their
maintenance and their clothing must be-- borne by the father according
to usage; no soul shall have imposed upon it a duty but to the extent
of its capacity; neither shall a mother be made to suffer harm on
account of her child, nor a father on account of his child, and a
similar duty (devolves) on the (father's) heir, but if both desire
weaning by mutual consent and counsel, there is no blame on them, and
if you wish to engage a wet-nurse for your children, there is no blame
on you so long as you pay what you promised for according to usage; and
be careful of (your duty to) Allah and know that Allah sees what you
do.

002.234
Y: If any of you die and leave widows behind, they shall wait concerning
themselves four months and ten days: When they have fulfilled their
term, there is no blame on you if they dispose of themselves in a just
and reasonable manner. And Allah is well acquainted with what ye do.

P: Such of you as die and leave behind them wives, they (the wives)
shall wait, keeping themselves apart, four months and ten days. And
when they reach the term (prescribed for them) then there is no sin for
you in aught that they may do with themselves in decency. Allah is
informed of what ye do.

S: And (as for) those of you who die and leave wives behind, they should
keep themselves in waiting for four months and ten days; then when they
have fully attained their term, there is no blame on you for what they
do for themselves in a lawful manner; and Allah is aware of what you
do.

002.235
Y: There is no blame on you if ye make an offer of betrothal or hold it
in your hearts. Allah knows that ye cherish them in your hearts: But do
not make a secret contract with them except in terms honourable, nor
resolve on the tie of marriage till the term prescribed is fulfilled.
And know that Allah Knoweth what is in your hearts, and take heed of
Him; and know that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing.

P: There is no sin for you in that which ye proclaim or hide in your
minds concerning your troth with women. Allah knoweth that ye will
remember them. But plight not your troth with women except by uttering
a recognised form of words. And do not consummate the marriage until
(the term) prescribed is run. Know that Allah knoweth what is in your
minds, so beware of Him; and know that Allah is Forgiving, Clement.

S: And there is no blame on you respecting that which you speak
indirectly in the asking of (such) women in marriage or keep (the
proposal) concealed within your minds; Allah knows that you will mention
them, but do not give them a promise in secret unless you speak in a
lawful manner, and do not confirm the marriage tie until the writing is
fulfilled, and know that Allah knows what is in your minds, therefore
beware of Him, and know that Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing.

002.236
Y: There is no blame on you if ye divorce women before consummation or
the fixation of their dower; but bestow on them (A suitable gift), the
wealthy according to his means, and the poor according to his means;- A
gift of a reasonable amount is due from those who wish to do the right
thing.

P: It is no sin for you if ye divorce women while yet ye have not
touched them, nor appointed unto them a portion. Provide for them, the
rich according to his means, and the straitened according to his means,
a fair provision. (This is) a bounden duty for those who do good.

S: There is no blame on you if you divorce women when you have not
touched them or appointed for them a portion, and make provision for
them, the wealthy according to his means and the straitened in
circumstances according to his means, a provision according to usage;
(this is) a duty on the doers of good (to others).

002.237
Y: And if ye divorce them before consummation, but after the fixation of
a dower for them, then the half of the dower (Is due to them), unless
they remit it or (the man's half) is remitted by him in whose hands is
the marriage tie; and the remission (of the man's half) is the nearest
to righteousness. And do not forget Liberality between yourselves. For
Allah sees well all that ye do.

P: If ye divorce them before ye have touched them and ye have appointed
unto them a portion, then (pay the) half of that which ye appointed,
unless they (the women) agree to forgo it, or he agreeth to forgo it in
whose hand is the marriage tie. To forgo is nearer to piety. And forget
not kindness among yourselves. Allah is Seer of what ye do.

S: And if you divorce them before you have touched them and you have
appointed for them a portion, then (pay to them) half of what you have
appointed, unless they relinquish or he should relinquish in whose hand
is the marriage tie; and it is nearer to righteousness that you should
relinquish; and do not neglect the giving of free gifts between you;
surely Allah sees what you do.

002.238
Y: Guard strictly your (habit of) prayers, especially the Middle Prayer;
and stand before Allah in a devout (frame of mind).

P: Be guardians of your prayers, and of the midmost prayer, and stand up
with devotion to Allah.

S: Attend constantly to prayers and to the middle prayer and stand up
truly obedient to Allah.

002.239
Y: If ye fear (an enemy), pray on foot, or riding, (as may be most
convenient), but when ye are in security, celebrate Allah's praises in
the manner He has taught you, which ye knew not (before).

P: And if ye go in fear, then (pray) standing or on horseback. And when
ye are again in safety, remember Allah, as He hath taught you that
which (heretofore) ye knew not.

S: But if you are in danger, then (say your prayers) on foot or on
horseback; and when you are secure, then remember Allah, as. He has
taught you what you did not know.

002.240
Y: Those of you who die and leave widows should bequeath for their
widows a year's maintenance and residence; but if they leave (The
residence), there is no blame on you for what they do with themselves,
provided it is reasonable. And Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

P: (In the case of) those of you who are about to die and leave behind
them wives, they should bequeath unto their wives a provision for the
year without turning them out, but if they go out (of their own accord)
there is no sin for you in that which they do of themselves within
their rights. Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: And those of you who die and leave wives behind, (make) a bequest in
favor of their wives of maintenance for a year without turning (them)
out, then if they themselves go away, there is no blame on you for what
they do of lawful deeds by themselves, and Allah is Mighty, Wise.

002.241
Y: For divorced women Maintenance (should be provided) on a reasonable
(scale). This is a duty on the righteous.

P: For divorced women a provision in kindness: a duty for those who ward
off (evil).

S: And for the divorced women (too) provision (must be made) according
to usage; (this is) a duty on those who guard (against evil).

002.242
Y: Thus doth Allah Make clear His Signs to you: In order that ye may
understand.

P: Thus Allah expoundeth unto you His revelations so that ye may
understand.

S: Allah thus makes clear to you His communications that you may
understand.

002.243
Y: Didst thou not Turn by vision to those who abandoned their homes,
though they were thousands (In number), for fear of death? Allah said
to them: "Die": Then He restored them to life. For Allah is full of
bounty to mankind, but most of them are ungrateful.

P: Bethink thee (O Muhammad) of those of old, who went forth from their
habitations in their thousands, fearing death, and Allah said unto
them: Die; and then He brought them back to life. Lo! Allah is a Lord
of Kindness to mankind, but most of mankind give not thanks.

S: Have you not considered those who went forth from their homes, for
fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them, Die;
again He gave them life; most surely Allah is Gracious to people, but
most people are not grateful.

002.244
Y: Then fight in the cause of Allah, and know that Allah Heareth and
knoweth all things.

P: Fight in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: And fight in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is Hearing,
Knowing.

002.245
Y: Who is he that will loan to Allah a beautiful loan, which Allah will
double unto his credit and multiply many times? It is Allah that giveth
(you) Want or plenty, and to Him shall be your return.

P: Who is it that will lend unto Allah a goodly loan, so that He may
give it increase manifold? Allah straiteneth and enlargeth. Unto Him ye
will return.

S: Who is it that will offer of Allah a goodly gift, so He will multiply
it to him manifold, and Allah straitens and amplifies, and you shall be
returned to Him.

002.246
Y: Hast thou not Turned thy vision to the Chiefs of the Children of
Israel after (the time of) Moses? they said to a prophet (That was)
among them: "Appoint for us a king, that we May fight in the cause of
Allah." He said: "Is it not possible, if ye were commanded to fight,
that that ye will not fight?" They said: "How could we refuse to fight
in the cause of Allah, seeing that we were turned out of our homes and
our families?" but when they were commanded to fight, they turned back,
except a small band among them. But Allah Has full knowledge of those
who do wrong.

P: Bethink thee of the leaders of the Children of Israel after Moses,
how they said unto a prophet whom they had: Set up for us a king and we
will fight in Allah's way. He said: Would ye then refrain from fighting
if fighting were prescribed for you? They said: Why should we not fight
in Allah's way when we have been driven from our dwellings with our
children? Yet, when fighting was prescribed for them, they turned away,
all save a few of them. Allah is aware of evil-doers.

S: Have you not considered the chiefs of the children of Israel after
Musa, when they said to a prophet of theirs: Raise up for us a king,
(that) we may fight in the way of Allah. He said: May it not be that
you would not fight if fighting is ordained for you? They said: And
what reason have we that we should not fight in the way of Allah, and
we have indeed been compelled to abandon our homes and our children.
But when fighting was ordained for them, they turned back, except a few
of them, and Allah knows the unjust.

002.247
Y: Their Prophet said to them: "Allah hath appointed Talut as king over
you." They said: "How can he exercise authority over us when we are
better fitted than he to exercise authority, and he is not even gifted,
with wealth in abundance?" He said: "Allah hath Chosen him above you,
and hath gifted him abundantly with knowledge and bodily prowess: Allah
Granteth His authority to whom He pleaseth. Allah careth for all, and
He knoweth all things."

P: Their Prophet said unto them: Lo! Allah hath raised up Saul to be a
king for you. They said: How can he have kingdom over us when we are
more deserving of the kingdom than he is, since he hath not been given
wealth enough? He said: Lo! Allah hath chosen him above you, and hath
increased him abundantly in wisdom and stature. Allah bestoweth His
Sovereignty on whom He will. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.

S: And their prophet said to them: Surely Allah has raised Talut to be a
king over you. They said: How can he hold kingship over us while we
have a greater right to kingship than he, and he has not been granted
an abundance of wealth? He said: Surely Allah has chosen him in
preference to you, and He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and
physique, and Allah grants His kingdom to whom He pleases, and Allah is
Amplegiving, Knowing.

002.248
Y: And (further) their Prophet said to them: "A Sign of his authority is
that there shall come to you the Ark of the covenant, with (an
assurance) therein of security from your Lord, and the relics left by
the family of Moses and the family of Aaron, carried by angels. In this
is a symbol for you if ye indeed have faith."

P: And their Prophet said unto them: Lo! the token of his kingdom is
that there shall come unto you the ark wherein is peace of reassurance
from your Lord, and a remnant of that which the house of Moses and the
house of Aaron left behind, the angels bearing it. Lo! herein shall be
a token for you if (in truth) ye are believers.

S: And the prophet said to them: Surely the sign of His kingdom is, that
there shall come to you the chest in which there is tranquillity from
your Lord and residue of the relics of what the children of Musa and
the children of Haroun have left, the angels bearing it; most surely
there is a sign in this for those who believe.

002.249
Y: When Talut set forth with the armies, he said: "Allah will test you
at the stream: if any drinks of its water, He goes not with my army:
Only those who taste not of it go with me: A mere sip out of the hand
is excused." but they all drank of it, except a few. When they crossed
the river,- He and the faithful ones with him,- they said: "This day We
cannot cope with Goliath and his forces." but those who were convinced
that they must meet Allah, said: "How oft, by Allah's will, Hath a
small force vanquished a big one? Allah is with those who steadfastly
persevere."

P: And when Saul set out with the army, he said: Lo! Allah will try you
by (the ordeal of) a river. Whosoever therefore drinketh thereof he is
not of me, and whosoever tasteth it not he is of me, save him who
taketh (thereof) in the hollow of his hand. But they drank thereof, all
save a few of them. And after he had crossed (the river), he and those
who believed with him, they said: We have no power this day against
Goliath and his hosts. But those who knew that they would meet Allah
exclaimed: How many a little company hath overcome a mighty host by
Allah's leave! Allah is with the steadfast.

S: So when Talut departed with the forces, he said: Surely Allah will
try you with a river; whoever then drinks from it, he is not of me, and
whoever does not taste of it, he is surely of me, except he who takes
with his hand as much of it as fills the hand; but with the exception
of a few of them they drank from it. So when he had crossed it, he and
those who believed with him, they said: We have today no power against
Jalut and his forces. Those who were sure that they would meet their
Lord said: How often has a small party vanquished a numerous host by
Allah's permission, and Allah is with the patient.

002.250
Y: When they advanced to meet Goliath and his forces, they prayed:
"Our Lord! Pour out constancy on us and make our steps firm: Help us
against those that reject faith."

P: And when they went into the field against Goliath and his hosts they
said: Our Lord! Bestow on us endurance, make our foothold sure, and
give us help against the disbelieving folk.

S: And when they went out against Jalut and his forces they said: Our
Lord, pour down upon us patience, and make our steps firm and assist us
against the unbelieving people.

002.251
Y: By Allah's will they routed them; and David slew Goliath; and Allah
gave him power and wisdom and taught him whatever (else) He willed. And
did not Allah Check one set of people by means of another, the earth
would indeed be full of mischief: But Allah is full of bounty to all
the worlds.

P: So they routed them by Allah's leave and David slew Goliath; and
Allah gave him the kingdom and wisdom, and taught him of that which He
willeth. And if Allah had not repelled some men by others the earth
would have been corrupted. But Allah is a Lord of Kindness to (His)
creatures.

S: So they put them to flight by Allah's permission. And Dawood slew
Jalut, and Allah gave him kingdom and wisdom, and taught him of what He
pleased. And were it not for Allah's repelling some men with others,
the earth would certainly be in a state of disorder; but Allah is
Gracious to the creatures.

002.252
Y: These are the Signs of Allah: we rehearse them to thee in truth:
verily Thou art one of the messengers.

P: These are the portents of Allah which We recite unto thee (Muhammad)
with truth, and lo! thou art of the number of (Our) messengers;

S: These are the communications of Allah: We recite them to you with
truth; and most surely you are (one) of the messengers.

002.253
Y: Those messengers We endowed with gifts, some above others: To one of
them Allah spoke; others He raised to degrees (of honour); to Jesus the
son of Mary We gave clear (Signs), and strengthened him with the holy
spirit. If Allah had so willed, succeeding generations would not have
fought among each other, after clear (Signs) had come to them, but they
(chose) to wrangle, some believing and others rejecting. If Allah had
so willed, they would not have fought each other; but Allah Fulfilleth
His plan.

P: Of those messengers, some of whom We have caused to excel others, and
of whom there are some unto whom Allah spake, while some of them He
exalted (above others) in degree; and We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear
proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty) and We supported him with the holy
Spirit. And if Allah had so wiled it, those who followed after them
would not have fought one with another after the clear proofs had come
unto them. But they differed, some of them believing and some
disbelieving. And if Allah had so willed it, they would not have fought
one with another; but Allah doeth what He will.

S: We have made some of these messengers to excel the others among them
are they to whom Allah spoke, and some of them He exalted by (many
degrees of) rank; and We gave clear miracles to Isa son of Marium, and
strengthened him with the holy spirit. And if Allah had pleased, those
after them would not have fought one with another after clear arguments
had come to them, but they disagreed; so there were some of them who
believed and others who denied; and if Allah had pleased they would not
have fought one with another, but Allah brings about what He intends.

002.254
Y: O ye who believe! Spend out of (the bounties) We have provided for
you, before the Day comes when no bargaining (Will avail), nor
friendship nor intercession. Those who reject Faith they are the
wrong-doers.

P: O ye who believe! Spend of that wherewith We have provided you ere a
day come when there will be no trafficking, nor friendship, nor
intercession. The disbelievers, they are the wrong-doers.

S: O you who believe! spend out of what We have given you before the day
comes in which there is no bargaining, neither any friendship nor
intercession, and the unbelievers-- they are the unjust.

002.255
Y: Allah! There is no god but He,-the Living, the Self-subsisting,
Eternal. No slumber can seize Him nor sleep. His are all things in the
heavens and on earth. Who is there can intercede in His presence except
as He permitteth? He knoweth what (appeareth to His creatures as)
before or after or behind them. Nor shall they compass aught of His
knowledge except as He willeth. His Throne doth extend over the heavens
and the earth, and He feeleth no fatigue in guarding and preserving
them for He is the Most High, the Supreme (in glory).

P: Allah! There is no deity save Him, the Alive, the Eternal. Neither
slumber nor sleep overtaketh Him. Unto Him belongeth whatsoever is in
the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. Who is he that intercedeth
with Him save by His leave? He knoweth that which is in front of them
and that which is behind them, while they encompass nothing of His
knowledge save what He will. His throne includeth the heavens and the
earth, and He is never weary of preserving them. He is the Sublime, the
Tremendous.

S: Allah is He besides Whom there is no god, the Everliving, the
Self-subsisting by Whom all subsist; slumber does not overtake Him nor
sleep; whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is His;
who is he that can intercede with Him but by His permission? He knows
what is before them and what is behind them, and they cannot comprehend
anything out of His knowledge except what He pleases, His knowledge
extends over the heavens and the earth, and the preservation of them
both tires Him not, and He is the Most High, the Great.

002.256
Y: Let there be no compulsion in religion: Truth stands out clear from
Error: whoever rejects evil and believes in Allah hath grasped the most
trustworthy hand-hold, that never breaks. And Allah heareth and knoweth
all things.

P: There is no compulsion in religion. The right direction is henceforth
distinct from error. And he who rejecteth false deities and believeth
in Allah hath grasped a firm handhold which will never break. Allah is
Hearer, Knower.

S: There is no compulsion in religion; truly the right way has become
clearly distinct from error; therefore, whoever disbelieves in the
Shaitan and believes in Allah he indeed has laid hold on the firmest
handle, which shall not break off, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

002.257
Y: Allah is the Protector of those who have faith: from the depths of
darkness He will lead them forth into light. Of those who reject faith
the patrons are the evil ones: from light they will lead them forth
into the depths of darkness. They will be companions of the fire, to
dwell therein (For ever).

P: Allah is the Protecting Guardian of those who believe. He bringeth
them out of darkness into light. As for those who disbelieve, their
patrons are false deities. They bring them out of light into darkness.
Such are rightful owners of the Fire. They will abide therein.

S: Allah is the guardian of those who believe. He brings them out of the
darkness into the light; and (as to) those who disbelieve, their
guardians are Shaitans who take them out of the light into the
darkness; they are the inmates of the fire, in it they shall abide.

002.258
Y: Hast thou not Turned thy vision to one who disputed with Abraham
About his Lord, because Allah had granted him power? Abraham said: "My
Lord is He Who giveth life and death." He said: "I give life and
death". Said Abraham: "But it is Allah that causeth the sun to rise
from the east: Do thou then cause him to rise from the West." Thus was
he confounded who (in arrogance) rejected faith. Nor doth Allah Give
guidance to a people unjust.

P: Bethink thee of him who had an argument with Abraham about his Lord,
because Allah had given him the kingdom; how, when Abraham said: My
Lord is He Who giveth life and causeth death, he answered: I give life
and cause death. Abraham said: Lo! Allah causeth the sun to rise in the
East, so do thou cause it to come up from the West. Thus was the
disbeliever abashed. And Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.

S: Have you not considered him (Namrud) who disputed with Ibrahim about
his Lord, because Allah had given him the kingdom? When Ibrahim said:
My Lord is He who gives life and causes to die, he said: I give life
and cause death. Ibrahim said: So surely Allah causes the sun to rise
from the east, then make it rise from the west; thus he who disbelieved
was confounded; and Allah does not guide aright the unjust people.

002.259
Y: Or (take) the similitude of one who passed by a hamlet, all in ruins
to its roofs. He said: "Oh! how shall Allah bring it (ever) to life,
after (this) its death?" but Allah caused him to die for a hundred
years, then raised him up (again). He said: "How long didst thou tarry
(thus)?" He said: "(Perhaps) a day or part of a day." He said: "Nay,
thou hast tarried thus a hundred years; but look at thy food and thy
drink; they show no signs of age; and look at thy donkey: And that We
may make of thee a sign unto the people, Look further at the bones, how
We bring them together and clothe them with flesh." When this was shown
clearly to him, he said: "I know that Allah hath power over all
things."

P: Or (bethink thee of) the like of him who, passing by a township which
had fallen into utter ruin, exclaimed: How shall Allah give this
township life after its death? And Allah made him die a hundred years,
then brought him back to life. He said: How long hast thou tarried?
(The man) said: I have tarried a day or part of a day. (He) said: Nay,
but thou hast tarried for a hundred years. Just look at thy food and
drink which have not rotted! Look at thine ass! And, that We may make
thee a token unto mankind, look at the bones, how We adjust them and
then cover them with flesh! And when (the matter) became clear unto
him, he said: I know now that Allah is Able to do all things.

S: Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town, and it had fallen
down upon its roofs; he said: When will Allah give it life after its
death? So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him
to life. He said: How long have you tarried? He said: I have tarried a
day, or a part of a day. Said He: Nay! you have tarried a hundred
years; then look at your food and drink-- years have not passed over
it; and look at your ass; and that We may make you a sign to men, and
look at the bones, how We set them together, then clothed them with
flesh; so when it became clear to him, he said: I know that Allah has
power over all things.

002.260
Y: When Abraham said: "Show me, Lord, how You will raise the dead," He
replied: "Have you no faith?" He said "Yes, but just to reassure my
heart." Allah said, "Take four birds, draw them to you, and cut their
bodies to pieces. Scatter them over the mountain-tops, then call them
back. They will come swiftly to you. Know that Allah is Mighty, Wise."

P: And when Abraham said (unto his Lord): My Lord! Show me how Thou
givest life to the dead, He said: Dost thou not believe? Abraham said:
Yea, but (I ask) in order that my heart may be at ease. (His Lord)
said: Take four of the birds and cause them to incline unto thee, then
place a part of them on each hill, then call them, they will come to
thee in haste, and know that Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: And when Ibrahim said: My Lord! show me how Thou givest life to the
dead, He said: What! and do you not believe? He said: Yes, but that my
heart may be at ease. He said: Then take four of the birds, then train
them to follow you, then place on every mountain a part of them, then
call them, they will come to you flying; and know that Allah is Mighty,
Wise.

002.261
Y: The parable of those who spend their substance in the way of Allah is
that of a grain of corn: it groweth seven ears, and each ear Hath a
hundred grains. Allah giveth manifold increase to whom He pleaseth: And
Allah careth for all and He knoweth all things.

P: The likeness of those who spend their wealth in Allah's way is as the
likeness of a grain which groweth seven ears, in every ear a hundred
grains. Allah giveth increase manifold to whom He will. Allah is
All-Embracing, All-Knowing.

S: The parable of those who spend their property in the way of Allah is
as the parable of a grain growing seven ears (with) a hundred grains in
every ear; and Allah multiplies for whom He pleases; and Allah is
Ample-giving, Knowing.

002.262
Y: Those who spend their substance in the cause of Allah, and follow not
up their gifts with reminders of their generosity or with injury,-for
them their reward is with their Lord: on them shall be no fear, nor
shall they grieve.

P: Those who spend their wealth for the cause of Allah and afterward
make not reproach and injury to follow that which they have spent;
their reward is with their Lord, and there shall no fear come upon
them, neither shall they grieve.

S: (As for) those who spend their property in the way of Allah, then do
not follow up what they have spent with reproach or injury, they shall
have their reward from their Lord, and they shall have no fear nor
shall they grieve.

002.263
Y: Kind words and the covering of faults are better than charity
followed by injury. Allah is free of all wants, and He is
Most-Forbearing.

P: A kind word with forgiveness is better than almsgiving followed by
injury. Allah is Absolute, Clement.

S: Kind speech and forgiveness is better than charity followed by
injury; and Allah is Self-sufficient, Forbearing.

002.264
Y: O ye who believe! cancel not your charity by reminders of your
generosity or by injury,- like those who spend their substance to be
seen of men, but believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day. They are
in parable like a hard, barren rock, on which is a little soil: on it
falls heavy rain, which leaves it (Just) a bare stone. They will be
able to do nothing with aught they have earned. And Allah guideth not
those who reject faith.

P: O ye who believe! Render not vain your almsgiving by reproach and
injury, like him who spendeth his wealth only to be seen of men and
believeth not in Allah and the Last Day. His likeness is as the
likeness of a rock whereon is dust of earth; a rainstorm smiteth it,
leaving it smooth and bare. They have no control of aught of that which
they have gained. Allah guideth not the disbelieving folk.

S: O you who believe! do not make your charity worthless by reproach and
injury, like him who spends his property to be seen of men and does not
believe in Allah and the last day; so his parable is as the parable of
a smooth rock with earth upon it, then a heavy rain falls upon it, so
it leaves it bare; they shall not be able to gain anything of what they
have earned; and Allah does not guide the unbelieving people.

002.265
Y: And the likeness of those who spend their substance, seeking to
please Allah and to strengthen their souls, is as a garden, high and
fertile: heavy rain falls on it but makes it yield a double increase of
harvest, and if it receives not Heavy rain, light moisture sufficeth
it. Allah seeth well whatever ye do.

P: And the likeness of those who spend their wealth in search of Allah's
pleasure, and for the strengthening of their souls, is as the likeness
of a garden on a height. The rainstorm smiteth it and it bringeth forth
its fruit twofold. And if the rainstorm smite it not, then the shower.
Allah is Seer of what ye do.

S: And the parable of those who spend their property to seek the
pleasure of Allah and for the certainty 'of their souls is as the
parable of a garden on an elevated ground, upon which heavy rain falls
so it brings forth its fruit twofold but if heavy rain does not fall
upon it, then light rain (is sufficient); and Allah sees what you do.

002.266
Y: Does any of you wish that he should have a garden with date-palms and
vines and streams flowing underneath, and all kinds of fruit, while he
is stricken with old age, and his children are not strong (enough to
look after themselves)- that it should be caught in a whirlwind, with
fire therein, and be burnt up? Thus doth Allah make clear to you (His)
Signs; that ye may consider.

P: Would any of you like to have a garden of palm-trees and vines, with
rivers flowing underneath it, with all kinds of fruit for him therein;
and old age hath stricken him and he hath feeble offspring; and a fiery
whirlwind striketh it and it is (all) consumed by fire. Thus Allah
maketh plain His revelations unto you, in order that ye may give
thought.

S: Does one of you like that he should have a garden of palms and vines
with streams flowing beneath it; he has in it all kinds of fruits; and
old age has overtaken him and he has weak offspring, when, (lo!) a
whirlwind with fire in it smites it so it becomes blasted; thus Allah
makes the communications clear to you, that you may reflect.

002.267
Y: O ye who believe! Give of the good things which ye have (honourably)
earned, and of the fruits of the earth which We have produced for you,
and do not even aim at getting anything which is bad, in order that out
of it ye may give away something, when ye yourselves would not receive
it except with closed eyes. And know that Allah is Free of all wants,
and worthy of all praise.

P: O ye who believe! Spend of the good things which ye have earned, and
of that which We bring forth from the earth for you, and seek not the
bad (with intent) to spend thereof (in charity) when ye would not take
it for yourselves save with disdain; and know that Allah is Absolute,
Owner of Praise.

S: O you who believe! spend (benevolently) of the good things that you
earn and or what We have brought forth for you out of the earth, and do
not aim at what is bad that you may spend (in alms) of it, while you
would not take it yourselves unless you have its price lowered, and
know that Allah is Self-sufficient, Praiseworthy.

002.268
Y: The Evil one threatens you with poverty and bids you to conduct
unseemly. Allah promiseth you His forgiveness and bounties. And Allah
careth for all and He knoweth all things.

P: The devil promiseth you destitution and enjoineth on you lewdness.
But Allah promiseth you forgiveness from Himself with bounty. Allah is
All-Embracing, All-Knowing.

S: Shaitan threatens you with poverty and enjoins you to be niggardly,
and Allah promises you forgiveness from Himself and abundance; and
Allah is Ample-giving, Knowing.

002.269
Y: He granteth wisdom to whom He pleaseth; and he to whom wisdom is
granted receiveth indeed a benefit overflowing; but none will grasp the
Message but men of understanding.

P: He giveth wisdom unto whom He will, and he unto whom wisdom is given,
he truly hath received abundant good. But none remember except men of
understanding.

S: He grants wisdom to whom He pleases, and whoever is granted wisdom,
he indeed is given a great good and none but men of understanding mind.

002.270
Y: And whatever ye spend in charity or devotion, be sure Allah knows it
all. But the wrong-doers have no helpers.

P: Whatever alms ye spend or vow ye vow, lo! Allah knoweth it.
Wrong-doers have no helpers.

S: And whatever alms you give or (whatever) vow you vow, surely Allah
knows it; and the unjust shall have no helpers.

002.271
Y: If ye disclose (acts of) charity, even so it is well, but if ye
conceal them, and make them reach those (really) in need, that is best
for you: It will remove from you some of your (stains of) evil. And
Allah is well acquainted with what ye do.

P: If ye publish your almsgiving, it is well, but if ye hide it and give
it to the poor, it will be better for you, and will atone for some of
your ill-deeds. Allah is Informed of what ye do.

S: If you give alms openly, it is well, and if you hide it and give it
to the poor, it is better for you; and this will do away with some of
your evil deeds; and Allah is aware of what you do.

002.272
Y: It is not required of thee (O Messenger), to set them on the right
path, but Allah sets on the right path whom He pleaseth. Whatever of
good ye give benefits your own souls, and ye shall only do so seeking
the "Face" of Allah. Whatever good ye give, shall be rendered back to
you, and ye shall not Be dealt with unjustly.

P: The guiding of them is not thy duty (O Muhammad), but Allah guideth
whom He will. And whatsoever good thing ye spend, it is for yourselves,
when ye spend not save in search of Allah's Countenance; and whatsoever
good thing ye spend, it will be repaid to you in full, and ye will not
be wronged.

S: To make them walk in the right way is not incumbent on you, but Allah
guides aright whom He pleases; and whatever good thing you spend, it is
to your own good; and you do not spend but to seek Allah's pleasure;
and whatever good things you spend shall be paid back to you in full,
and you shall not be wronged.

002.273
Y: (Charity is) for those in need, who, in Allah's cause are restricted
(from travel), and cannot move about in the land, seeking (For trade or
work): the ignorant man thinks, because of their modesty, that they are
free from want. Thou shalt know them by their (Unfailing) mark: They
beg not importunately from all the sundry. And whatever of good ye
give, be assured Allah knoweth it well.

P: (Alms are) for the poor who are straitened for the cause of Allah,
who cannot travel in the land (for trade). The unthinking man
accounteth them wealthy because of their restraint. Thou shalt know
them by their mark: They do not beg of men with importunity. And
whatsoever good thing ye spend, lo! Allah knoweth it.

S: (Alms are) for the poor who are confined in the way of Allah-- they
cannot go about in the land; the ignorant man thinks them to be rich on
account of (their) abstaining (from begging); you can recognise them by
their mark; they do not beg from men importunately; and whatever good
thing you spend, surely Allah knows it.

002.274
Y: Those who (in charity) spend of their goods by night and by day, in
secret and in public, have their reward with their Lord: on them shall
be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

P: Those who spend their wealth by night and day, by stealth and openly,
verily their reward is with their Lord, and their shall no fear come
upon them neither shall they grieve.

S: (As for) those who spend their property by night and by day, secretly
and openly, they shall have their reward from their Lord and they shall
have no fear, nor shall they grieve.

002.275
Y: Those who devour usury will not stand except as stand one whom the
Evil one by his touch Hath driven to madness. That is because they say:
"Trade is like usury," but Allah hath permitted trade and forbidden
usury. Those who after receiving direction from their Lord, desist,
shall be pardoned for the past; their case is for Allah (to judge); but
those who repeat (The offence) are companions of the Fire: They will
abide therein (for ever).

P: Those who swallow usury cannot rise up save as he ariseth whom the
devil hath prostrated by (his) touch. That is because they say: Trade
is just like usury; whereas Allah permitteth trading and forbiddeth
usury. He unto whom an admonition from his Lord cometh, and (he)
refraineth (in obedience thereto), he shall keep (the profits of) that
which is past, and his affair (henceforth) is with Allah. As for him
who returneth (to usury) - Such are rightful owners of the Fire. They
will abide therein.

S: Those who swallow down usury cannot arise except as one whom Shaitan
has prostrated by (his) touch does rise. That is because they say,
trading is only like usury; and Allah has allowed trading and forbidden
usury. To whomsoever then the admonition has come from his Lord, then
he desists, he shall have what has already passed, and his affair is in
the hands of Allah; and whoever returns (to it)-- these arc the inmates
of the fire; they shall abide in it.

002.276
Y: Allah will deprive usury of all blessing, but will give increase for
deeds of charity: For He loveth not creatures ungrateful and wicked.

P: Allah hath blighted usury and made almsgiving fruitful. Allah loveth
not the impious and guilty.

S: Allah does not bless usury, and He causes charitable deeds to
prosper, and Allah does not love any ungrateful sinner.

002.277
Y: Those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, and establish
regular prayers and regular charity, will have their reward with their
Lord: on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

P: Lo! those who believe and do good works and establish worship and pay
the poor-due, their reward is with their Lord and there shall no fear
come upon them neither shall they grieve.

S: Surely they who believe and do good deeds and keep up prayer and pay
the poor-rate they shall have their reward from their Lord, and they
shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve.

002.278
Y: O ye who believe! Fear Allah, and give up what remains of your demand
for usury, if ye are indeed believers.

P: O ye who believe! Observe your duty to Allah, and give up what
remaineth (due to you) from usury, if ye are (in truth) believers.

S: O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and relinquish
what remains (due) from usury, if you are believers.

002.279
Y: If ye do it not, Take notice of war from Allah and His Messenger: But
if ye turn back, ye shall have your capital sums: Deal not unjustly,
and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly.

P: And if ye do not, then be warned of war (against you) from Allah and
His messenger. And if ye repent, then ye have your principal (without
interest). Wrong not, and ye shall not be wronged.

S: But if you do (it) not, then be apprised of war from Allah and His
Messenger; and if you repent, then you shall have your capital; neither
shall you make (the debtor) suffer loss, nor shall you be made to
suffer loss.

002.280
Y: If the debtor is in a difficulty, grant him time Till it is easy for
him to repay. But if ye remit it by way of charity, that is best for
you if ye only knew.

P: And if the debtor is in straitened circumstances, then (let there be)
postponement to (the time of) ease; and that ye remit the debt as
almsgiving would be better for you if ye did but know.

S: And if (the debtor) is in straitness, then let there be postponement
until (he is in) ease; and that you remit (it) as alms is better for
you, if you knew.

002.281
Y: And fear the Day when ye shall be brought back to Allah. Then shall
every soul be paid what it earned, and none shall be dealt with
unjustly.

P: And guard yourselves against a day in which ye will be brought back
to Allah. Then every soul will be paid in full that which it hath
earned, and they will not be wronged.

S: And guard yourselves against a day in which you shall be returned to
Allah; then every soul shall be paid back in full what it has earned,
and they shall not be dealt with unjustly.

002.282
Y: O ye who believe! When ye deal with each other, in transactions
involving future obligations in a fixed period of time, reduce them to
writing Let a scribe write down faithfully as between the parties: let
not the scribe refuse to write: as Allah has taught him, so let him
write. Let him who incurs the liability dictate, but let him fear His
Lord Allah, and not diminish aught of what he owes. If they party
liable is mentally deficient, or weak, or unable Himself to dictate,
Let his guardian dictate faithfully, and get two witnesses, out of your
own men, and if there are not two men, then a man and two women, such
as ye choose, for witnesses, so that if one of them errs, the other can
remind her. The witnesses should not refuse when they are called on
(For evidence). Disdain not to reduce to writing (your contract) for a
future period, whether it be small or big: it is juster in the sight of
Allah, More suitable as evidence, and more convenient to prevent doubts
among yourselves but if it be a transaction which ye carry out on the
spot among yourselves, there is no blame on you if ye reduce it not to
writing. But take witness whenever ye make a commercial contract; and
let neither scribe nor witness suffer harm. If ye do (such harm), it
would be wickedness in you. So fear Allah; For it is Good that teaches
you. And Allah is well acquainted with all things. If ye are on a
journey, and cannot find a scribe, a pledge with possession (may serve
the purpose). And if one of you deposits a thing on trust with another,
let the trustee (faithfully) discharge his trust, and let him Fear his
Lord conceal not evidence; for whoever conceals it, - his heart is
tainted with sin. And Allah knoweth all that ye do.

P: O ye who believe! When ye contract a debt for a fixed term, record it
in writing. Let a scribe record it in writing between you in (terms of)
equity. No scribe should refuse to write as Allah hath taught him, so
let him write, and let him who incurreth the debt dictate, and let him
observe his duty to Allah his Lord, and diminish naught thereof. But if
he who oweth the debt is of low understanding, or weak, or unable
himself to dictate, then let the guardian of his interests dictate in
(terms of) equity. And call to witness, from among your men, two
witnesses. And if two men be not (at hand) then a man and two women, of
such as ye approve as witnesses, so that if the one erreth (through
forgetfulness) the other will remember. And the witnesses must not
refuse when they are summoned. Be not averse to writing down (the
contract) whether it be small or great, with (record of) the term
thereof. That is more equitable in the sight of Allah and more sure for
testimony, and the best way of avoiding doubt between you; save only in
the case when it is actual merchandise which ye transfer among
yourselves from hand to hand. In that case it is no sin for you if ye
write it not. And have witnesses when ye sell one to another, and let
no harm be done to scribe or witness. If ye do (harm to them) lo! it is
a sin in you. Observe your duty to Allah. Allah is teaching you. And
Allah is knower of all things.

S: O you who believe! when you deal with each other in contracting a
debt for a fixed time, then write it down; and let a scribe write it
down between you with fairness; and the scribe should not refuse to
write as Allah has taught him, so he should write; and let him who owes
the debt dictate, and he should be careful of (his duty to) Allah, his
Lord, and not diminish anything from it; but if he who owes the debt is
unsound in understanding, or weak, or (if) he is not able to dictate
himself, let his guardian dictate with fairness; and call in to witness
from among your men two witnesses; but if there are not two men, then
one man and two women from among those whom you choose to be witnesses,
so that if one of the two errs, the second of the two may remind the
other; and the witnesses should not refuse when they are summoned; and
be not averse to writing it (whether it is) small or large, with the
time of its falling due; this is more equitable in the sight of Allah
and assures greater accuracy in testimony, and the nearest (way) that
you may not entertain doubts (afterwards), except when it is ready
merchandise which you give and take among yourselves from hand to hand,
then there is no blame on you in not writing it down; and have
witnesses when you barter with one another, and let no harm be done to
the scribe or to the witness; and if you do (it) then surely it will be
a transgression in you, and be careful of (your duty) to Allah, Allah
teaches you, and Allah knows all things.

002.283
Y: If ye are on a journey, and cannot find a scribe, a pledge with
possession (may serve the purpose). And if one of you deposits a thing
on trust with another, Let the trustee (Faithfully) discharge His
trust, and let him fear his Lord. Conceal not evidence; for whoever
conceals it,- His heart is tainted with sin. And Allah Knoweth all that
ye do.

P: If ye be on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then a pledge in hand
(shall suffice). And if one of you entrusteth to another let him who is
trusted deliver up that which is entrusted to him (according to the
pact between them) and let him observe his duty to Allah his Lord. Hide
not testimony. He who hideth it, verily his heart is sinful. Allah is
Aware of what ye do.

S: And if you are upon a journey and you do not find a scribe, then
(there may be) a security taken into possession; but if one of you
trusts another, then he who is trusted should deliver his trust, and
let him be careful (of his duty to) Allah, his Lord; and do not conceal
testimony, and whoever conceals it, his heart is surely sinful; and
Allah knows what you do.

002.284
Y: To Allah belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth. Whether
ye show what is in your minds or conceal it, Allah Calleth you to
account for it. He forgiveth whom He pleaseth, and punisheth whom He
pleaseth, for Allah hath power over all things.

P: Unto Allah (belongeth) whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is
in the earth; and whether ye make known what is in your minds or hide
it, Allah will bring you to account for it. He will forgive whom He
will and He will punish whom He will. Allah is Able to do all things.

S: Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is Allah's;
and whether you manifest what is in your minds or hide it, Allah will
call you to account according to it; then He will forgive whom He
pleases and chastise whom He pleases, and Allah has power over all
things.

002.285
Y: The Messenger believeth in what hath been revealed to him from his
Lord, as do the men of faith. Each one (of them) believeth in Allah,
His angels, His books, and His messengers. "We make no distinction
(they say) between one and another of His messengers." And they say:
"We hear, and we obey: (We seek) Thy forgiveness, our Lord, and to Thee
is the end of all journeys."

P: The messenger believeth in that which hath been revealed unto him
from his Lord and (so do) believers. Each one believeth in Allah and
His angels and His scriptures and His messengers - We make no
distinction between any of His messengers - and they say: We hear, and
we obey. (Grant us) Thy forgiveness, our Lord. Unto Thee is the
journeying.

S: The messenger believes in what has been revealed to him from his
Lord, and (so do) the believers; they all believe in Allah and His
angels and His books and His messengers; We make no difference between
any of His messengers; and they say: We hear and obey, our Lord! Thy
forgiveness (do we crave), and to Thee is the eventual course.

002.286
Y: On no soul doth Allah Place a burden greater than it can bear. It
gets every good that it earns, and it suffers every ill that it earns.
(Pray:) "Our Lord! Condemn us not if we forget or fall into error; our
Lord! Lay not on us a burden Like that which Thou didst lay on those
before us; Our Lord! Lay not on us a burden greater than we have
strength to bear. Blot out our sins, and grant us forgiveness. Have
mercy on us. Thou art our Protector; Help us against those who stand
against faith."

P: Allah tasketh not a soul beyond its scope. For it (is only) that
which it hath earned, and against it (only) that which it hath
deserved. Our Lord! Condemn us not if we forget, or miss the mark! Our
Lord! Lay not on us such a burden as thou didst lay on those before us!
Our Lord! Impose not on us that which we have not the strength to bear!
Pardon us, absolve us and have mercy on us, Thou, our Protector, and
give us victory over the disbelieving folk.

S: Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability; for it is (the benefit of) what it has earned and upon it (the
evil of) what it has wrought: Our Lord! do not punish us if we forget
or make a mistake; Our Lord! do not lay on us a burden as Thou didst
lay on those before us, Our Lord do not impose upon us that which we
have not the strength to bear; and pardon us and grant us protection
and have mercy on us, Thou art our Patron, so help us against the
unbelieving people.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 3:

           AL-E-IMRAN (THE FAMILY OF 'IMRAN, THE HOUSE OF 'IMRAN)
 Total Verses: 200 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

003.001
Y: A. L. M.

P: Alim. Lam. Mim.

S: Alif Lam Mim.

003.002
Y: Allah! There is no god but He,-the Living, the Self-Subsisting,
Eternal.

P: Allah! There is no God save Him, the Alive, the Eternal.

S: Allah, (there is) no god but He, the Everliving, the Self-subsisting
by Whom all things subsist.

003.003
Y: It is He Who sent down to thee (step by step), in truth, the Book,
confirming what went before it; and He sent down the Law (of Moses) and
the Gospel (of Jesus) before this, as a guide to mankind, and He sent
down the criterion (of judgment between right and wrong).

P: He hath revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture with truth,
confirming that which was (revealed) before it, even as He revealed the
Torah and the Gospel.

S: He has revealed to you the Book with truth, verifying that which is
before it, and He revealed the Tavrat and the Injeel aforetime, a
guidance for the people, and He sent the Furqan.

003.004
Y: Then those who reject Faith in the Signs of Allah will suffer the
severest penalty, and Allah is Exalted in Might, Lord of Retribution.

P: Aforetime, for a guidance to mankind; and hath revealed the Criterion
(of right and wrong). Lo! those who disbelieve the revelations of
Allah, theirs will be a heavy doom. Allah is Mighty, Able to Requite
(the wrong).

S: Surely they who disbelieve in the communications of Allah they shall
have a severe chastisement; and Allah is Mighty, the Lord of
retribution.

003.005
Y: From Allah, verily nothing is hidden on earth or in the heavens.

P: Lo! nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden from Allah.

S: Allah-- surely nothing is hidden from Him in the earth or in the
heaven.

003.006
Y: He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He pleases. There is no god
but He, the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

P: He it is Who fashioneth you in the wombs as pleaseth Him. There is no
Allah save Him, the Almighty, the Wise.

S: He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He likes; there is no god but
He, the Mighty, the Wise.

003.007
Y: He it is Who has sent down to thee the Book: In it are verses basic
or fundamental (of established meaning); they are the foundation of the
Book: others are allegorical. But those in whose hearts is perversity
follow the part thereof that is allegorical, seeking discord, and
searching for its hidden meanings, but no one knows its hidden meanings
except Allah. And those who are firmly grounded in knowledge say: "We
believe in the Book; the whole of it is from our Lord:" and none will
grasp the Message except men of understanding.

P: He it is Who hath revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture wherein
are clear revelations - they are the substance of the Book - and others
(which are) allegorical. But those in whose hearts is doubt pursue,
forsooth, that which is allegorical seeking (to cause) dissension by
seeking to explain it. None knoweth its explanation save Allah. And
those who are of sound instruction say: We believe therein; the whole
is from our Lord; but only men of understanding really heed.

S: He it is Who has revealed the Book to you; some of its verses are
decisive, they are the basis of the Book, and others are allegorical;
then as for those in whose hearts there is perversity they follow the
part of it which is allegorical, seeking to mislead and seeking to give
it (their own) interpretation, but none knows its interpretation except
Allah, and those who are firmly rooted in knowledge say: We believe in
it, it is all from our Lord; and none do mind except those having
understanding.

003.008
Y: "Our Lord!" (they say), "Let not our hearts deviate now after Thou
hast guided us, but grant us mercy from Thine own Presence; for Thou
art the Grantor of bounties without measure."

P: Our Lord! Cause not our hearts to stray after Thou hast guided us,
and bestow upon us mercy from Thy Presence. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art
the Bestower.

S: Our Lord! make not our hearts to deviate after Thou hast guided us
aright, and grant us from Thee mercy; surely Thou art the most liberal
Giver.

003.009
Y: "Our Lord! Thou art He that will gather mankind Together against a
day about which there is no doubt; for Allah never fails in His
promise."

P: Our Lord! Lo! it is Thou Who gatherest mankind together to a Day of
which there is no doubt. Lo! Allah faileth not to keep the tryst.

S: Our Lord! surely Thou art the Gatherer of men on a day about which
there is no doubt; surely Allah will not fail (His) promise.

003.010
Y: Those who reject Faith,- neither their possessions nor their
(numerous) progeny will avail them aught against Allah: They are
themselves but fuel for the Fire.

P: (On that Day) neither the riches nor the progeny of those who
disbelieve will aught avail them with Allah. They will be fuel for
Fire.

S: (As for) those who disbelieve, surely neither their wealth nor their
children shall avail them in the least against Allah, and these it is
who are the fuel of the fire.

003.011
Y: (Their plight will be) no better than that of the people of Pharaoh,
and their predecessors: They denied our Signs, and Allah called them to
account for their sins. For Allah is strict in punishment.

P: Like Pharaoh's folk and those who were before them, they disbelieved
Our revelations and so Allah seized them for their sins. And Allah is
severe in punishment.

S: Like the striving of the people of Firon and those before them; they
rejected Our communications, so Allah destroyed them on account of
their faults; and Allah is severe in requiting (evil).

003.012
Y: Say to those who reject Faith: "Soon will ye be vanquished and
gathered together to Hell,-an evil bed indeed (to lie on)!"

P: Say (O Muhammad) unto those who disbelieve: Ye shall be overcome and
gathered unto Hell, an evil resting-place.

S: Say to those who disbelieve: You shall be vanquished, and driven
together to hell; and evil is the resting-place.

003.013
Y: "There has already been for you a Sign in the two armies that met (in
combat): One was fighting in the cause of Allah, the other resisting
Allah; these saw with their own eyes Twice their number. But Allah doth
support with His aid whom He pleaseth. In this is a warning for such as
have eyes to see."

P: There was a token for you in two hosts which met: one army fighting
in the way of Allah, and another disbelieving, whom they saw as twice
their number, clearly, with their very eyes. Thus Allah strengtheneth
with His succour whom He will. Lo! herein verily is a lesson for those
who have eyes.

S: Indeed there was a sign for you in the two hosts (which) met together
in encounter; one party fighting in the way of Allah and the other
unbelieving, whom they saw twice as many as themselves with the sight
of the eye and Allah strengthens with His aid whom He pleases; most
surely there is a lesson in this for those who have sight.

003.014
Y: Fair in the eyes of men is the love of things they covet: Women and
sons; Heaped-up hoards of gold and silver; horses branded (for blood
and excellence); and (wealth of) cattle and well-tilled land. Such are
the possessions of this world's life; but in nearness to Allah is the
best of the goals (To return to).

P: Beautified for mankind is love of the joys (that come) from women and
offspring; and stored-up heaps of gold and silver, and horses branded
(with their mark), and cattle and land. That is comfort of the life of
the world. Allah! With Him is a more excellent abode.

S: The love of desires, of women and sons and hoarded treasures of gold
and silver and well bred horses and cattle and tilth, is made to seem
fair to men; this is the provision of the life of this world; and Allah
is He with Whom is the good goal (of life).

003.015
Y: Say: Shall I give you glad tidings of things Far better than those?
For the righteous are Gardens in nearness to their Lord, with rivers
flowing beneath; therein is their eternal home; with companions pure
(and holy); and the good pleasure of Allah. For in Allah's sight are
(all) His servants,-

P: Say: Shall I inform you of something better than that? For those who
keep from evil, with their Lord, are Gardens underneath which rivers
flow wherein they will abide, and pure companions, and contentment from
Allah. Allah is Seer of His bondmen,

S: Say: Shall I tell you what is better than these? For those who guard
(against evil) are gardens with their Lord, beneath which rivers flow,
to abide in them, and pure mates and Allah's pleasure; and Allah sees
the servants.

003.016
Y: (Namely), those who say: "Our Lord! we have indeed believed: forgive
us, then, our sins, and save us from the agony of the Fire;"-

P: Those who say: Our Lord! Lo! we believe. So forgive us our sins and
guard us from the punishment of Fire;

S: Those who say: Our Lord! surely we believe, therefore forgive us our
faults and save us from the chastisement of the fire.

003.017
Y: Those who show patience, Firmness and self-control; who are true (in
word and deed); who worship devoutly; who spend (in the way of Allah);
and who pray for forgiveness in the early hours of the morning.

P: The steadfast, and the truthful, and the obedient, those who spend
(and hoard not), those who pray for pardon in the watches of the night.

S: The patient, and the truthful, and the obedient, and those who spend
(benevolently) and those who ask forgiveness in the morning times.

003.018
Y: There is no god but He: That is the witness of Allah, His angels, and
those endued with knowledge, standing firm on justice. There is no god
but He, the Exalted in Power, the Wise.

P: Allah (Himself) is Witness that there is no God save Him. And the
angels and the men of learning (too are witness). Maintaining His
creation in justice, there is no God save Him the Almighty, the Wise.

S: Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the
angels and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His creation with
justice; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.

003.019
Y: The Religion before Allah is Islam (submission to His Will): Nor did
the People of the Book dissent therefrom except through envy of each
other, after knowledge had come to them. But if any deny the Signs of
Allah, Allah is swift in calling to account.

P: Lo! religion with Allah (is) the Surrender (to His Will and
Guidance). Those who (formerly) received the Scripture differed only
after knowledge came unto them, through transgression among themselves.
Whoso disbelieveth the revelations of Allah (will find that) lo! Allah
is swift at reckoning.

S: Surely the (true) religion with Allah is Islam, and those to whom the
Book had been given did not show opposition but after knowledge had
come to them, out of envy among themselves; and whoever disbelieves in
the communications of Allah then surely Allah is quick in reckoning.

003.020
Y: So if they dispute with thee, say: "I have submitted My whole self to
Allah and so have those who follow me." And say to the People of the
Book and to those who are unlearned: "Do ye (also) submit yourselves?"
If they do, they are in right guidance, but if they turn back, Thy duty
is to convey the Message; and in Allah's sight are (all) His servants.

P: And if they argue with thee, (O Muhammad), say: I have surrendered my
purpose to Allah and (so have) those who follow me. And say unto those
who have received the Scripture and those who read not: Have ye (too)
surrendered? If they surrender, then truly they are rightly guided, and
if they turn away, then it is thy duty only to convey the message (unto
them). Allah is Seer of (His) bondmen.

S: But if they dispute with you, say: I have submitted myself entirely
to Allah and (so) every one who follows me; and say to those who have
been given the Book and the unlearned people: Do you submit yourselves?
So if they submit then indeed they follow the right way; and if they
turn back, then upon you is only the delivery of the message and Allah
sees the servants.

003.021
Y: As to those who deny the Signs of Allah and in defiance of right,
slay the prophets, and slay those who teach just dealing with mankind,
announce to them a grievous penalty.

P: Lo! those who disbelieve the revelations of Allah, and slay the
prophets wrongfully, and slay those of mankind who enjoin equity:
promise them a painful doom.

S: Surely (as for) those who disbelieve in the communications of Allah
and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin
justice, announce to them a painful chastisement.

003.022
Y: They are those whose works will bear no fruit in this world and in
the Hereafter nor will they have anyone to help.

P: Those are they whose works have failed in the world and the
Hereafter; and they have no helpers.

S: Those are they whose works shall become null in this world as well as
