various names, some God conformed to their ideas; that is to say, cruel,
carnivorous, selfish, greedy of blood. We find in all the religions of
the earth a God of armies, a jealous God, an avenging God, an
exterminating God, a God who enjoys carnage and whose worshipers make it
a duty to serve him to his taste. Lambs, bulls, children, men, heretics,
infidels, kings, whole nations, are sacrificed to him. The zealous
servants of this barbarous God go so far as to believe that they are
obliged to offer themselves as a sacrifice to him. Everywhere we see
zealots who, after having sadly meditated upon their terrible God,
imagine that, in order to please him, they must do themselves all the
harm possible, and inflict upon themselves, in his honor, all imaginable
torments. In a word, everywhere the baneful ideas of Divinity, far from
consoling men for misfortunes incident to their existence, have filled
the heart with trouble, and given birth to follies destructive to them.
How could the human mind, filled with frightful phantoms and guided by
men interested in perpetuating its ignorance and its fear, make
progress? Man was compelled to vegetate in his primitive stupidity; he
was preserved only by invisible powers, upon whom his fate was supposed
to depend. Solely occupied with his alarms and his unintelligible
reveries, he was always at the mercy of his priests, who reserved for
themselves the right of thinking for him and of regulating his conduct.

Thus man was, and always remained, a child without experience, a slave
without courage, a loggerhead who feared to reason, and who could never
escape from the labyrinth into which his ancestors had misled him; he
felt compelled to groan under the yoke of his Gods, of whom he knew
nothing except the fabulous accounts of their ministers. These, after
having fettered him by the ties of opinion, have remained his masters or
delivered him up defenseless to the absolute power of tyrants, no less
terrible than the Gods, of whom they were the representatives upon the
earth. Oppressed by the double yoke of spiritual and temporal power, it
was impossible for the people to instruct themselves and to work for
their own welfare. Thus, religion, politics, and morals became
sanctuaries, into which the profane were not permitted to enter. Men had
no other morality than that which their legislators and their priests
claimed as descended from unknown empyrean regions. The human mind,
perplexed by these theological opinions, misunderstood itself, doubted
its own powers, mistrusted experience, feared truth, disdained its
reason, and left it to blindly follow authority. Man was a pure machine
in the hands of his tyrants and his priests, who alone had the right to
regulate his movements. Always treated as a slave, he had at all times
and in all places the vices and dispositions of a slave.

These are the true sources of the corruption of habits, to which
religion never opposes anything but ideal and ineffectual obstacles;
ignorance and servitude have a tendency to make men wicked and unhappy.
Science, reason, liberty, alone can reform them and render them more
happy; but everything conspires to blind them and to confirm them in
their blindness. The priests deceive them, tyrants corrupt them in order
to subjugate them more easily. Tyranny has been, and will always be, the
chief source of the depraved morals and habitual calamities of the
people. These, almost always fascinated by their religious notions or by
metaphysical fictions, instead of looking upon the natural and visible
causes of their miseries, attribute their vices to the imperfections of
their nature, and their misfortunes to the anger of their Gods; they
offer to Heaven vows, sacrifices, and presents, in order to put an end
to their misfortunes, which are really due only to the negligence, the
ignorance, and to the perversity of their guides, to the folly of their
institutions, to their foolish customs, to their false opinions, to
their unreasonable laws, and especially to their want of enlightenment.
Let the mind be filled early with true ideas; let man's reason be
cultivated; let justice govern him; and there will be no need of
opposing to his passions the powerless barrier of the fear of Gods. Men
will be good when they are well taught, well governed, chastised or
censured for the evil, and justly rewarded for the good which they have
done to their fellow-citizens. It is idle to pretend to cure mortals of
their vices if we do not begin by curing them of their prejudices. It is
only by showing them the truth that they can know their best interests
and the real motives which will lead them to happiness. Long enough have
the instructors of the people fixed their eyes on heaven; let them at
last bring them back to the earth. Tired of an incomprehensible
theology, of ridiculous fables, of impenetrable mysteries, of puerile
ceremonies, let the human mind occupy itself with natural things,
intelligible objects, sensible truths, and useful knowledge. Let the
vain chimeras which beset the people be dissipated, and very soon
rational opinions will fill the minds of those who were believed fated
to be always in error. To annihilate religious prejudices, it would be
sufficient to show that what is inconceivable to man can not be of any
use to him. Does it need, then, anything but simple common sense to
perceive that a being most clearly irreconcilable with the notions of
mankind, that a cause continually opposed to the effects attributed to
him; that a being of whom not a word can be said without falling into
contradictions; that a being who, far from explaining the mysteries of
the universe, only renders them more inexplicable; that a being to whom
for so many centuries men addressed themselves so vainly to obtain their
happiness and deliverance from their sufferings; does it need, I say,
more than simple common sense to understand that the idea of such a
being is an idea without model, and that he is himself evidently not a
reasonable being? Does it require more than common sense to feel that
there is at least delirium and frenzy in hating and tormenting each
other for unintelligible opinions of a being of this kind? Finally, does
it not all prove that morality and virtue are totally incompatible with
the idea of a God, whose ministers and interpreters have painted him in
all countries as the most fantastic, the most unjust, and the most cruel
of tyrants, whose pretended wishes are to serve as rules and laws for
the inhabitants of the earth? To discover the true principles of
morality, men have no need of theology, of revelation, or of Gods; they
need but common sense; they have only to look within themselves, to
reflect upon their own nature, to consult their obvious interests, to
consider the object of society and of each of the members who compose
it, and they will easily understand that virtue is an advantage, and
that vice is an injury to beings of their species. Let us teach men to
be just, benevolent, moderate, and sociable, not because their Gods
exact it, but to please men; let us tell them to abstain from vice and
from crime, not because they will be punished in another world, but
because they will suffer in the present world. There are, says
Montesquieu, means to prevent crime, they are sufferings; to change the
manners, these are good examples. Truth is simple, error is complicated,
uncertain in its gait, full of by-ways; the voice of nature is
intelligible, that of falsehood is ambiguous, enigmatical, and
mysterious; the road of truth is straight, that of imposture is oblique
and dark; this truth, always necessary to man, is felt by all just
minds; the lessons of reason are followed by all honest souls; men are
unhappy only because they are ignorant; they are ignorant only because
everything conspires to prevent them from being enlightened, and they
are wicked only because their reason is not sufficiently developed.




COMMON SENSE.

Detexit quo dolose Vaticinandi furore sacerdotes mysteria, illis spe
ignota, audactur publicant.--PETRON. SATYR.




I.--APOLOGUE.

There is a vast empire governed by a monarch, whose conduct does but
confound the minds of his subjects. He desires to be known, loved,
respected, and obeyed, but he never shows himself; everything tends to
make uncertain the notions which we are able to form about him. The
people subjected to his power have only such ideas of the character and
the laws of their invisible sovereign as his ministers give them; these
suit, however, because they themselves have no idea of their master, for
his ways are impenetrable, and his views and his qualities are totally
incomprehensible; moreover, his ministers disagree among themselves in
regard to the orders which they pretend emanated from the sovereign
whose organs they claim to be; they announce them diversely in each
province of the empire; they discredit and treat each other as impostors
and liars; the decrees and ordinances which they promulgate are obscure;
they are enigmas, made not to be understood or divined by the subjects
for whose instruction they were intended. The laws of the invisible
monarch need interpreters, but those who explain them are always
quarreling among themselves about the true way of understanding them;
more than this, they do not agree among themselves; all which they
relate of their hidden prince is but a tissue of contradictions,
scarcely a single word that is not contradicted at once. He is called
supremely good, nevertheless not a person but complains of his decrees.
He is supposed to be infinitely wise, and in his administration
everything seems contrary to reason and good sense. They boast of his
justice, and the best of his subjects are generally the least favored.
We are assured that he sees everything, yet his presence remedies
nothing. It is said that he is the friend of order, and everything in
his universe is in a state of confusion and disorder; all is created by
him, yet events rarely happen according to his projects. He foresees
everything, but his foresight prevents nothing. He is impatient if any
offend him; at the same time he puts every one in the way of offending
him. His knowledge is admired in the perfection of his works, but his
works are full of imperfections, and of little permanence. He is
continually occupied in creating and destroying, then repairing what he
has done, never appearing to be satisfied with his work. In all his
enterprises he seeks but his own glory, but he does not succeed in being
glorified. He works but for the good of his subjects, and most of them
lack the necessities of life. Those whom he seems to favor, are
generally those who are the least satisfied with their fate; we see them
all continually revolting against a master whose greatness they admire,
whose wisdom they extol, whose goodness they worship, and whose justice
they fear, revering orders which they never follow. This empire is the
world; its monarch is God; His ministers are the priests; their subjects
are men.




II.--WHAT IS THEOLOGY?

There is a science which has for its object only incomprehensible
things. Unlike all others, it occupies itself but with things unseen.
Hobbes calls it "the kingdom of darkness." In this land all obey laws
opposed to those which men acknowledge in the world they inhabit. In
this marvelous region light is but darkness, evidence becomes doubtful
or false, the impossible becomes credible, reason is an unfaithful
guide, and common sense changed into delirium. This science is named
Theology, and this Theology is a continual insult to human reason.




III.

By frequent repetition of if, but, and perhaps, we succeed in forming an
imperfect and broken system which perplexes men's minds to the extent of
making them forget the clearest notions, and to render uncertain the
most palpable truths. By the aid of this systematic nonsense, all nature
has become an inexplicable enigma for man; the visible world has
disappeared to give place to invisible regions; reason is obliged to
give place to imagination, which can lead us only to the land of
chimeras which she herself has invented.




IV.--MAN BORN NEITHER RELIGIOUS NOR DEISTICAL.

All religious principles are founded upon the idea of a God, but it is
impossible for men to have true ideas of a being who does not act upon
any one of their senses. All our ideas are but pictures of objects which
strike us. What can the idea of God represent to us when it is evidently
an idea without an object? Is not such an idea as impossible as an
effect without a cause? An idea without a prototype, is it anything but
a chimera? Some theologians, however, assure us that the idea of God is
innate, or that men have this idea from the time of their birth. Every
principle is a judgment; all judgment is the effect of experience;
experience is not acquired but by the exercise of the senses: from which
it follows that religious principles are drawn from nothing, and are not
innate.




V.--IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO BELIEVE IN A GOD, AND THE MOST REASONABLE
THING IS NOT TO THINK OF HIM.

No religious system can be founded otherwise than upon the nature of God
and of men, and upon the relations they bear to each other. But, in
order to judge of the reality of these relations, we must have some idea
of the Divine nature. But everybody tells us that the essence of God is
incomprehensible to man; at the same time they do not hesitate to assign
attributes to this incomprehensible God, and assure us that man can not
dispense with a knowledge of this God so impossible to conceive of. The
most important thing for men is that which is the most impossible for
them to comprehend. If God is incomprehensible to man, it would seem
rational never to think of Him at all; but religion concludes that man
is criminal if he ceases for a moment to revere Him.




VI.--RELIGION IS FOUNDED UPON CREDULITY.

We are told that Divine qualities are not of a nature to be grasped by
limited minds. The natural consequence of this principle ought to be
that the Divine qualities are not made to employ limited minds; but
religion assures us that limited minds should never lose sight of this
inconceivable being, whose qualities can not be grasped by them: from
which we see that religion is the art of occupying limited minds with
that which is impossible for them to comprehend.




VII.--EVERY RELIGION IS AN ABSURDITY.

Religion unites man with God or puts them in communication; but do you
say that God is infinite? If God is infinite, no finite being can have
communication or any relation with Him. Where there are no relations,
there can be no union, no correspondence, no duties. If there are no
duties between man and his God, there exists no religion for man. Thus
by saying that God is infinite, you annihilate, from that moment, all
religion for man, who is a finite being. The idea of infinity is for us
in idea without model, without prototype, without object.




VIII.--THE NOTION OF GOD IS IMPOSSIBLE.

If God is an infinite being, there can be neither in the actual world or
in another any proportion between man and his God; thus the idea of God
will never enter the human mind. In the supposition of a life where men
will be more enlightened than in this one, the infinity of God will
always place such a distance between his idea and the limited mind of
man, that he will not be able to conceive of God any more in a future
life than in the present. Hence, it evidently follows that the idea of
God will not be better suited to man in the other life than in the
present. God is not made for man; it follows also that intelligences
superior to man--such as angels, archangels, seraphims, and saints--can
have no more complete notions of God than has man, who does not
understand anything about Him here below.




IX.--ORIGIN OF SUPERSTITION.

How is it that we have succeeded in persuading reasonable beings that
the thing most impossible to understand was the most essential for them.
It is because they were greatly frightened; it is because when men are
kept in fear they cease to reason; it is because they have been
expressly enjoined to distrust their reason. When the brain is troubled,
we believe everything and examine nothing.




X.--ORIGIN OF ALL RELIGION.

Ignorance and fear are the two pivots of all religion. The uncertainty
attending man's relation to his God is precisely the motive which
