consequence of thee. O Emperor, I have been duly worshipped. I desire
now to go with thy leave!' King Yudhishthira the just, thus addressed
by the Rishi of dark hue, saluted (him) his grandfather and touching
his feet said,--'O chief of men, a doubt difficult of being dispelled,
hath risen within me. O bull among regenerate ones, save thee there is
none to remove it. The illustrious Rishi Narada said that (as a
consequence of the Rajasuya sacrifice) three kinds of portents, viz.,
celestial, atmospherical and terrestrial ones happen. O grandsire, have
those portents been ended by the fall of the king of the Chedis?'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of the king, the exalted
son of Parasara, the island-born Vyasa of dark hue, spoke these
words,--'For thirteen years, O king, those portents will bear mighty
consequences ending in destruction, O king of kings, of all the
Kshatriyas. In course of time, O bull of the Bharata race, making thee
the sole cause, the assembled Kshatriyas of the world will be
destroyed, O Bharata, for the sins of Duryodhana and through the might
of Bhima and Arjuna. In thy dream, O king of kings thou wilt behold
towards the end of this might the blue throated Bhava, the slayer of
Tripura, ever absorbed in meditation, having the bull for his mark,
drinking off the human skull, and fierce and terrible, that lord of all
creatures, that god of gods, the husband of Uma, otherwise called Hara
and Sarva, and Vrisha, armed with the trident and the bow called
Pinaka, and attired in tiger skin. And thou wilt behold Siva, tall and
white as the Kailasa cliff and seated on his bull, gazing unceasingly
towards the direction (south) presided over by the king of the Pitris.
Even this will be the dream thou wilt dream today, O king of kings. Do
not grieve for dreaming such a dream. None can rise superior to the
influence of Time. Blest be thou! I will now proceed towards the
Kailasa mountain. Rule thou the earth with vigilance and steadiness,
patiently bearing every privation!'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Having said this, the illustrious and
island-born Vyasa of dark hue, accompanied by his disciples ever
following the dictates of the Vedas, proceeded towards Kailasa. And
after the grand-father had thus gone away, the king afflicted with
anxiety and grief, began to think continuously upon what the Rishi hath
said. And he said to himself, 'Indeed what the Rishi hath said must
come to pass. We will succeed in warding off the fates by exertion
alone?' Then Yudhishthira endued with great energy addressing all his
brothers, said, 'Ye tigers among men, ye have heard what the
island-born Rishi hath told me. Having heard the words of the Rishi, I
have arrived at this firm resolution viz., that I should die, as I am
ordained to be the cause of the destruction of all Kshatriyas. Ye my
dear ones, if Time hath intended so what need is there for me to live?'
Hearing these words of the king, Arjuna replied, 'O king, yield not
thyself to this terrible depression that is destructive of reason.
Mustering fortitude, O great king, do what would be beneficial.'
Yudhishthira then, firm in truth, thinking all the while of
Dwaipayana's words answered his brothers thus,--'Blest be ye. Listen to
my vow from this day. For thirteen years, what ever purpose have I to
live for, I shall not speak a hard word to my brothers or to any of the
kings of the earth. Living under the command of my relatives, I shall
practise virtue, exemplifying my vow. If I live in this way, making no
distinction between my own children and others, there will be no
disagreement (between me and others). It is disagreement that is the
cause of war in the world. Keeping war at a distance, and ever doing
what is agreeable to others, evil reputation will not be mine in the
world, ye bulls among men.' Hearing these words of their eldest
brother, the Pandavas, always engaged in doing what was agreeable to
him, approved of them. And Yudhishthira the just, having pledged so,
along with his brothers in the midst of that assembly, gratified his
priests as also the gods with due ceremonies. And, O bull of the
Bharata race, after all the monarchs had gone away, Yudhishthira along
with his brothers, having performed the usual auspicious rites,
accompanied by his ministers entered his own palace. And, O ruler of
men, king Duryodhana and Sakuni, the son of Suvala, continued to dwell
in that delightful assembly house."


SECTION XLVI

Vaisampayana said,--"That bull among men, Duryodhana, continued to
dwell in that assembly house (of the Pandavas). And with Sakuni, the
Kuru prince slowly examined the whole of that mansion, and the Kuru
prince beheld in it many celestial designs, which he had never seen
before in the city called after the elephant (Hastinapore). And one day
king Duryodhana in going round that mansion came upon a crystal
surface. And the king, from ignorance, mistaking it for a pool of
water, drew up his clothes. And afterwards finding out his mistake the
king wandered about the mansion in great sorrow. And sometime after,
the king, mistaking a lake of crystal water adorned with lotuses of
crystal petals for land, fell into it with all his clothes on.
Beholding Duryodhana fallen into the lake, the mighty Bhima laughed
aloud as also the menials of the palace. And the servants, at the
command of the king, soon brought him dry and handsome clothes.
Beholding the plight of Duryodhana, the mighty Bhima and Arjuna and
both the twins--all laughed aloud. Being unused to putting up with
insults, Duryodhana could not bear that laugh of theirs. Concealing his
emotions he even did not cast his looks on them. And beholding the
monarch once more draw up his clothes to cross a piece of dry land
which he had mistaken for water, they all laughed again. And the king
sometime after mistook a closed door made of crystal as open. And as he
was about to pass through it his head struck against it, and he stood
with his brain reeling. And mistaking as closed another door made of
crystal that was really open, the king in attempting to open it with
stretched hands, tumbled down. And coming upon another door that was
really open, the king thinking it as closed, went away from it. And, O
monarch, king Duryodhana beholding that vast wealth in the Rajasuya
sacrifice and having become the victim of those numerous errors within
the assembly house at last returned, with the leave of the Pandavas, to
Hastinapore."

"And the heart of king Duryodhana, afflicted at sight of the prosperity
of the Pandavas, became inclined to sin, as he proceeded towards his
city reflecting on all he had seen and suffered. And beholding the
Pandavas happy and all the kings of the earth paying homage to them, as
also everybody, young and old, engaged in doing good unto them, and
reflecting also on the splendour and prosperity of the illustrious sons
of Pandu, Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, became pale. In
proceeding (to his city) with an efflicted heart, the prince thought of
nothing else but that assembly house and that unrivalled prosperity of
the wise Yudhishthira. And Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, was so
taken up with his thoughts then that he spoke not a word to Suvala's
son even though the latter addressed him repeatedly. And Sakuni,
beholding him absent-minded, said,--'O Duryodhana, why art thou
proceeding thus'?

"Duryodhana replied,--'O uncle, beholding this whole earth owning the
sway of Yudhishthira in consequence of the might of the illustrious
Arjuna's weapons and beholding also that sacrifice of the son of Pritha
like unto the sacrifice of Sakra himself of great glory among the
celestials, I, being filled with jealousy and burning day and night, am
being dried up like a shallow tank in the summer season. Behold, when
Sisupala was slain by the chief of the Satwatas, there was no man to
take the side of Sisupala. Consumed by the fire of the Pandava, they
all forgave that offence; otherwise who is there that could forgive it?
That highly improper act of grave consequence done by Vasudeva
succeeded in consequence of the power of the illustrious son of Pandu.
And so many monarchs also brought with them various kinds of wealth for
king Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, like tribute-paying Vaisyas!
Beholding Yudhishthira's prosperity of such splendour, my heart
burneth, efflicted with jealously, although it behoveth me not to be
jealous.'

"Having reflected in this way, Duryodhana, as if burnt by fire,
addressed the king of Gandhara again and said,--'I shall throw myself
upon a flaming fire or swallow poison or drown myself in water. I
cannot live. What man is there in the world possessed of vigour who can
bear to see his foes in the enjoyment of prosperity and himself in
destitution? Therefore I who bear to see that accession of prosperity
and fortune (in my foes) am neither a woman nor one that is not a
woman, neither also a man nor one that is not a man. Beholding their
sovereignty over the world and vast affluence, as also that sacrifice,
who is there like me that would not smart under all that? Alone I am
incapable of acquiring such royal prosperity; nor do I behold allies
that could help me in the matter. It is for this that I am thinking of
self-destruction. Beholding that great and serene prosperity of the son
of Kunti, I regard Fate as supreme and exertions fruitless. O son of
Suvala, formerly I strove to compass his destruction. But baffling all
my efforts he hath grown in prosperity even like the lotus from within
a pool of water. It is for this that I regard Fate as supreme and
exertions fruitless. Behold, the sons of Dhritarashtra are decaying and
the sons of Pritha are growing day by day. Beholding that prosperity of
the Pandavas, and that assembly house of theirs, and those menials
laughing at me, my heart burneth as if it were on fire. Therefore, O
uncle, know me now as deeply grieved and filled with jealousy, and
speak of it to Dhritarashtra.'


SECTION XLVII

"Sakuni said.--'O Duryodhana, thou shouldst not be jealous of
Yudhishthira. The sons of Pandu are enjoying what they deserve in
consequence of their own good fortune. O slayer of foes, O great king,
thou couldst not destroy them by repeatedly devising numberless plans,
many of which thou hadst even put to practice. Those tigers among men
out of sheer luck escaped all those machinations. They have obtained
Draupadi for wife and Drupada with his sons as also Vasudeva of great
prowess as allies, capable of helping them in subjugating the whole
world. And O king, having inherited the paternal share of the kingdom
without being deprived of it they have grown in consequence of their
own energy. What is there to make thee sorry for this? Having gratified
Hustasana, Dhananjaya hath obtained the bow Gandiva and the couple of
inexhaustible quivers and many celestial weapons. With that unique bow
and by the strength of his own arms also he hath brought all the kings
of the world under his sway. What is there to make thee sorry for this?
Having saved the Asura Maya from a conflagration, Arjuna, that slayer
of foes, using both his hands with equal skill, caused him to build
that assembly house. And it is for this also that commanded by Maya,
those grim Rakshasas called Kinkaras supported that assembly house.
What is there in this to make thee sorry? Thou hast said, O king, that
thou art without allies. This, O Bharata, is not true. These thy
brothers are obedient to thee. Drona of great prowess and wielding the
large bow along with his son, Radha's son Karna, the great warrior
Gautama (Kripa), myself with my brothers and king Saumadatti--these are
thy allies. Uniting thyself with these, conquer thou the whole of the
earth.'

"Duryodhana said,--'O king, with thee, as also with these great
warriors, I shall subjugate the Pandavas, if it pleases thee. If I can
now subjugate them, the world will be mine and all the monarchs, and
that assembly house so full of wealth.'

"Sakuni replied,--'Dhananjaya and Vasudeva, Bhimasena and Yudhishthira,
Nakula and Sahadeva and Drupada with his sons,--these cannot be
vanquished in battle by even the celestials, for they are all great
warriors wielding the largest bows, accomplished in weapons, and
delighting in battle. But, O king, I know the means by which
Yudhishthira himself may be vanquished. Listen to me and adopt it.'

"Duryodhana said,--'without danger to our friends and other illustrious
men, O uncle, tell me if there is any way by which I may vanquish him.'

"Sakuni said,--'The son of Kunti is very fond of dice-play although he
doth not know how to play. That king if asked to play, is ill able to
refuse. I am skillful at dice. There is none equal to me in this
respect on earth, no, not even in the three worlds, O son of Kuru.
Therefore, ask him to play at dice. Skilled at dice, I will win his
kingdom, and that splendid prosperity of his for thee, O bull among
men. But, O Duryodhana, represent all this unto the king
(Dhritarashtra). Commanded by thy father I will win without doubt the
whole of Yudhishthira's possessions.'

"Duryodhana said 'O son of Suvala, thou thyself represent properly all
this to Dhritarashtra, the chief of the Kurus. I shall not be able to
do so.'"


SECTION XLVIII

Vaisampayana said--"O king, impressed with the great Rajasuya sacrifice
of king Yudhishthira, Sakuni, the son of Suvala, having learnt before
the intentions of Duryodhana, while accompanying him in the way from
the assembly house, and desirous of saying what was agreeable to him,
approached Dhritarashtra endued with great wisdom, and finding the
monarch deprived of his eye seated (in his throne), told him these
words,--'Know, O great king, O bull of the Bharata race, that
Duryodhana, having lost colour, hath become pale and emaciated and
depressed and a prey to anxiety. Why dost thou not, after due enquiry,
ascertain the grief that is in the heart of thy eldest son, the grief
that is caused by the foe?'

"Dhritarashtra said,--'Duryodhana, what is the reason of thy great
affliction, O son of the Kuru race? If it is fit for me to hear it,
then tell me the reason. This Sakuni here says that thou hast lost
colour, become pale and emaciated, and a prey to anxiety. I do not know
what can be the reason of the sorrow. This vast wealth of mine is at
thy control. Thy brothers and all our relations never do anything that
is disagreeable to thee. Thou wearest the best apparel and eatest the
best food that is prepared with meat. The best of horse carries thee.
What it is, therefore, that hath made thee pale and emaciated? Costly
beds, beautiful damsels, mansions decked with excellent furniture, and
sport of the delightful kind, without doubt these all wait but at thy
command, as in the case of the gods themselves. Therefore, O proud one,
why dost thou grieve, O son, as if thou wert destitute.'

"Duryodhana said,--'I eat and dress myself like a wretch and pass my
time all the while a prey to fierce jealousy. He indeed is a man, who
incapable of bearing the pride of the foe, liveth having vanquished
that foe with the desire of liberating his own subjects from the
tyranny of the foe. Contentment, as also pride, O Bharata, are
destructive of prosperity; and those other two qualities also, viz.,
compassion and fear. One who acteth under the influence of these, never
obtaineth anything high. Having beheld Yudhishthira's prosperity,
whatever I enjoy brings me no gratification. The prosperity of Kunti's
son that is possessed of such splendour maketh me pale. Knowing the
affluence of the foe and my own destitution, even though that affluence
is not before me, I yet see it before me. Therefore, have I lost colour
and become melancholy, pale and emaciated. Yudhishthira supporteth
eighty-eight thousand Snataka Brahmanas leading domestic lives, giving
unto each of them thirty slave-girls. Beside this, thousand other
Brahmanas daily eat at his palace the best of food on golden plates.
The king of Kambhoja sent unto him (as tribute) innumerable skins,
black, darkish, and red, of the deer Kadali, as also numberless
blankets of excellent textures. And hundreds and thousands and
thousands of she-elephants and thirty thousand she-camels wander within
the palace, for the kings of the earth brought them all as tribute to
the capital of the Pandavas. And, O lord of earth, the kings also
brought unto this foremost of sacrifices heaps upon heaps of jewels and
gems for the son of Kunti. Never before did I see or hear of such
enormous wealth as was brought unto the sacrifice of the intelligent
sons of Pandu. And, O king, beholding that enormous collection of
wealth belonging to the foe, I can not enjoy peace of mind. Hundreds of
Brahmanas supported by the grants that Yudhishthira hath given them and
possessing wealth of kine, waited at the palace gate with three
thousands of millions of tribute but were prevented by the keepers from
entering the mansion. Bringing with them clarified butter in handsome
Kamandalus made of gold, they did not obtain admission into the palace,
and Ocean himself brought unto him in vessels of white copper the
nectar that is generated within his waters and which is much superior
to that which flowers and annual plants produce for Sakra. And Vasudeva
(at the conclusion of the sacrifice) having brought an excellent conch
bathed the Sun of Pritha with sea water brought in thousand jars of
gold, all well adorned with numerous gems. Beholding all this I became
feverish with jealousy. Those jars had been taken to the Eastern and
the Southern oceans. And they had also been taken on the shoulders of
men to the Western ocean, O bull among men. And, O father, although
none but birds only can go to the Northern region Arjuna, having gone
thither, exacted as tribute a vast quantity of wealth. There is another
wonderful incident also which I will relate to thee. O listen to me.
When a hundred thousand Brahmanas were fed, it had been arranged that
to notify this act every day conches would be blown in a chorus. But, O
Bharata, I continually heard conches blown there almost repeatedly. And
hearing those notes my hair stood on end. And, O great king, that
palatial compound, filled with innumerable monarchs that came there as
spectators, looked exceedingly handsome like the cloudless firmament
with stars. And, O king of men, the monarchs came into that sacrifice
of the wise son of Pandu bringing with them every kind of wealth. And
the kings that came there became like Vaisyas the distributors of food
unto the Brahmanas that were fed. And O king, the prosperity that I
beheld of Yudhishthira was such that neither the chief himself of the
celestials, nor Yama or Varuna, nor the lord of the Guhyakas owneth the
same. And beholding that great prosperity of the son of Pandu, my heart
burneth and I cannot enjoy peace.'

"Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Sakuni replied,--'Hear how thou
mayest obtain this unrivalled prosperity that thou beholdest in the son
of Pandu, O thou that hast truth for thy prowess. O Bharata, I am an
adept at dice, superior to all in the world. I can ascertain the
success or otherwise of every throw, and when to stake and when not. I
have special knowledge of the game. The Son of Kunti also is fond of
dice playing though he possesseth little skill in it. Summoned to play
or battle, he is sure to come forward, and I will defeat him repeatedly
at every throw by practising deception. I promise to win all that
wealth of his, and thou, O Duryodhana, shalt then enjoy the same.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"King Duryodhana, thus addressed by Sakuni,
without allowing a moment to elapse, said unto Dhritarashtra,--'This,
Sakuni, an adept at dice, is ready to win at dice, O king, the wealth
of the sons of Pandu. It behoveth thee to grant him permission to do
so.'

"Dhritarashtra replied,--'I always follow the counsels of Kshatta, my
minister possessed of great wisdom. Having consulted with him, I will
inform thee what my judgment is in respect of this affair. Endued with
great foresight, he will, keeping morality before his eyes, tell us
what is good and what is proper for both parties, and what should be
done in this matter.'

"Duryodhana said,--'If thou consultest with Kshatta he will make thee
desist. And if thou desist, O king, I will certainly kill myself. And
when I am dead, O king, thou wilt become happy with Vidura. Thou wilt
then enjoy the whole earth; what need hast thou with me?'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Dhritarashtra, hearing these words of
affliction uttered by Duryodhana from mixed feeling, himself ready to
what Duryodhana had dictated, commanded his servant, saying,--'Let
artificers be employed to erect without delay a delightful and handsome
and spacious palace with an hundred doors and a thousand columns. And
having brought carpenters and joiners, set ye jewels and precious
stones all over the walls. And making it handsome and easy of access,
report to me when everything is complete.' And, O monarch, king
Dhritarashtra having made this resolution for the pacification of
Duryodhana, sent messengers unto Vidura for summoning him. For without
taking counsel with Vidura never did the monarch form any resolution.
But as regards the matter at hand, the king although he knew the evils
of gambling, was yet attracted towards it. The intelligent Vidura,
however, as soon as he heard of it, knew that the arrival of Kali was
at hand. And seeing that the way to destruction was about to open, he
quickly came to Dhritarashtra. And Vidura approaching his illustrious
eldest brother and bowing down unto his feet, said these words:

"'O exalted king, I do not approve of this resolution that thou hast
formed. It behave thee, O king, to act in such a way that no dispute
may arise between thy children on account of this gambling match.'

"Dhritarashtra replied,--'O Kshatta, if the gods be merciful unto us,
assuredly no dispute will ever arise amongst my sons. Therefore,
auspicious or otherwise, beneficial or otherwise, let this friendly
challenge at dice proceed. Even this without doubt is what fate hath
ordained for us. And, O son of the Bharata race, when I am near, and
Drona and Bhishma and thou too, nothing evil that even Fate might have
ordained is likely to happen. Therefore, go thou on a car yoking
thereto horses endued with the speed of the wind, so that thou mayest
reach Khandavaprastha even today and bring thou Yudhishthira with thee.
And, O Vidura, I tell that even this is my resolution. Tell me nothing.
I regard Fate as supreme which bringeth all this.' Hearing these words
of Dhritarashtra and concluding that his race was doomed, Vidura in
great sorrow went unto Bhishma with great wisdom."


SECTION XLIX

Janamejaya said,--"O thou foremost of all conversant with the Vedas,
how did that game at dice take place, fraught with such evil to the
cousins and through which my grand-sires, the son of Pandu, were
plunged into such sorrow? What kings also were present in that
assembly, and who amongst them approved of the gambling match and who
