government and form of action, nations, individuals, and religion are
unprotected; hence the necessity of this By-Law and the warning of
Holy Writ: "That servant, which knew his lord's will, and prepared
not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes."

It is the duty of the Christian Science Board of Directors to watch
and make sure that the officers of this Church perform the functions
of their several offices promptly and well. If an officer fails to
fulfil all the obligations of his office, the Board of Directors
shall immediately call a meeting and notify this officer either to
resign his place or to perform his office faithfully; then failing to
do either, said officer shall be dismissed from this Church, and his
dismissal shall be written on the Church records.

It is the duty of any member of this Church, and especially of one
who has been or who is the First Reader of a church, to inform the
Board of Directors of the failure of the Committee on Publication or
of any other officer in this Church to perform his official duties.
A Director shall not make known the name of the complainant.

If the Christian Science Board of Directors fails to fulfil the
requirements of this By-Law, and a member of this Church or the
Pastor Emeritus shall complain thereof to the Clerk and the complaint
be found valid, the Directors shall resign their office or perform
their functions faithfully. Failing to do thus, the Pastor Emeritus
shall appoint five suitable members of this Church to fill the
vacancy. The salary of the members of the Board of Directors shall
be at present two thousand five hundred dollars each annually.


Article II--READERS OF THE MOTHER CHURCH

Election. SECTION 1. The Readers for The Mother Church shall be a man
and a woman, one to read the BIBLE, and one to read SCIENCE AND
HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES.

Eligibility. SECTION 2. The Directors shall select intelligible
Readers who are exemplary Christians and good English scholars.
They must be members of The Mother Church.

Removal. SECTION 3. If a Reader in The Mother Church be found at any
time inadequate or unworthy, he or she shall be removed from office
by a majority vote of the Board of Directors and the consent of the
Pastor Emeritus, and the vacancy supplied.

First Reader's Residence. SECTION 4. Unless Mrs. Eddy requests
otherwise, the First Reader of The Mother Church shall occupy, during
his term of Readership, the house of the Pastor Emeritus, No. 385
Commonwealth Avenue, Boston. The Board of Directors shall pay from
the Church funds the taxes and rent on this property; the Board shall
attend to the insurance before it expires, suitably furnish the
house, and keep the property in good repair, so long as Mrs. Eddy
does not occupy the house herself and the occupants are satisfactory
to her.


Article III--DUTIES OF READERS OF THE MOTHER CHURCH AND OF ITS
BRANCH CHURCHES

Moral Obligations. SECTION 1. The Readers of The Mother Church and of
all its branch churches must devote a suitable portion of their time
to preparation for the reading of the Sunday lesson,--a lesson on
which the prosperity of Christian Science largely depends. They
must keep themselves unspotted from the world,--uncontaminated with
evil,--that the mental atmosphere they exhale shall promote health
and holiness, even that spiritual _animus_ so universally needed.

First Readers' Duties. SECTION 2. It shall be the duty of the First
Readers to conduct the principal part of the Sunday services, and
the Wednesday evening meetings.

Suitable Selections. SECTION 3. The First Readers shall read, as
a part of the Wednesday evening services, selections from the
SCRIPTURES, and from SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES.

Order of Reading. SECTION 4. The First Readers in the Christian
Science churches shall read the correlative texts in SCIENCE AND
HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES; and the Second Readers shall read
the BIBLE texts. The readings from the SCRIPTURES shall precede the
readings from SCIENCE AND HEALTH. The Readers shall not read from
copies or manuscripts, but from the books.

Naming Book and Author. SECTION 5. The Readers of SCIENCE AND HEALTH
WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES, before commencing to read from this book,
shall distinctly announce the full title of the book and give the
author's name. Such announcement shall be made but once during the
lesson.

Readers in Branch Churches. SECTION 6. These Readers shall be members
of The Mother Church. They shall read understandingly and be well
educated. They shall make no remarks explanatory of the LESSON-SERMON
at any time, but they shall read all notices and remarks that may be
printed in the CHRISTIAN SCIENCE QUARTERLY. This By-Law applies to
Readers in all the branch churches.

Enforcement of By-Laws. SECTION 7. It shall be the duty of every
member of The Mother Church, who is a First Reader in a Church of
Christ, Scientist, to enforce the discipline and by-laws of the
church in which he is Reader.

A Reader not a Leader. SECTION 8. The Church Reader shall not be a
Leader, but he shall maintain the Tenets, Rules, and discipline of
the Church. A Reader shall not be a President of a church.




CHURCH MEMBERSHIP


Article IV--QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP

Believe in Christian Science. SECTION 1. To become a member of The
Mother Church, the First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston,
Mass., the applicant must be a believer in the doctrines of Christian
Science, according to the platform and teaching contained in the
Christian Science textbook, SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE
SCRIPTURES, by Rev. Mary Baker Eddy. The BIBLE, together with SCIENCE
AND HEALTH and other works by Mrs. Eddy, shall be his only textbooks
for self-instruction in Christian Science, and for teaching and
practising metaphysical healing.

Free from Other Denominations. SECTION 2. This Church will receive
a member of another Church of Christ, Scientist, but not a church
member from a different denomination until that membership is
dissolved.

Children when Twelve Years Old. SECTION 3. Children who have arrived
at the age of twelve years, who are approved, and whose applications
are countersigned by one of Mrs. Eddy's loyal students, by a
Director, or by a student of the Board of Education, may be admitted
to membership with The Mother Church.


Article V--APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP

Students of the College. SECTION 1. Applications for membership with
The Mother Church from students of the Massachusetts Metaphysical
College who studied with Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, shall be signed by the
Christian Science Board of Directors as evidence of the loyalty of
the applicants.

Other Students. SECTION 2. Applicants for membership who have not
studied Christian Science with Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, can unite with
this Church only by approval from students of Mrs. Eddy, loyal to the
teachings of the textbook, SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE
SCRIPTURES, or from members of The Mother Church, as provided in
Article VI, Sect. 2, of these By-Laws.

Students' Pupils. SECTION 3. Applications for membership with The
Mother Church, coming from pupils of loyal students who have taken
the Primary or Normal Course at the Massachusetts Metaphysical
College or in the Board of Education, or from pupils of those who
have passed an examination by the Board of Education, shall have the
approval and signature of their teachers, except in such cases as are
provided for in Sect. 4 of this Article.

Exceptional Cases. SECTION 4. Loyal Christian Scientists whose
teachers are deceased, absent, or disloyal, or those whose teachers,
for insufficient cause, refuse to endorse their applications for
membership with The Mother Church,--can apply to the Clerk of this
Church, and present to him a recommendation signed by three members
thereof in good standing, after which, the unanimous vote of the
Board of Directors may admit said applicant to membership.

Addressed to Clerk. SECTION 5. All applications for membership must
be addressed to the Clerk of the Church.

Endorsing Applications. SECTION 6. A member of The Mother Church
shall not endorse nor countersign an application for membership
therewith until after the blank has been properly filled out by an
applicant. A member who violates this By-Law shall be disciplined.

Notice of Rejection. SECTION 7. If an application for membership with
The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., is rejected,
the Clerk of the Church shall send to the applicant a notice of such
rejection; but neither the Clerk nor the Church shall be obliged to
report the cause for rejection.


Article VI--RECOMMENDATION AND ELECTION

Pupils of Normal Students. SECTION 1. One Normal student cannot
recommend the pupil of another Normal student, so long as both are
loyal to their Leader and to the Christian Science textbook, except
as provided for in Article V, Sect. 4.

Members of The Mother Church. SECTION 2. Only members of The Mother
Church are qualified to approve for membership individuals who are
known to them to be Christians, and faithful, loyal students of the
textbook, SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES. If the
approver is not a loyal student of Mrs. Eddy, a Director of this
Church, or a student of the Board of Education who holds a degree,
the application must be countersigned by one of these.

Election. SECTION 3. Applicants for membership in this Church, whose
applications are correctly prepared, may be elected by majority vote
of the Christian Science Board of Directors at the semi-annual
meetings held for this purpose.


Article VII--PROBATIONARY MEMBERSHIP

Members who once Withdrew. SECTION 1. Individuals who have heretofore
been members of this Church, or were members of the Church of Christ,
Scientist, organized in 1879 by Mary Baker Eddy, but who have
voluntarily withdrawn, may be received into this Church on one year's
probation, provided they are willing and anxious to live according to
its requirements and make application for membership according to
its By-Laws. If, at the expiration of said one year, they are found
worthy, they shall be received into full membership, but if not found
worthy their applications shall be void.

Members once Dismissed. SECTION 2. A full member or a probationary
member, who has been excommunicated once, and who afterward, when
sufficient time has elapsed thoroughly to test his sincerity, gives
due evidence of having genuinely repented and of being radically
reformed, shall be eligible to probationary membership upon a
unanimous vote of the Christian Science Board of Directors.

Ineligible for Probation. SECTION 3. If a member has been twice
notified of his excommunication, he shall not again be received into
this Church.




DISCIPLINE


Article VIII--GUIDANCE OF MEMBERS

A Rule for Motives and Acts. SECTION 1. Neither animosity nor mere
personal attachment should impel the motives or acts of the members
of The Mother Church. In Science, divine Love alone governs man;
and a Christian Scientist reflects the sweet amenities of Love, in
rebuking sin, in true brotherliness, charitableness, and forgiveness.
The members of this Church should daily watch and pray to be
delivered from all evil, from prophesying, judging, condemning,
counseling, influencing or being influenced erroneously.

To be Read in Church. SECTION 2. The above Church Rule shall be read
in The Mother Church and in the branch churches by the First Reader
on the first Sunday of each month. On Communion day the Church Tenets
are to be read.

Christ Jesus the Ensample. SECTION 3. He who dated the Christian era
is the Ensample in Christian Science. Careless comparison or
irreverent reference to Christ Jesus is abnormal in a Christian
Scientist, and is prohibited. When it is necessary to show the
great gulf between Christian Science and theosophy, hypnotism, or
spiritualism, do it, but without hard words. The wise man saith,
"A soft answer turneth away wrath." However despitefully used and
misrepresented by the churches or the press, in return employ no
violent invective, and do good unto your enemies when the opportunity
occurs. A departure from this rule disqualifies a member for office
in the Church or on the Board of Lectureship, and renders this member
liable to discipline and, possibly, dismissal from The Mother Church.

Daily Prayer. SECTION 4. It shall be the duty of every member of this
Church to pray each day: "Thy kingdom come;" let the reign of divine
Truth, Life, and Love be established in me, and rule out of me all
sin; and may Thy Word enrich the affections of all mankind, and
govern them!

Prayer in Church. SECTION 5. The prayers in Christian Science
churches shall be offered for the congregations collectively and
exclusively.

Alertness to Duty. SECTION 6. It shall be the duty of every member
of this Church to defend himself daily against aggressive mental
suggestion, and not be made to forget nor to neglect his duty to God,
to his Leader, and to mankind. By his works he shall be judged,--and
justified or condemned.

One Christ. SECTION 7. In accordance with the Christian Science
textbooks,--the BIBLE, and SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE
SCRIPTURES,--and in accord with all of Mrs. Eddy's teachings, members
of this Church shall neither entertain a belief nor signify a belief
in more than one Christ, even that Christ whereof the Scripture
beareth testimony.

No Malpractice. SECTION 8. Members will not intentionally or
knowingly mentally malpractise, inasmuch as Christian Science can
only be practised according to the Golden Rule: "All things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them." (Matt. 7:12.)

A member of The Mother Church who mentally malpractises upon or
treats our Leader or her staff without her or their consent shall be
disciplined, and a second offense as aforesaid shall cause the name
of said member to be dropped forever from The Mother Church.

Formulas Forbidden. SECTION 9. No member shall use written formulas,
