away, and the fashion thereof: but he that doeth the will of God
abideth for ever.'




THE OLD JUDGE AND THE YOUNG KING

'Now the Lord had told Samuel In his ear a day before Saul came,
saying, 16, To-morrow, about this time I will send thee a man out of
the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over My
people Israel, that he may save My people out of the hand of the
Philistines: for I have looked upon My people, because their cry is
come unto Me. 17. And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said unto him,
Behold the man whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over My
people. 18. Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell
me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is. 19. And Samuel answered
Saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before me unto the high place; for
ye shall eat with me to-day, and to-morrow I will let thee go, and will
tell thee all that is in thine heart. 20. And as for thine asses that
were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them; for they are found.
And on whom is all the desire of Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all
thy father's house? 21. And Saul answered and said, Am not I a
Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the
least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then
speakest thou so to me? 22. And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and
brought them into the parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place
among them that were bidden, which were about thirty persons. 23. And
Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of
which I said unto thee, Set it by thee. 24. And the cook took up the
shoulder, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And
Samuel said, Behold that which is left I set it before thee, and eat:
for unto this time hath it been kept for thee since I said, I have
invited the people. So Saul did eat with Samuel that day. 25. And when
they were come down from the high place into the city, Samuel communed
with Saul upon the top of the house. 26. And they arose early: and it
came to pass about the spring of the day, that Samuel called Saul to
the top of the house, saying, Up, that I may send thee away. And Saul
arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad. 27. And
as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul,
Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on,) but stand thou
still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God.'--1 SAMUEL ix.
15-27.


Both the time and the place of the incidents here told are unknown. No
note is given of the interval that had elapsed since the elders'
deputation. All that we know is that on the previous day Samuel had had
the divine communication mentioned in verse 15, and that some days are
implied as spent by Saul in his quest for his fathers asses, Equally
uncertain is the name of the city. It was not Samuel's ordinary
residence; it was in the 'land of Zuph,' an unknown district; it was
perched, like most of the cities, on a hill; it had fountains lower
down the slope, and a 'high place' farther up, where there was a
building large enough for a feast. How strangely vivid the picture of
this anonymous city is, and how we can yet see the maidens coming down
to the fountains, the wearied travellers toiling up, and the voluble
abundance of the directions given them!

I. The first thing we have to note is the premonitory word of the Lord.
Observe the picturesque and forcible expression, 'had uncovered the ear
of Samuel.' It is more than picturesque. It gives in the strongest form
the fact of a revelation, both as to its origin and its secrecy. It is
vain to represent the transition from judgeship to monarchy as a mere
political revolution, inaugurated by Samuel as a fore-seeing statesman.
It is misleading to speak of him, as Dean Stanley does, as one of the
men who mediate between the old and the new. His opinions and views go
for just nothing in the transaction, and he is simply God's instrument.
The people's desire for the king, and God's answer to it, were equally
independent of him. His own ideas were dead against the change, and at
each step in bringing it about the divine causality is everything, and
he is nothing but its obedient servant. It is hopeless to sift out a
naturalistic explanation from the narrative, which is either
supernatural or nothing. Note the three points of this
communication,--God's sending Saul, the command to anoint, and the
motive ascribed to God. As to the first, how striking that full-toned
authoritative 'I will send' is! Think of the chain of ordinary events
which brought Saul to the little city,--the wandering of a drove of
asses, the failure to get on their tracks, the accident of being in the
land of Zuph when he got tired of the search, the suggestion of the
servant; and behind all these, and working through them, the will and
hand of God, thrusting this man, all unconscious, along a path which he
knew not. Our own purposes we may know, but God's we do not know. There
is something awful in the thought of the issues that may spring from
the smallest affairs, and we shall be bewildered and paralysed if once
we get a glimpse of the complicated web which is ever being woven in
the loom of time, unless we, too, can, by faith, see the Weaver, and
then we shall be at rest. Call nothing trivial, and seek to be
conscious of His guiding hand.

The command to Samuel to anoint Saul is no product of Samuel's own
reflection, but comes to him, in this imperative form, before he has
seen Saul, like a commission in blank, in regard to which he has no
option, and in the origin of which he had no share. It was a piece of
painful work to devolve his authority, like Aaron's having to strip off
his robes before he died, and to put them on his son. But there is no
trace of wounded feeling in Samuel. He is true to his childhood's word,
'Speak, for Thy servant heareth,' and, no doubt, he had the reward
which obedience ever has to sweeten the bitterest draught, the reward
of a quiet heart.

The reason as given in the last clause of the verse ought to have made
Samuel's self-abnegation easier. God sets him the example. Israel had
rejected Him, but He still calls them 'My people,' and looks upon them
in tender care, and hears their cry. There is no contradiction here
with the aspect of the concession to the people's wish, which appeared
in the former section. Hasty criticism tries to make out discrepancies
in the accounts, because it does not recognise one of the plainest
characteristics of Scripture; namely, its habit of stating strongly and
exclusively that side of a complicated matter which is relevant to the
purpose in hand, and leaving the other sides to be presented in due
time. The three accounts of the election give three different reasons
for it. In chapter viii., the people put it on the ground of Samuel's
age and his son's unfitness, and God treats it as national rejection of
Him. Here it appears as due, on the part of the people, to their fear
of the Philistines, and on the part of God to His loving yielding to
their cry. In 1 Samuel xii. 12, Samuel traces it to the fear of
Ammonite invasion. Are these contradictory or supplementary accounts?
Certainly the latter. Though Israel had in heart rejected God, and He
gave them a king that they might learn how much better they would have
been without one, it is as true that He lovingly listened to the cry of
their fear, and answered them, in pity and tender care, by giving them
the king whom they desired, and who would deliver them from their
enemies. Let us learn how patient of our faithless follies, and how
full of long-suffering love, even in 'anger,' He is. The same gift of
His providence, regarded in one light, is loving chastisement, and in
another is loving compliance with our cry and swift help to our need in
the shape that we desire, but in both aspects is good and perfect.
Note, too, that God's look is active, and is the bringing of the needed
aid, and that He waits for our cry before He comes with His help.

II. The meeting of Samuel and Saul. They encounter each other in the
gate,--the prophet on his way to the sacrifice, the future king with
his head full of his humble quest. Samuel knows Saul by divine
intimation as soon as he sees him, but Saul does not know Samuel. His
question indicates the noble simplicity, without attendants or
trappings, of the judge's life; but it also suggests the strange
isolation of these early days, and the probable indifference of Saul to
religion. If he had cared much about God's rule in Israel, he could
scarcely have been so ignorant as his servant's words about 'the seer,'
and his failure to know him when he saw him, show Saul to have been. He
had not cared to see Samuel in any of the latter's circuits, and now he
only wants to get some information from a diviner about these
unfortunate asses. What a contrast between the thoughts of the two, as
they looked at each other! Saul begins by consulting Samuel as a
magician; he ends by seeking counsel from the witch at Endor. Samuel's
words are beautiful in their smothering of all personal feeling, and
dignified in their authority. He at once takes command of Saul, and
prepares him by half-hints for something great to come. The direction
to 'go up before me' is a sign of honour. The invitation to the
sacrificial feast is another. The promise to disclose his own secret
thoughts to Saul may, perhaps, point to some hidden ambitions, the
knowledge of which would prove Samuel's prophetic character. The
assurance as to the asses answers the small immediate occasion of
Saul's resort to him, and the dim hint in the last words of verse 20,
rightly translated, tells him that 'all that is desirable in Israel' is
for him, and for all his father's house. He went out to look for his
father's asses, and he found a kingdom. The words were enigmatical; but
if Saul knew of the impending revolution, they could scarcely fail to
dazzle him and take away his breath. His answer is more than mere
Oriental self-depreciation. Its bashful modesty contrasts sadly with
the almost insane masterfulness and arrogant self-will of his later
years. Fair beginnings may end ill, and those who are set in positions
of influence have hard work to keep steady heads, and to sail with low
sails.

III. The feast. Up at the high place was some chamber used for the
feasts which followed the sacrifices. A company of thirty--or,
according to another reading, of seventy--persons had been invited, and
the stately young stranger from Benjamin, with his servant (a trait of
the simple manners of these days), is set in the place of honour, where
wondering eyes fasten on him. Attention is still more emphatically
centred on him when Samuel bids 'the cook' bring a part of the
sacrifice which he had been ordered to set aside. It proves to be the
'shoulder' or 'thigh,' the priest's perquisite, and therefore probably
Samuel's. To give this to another was equivalent to putting him in
Samuel's place; and Samuel's words in handing it to Saul make its
meaning plain. It is 'that which hath been reserved.' It has been 'kept
for thee' till 'the appointed time,' and that with a view to the
assembled guests. All this is in true prophetic fashion, which
delighted in symbols, and these of the homeliest sort. The whole
transaction expressed the transference of power to Saul, the divine
reserving of the monarchy for him, and the public investiture with it,
by the prophet himself. The veil was intentional, and intentionally
thin. Cannot we see the flush of surprise and modesty on Saul's cheek,
as he tore the pieces from the significant 'shoulder,' and hear the
whispers that ran through the guest-chamber?

IV. The private colloquy. When the simple feast was over, the strangely
assorted pair went down to Samuel's house, and there, on the quiet
house-top, where were no curious ears, held long and earnest talk. No
doubt Samuel told Saul all that was in his heart, as he had said that
he would, and convinced him thereby that it was God who was speaking to
him through the prophet. Nor would exhortations and warnings be
wanting, which the old man's experience would be anxious to give, and
the young one's modesty not unwilling to receive. Saul is a listener,
not a speaker, in this unreported interview; and Samuel is in it, as
throughout, the superior. The characteristic which marked the beginning
of the Jewish monarchy was stamped on it till the end. The king was
inferior to the prophet, and was meant to take his instructions from
him when he appeared. Saul was docile on that first day, when he was
half dazed with his new prospects, and wholly grateful to Samuel; but
the history will show us how soon the fair promise of concord was
darkened, and how fiercely he chafed at Samuel's attempted control.

One can fancy his thoughts as he lay in the starlight, on the
house-top, that night, and gazed into the astounding future that had
opened before him. Had there been any true religion in him, it would
have been a wakeful night of prayer. But, more likely, as the event
proves, the ambition and arrogance which were deep in his nature,
though hitherto undeveloped, were his counsellors, and drove Samuel's
wisdom out of his head.

As soon as the morning-red began to rise in the East, Samuel sent him
away, to secure, as would appear, privacy in his departure. With simple
courtesy the prophet accompanied his guest, and as soon as they had got
down the hill beyond the last house of the city, he bids Saul send on
his servant, that he may speak a last word to him alone. Our text stops
before the solemn anointing, and leaves these two standing there, in
the fresh morning, type of the new career opening for one of them. What
a contrast in the men! The one has all his long life been true to his
first vow, 'Speak, for Thy servant heareth,' and now has come, in
fulness of years, and reverenced by all men, near the end of his
patient, faithful service. His work is all but done, and his heart is
quiet in the peace which is the best reward of loving and doing God's
law. Ripened wisdom, calm trust, unhesitating submission cast a glory
round the old man, who is now performing the supreme act of
self-abnegation of his lifetime, and, not without a sense of relief, is
laying the burden, so long and uncomplainingly borne, on the great
shoulders of this young giant. The other has a humble past of a few
years rapidly sinking out of his dazzled sight, and is in a whirl of
emotion at the startling suddenness of his new dignity. When one thinks
of Gilboa, and the desperate suicide there, how pathetic is that
strong, jubilant young figure, in the morning light, below the city, as
he bows his head to receive the anointing which, little as he knew it,
was to prove his ruin! A life begun by obedient listening to God's
voice, and continued in the same, comes at last to a blessed end, and
is crowned with many goods. A life which but partially accepts God's
will as its law, and rather takes counsel of its own passions and
arrogant self-sufficiency, may have much that is bright and lovable at
its beginning, but will steadily darken as it goes on, and will set at
last in eclipse and gloom.




THE KING AFTER MAN'S HEART

'And Samuel called the people together unto the Lord to Mizpeh; 18. And
said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I
brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hand of
the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of them that
oppressed you; 19. And ye have this day rejected your God, who Himself
saved you out of all your adversities and your tribulations; and ye
have said unto Him, Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present
yourselves before the Lord by your tribes, and by your thousands. 20.
And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come near, the
tribe of Benjamin was taken. 21. When he had caused the tribe of
Benjamin to come near by their families, the family of Matri was taken,
and Saul the son of Kish was taken: and when they sought him, he could
not be found. 22. Therefore they enquired of the Lord further, if the
man should yet come thither. And the Lord answered, Behold, he hath hid
himself among the stuff. 23. And they ran and fetched him thence: and
when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people
from his shoulders and upward. 24. And Samuel said to all the people,
See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that there is none like him among
all the people? And all the people shouted, and said, God save the
king. 25. Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and
wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the Lord. And Samuel sent all
the people away, every man to his house. 26. And Saul also went home to
Gibeah; and there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had
touched. 27. But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save
us? And they despised him, and brought him no presents. But he held his
peace.'--1 SAMUEL x. 17-27.


These verses fit on to chapter viii., chapters ix. to x. 16, being
probably from another source, inserted here because the anointing of
Saul, told in them, did occur between Samuel's dismissal of the people
and his summoning of the national assembly which is here related. That
private anointing of Saul was the divine call to him individually; the
text tells of his public designation to the nation. The two are
perfectly consistent, and, indeed, the private anointing is presupposed
in the incident recorded in this passage, of Saul's hiding himself, for
he could not have known the result that he would be 'taken,' unless he
had had that previous intimation. The assembly at Mizpah was not
convened in order to choose a king, but to accept God's choice, which
was then to be declared.

But before the choice was announced, a last appeal was made to the
people, if, perchance, they might still be persuaded to forgo their
rebellious desire. It is not, indeed, said that this final, all but
hopeless attempt was made by Samuel at the divine command, and we are
not told that he had any further revelation than that in chapter viii.
7-9. But, no doubt, he was speaking as Jehovah's mouthpiece, and so we
have here one more instance of that long-suffering divine patience and
love which 'hopeth all things,' and lingers pleadingly round the
alienated heart, seeking to woo it back to itself, and never ceasing to
labour to avert the evil deed, till it is actually and irrevocably
done. It may be said that God knew that the appeal was sure to fail,
and therefore could not have made it. But is not that mysterious
continuance of effort, foreknown to be futile, the very paradox of
God's love? Did not Jesus give the traitor the sop, as a last token of
friendship, a last appeal to his heart? And does not God still in like
manner deal with us all?

Observe how He seeks to win Israel back. It is not by threatenings, but
by reminders of His great benefits. He will not drive men back to His
service, like a slave-driver with brandished whip, but He wishes to
draw them back by 'the cords of love.' It is service from hearts melted
by thankfulness, and therefore overflowing in joyful, willing obedience
and grateful acts, that He desires. 'The mercies of God' should lead to
men offering themselves as 'living sacrifices.'

The last appeal failed, and Samuel at once went on to give the people
the desired bitter which they thought so sweet. Of course, it was by
their representatives that the tribes presented themselves before God.
The manner of making God's choice known is not told, and speculations
as to it are idle. Probably a simple yes or no, as each tribe, family
or individual was 'presented' was the mode, but how it was conveyed is
quite unknown. That is a small matter; more important is it to note
that Saul was chosen simply because he was the very type of the
national ideal of a hero-king. Both here and in chapter ix. 2 his
stature and bravery are the only qualities mentioned. What Israel
wanted was a rough fighter, with physical strength, plenty of bone and
muscle. About moral, intellectual or spiritual qualities they did not
care, and they got the kind of king that they wanted,--the only kind
that they could appreciate. The only way to teach them that one who was
a head and shoulders taller than any of them was not thereby certified
to be the ideal king, was to give them such a man, and let them see
what good he would do them.

There is no surer index nor sharper test of national or individual
character than the sort of 'heroes' they worship. _Vox populi_ has not
been very much refined since Saul's day. Athletes and soldiers still
captivate the crowd, and a mere prophet like Samuel has no chance
beside the man of broad shoulders and well-developed biceps. And very
often communities, especially democratic ones, get the 'king' they
desire, the leader, statesman or the like, who comes near their ideal.
The man whom they choose is the man whom, generally, they deserve.
Israel had an excuse for its burst of ardour for a soldier, for it was
in deadly danger from the Philistines. Is there as good an excuse for
us in Britain, in our recent adoration of successful generals? Israel
found out that its idol lacked higher gifts than thews and sinews, and
experience taught them the falseness of their ideal.

Saul's hiding among the piles of miscellaneous baggage, which the
multitude of representatives had brought with them, is usually set down
to his credit, as indicating an engaging modesty; but there is another
and more probable explanation of it, less creditable to him. Was it not
rather occasioned by his shrinking from the heavy task that God was
laying on him? He was not being summoned to a secure throne, but to 'go
out before us, and fight our battles.' He might well shrink, but if he
had been God-fearing and God-obeying and God-trusting, he would have
cried, 'Here am I! send me,' instead of skulking among the stuff. There
was another Saul, who could say, 'I was not disobedient unto the
heavenly vision.' It had been better for the son of Kish if he had been
like the young Pharisee from Tarsus. We too have divine calls in _our_
lives, and alas! we too not seldom hide ourselves among the stuff, and
try to avoid taking up some heavy duty, by absorbing our minds in
material good. Few things have greater power of obscuring 'the heavenly
vision,' and of rendering us unwilling to obey it, than the clinging to
the things of this world, which are in their place as the traveller's
luggage needful on the road, but very much out of their place when they
become a hiding-place for a man whom God is calling to service.

The 'manner of the kingdom,' which Samuel wrote and laid up before the
Lord, was probably not the same as 'the manner of the king' (chapter
viii. 9-18), but a kind of constitution, or solemn statement of the
principles which were to govern the monarchy. The reading in verse 26
should probably be 'the men of valour,' instead of 'a band of men.'
They were brave men, 'whose hearts God had touched.' Now that Saul was
chosen by God, loyalty to God was shown by loyalty to Saul. The sin of
the people's desire, and the drop from the high ideal of the theocracy,
and the lack of lofty qualities in Saul, may all be admitted. But God
has made him king, and that is enough. Henceforward, God's servants
will be Saul's partisans. The malcontents were apparently but a small
faction. They, perhaps, had had a candidate of their own, but, at all
events, they criticised God's appointed deliverer, and saw nothing in
him to warrant the expectation that he would be able to do much for
Israel. Disparaging criticism of God's chosen instruments comes from
distrust of God who chose them. To doubt _the_ divinely sent
Deliverer's power to 'save' is to accuse God of not knowing our needs
and of miscalculating the power of His supply of them. But not a few of
us put that same question in various tones of incredulity, scorn or
indifference. Sense makes many mistakes when it takes to trying to
weigh Christ in its vulgar balances, and to settling whether He looks
like a Saviour and a King.

SAMUEL'S CHALLENGE AND CHARGE

'And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto your
voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you. 2.
And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked before
you from my childhood unto this day. 3. Behold, here I am: witness
against me before the Lord, and before His anointed: whose ox have I
taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine
eyes therewith? and I will restore it you. 4. And they said, Thou hast
not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken ought of
any man's hand. 5. And he said unto them, The Lord is witness against
you, and His anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought
in my hand. And they answered, He is witness. 6. And Samuel said unto
the people, It is the Lord that advanced Moses and Aaron, and that
brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt. 7. Now therefore
stand still, that I may reason with you before the Lord of all the
righteous acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to your fathers. 8.
When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the Lord,
then the Lord sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers
out of Egypt, and them dwell in this place. 9. And when they forgat the
Lord their God, He sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the
host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand
of the king of Moab, and they fought against them. 10. And they cried
unto the Lord, and said, We have sinned, because we have forsaken the
Lord, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but now deliver us out of
the hand of our enemies, and we will serve Thee. 11. And the Lord sent
Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out
of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelled safe. 12. And
when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against
you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over us: when the
Lord your God was your king. 13. Now therefore behold the king whom ye
have chosen, and whom ye have desired! and, behold, the Lord hath set a
king over you. 14. If ye will fear the Lord, and serve Him, and obey
His voice, and not rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then
shall both ye and also the king that reigneth over you continue
following the Lord your God: 15. But if ye will not obey the voice of
the Lord, but rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall the
hand of the Lord be against you, as it was against your fathers.'--1
SAMUEL xii. 1-15.

The portion of Samuel's address included in this passage has three main
sections: his noble and dignified assertion of his official purity, his
summary of the past history, and his solemn declaration of the
conditions of future wellbeing for the nation with its new king.

I. Probably the war with the Ammonite king Nahash, which had postponed
the formal inauguration of the king, had been carried on in the
neighbourhood of the Jordan valley; and thus Gilgal would be a
convenient rendezvous. But it was chosen for other reasons also, and,
as appears from 1 Samuel x. 8, had been fixed on by Samuel at his first
interview with Saul. There the Covenant had been renewed, after the
wanderers had crossed the river, with Joshua at their head, and it was
fitting that the beginnings of the new form of the national life should
be consecrated by worship on the same site as had witnessed the
beginnings of the national life on the soil of the promised land.
Perhaps the silent stones, which Joshua reared, stood there yet. At all
events, sacred memories could scarcely fail, as the rejoicing crowd,
standing where their fathers had renewed the Covenant, saw the
blackened ruins of Jericho, and the foaming river, now, as then,
filling all its banks in the time of harvest, which their fathers had
crossed with the ark, that was now hidden at Kirjath-jearim, for their
guide. The very place spoke the same lessons from the past which Samuel
was about to teach them.

There is just a faint trace of Samuel's disapproval of the new order in
his first words. He takes care to throw the whole responsibility on the
people; but, at the same time, he assumes the authoritative tone which
becomes him, and quietly takes the position of superiority to the king
whom he has made. I Samuel xi. 15 seems to imply that he took no part
in the rejoicings. It was 'Saul and all the men of Israel' who were so
glad. He was still hesitant as to the issue, and obeyed the divine
command with clearer insight into its purpose than the shouting crowd
and the proud young king had. There is something very pathetic in the
contrast he draws between Saul and himself. 'The king walketh before
you,' in all the vigour of his young activity, and delighting all your
eyes, and 'I am old and gray-headed,' feeble, and fit for little more
work, and therefore, as happens to such worn-out public servants, cast
aside for a new man. Samuel was not a monster of perfection without
human feelings. His sense of Israel's ingratitude to himself and
practical revolt from God lay together in his mind, and colour this
whole speech, which has a certain tone of severity, and an absence of
all congratulation. Probably that accounts for the mention of his sons.
The elders' frank statement of their low opinion of them had been a
sore point with Samuel, and he cannot help alluding to it. It was not
for want of possible successors in his own house that they had cried
out for a king. If this be not the bearing of the allusion to his sons,
it is difficult to explain; and this obvious explanation would never
have been overlooked if Samuel had not been idealised into a faultless
saint. The dash of human infirmity and fatherly blindness gives reality
to the picture. 'I have walked before you from my youth unto this day.'
Note the recurrence of the same expression as is applied to Saul in the
former part of the verse. It is as if he had said, 'Once I was as he is
now,--young and active in your sight, and for your service. Remember
these past years. May your new fancy's record be as stainless as mine
is, when he is old and grayheaded!' The words bring into view the
characteristic of Samuel's life which is often insisted on in the
earlier chapters,--its calm, unbroken continuity and uniformity of
direction, from the long-past days when he wore 'the little coat' his
mother made him, with so many tears dropped on it, till this closing
hour. While everything was rushing down to destruction in Eli's time,
and his sons were rioting at the Tabernacle door, the child was growing
up in the stillness; and from then till now, amid all changes, his
course had been steady, and pointed to one aim. Blessed they whose age
is but the fruitage of the promise of their youth! Blessed they who
begin as 'little children,' with the forgiveness of sin and the
knowledge of the Father, and who go on, as 'young men,' to overcome the
Evil One, and end, as 'fathers,' with the deeper knowledge of Him who
is 'from the beginning,' which is the reward of childhood's trust and
manhood's struggles!

Samuel is still a prophet, but he is ceasing to be the sole authority,
and, in his conscious integrity, calls for a public, full discharge, in
the presence of the king. Note that verse 3 gives the first instance of
the use of the name 'Messiah,' and think of the contrast between Saul
and Jesus. Observe, too, the simple manners of these times, when 'ox
and ass' were the wealth. They would be poor plunder nowadays. Note
also the various forms of injustice of which he challenges any one to
convict him. Forcible seizure of live stock, fraud, harsh oppression,
and letting suitors put gold on his eyes that he might not see, are the
vices of the Eastern ruler to-day, and rampant in that unhappy land, as
they have been ever since Samuel's time. I think I have heard of
politicians in some other countries further west than Gilgal, who have
axes to grind and logs to roll, and of the wonderful effects, in many
places of business, of certain circular gold discs applied to the eyes.
This man went away a poor man. He does not seem to have had salary, or
retiring pension; but he carried away a pair of clean hands, as the
voice of a nation witnessed.

II. Having cleared himself, Samuel recounts the outlines of the past,
in order to emphasise the law that cleaving to God had ever brought
deliverance; departure, disaster; and penitence, restoration. It is
history with a purpose, and less careful about chronology than
principles. Facts are good, if illuminated by the clear recognition of
the law which they obey; but, without that, they are lumber. The
'philosophy of history' is not reached without the plain recognition of
the working of the divine will. No doubt the principles which Samuel
discerned written as with a sunbeam on the past of Israel were
illustrated there with a certainty and directness which belonged to it
alone; but we shall make a bad use of the history of Israel, if we say,
'It is all miraculous, and therefore inapplicable to modern national
life.' It would be much nearer the mark to say, 'It is all miraculous,
and therefore meant as an exhibition for blind eyes of the eternal
principles which govern the history of all nations.' It is as true in
Britain to-day as ever it was in Judea, that righteousness and the fear
of God are the sure foundations of real national as of individual
prosperity. The kingdoms of this world are not the devil's, though
diplomatists and soldiers seem to think so. If any nation were to live
universally by the laws of God, it might not have what the world calls
national success; it would have no story of wholesale robbery, called
military glory, but it would have peace within its borders, and life
would go nobly and sweetly there. 'Happy is the people, that is in such
a case: yea, happy is the people, whose God is the Lord.'

The details of Samuel's _resume_ need not occupy much time. Note the
word in verse 7, 'reason,' or, as the Revised Version renders, 'plead.'
He takes the position of God's advocate in the suit, and what he will
prove for his client is the 'righteousness' of his dealings in the
past. The story, says he, can be brought down to very simple
elements,--a cry to God, an answer of deliverance, a relapse,
punishment, a renewed cry to God, and all the rest of the series as
before. It is like a repeating decimal, over and over again, each
figure drawing the next after it. The list of oppressors in verse 9,
and that of deliverers in verse 11, do not follow the same order, but
that matters nothing. Clearly the facts are assumed as well known, and
needing only summary reference. The new-fashioned way of treating
Biblical history, of course, takes that as an irrefutable proof of the
late date and spuriousness of this manufactured speech put into
Samuel's mouth. Less omniscient students will be content with accepting
the witness to the history. Nobody knows anything of a judge named
Bedan, and the conjectural emendation 'Barak' is probable, especially
remembering the roll-call in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where Gideon,
Barak, and Jephthah appear in the same order, with the addition of
Samson. The supposition that 'Samuel,' in this verse, is an error for
'Samson,' is unnecessary; for the prophet's mention of himself thus is
not unnatural, in the circumstances, and is less obtrusive than to have
said 'me.'

The retrospect here given points the lesson of the sin and folly of the
demand for a king. The old way had been to cry to God in their
distresses, and the old experience had been that the answer came swift
and sufficient; but this generation had tried a new method, and fear of
'Nahash the Ammonite' had driven them to look for a man to help them.
The experience of God's responses to prayer does not always wean even
those who receive them from casting about for visible helpers. Still
less does the experience of our predecessors keep us from it. Strange
that after a hundred plain instances of His aid, the hundred and first
distress should find us almost as slow to turn to Him, and as eager to
secure earthly stays, as if there were no past of our own, or of many
generations, all crowded and bright with tokens of His care! We are
always disposed to doubt whether the power that delivered from Sisera,
Philistines, and Moab, will be able to deliver us from Nahash. The new
danger looks the very worst of all, and this time we must have a king.
All the while Israel had God for its king. Our dim eyes cannot see the
realities of the invisible world, and so we cleave to the illusions of
the visible, which, at their best, are but shadows of the real, and are
often made, by our weak hearts, its rival and substitute. What does the
soldier, who has an impenetrable armour to wear, want with pasteboard
imitations, like those worn in a play? It is doubtful wisdom to fling
away the substance in grasping at the shadow. Saul was brave, and a
head and shoulders above the people, and he had beaten Nahash for them;
but Saul for God is a poor exchange. Do we do better, when we hanker
after something more tangible than an unseen Guide, Helper, Stay, Joy,
and Peace-bringer for our hearts, and declare plainly, by our eager
race after created good, that we do not reckon God by Himself enough
for us?

III. The part of Samuel's address with which we are concerned here
closes with the application of the history to the present time. The
great point of the last three verses is that the new order of things
has not changed the old law, which bound up well-being inseparably with
obedience. They have got their king, and there he stands; but if they
think that that is to secure their prosperity, they are much mistaken.
There is a touch of rebuke, and possibly of sarcasm, in pointing to
Saul, and making so emphatic, as in verse 13, the vehemence of their
anxiety to get him. It is almost as if Samuel had said, 'Look at him,
and say whether he is worth all that eagerness. Do you like him as
well, now that you have him, as you did before?' There are not many of
this world's goods which stand that test. The shell that looked silvery
and iridescent when in the sea is but a poor, pale reminder of its
former self, when we hold it dry in our hands. One object of desire,
and only one, brings no disappointment in possessing it. He, and only
he, who sets his hope on God, will never have to feel that he is not so
satisfied with the fulfilment as with the dream.

Israel had rejected God in demanding a king; but the giver of their
demand had been God, and their rejection had not abolished the divine
government, nor altered one jot of the old law. They and their king
were equally its subjects. There is great emphasis in the special
mention of 'your king' as bound to obedience as much as they; and, if
we follow the Septuagint reading of verse 15, the mention is repeated
there in the threatening of punishment. No abundance of earthly
supports or objects of our love or trust in the least alters the
unalterable conditions of well-being. Whether surrounded with these or
stripped of all, to fear and serve the Lord and to hearken to His voice
is equally the requisite for all true blessedness, and is so equally to
the helper and the helped, the lover and the loved. We are ever tempted
to think that, when our wishes are granted, and some dear or strong
hand is stretched out for aid, all will be well; and we are terribly
apt to forget that we need God as much as before, and that the way of
being blessed has not changed. Those whose hearts and homes are bright
with loved faces, and whose lives are guarded by strong and wise hands,
have need to remember that they and their dear ones are under the same
conditions of well-being as are the loneliest and saddest; and they who
'have none other that fighteth for' them have no less need to remember
that, if God be their companion, they cannot be utterly solitary, nor
altogether helpless if He be their aid.




OLD TRUTH FOR A NEW EPOCH

'Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have
desired! and, behold, the Lord hath set a king over yon. 14. If ye will
fear the Lord, and serve Him, and obey His voice, and not rebel against
the commandment of the Lord; then shall both ye, and also the king that
reigneth over you, continue following the Lord your God: 15. But if ye
will not obey the voice of the Lord, but rebel against the commandment
of the Lord; then shall the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was
against your fathers. 16. Now therefore stand and see this great thing,
which the Lord will do before your eyes. 17. Is it not wheat-harvest
to-day! I will call unto the Lord, and He shall send thunder and rain;
that ye may perceive and see that your wickedness is great, which ye
have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you a king. 18. So Samuel
called unto the Lord; and the Lord sent thunder and rain that day: and
all the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel. 19. And all the
people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God,
that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask
us a king. 20. And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done
all this wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but
serve the Lord with all your heart; 21. And turn ye not aside: for then
should ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver, for
they are vain. 22. For the Lord will not forsake His people for His
great name's sake: because it hath pleased the Lord to make you His
people. 23. Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against
the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and
the right way: 24. Only fear the Lord, and serve Him in truth with all
your heart: for consider how great things He hath done for you. 25. But
if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
king.'--1 SAMUEL xii. 13-25.


Samuel's office as judge necessarily ended when Saul was made king, but
his office of prophet continued. This chapter deals with both the
cessation and the continuance, giving at first his dignified, and
somewhat pained, vindication of his integrity, and then passing on to
show him exercising his prophetic function in exhortation, miracle, and
authoritative declaration of Jehovah's will.

I. The first point is the sign which Samuel gave. Usually there is no
rain in Palestine from about the end of April till October. Samuel was
speaking during the wheat harvest, which falls about the beginning of
June. We note that he volunteered the sign, and, what is still more
remarkable, that he is sure that God will send it in answer to his
prayer. Why was he thus certain? Because he recognised that the impulse
to proffer the sign came from God. We know little of the mental
processes by which a prophet could discriminate between his own
thinkings and God's speech, but such discrimination was possible, or
there could have been no ring of confidence in the prophet's 'Thus
saith the Lord.' Not even a 'Samuel among them that call upon His name'
had a right to assume that every asking would certainly have an answer.
It is when we ask 'anything according to His will' that we know that
'He heareth us,' and are entitled to predict to others the sure answer.

It seems a long leap logically from hearing the thunder and seeing the
rain rushing down on the harvest field, to recognising the sin of
asking for a king. But the connecting steps are plain. Samuel announced
the storm, he asked God to send it, it came at his word; therefore he
was approved of God and was His messenger; therefore his words about
the desire for a king were God's words. Again, God sent the tempest;
therefore God ruled the elemental powers, and wielded them so as to
affect Israel, and therefore it had been folly and sin to wish for
another defender. So the result of the thunder-burst was twofold--they
'feared Jehovah and Samuel,' and they confessed their sin in desiring a
king. They were but rude and sense-bound men, like children in many
respects; their religion was little more than outward worship and a
vague awe; they needed 'signs' as children need picture-books. The very
slightness and superficiality of their religion made their confession
easy and swift, and neither the one nor the other went deep enough to
be lasting. The faith that is built on 'signs and wonders' is easily
battered down; the repentance that is due to a thunderstorm is over as
soon as the sun comes out again. The shallowness of the contrition in
this case is shown by two things,--the request to Samuel to pray for
them, and the boon which they begged him to ask, 'that we die not.'
They had better have prayed for themselves, and they had better have
asked for strength to cleave to Jehovah. They were like Simon Magus
cowering before Peter, and beseeching him, 'Pray ye for me to the Lord,
that none of the things which ye have spoken may come upon me.' That is
not the voice of true repentance, the 'godly sorrow' which works
healing and life, but that of the 'sorrow of the world which worketh
death.' The real penitent will press the closer to the forgiving
Father, and his cry will be for purity even more than for pardon.

II. Samuel's closing words are tender, wise, and full of great truths.
He begins with encouragement blended with reiteration of the people's
sin. It is not safe for a forgiven man to forget his sin quickly. The
more sure he is that God has forgotten, the more careful he should be
to remember it, for gratitude, humility and watchfulness. But it should
never loom so large before him as to shut out the sunshine of God's
love, for no fruits of goodness will ripen in character without that
light. It is a great piece of practical wisdom always to keep one's
forgiven sin in mind, and yet not to let it paralyse hopefulness and
effort. 'Ye have indeed done all this evil, ... yet turn not aside from
following Jehovah.' That is a truly evangelical exhortation. The memory
of past failures is never to set the tune for future service. Again,
Samuel based the exhortation to whole-hearted service of Jehovah on
Jehovah's faithfulness and great benefits (vs. 22-24), It is suicidal
folly to turn away from Him who never turns away from us; it is black
ingratitude, as well as suicidal folly, to refuse to serve Him whose
mercies encompass us. That divine good pleasure, which has no source
but in Himself, flows out like an artesian well, unceasing. His 'nature
and property' is to love. His past is the prophecy of His future. He
will always be what He has been, and always do what He has done.
Therefore we need not fear, though we change and are faithless. 'He
cannot deny Himself.' His revealed character would be dimmed if He
abandoned a soul that clung to Him. So our faith should, in some
measure, match His faithfulness, and we should build firmly on the firm
foundation.

III. Samuel answers the people's request for his prayers with a wise
word, full of affection, and also full of dignity and warning, all the
more impressive because veiled. He promises his continued intercession,
but he puts it as a duty which he owes to God rather than to them only,
and he thus sufficiently asserts his God-appointed office. He promises
to do more than pray for them; namely, to continue as their ethical and
religious guide, which they had not asked him to be. That at once makes
his future position in the monarchy clear. He is still the prophet,
though no longer the judge, and, as the future was to show, he has to
direct monarch as well as people. But it also hints to the people that
his prayers for them will be of little avail unless they listen to his
teaching. Whether a Samuel prays for us or not, if we do not listen to
the voices that bid us serve God, we 'shall be consumed.'




SAUL REJECTED

'Then came the word of the Lord unto Samuel, saying, 11. It repenteth
Me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he is turned back from
following Me, and hath not performed My commandments. And it grieved
Samuel; and he cried unto the Lord all night. 12. And when Samuel rose
early to meet Saul in the morning, it was told Samuel, saying, Saul
came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a place, and is gone about,
and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal. 13. And Samuel came to Saul:
and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of the Lord: I have performed
the commandment of the Lord. 14. And Samuel said, What meaneth then
this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen
which I hear? 15. And Saul said, They have brought them from the
Amalekites: for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the
oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lore thy God; and the rest we have utterly
destroyed. 16. Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee
what the Lord hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.
17. And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed
thee king over Israel? 18. And the Lord sent thee on a journey, and
said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed. 19. Wherefore then didst thou not
obey the voice of the Lord, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst
evil in the sight of the Lord? 20. And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I
have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way which the Lord
sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly
destroyed the Amalekites. 21. But the people took of the spoil, sheep
and oxen, the chief of the things which should have been utterly
destroyed, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in Gilgal. 22. And Samuel
said, Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices,
as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than
sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. 23. For rebellion is as
the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.
Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, He hath also rejected
thee from being king.'--1 SAMUEL xv. 10-23.


Again the narrative takes us to Gilgal,--a fateful place for Saul,
There they 'made Saul king before the Lord'; there he had taken the
first step on his dark way of gloomy, proud self-will, down which he
was destined to plunge so far and fatally. There he had, in
consequence, received the message of the transference of the kingdom
from his house, though not from himself. Now, flushed with his victory
over Amalek, he has come there with his troops, laden with spoil. They
had made a swift march from the south where Amalek dwelt, passing by
Nabal's Carmel, where they had put up some sort of monument of their
exploit in a temper of vain-glory, very unlike the spirit which reared
the stone of help at Eben-ezer; and apparently they purpose sacrifices
and a feast. But Samuel comes into camp with no look of congratulation.
Probably the vigorous old man had walked that day from his home, some
fifteen miles off, and on the way seems to have picked up tidings of
Saul's victory and position, which ought to have reached him from the
king himself, and would have done so if Saul's conscience had been
clear. The omission to tell him was studied neglect, which revealed
much.

Samuel had 'cried unto the Lord all night,' if perchance the terrible
sentence might be reversed; and his cries had not been in vain, for
they had brought him into complete submission, and had nerved him to do
his work calmly, without a quiver or a pang of personal feeling, as
becomes God's prophet.


I. We must go back a step beyond this passage to understand it. Note,
first, the command which was disobeyed. The campaign against Amalek was
undertaken by express divine direction through Samuel's lips. It was
the delayed fulfilment of a sentence passed in the times of the
Conquest, but not executed then. The terrible old usages of that period
