"refractory and seditious," and in a threat to send his army and fleet
to Scotland, but these soon died away. The "refractory and seditious"
king eventually surrendered to the Covenanters, abolished courts,
canons, liturgies, and articles, and consented to the calling of a
General Assembly. This was the first free General Assembly of the Church
of Scotland for the last forty two years. It was held in Glasgow, on
21st November, 1638; and its work in the overthrow of Prelacy and the
royal supremacy and in the re-assertion of the spiritual independence of
the Church, was one of the most signal successes in the still
progressing conflict of the second Reformation.

Meanwhile, Charles II. was endeavouring to secure the recognition of his
absolute monarchy in England. There also he rigorously demanded
submission to despotic claims. By abolishing Parliaments, annulling
charters, appointing the star chamber, he introduced a reign of terror.
In the room of those legislative bulwarks of liberty, which the nation
had constructed through the skill and experience of generations, a "grim
tyranny," writes Dr. Wylie, "reared its gaunt form, with the terrible
accompaniments of star chamber, pillory, and branding irons. It reminded
one of sunset in the tropics. There the luminary of the day goes down at
a plunge into the dark. So had the day of liberty in England gone down
at a stride into the night of tyranny." The oppressed people turned to
the Covenanters of Scotland for sympathy and counsel. The negotiations
resulted in the preparation of an international league in defence of
religion and liberty. Against the banner of the King they raised the
banner of the Covenant. Alexander Henderson drafted the new Bond. The
document breathed the spirit of the National Covenant of Greyfriars,
condemned the Papal and Prelatic system, pled for a constitutional
monarchy, and outlined a comprehensive programme for future efforts in
extending the principles of the Reformation. On September 25, 1643, it
was subscribed in St. Margarets Church, Westminster. The members of
Parliament in England and the Westminster Assembly of Divines stood with
uplifted hands, and, as article after article was read, they took this
Oath to God. The Commissioners from Scotland to the Westminster Assembly
united with the people of England in the solemnity of the day. Thus the
representatives of the two nations stood before the Lord. This was the
Solemn League and Covenant, "the noblest in its essential features,"
writes Hetherington, "of all that are recorded among the international
transactions of the world." The Parliament and Westminster Assembly
issued instructions for its subscription throughout the kingdom. The
classes and the masses in England, Scotland, and Ireland received it
with gladness. In the face of a despotism unexampled in the history of
these lands, high and low, rich and poor, bowed themselves as one before
the throne of God. "For at that time day by day there came to David to
help him, until it was a great host like the host of God." Through this
League and Covenant, the people of the British Isles were protected by
Omnipotence, and were as invincible against the despotic forces that
assailed them as were the white cliffs of their native shores against
the huge galleons of the invincible Armada.

    "To Thine own people, with Thine arm,
      Thou didst redemption bring;
    To Jacob's sons and to the tribes
      Of Joseph that do spring."

These Covenants were prepared and subscribed in a spirit of deep piety.
But for the sterling spirituality of the Reformers there would never
have been a Covenanted Reformation. The work of Covenanting is itself a
lofty spiritual exercise, and requires a people possessing much of the
Spirit of the living God. Every public act for the sake of Christ should
be the outcome of an impassioned devotion. The reading of even the scant
records of those times of Covenanting, telling of the prayers, and
tears, and love, and courage of those who gave themselves to God, is
fitted to inspire the coldest heart with noblest emotions. Their inward
piety made them men of power, and enabled them to bear down every
barrier to the kingdom of their Lord erected by the craft of prince and
priest. It is when Israel would call her Lord, Ishi, my Husband, that
"the names of Baalim would be taken out of her mouth and be remembered
no more." It was when the Christians of the Mearns had communion at "the
table of the Lord Jesus," ministered by Knox, that they "banded
themselves to the uttermost of their power to maintain the true
preaching of the Evangel of Christ." The historian, Burton, describes
the movement that resulted in the subscription of the National Covenant
as the fruit of "a great religious revival," and the Reformation as "the
great revival." And Kirkton says, "I verily believe there were more
souls converted to Christ in that short time than in any other season
since the Reformation." Their intense piety prepared the Covenanters for
the persecutions to follow and for crowns of martyrdom. In and around
their whole Covenanting procedure, there was the atmosphere of a
paradise of communion with God.

These Covenants exhibited the great ecclesiastical breadth of the
Covenanters. The enthronement of the Word of God over the Church was one
of the commanding objects of the Reformers. If only the Church would
hear and honour Christ, her King, speaking in that Word, then would she
be clothed with the sun, and have on her head a crown of twelve stars.
The Reformers resolutely set themselves to apply the Word to the Church,
in all her departments; she must be such an institution as her Lord had
instructed. The will of priest, and prince, and presbyter, and people,
must be set aside in the presence of the will of her sole Sovereign. The
works of demolition and reconstruction must go on together. Built
according to the design of her Lord, her bulwarks, and towers, and
palaces shall command the admiration of the world. The pattern was not
taken from Rome, nor "even from Geneva, but from the blessed Word of
God." No quarter shall be given to hierarchy of Pope or prelate in the
government of the Church, to the "commandments of men" in the doctrine
of the Church, or to unscriptural rites in the worship of the Church. So
great was their success that the Reformers could say that they "had
borrowed nothing from the border of Rome," and had "nothing that ever
flowed from the man of sin." Often the battle raged most fiercely round
the standard of the independence of the Church, but ever the Covenanters
emerged from the struggle victorious. Valorously did they maintain that
Christ ought to "bear the glory of ruling His own kingdom, the Church,"
and fearlessly they defied the monarchs in their invasions of Messiah's
rights. Besides, they were not satisfied with the attainment of a united
Church in their own kingdom alone. They were filled with the spirit of
the Saviour's prayer, "That they all may be one." In the present times,
those who publicly contend for the reunion of a "few scattered
fragments" of the Reformed Church are belauded as men of large hearts
and liberal aims. The Covenanters embodied in their Solemn League and
Covenant an engagement to "bring the Churches of God in the three
kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity;" and they also
subsequently included the Churches on the Continent in their efforts for
ecclesiastical union. For the purposes of these ecclesiastical unions,
the Westminster Assembly sat for five years in Westminster, after
signing the Solemn League, and framed a basis for union in the standards
they produced--which still testify that the members of that Assembly
were in advance of their times. Yes, the Covenanters were not narrow,
sectarian, bigoted; but large, liberal, Catholic.

These Covenants were deeds of lofty imperial significance. The
reformation of the Church, however complete, would have been a limited
Reformation. There are two powers ordained of God and both must be
reformed. The comprehensive aims of the Covenanters embraced both State
and Church. Their deeds were civil as well as ecclesiastical. A Church
thoroughly reformed and Christian in a State unreformed and
anti-Christian, would never have satisfied the Reformers. The State also
must be no longer a vassal of the Pope, it must be a servant of the
blessed and only Potentate. God in His word here also as in the Church
must be joyfully granted the exclusive supremacy. The Covenanters vowed
to defend the King in the defence and preservation of the reformed
religion. They secured the recognition of the Church by Parliament. The
members of Parliament themselves became Covenanters. In short,
Christianity pervaded and adorned the constitution and administration of
civil government in the United Kingdom. The Covenanters were convinced
that no power, except that provided by the Word of God, could possibly
resist the arbitrary claims of the monarchs, secure the safety of the
State, and promote civil liberty in the land. Religion in the realm of
citizenship is the very crown of any realm. In the face of the
despotisms of Pope and Monarch, it would not have been surprising had
the Covenanters invented and endeavoured to apply to the State the
modern theory of religious equality, which denies the right of the State
to even acknowledge the Prince of the kings of the earth. If ever they
dreamt of such a theory, their thought of the supremacy of Jesus would
make it vanish as a dream. Much less would they ever admit the
possibility of deliverance by the theory of a concurrent recognition of
all religions, as this would lower a nation to the position of
heathenism with its "gods many," and would soon involve the strongest
empire in disaster. Papalism in the State in the ascendancy, absolute
Monarchism in the State, Secularism in the State, Polytheism in the
State--these are four despotisms, and must be flung with detestation out
of all Christian lands. The State that is not on the side of Christ, and
Christ alone, is in antagonism to all the moral forces of the universe.
Its throne is against the throne of the Highest. The Scottish
Covenanters placed the crown of the State on the Head of its rightful
Monarch, and so lifted their kingdom to imperial grandeur.

There are some spots of this world that have secured undying memorials,
as they have been stages for the settlement of questions of momentous
importance in the destinies of nations. There is Marathon in Greece,
Waterloo in France, Sadowa in Austria, and Trafalgar on the sea, but
probably the scenes associated with these pale in glory in the presence
of Greyfriars and Westminster, where nations won unparalleled victories
in the surrender of themselves to their Covenant God. These two spots
were the earthly centres of spiritual movements of mighty magnitude, and
possess in the eyes of the God of Heaven and of the principalities about
His Throne a splendour not eclipsed by any that ever shone on a
battlefield. When the day of millennial glory comes, the people of the
new Era will not look to the Sadowas and the Sedans, but to such spots
as these where the greatest heroes of the pre-millennial times reflected
millennial light and anticipated millennial triumphs. For there, by an
army without sword or spear, the absolutism of Monarchies and the
tyranny of Hierarchies were scattered like chaff before the wind. As the
Covenanters entered into and rejoiced in their vows to God, the
Imperialism of King Jesus conquered the Imperialism which prince and
priest had been enforcing with rigour; and this Imperialism shall be in
the ascendancy yet the world over when the empires of earth shall crown
the Christ of God as King of the Church and King of nations.

But the Covenanters have scarce time to estimate and enjoy the benefits
of their conquests before a tempest burst forth suddenly and threatened
the destruction of all the attainments of the past. In a moment of
national infatuation the Stuart dynasty was restored to the throne, and
Charles II. instantly proceeded to set up once more the Dagon of the
Royal Supremacy and enforce its recognition by all his power. On two
occasions he had subscribed the Solemn League, and he had issued
instructions in its favour, professing warm admiration of both Covenants
and of the Reformation. But now the perjured monarch employed all his
craft and power to overthrow the whole Covenanted Reformation in Church
and State. Parliament, the slave of his behests, passed the Act of
Supremacy, giving legislative sanction to all the rights he claimed. The
Acts Rescissory followed, declaring the Covenants unlawful and seditious
deeds, and repealing all Parliamentary laws in their favour. Then came
the abolition of Presbyterianism, Indulgences, the restoration of
Prelacy, the appointment of High Commission Courts, the ejection of all
ministers who would not obey the royal mandates, and the erection of
scaffolds. The monarch seemed determined to extinguish every spark of
liberty in the kingdom. The reign of peace was supplanted by a reign of
terror. The Covenants were broken, burnt, buried, by public orders. The
Covenanters met to worship God in the moorlands and dells, setting a
watch for the dragoons of Claverhouse. Thousands upon thousands of the
noblest patriots were imprisoned, tortured, mangled, shot. At times
their indignation burst forth through arms, as at Rullion Green,
Drumclog, and Bothwell Bridge. Their most brilliant victories were on
the scaffold when they passed triumphantly to the crown; for there was
"a noble army" of martyrs, from Argyle the proto-martyr of the "Killing
times," down to the youthful Renwick, last of the white-robed throng.
The ruin wrought by Charles I. in England "we have likened," says Dr.
Wylie, "to a tropical sunset, where night follows day at a single
stride. But the fall of Scotland into the abyss of oppression and
suffering under Charles II. was like the disastrous eclipse of the sun
in his meridian height, bringing dismal night over the shuddering earth
at the hour of noon."

    "The hills with the deep mournful music were ringing,
    The curlew and plover in concert were singing;
    But the melody died 'midst derision and laughter,
    As the hosts of ungodly rushed on to the slaughter.

    "When the righteous had fallen and the combat had ended,
    A chariot of fire through the dark cloud descended;
    The drivers were angels on horses of whiteness,
    And its burning wheels turned on axles of brightness.

    "On the arch of the rainbow the chariot is gliding;
    Through the paths of the thunder the horsemen are riding;
    Glide swiftly, bright spirits, the prize is before you,
    A crown never fading, a kingdom of glory."

Throughout the long thirty years of persecution, the decimated
Covenanters still lived. The Banner for Christ's Crown and Covenant was
still waved by them through the blood-stained land. Oftentimes they
issued declarations and protests against the tyranny of their
oppressors, many of which concluded with those inspiriting words at the
close of the last of them, "Let King Jesus reign and all His enemies be
scattered." The most famous of these papers was the Sanquhar
Declaration. On the 22nd of June, 1680, twenty horsemen rode into the
burgh of Sanquhar, and at the market cross read their declaration, in
which they "disowned Charles Stuart that has been reigning (or rather
tyrannizing as we may say) on the throne of Britain these years bygone,
as having any right, title to, or interest in the said Crown of Scotland
for government, as forfeited several years since by his perjury and
breach of Covenant both to God and His Kirk, and usurpation of His Crown
and Royal Prerogatives therein." That courageous act of those twenty
patriots proclaimed the doom of the House of Stuart.

    "Men called it rash, perhaps it was crime:
    Their deed flashed out God's will, an hour before the time."

A few years afterwards, the nations of England and Scotland endorsed the
action of Richard Cameron and his compatriots. The blood of Guthrie, and
Cargill, and MacKail had cried for vengeance, and the God of the
Covenanters hurled the Stuart dynasty from the throne. "Alas! is it not
true?" writes Carlyle in his _Heroes_, "that many men in the van do
always, like Russian soldiers, march into the ditch of Schwiednitz, and
fill it up with their dead bodies, that the rear may pass over them
dry-shod, and gain the honour? How many earnest, rugged Cromwells,
Knoxes, poor peasant Covenanters, wrestling, battling for very life, in
rough, miry places, have to struggle and suffer and fall, greatly
censured, bemired, before a beautiful Revolution of eighty-eight can
step over them in official pumps and silk stockings, with universal
three-times-three!"

The stedfast followers of the Covenanters expected that, on the
cessation of the persecution, there would be the restoration of the
whole Covenanted Reformation in Church and State. But their just
expectations were doomed to bitter disappointment. Neither by Church nor
State was any proposal ever seriously entertained of renewing the
national Covenants with God, as at the commencement of the Second
Reformation. Instead, the Acts Rescissory were permitted to remain on
the Statute-book, and the Covenants to lie under the infamy to which the
King and the Royalists had consigned them. The State exerted an Erastian
control of the Church, and the Church yielded submission. Her standards
were assigned her before she met; her assemblies were summoned and
prorogued at the sovereign's pleasure; Presbyterianism was established,
not because it possessed a _jus divinum_ but because the people willed
it; her government was controlled through the admission into her
ministry, by royal request, of many who had accepted indulgences and
were supporters of Prelacy. The whole period of the Second Reformation
was almost annihilated by the settlement of the Church, not according to
the periods, 1638 and 1643, but according to 1592. The Acts of the
Assemblies of the Revolution Church never once mention the Solemn League
and Covenant. Ministers who pled for its recognition exposed themselves
to the censures of their brethren. An attempt by the Church, soon after
the Revolution to assert the supremacy of Christ and the Church's
independence under Him, issued in the dissolution of the Assembly by the
royal Commissioner. And this departure of the Church and State at the
Revolution was strikingly and sadly endorsed when, at the Union with
England, Scotland consented that the Prelatic Establishment in England
should be allowed to remain "inviolable for ever." A few "stones had
been gathered from the wreck of the Reformation to be incorporated with
the new structure, but the venerable fabric itself was left in ruins."

Yes! the Revolution came but not the Reformation. The sword was returned
to its scabbard, but Church and State did not return to their Covenant
God. Into sympathy and fellowship with institutions founded on
principles subversive of those they had vowed to maintain, the faithful
followers of the Reformers and Martyrs could not enter. The banner for
Christ's Crown and Covenant had waved over the fields of Scotland when
the storms of persecution had raged most fiercely, and how could they be
justified in dropping it now when the God of Zion was pleased to command
a calm. The minority who thus preserved an unbroken relationship with
the pre-Revolution and Martyr period continued to meet in "Societies"
for sixteen years, when they were joined by a minister--Rev. John
M'Millan--who was driven out of the Revolution Church because of his
testimony for the whole Covenanted Reformation. Some years afterwards,
another minister espoused the cause then represented by Mr. M'Millan and
the United Societies, and this union resulted in the constitution of the
Reformed Presbytery. Two years afterwards, in 1712, the members of the
Reformed Presbyterian Church engaged in the work of Covenant Renovation,
at Auchensaugh, near Douglas, in Lanarkshire. Since that time this
Church has had an unbroken history, excepting a disruption in 1863, when
a majority departed from her distinctive position.

But what is the bearing of Scotland's Covenanted Reformation of three
centuries ago, on the Scotland of the present times? Has it no
instruction for all times? Is the whole prolonged struggle, with all its
chequered scenes, but a panorama on which spectators may gaze with but
passing emotions? Is it all but a story with interest, however
thrilling, for the study of the antiquarian? If so then the whole
contendings of Reformers and Covenanters and Martyrs sink into
insignificance indeed; they have been assigned a magnitude far beyond
their desert. If the doctrines and principles for whose application in
Church and State they fought and suffered, were unscriptural, then let
an enlightened posterity bury with shame the story of their warfare. Or,
if they were of mere temporary importance, then the Covenanters merit no
higher admiration than that accorded to those who, like the Armenians
now in Turkey, cry out against the oppressions of the civil power. But
these doctrines and principles were brought from the Word of God and
possess imperishable excellency. Their glory was not temporal; it is
eternal. And they shall yet undergo a resurrection and receive
universally a joyous recognition.

The obligation of these national Covenants on the British nation still
has been oftentimes demonstrated by indisputable arguments. The Word of
God teaches in the most pointed manner this principle of devolving
Covenant obligation. The God of Israel threatened His people with
chastisement for breaking the Covenant He had made with their fathers
four hundred years before. The Covenanters themselves bound their
posterity to God by express words in their bonds. The renovation of
Covenants at various times proceeded on this principle. In the time of
persecution, the sufferers again and again declared that they and others
were bound by the vows of their fathers. "God hath laid engagements upon
Scotland," said Argyle on the scaffold, "we are tied by Covenants to
religion and Reformation; and it passeth the power of all the
magistrates under heaven to absolve from the oath of God." The
scriptural character of their contents infers the perpetual obligation
of these Covenants. All who accept the Scriptures as the Word of God,
must renounce the errors condemned by the Covenants and contend for the
truths those who subscribed them pledged themselves to maintain. No
Christian should ever dare to seek relief from the claims of Christ; it
is his honour to acknowledge and live and die for them. These deeds were
as national as any in the statute-book and therefore they are obligatory
still, for the nation in its corporate character is the same now as
three hundred years ago. Their perpetual obligation may be resisted, as
it often is, on the plea that a people have no right to bind posterity.
But should such a plea be declared valid, then society would be thrown
into the wildest disorder and temporal ruin would overtake millions.
Heirs could be justified in refusing to fulfil the instructions of
testators; young people could condemn the baptismal vows taken by
parents; governments and cabinets could tear up the treaties of their
predecessors; and the nation itself could repudiate the national debt.
Those who enter into the possession of valuable estates, secured for
them by the toil and struggles of ancestry, do not renounce their
estates because they themselves were not consulted in the execution of
the title deeds. These deeds of the Covenanters, and the heritage
secured by them, were obtained through the noblest sacrifices. They were
deeds presented before the Throne, and registered in the Court of
heaven, and those who repudiate them incur the risk of an awful
forfeiture.

The present conditions in Church and State throughout the British Isles,
force upon the minds of all who admire the Reformation the facts that
the doctrines and principles of those Reformations are even now ignored
and despised, and that the systems which were cast out by the whole
nation through their Covenants are now in power. The objects sought by
the Covenants have not yet been realized. In several sad respects, both
Church and State are in positions of acute antagonism to those great
catholic objects. An ecclesiastical supremacy in the British sovereign
rears its head over these Covenanted kingdoms; for, as Blackstone
writes, this supremacy is "an inherent right of the British Crown." The
"Anti-Christian" hierarchy of Prelacy is implanted in the national
constitution and sustained by the whole prestige of the realm. Under its
lordly bewitchery, Erastianism prevails in the Established Churches of
the kingdom. The Oath of Allegiance implicates all who take it in an
acknowledgment of the ecclesiastical supremacy of the sovereign as "by
law established," and this Oath must be taken by every member of
Parliament before he can sit and vote in the House, under a penalty of
five hundred pounds. The basis of qualification for membership in
Parliament has been so much altered in recent times that Roman
Catholics, atheists, and now idolaters are admitted--changes which have
been demanded by the vast majority of the non-established Churches, who
are pleading for the exclusion of religion from all State institutions.
The Papacy, through its various agencies, is in receipt of more than a
million and a quarter pounds annually from the national funds. A
wide-spread reaction in favour of the Romish religion is going forward,
and is being powerfully assisted by the Romanizing movement in the
Church of England, and the Ritualistic in the Presbyterian Churches
throughout the kingdom.

Had the two nations and their Churches adhered to their National
Covenants and the Solemn League and Covenant, and to the formularies
prepared by the international Assembly at Westminster, the lovers of the
Covenanted Reformation would not have had these portentous conditions to
deplore to-day. Would their adherence to those deeds and documents have
done them any dishonour? And would it not be to the lasting honour of
their posterity now, if a movement were originated and carried through
to reproduce with all possible fulness the scenes of the past--another
Greyfriars, Edinburgh, and another St. Margarets, Westminster. But, even
apart from the historical aspect of the whole matter, the question may,
in the presence of these monstrous evils, be pressed upon the attention
and heart of all the people throughout the land? What ought to be done
to remove these evils and avert the disaster which their continuance
must entail? What ought the British subject, if a patriot, do, in the
face of evils which threaten the ruin of his kingdom? What ought the
Protestant to do, in the presence of a government and administration
which are daily advancing the court of Rome to power? What the
Presbyterian, who cannot take the Oath of Allegiance without committing
himself to the hierarchy of Prelacy? What the Christian, in the presence
of systems in imperial politics which have already dethroned Christ and
are hastening to expel Him from all national institutions? Is there no
means by which the Christian citizen can exonerate himself from
national sins, and free himself of all responsibility for national
calamity? Must he still exercise his right to vote and give his support
to governments which, in the hands of both political parties, are
augmenting rather than diminishing the existing evils? If the members of
one political party secede from that party, when changes they cannot
accept are welcomed to their programme, and henceforth refuse them their
support at the polling-booth, would it not be proper that men, sensible
of the utter inadequacy of the performances of both parties to meet the
evils under which the nation lies, should stand aloof from both
government and opposition? The leading Unionists in Ireland again and
again declared that they could not possibly enter into the proposed
Parliament under Home Rule which would be set up in Dublin, and their
declarations awakened universal sympathy. For reasons similar, should
not all Christian electors refuse to identify themselves with a
constitution and government which are based on principles subversive of
independence and liberty? Protests against existing evils are not
sufficient. Practical political dissent is imperatively demanded in the
interests of patriotism and Christianity. If even one-tenth of the
electors in the United Kingdom prepared a paper of grievances, setting
forth the present dishonours done to Christ nationally, and calling for
the abandonment of all that is unscriptural in the public policy, and
the adoption of what is scriptural and honouring to Christ, and
accompany this manifesto with a declaration that they cannot violate
their convictions by identifying themselves with the government till
reforms be conceded, would not such a movement touch the mind and heart
of the nation as no question in party politics has done for generations?
Their attitude of separation would carry extraordinary dignity and
power. And they could plead too that the evils of which they complained
were abjured by the nation universally, when the National Covenants
were taken in Scotland, England, and Ireland, and when Sovereigns and
Members of Parliament again subscribed them as a condition of the high
offices to which they were called. How could they loyally support a
