There is always a great deal of discrepancy between that which is best
for the gods and that which is best for the individual and for society
in general. One cannot serve man perfectly and the traditional gods as
well. It is, therefore, the contention of freethinkers that if man had
given to the service of man all that he had given to the gods in the
past, our present stage of civilization would be much in advance of
where it is today.

If there is anything in the discussion to follow that may seem
irreverent to the reader, the author wishes to call attention that he
has but presented well substantiated facts. It is not only his opinion
that he is voicing, but it is the facts as he has found them recorded in
the researches of numerous sincere men. Finally, it is the conviction of
all freethinkers that, as Professor James H. Leuba has stated, "It is,
furthermore, essential to intellectual and moral advances that the
beliefs that come into existence should have free play. Antagonistic
beliefs must have the chance of proving their worth in open contest. It
is this way scientific theories are tested, and in this way also,
religious and ethical conceptions should be tried. But a fair struggle
cannot take place when people are dissuaded from seeking knowledge, or
when knowledge is hidden."

The cultivation of the intellect is a duty that is imposed on all men.
Even those who still cling to the dying beliefs must admit the force of
what Winwood Reade said, "To cultivate the intellect is therefore a
religious duty; and when this truth is fairly recognized by men, the
religion which teaches that the intellect should be distrusted and that
it should be subservient to faith, will inevitably fall."

When the principles of freethought shall have dispelled the intellectual
cloud of the God-idea and the vanishing dream of a heaven which has too
long drawn men's eyes away from this earth, then, and then only, will
these words of Cicero have widespread meaning:

"Men were born for the sake of men, that each should assist the
others."




THE NECESSITY OF ATHEISM




CHAPTER I

THE EVOLUTION OF RELIGIOUS BELIEFS

    _To early man, the gods were real in the same sense that the
    mountains, forests, or waterfalls which were thought to be their
    homes were real. For a long time the spirits that lived in drugs or
    wines and made them potent were believed to be of the same order of
    fact as the potency itself. But the human creature is curious and
    curiosity is bold. Hence, the discovery that a reported god may be a
    myth._

    MAX CARL OTTO.


The geologists estimate that the age of the earth is somewhere between
80 and 800 millions of years; that the Neanderthal race existed for more
than 200,000 years; that between 40,000 and 25,000 years ago, as the
Fourth Glacial Period softened towards more temperate conditions, a
different human type came upon the scene and exterminated Homo
Neanderthalensis. These first "true men" descended from some more
ape-like progenitors and are classed by ethnologists with the same
species as ourselves, and with all human races subsequent to them under
one common, specific term, Homo Sapiens.

The age of cultivation began with the neolithic phase of human affairs
about 10,000 or 12,000 years ago; about 6000 or 7000 years ago men began
to gather into the first towns and to develop something more than the
loose-knit tribes which had hitherto been their highest political
organization. Altogether, there must have elapsed about 500,000 years
from the earliest ape-like human stage of life on this planet to the
present time.

It necessarily follows that the age of our present civilization is by no
means that which the Bible stipulates, but is merely an atom in the vast
space-time of this earth. The reason for this disparity is that with the
development of the mind of man throughout the ages there was conceived
also his self-made religious systems, based on a subjective
interpretation of the universe, and not on an objective one, devoid of
emotional bias.

"Primitive man did not understand the natural cause of shadows, echoes,
the birth and death of vegetable and animal organisms. Of this ignorance
religion was born, and theology was evolved as its art of expression."
(_Draper._)

Our story takes us back some twelve thousand years to neolithic man.
Squatting in his rude hovel or gloomy cave, he listens to the sounds of
a storm without. The howling of the wind, the flashes of lightning, and
crashing of thunder give rise to that elemental emotion--fear. Fear was
always with him, as he thought of the huge stones that fell and crushed
him, and the beasts which were so eager to devour him. All things about
him seemed to conspire for his death: the wind, lightning, thunder, rain
and storm, as well as the beasts and falling trees; for in his mind he
did not differentiate animate from inanimate objects. Slowly, through
his groping mind there evolved the thought, due to past experience, that
he could not contend with these things by physical force, but must
subdue them with magic; his magic consisted of the beating of crude
drum-like instruments, dances, and the mumbling of words.

Upon falling asleep he dreams, and awakening, he finds that he is still
in the same place where he had lain the night before. Yet, he is certain
that during the night he had traveled to his favorite wood and killed an
animal whose tender flesh he was still savoring. Since the conception
of a dream was as yet foreign to him, the logical conclusion he arrived
at was that he had both a body and a spirit. If he possessed a body and
a spirit, then all things about him, he reasoned, must likewise possess
a similar spirit. Some spirits, he felt, were friendly; some, hostile to
him. The hostile spirits were to be feared; but that powerful factor,
"hope," had at last entered into his mind, and he hoped to be able to
win them over to the camp of friendly spirits.

In this manner, man passed from the stage of contending against the
spirits to one of placating them. It was believed that certain men
carried more favor with the spirits than others, and these became the
original priests, called the "Shamans."

Another expedient for warding off evil spirits was by means of the
fetish. The primitive fetish was an object containing an active friendly
spirit, which, if worn by the individual, protected him from the evil
spirits. In a short while the manufacture of fetishes became a sacred
profession, and the men who were thought to fashion the best ones became
the professional holy men of the period, the priests.

At first, idols were used to drive away the evil spirits, and then, the
conception changed to one of attracting the good spirits to man. From
the individual fetish man passed to tribal ones, which in their first
form were huge boulders and trees.

As the primitive mind gained cunning, it slyly smeared the surface of
the idol with oily substances, hoping that the spirit, like some wild
beast, would come and lick, be gratified, and remain in the idol. When
some favorable signs denoted that a good spirit had entered into the
idol, it was regularly smeared with oils and then blood, in the hope
that the spirit would be pleased sufficiently to remain there
permanently. As time went on, it became a custom, a rite, and the
spirit having performed to the satisfaction of the tribe, ways were
invented to manifest their gratitude. Instead of smearing the idol with
blood, it was thought more fitting that an animal be killed and offered
to the good spirit contained within the idol. In this manner arose the
beginning of "sacrifice." It was at this time, when man began to
persuade the idols or spirits to do things for his benefit that religion
began.

Slowly, slowly, down through the ages, as the mind of man progressed,
his self-made religious conceptions advanced. He now worshiped idols,
and these idols were his gods. The Celts, the Babylonians, the Greeks,
the Romans, all had their idols. All were certain that their gods were
the true ones, and that the others were all inferior and even false
gods. But, is the modern worshipper who is contemptuous of the ancients
very different from them?

The centuries pass by, and in their wake is man's self-conceived
religion. Now, some men take the prerogative in the manufacture of
religion, and there evolve Brahmanism, Jainism, Buddhism, Hinduism,
Confucianism, Taoism, and Zoroastrianism, all inspired, all
supernatural, and with their myriads of followers who believed and still
believe that theirs is the only true creed.

Very recently, in the time-scale of our development, man adopted the
methods of "Big Business," and the religion of many gods and idols,
polytheism, has given way to one Supreme God, monotheism. Man found that
it made for simplicity and saved his valuable time if he worshiped one
god, instead of obeying the hitherto many. The "Chosen People" took it
upon themselves to bring the next divinely concocted conception of a
Supreme God, and they manufactured the creed of Judaism.

After many years, a rift arose among the Jews, and the sectarians were
defeated and expelled. Foiled in their first object, they cast aside
the laws of Moses and offered the Hebrew religion without the Hebrew
ceremonies to the Greek and Roman world. Jesus was the man who prepared
the way for this remarkable event.

When Mohammed conceived the divine conception that he would follow in
the footsteps of his brother-prophets, Moses and Jesus, the latest of
the major religions was revealed.

At the present time, the Hebrews and Christians, although worshiping the
same Jehovah, are disputing with each other, and indeed, amongst
themselves, with regard to the various attributes, amorous pursuits, and
lineal descendants of the Godhead. Jehovah himself appears to be on the
decline and his unity is steadily disintegrating into a paradoxical
trinity. But we are progressing, for in 1300 years no new prophet has
arisen, and no new divine revelation is perturbing our race; the old
ones, however, are causing quite enough disturbance.

It would be of value for the modern religionist who believes that the
worship of a deity in our own age is far removed from the worship of an
idol by our savage ancestors, to retrace his steps and compare the
savage mind worshiping his particular idol and a so-called civilized
mind of today worshiping his deity.

The savage prayed to his idol, that is, he _begged_. He begged the idol
to watch over his flock or his fields. The modern prays, that is he begs
of his idol, his deity, to prosper his business, to guard his life, and,
as one of my "super-devout" acquaintances recently informed me, on the
eve of an important golf match, for the Deity to give him endurance; in
other words, "to cut down his golf score."

The savage voiced his incantations; the modern sings hymns, that is he
flatters. There is still a great deal of the charlatanry of the magician
in the construction of the houses of prayer, with the sunlight shut out
and only filtering through the leaded and multi-colored panes, the
semidarkness, the solemnity, the rise and swell of the organ; all things
combined to overcome the senses, to play upon the emotions, and to
subdue the reason.

The savage made sacrifices to his idols, that is, he paid tribute,
chiefly out of fear, but partly in the hope of getting something better
in return. The modern does not offer human or animal sacrifice, it is
true; but it must be borne in mind that the wealth of the savage
consisted of his sheep, oxen, oils, and wines, not money. Today, the
devout offer a sacrifice of money to the Deity. We are all familiar with
the requests of religious institutions for gifts, which nearly always
finish with the phrase, "And the Lord will repay you many fold." In
other words, sacrifice part of your worldly goods to the idol, and he
will repay with high interest. He will give in return long life and much
riches. The savage was afraid to utter the real name of his god, it was
taboo. The modern says, "Take not the name of the Lord in vain." Even
today, the followers of Moses consider it taboo to utter the name of
Jehovah except in prayer.

The present-day methods of worship are no different from those of the
savage; the method of supplication has changed with the advance of the
years, but the fundamental ideas at the base of all worship are just as
crude today as they were 4000 years ago. Primitive man was no more a
fetishist than is the modern Catholic. The latter still wears medals and
images suspended from the neck and pinned to the inner clothing.

Moreover, a survey of the various religions extant indicates that the
religious factor is no less prevalent today than it was in primitive
societies.

In Greenland, one finds, that through nearly all of its vast area
religion has no place, but that is chiefly the result of its being
largely uninhabited. In Alaska, the population is for the most part
Catholic, although the natives are animists. In Canada, 33 per cent are
Catholic, the rest are mainly Protestant. In the United States, 20 per
cent are Catholic, 3.5 per cent are Jewish, and the remainder are
Protestants. Mexico, Central and South America, are almost entirely
Roman Catholic. In Europe, Russia was until recently dominantly Greek
Orthodox; the Scandinavian peninsula, the English Isles, and Central
Europe are dominantly Protestant, while France, Portugal, Spain, Italy,
and the rest of the countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea are
Catholic. The rest of the continent is divided between Jews and
Mohammedans. In Asia, the entire vast area of Siberia is only sparsely
settled and its religions include Animism, Taoism, and Christianity. In
China, we find the land of three truths, Confucianism, Taoism, and
Buddhism. India, Tibet, and Burma are dominated by Hinduism and
Buddhism; Arabia, Persia, and the rest of the continent are Mohammedan.
In Japan, there are the Shintoists. The East Indies, where the
population is native, are Animistic. In Australia, the dominant religion
is Protestantism. In North Africa, the west coast inhabitants are
Mohammedans, while the Abyssinians are Christians. There are some Coptic
Christians, in Egypt, while in the Congo and South African countries
down to the Cape Settlements, the natives are Animists. The Cape
Settlements themselves are Protestants.

More concretely, it is estimated that 10.7% of the inhabitants of the
globe are Protestants; 16.2% are Catholics; 7.1% are Greek Orthodox; 10%
are Animists; 1.4% are Shintoists; 18.2% are Confucians and Taoists;
12.8% are Hindus; 8.4% are Buddhists; 13.4% are Moslems; and 1.8% are
Hebrews and unclassified sects. Truly, a religious babel! and 10% of all
the inhabitants of the globe, about the same number of people who
profess to Protestantism, are Animists. This is the lowest stage of
primitive religion, and millions of humans are still quagmired in the
sloth of a primitive faith which once must have been the faith of all
human beings.

The Mohammedan, the Jew, the Christian, will readily agree that the
animism, the fetishism, and idolatry of the savage were man-made foolish
beliefs. They can readily perceive that there was nothing supernatural,
nothing revealed, in such beliefs; but they do not realize that to him,
in his infantile development, the fetish and the idol were just as
supernatural and superior as the modern conception of a Supreme Being.
In each age man creates his god, in his own image, and within the
confines of his own mental development. The mind of man has expanded so
that it has conquered more and more of his environment; it has grown and
wrested from nature those secrets which constitute his civilization.
Along with this has progressed the conception of a deity, but only to a
certain extent. The mind has embellished the outward appearance of its
gods, consolidated them, and built upon them intricate systems of
theology, upon which feed vast hordes of clergy; but the basic
conception, the fundamental principle, that there must be something
supernatural to explain something which we cannot explain at the present
moment, that conception still drugs the mind of man. Primitive man did
not understand the meaning of lightning, thunder, shadows, echoes, etc.,
and he placed these among the supernatural phenomena. The modern mind
explains these phenomena, understands the laws governing their
production. Yet, it is this same modern mind which persists in going
back to our savage ancestors and their mental sloth, by attributing the
myriads of phenomena which still elude its present stage of mental
development, to a particular idol, this time, a Supreme Being.
Brahmanism, Jainism, Buddhism, Hinduism, Confucianism, Taoism,
Zoroastrianism, Hebrewism, Mohammedanism, Christianity--which is the
true religion?

Let us suppose for a moment that an inhabitant of Mars, if there be
such, were by a "miracle" to be transported to this earth and endowed
with the mental capacity of the average inhabitant of the earth (a thing
which perhaps would not be so flattering to our guest), were to be
approached by a zealot of each one of these faiths, who hoped to convert
this stranger to its ranks. Since the factor of coercion by force of
environment to which each of these earthlings was subject would
naturally be absent, the Martian would be in a position to make a fair
choice. How much would the visitor be impressed by the statements of the
Christian, Mohammedan, or Jew, when advised that unless he embraced
their particular creed, he would be damned to eternal torture in their
particular Hell?

If a Christian were to accost him and endeavor to put the fear of God
into him, and if our visitor, being from Mars, already knew that of the
world's population, only about 27 per cent are Christians, and the other
73 per cent are Non-Christians, is it logical to suppose that he would
ever be convinced that an omniscient, omnipotent, benevolent, Supreme
Being would select only one quarter of his children whom he had created
for redemption, with the infallible knowledge that nearly three-quarters
of them would be confined to Hell for not believing what He could have
made them believe if He were truly omnipotent, omniscient, and
benevolent? Would he not rather reply that on his planet such a "Father"
who would select some of his children for rewards, and maliciously
