the King of the sermon there mentioned, and may possibly even yet be in
existence somewhere; if so, it cannot but be worth the trouble of
recovery and publication.

   1737, December, Friday, 23rd.  "The Master [_i.e._ Sir Joseph Jekyll,
   Master of the Rolls] told me that the King desired that Dr. Butler,
   Clerk of the Closet to the late Queen, might preach before him in the
   Princess Amelia's apartments.  He preached upon the subject of being
   bettered by afflictions, which affected His Majesty so much that he
   desired the sermon, and assured him that he would do something very
   good for him.  The Master desired that it might be known publicly, it
   was told him by the Bishop of Oxford [Seeker].  The Master seemed
   mightily pleased, and was in hopes it would be of great service to the
   public as well as his private family, which will be a pleasure to
   every body, and make even the death of Her Majesty (so great a seeming
   loss) of advantage to the nation."

I have been mainly induced to publish these Remains by the pleasure with
which some copies I had given away privately have been received, and I
confess that the fruit I should be most gratified to see, would be the
recovery of some longer work, not less worthy of its Author's reputation.

EDWARD STEERE, LL.D.

University College, London,
1st September, 1853.




FRAGMENTS.


From the autographs of Bp. Butler now in the library at the British
Museum.  [Add. MS. 9815.]



I.


God cannot approve of any thing but what is in itself Right, Fit, Just.
We should worship and endeavour to obey Him with this Consciousness and
Recollection.  To endeavour to please a man merely, is a different thing
from endeavouring to please him as a wise and good man, _i.e._
endeavouring to please him in the particular way, of behaving towards him
as we think the relations we stand in to him, and the intercourse we have
with him, require.

Almighty God is to be sure infinitely removed from all those human
weaknesses which we express by the words, captious, apt to take offence,
&c.  But an unthinking world does not consider what may be absolutely due
to Him from all Creatures capable of considering themselves as His
Creatures.  Recollect the idea, inadequate as it is, which we have of
God, and the idea of ourselves, and carelessness with regard to Him,
whether we are to worship Him at all, whether we worship Him in a right
manner, or conceited confidence that we do so, will seem to imply
unspeakable Presumption.  Neither do we know what necessary, unalterable
connexion there may be, between moral right and happiness, moral wrong
and misery.

Sincerity is doubtless the thing, and not whether we hit the right
manner, &c.  But a sense of the imperfection of our worship, apprehension
that it may be, and a degree of fear that it is, in some respects
erroneous, may perhaps be a temper of mind not unbecoming such poor
creatures as we are, in our addresses to God.  In proportion as we are
assured that we are honest and sincere, we may rest satisfied that God
cannot be offended with us, but indifference whether what we do be
materially, or in the nature of the thing abstracted from our way of
considering it, Good and Right,--such indifference is utterly
inconsistent with Sincerity.

No person who has just notions of God can be afraid of His displeasure
any further than as he is afraid of his own Character, whether it be what
it ought: but so far as a man has reason to fear his own character, so
far there must be reason to fear God's displeasure, or disapprobation;
not from any doubt of His Perfection and Goodness, but merely from the
belief of it.

Is it possible that people can be Scepticks in _Opinion_, and yet without
any doubtfulness, or solicitude about their _Actions_ and _Behaviour_?



II.


What a wonderful incongruity it is for a man to see the doubtfulness in
which things are involved, and yet be impatient out of action, or
vehement in it!  Say a man is a Sceptick, and add what was said of
Brutus, _quicquid vult valde vult_, and you say, there is the greatest
Contrariety between his Understanding and his Temper that can be
expressed in words.

* * * * *

In general a man ought not to do other people's duty for them; for their
duty was appointed them for their exercise; and besides, who will do it
in case of his death?  Nor has a man any right to raise in others such a
dependance upon him as that they must be miserable in case of his death,
tho' whilst he lives he answers that dependance.

* * * * *

Hobbs' definition of Benevolence, that 'tis the love of power is base and
false, but there is more of truth in it than appears at first sight; the
real Benevolence of men being, I think, for the most part, not indeed the
single love of power, but the love of power to be exercised in the way of
doing good; that is a different thing from the love of the good or
happiness of others by whomsoever effected, which last I call single or
simple Benevolence.  How little there is of this in the world may appear
by observing, how many persons can bear with great tranquillity that a
friend or child should live in misery, who yet cannot bear the thought of
their death.

Good men surely are not treated in this world as they deserve, yet 'tis
seldom, very seldom their goodness which makes them disliked, even in
cases where it may seem to be so: but 'tis some behaviour or other, which
however excusable, perhaps infinitely overbalanced by their virtues, yet
is offensive, possibly wrong; however such, it may be, as would pass off
