other. It is generally held by students of liturgy that the collects
were originally used in Mass only and were introduced into the Office at
a time much later than their introduction into the Mass books.

In the Masses for Holy Week we see the collects in their oldest existing
form. The rite of the Mass has been shortened at all other seasons, and
there remains now only the greeting, _Oremus_, and the collect itself.
The _Oremus_ did not refer immediately to the collect, but rather to the
silent prayer that went before it. This also explains the shortness of
the older collects. They are not the prayer itself, but its conclusion.
One short sentence summed up the petitions of the people. It is only
since the original meaning of the collect has been forgotten that it has
become itself a long petition with various references and clauses
(compare the collects for the Sundays after Pentecost with those of
modern feasts)--(_Cath. Encyl._, art. "Collects").

The following examples which are not extreme, may help to make clear and
emphatic the matter of the shortness of the old and the length of the
new collects.

"Protector in te sperantium, Deus, sine quo nihil est validum, nihil est
sanctum: multiplica super nos misericordiam tuam; ut te rectore, te
duce, sic transeamus per bona temporalia, ut non amittamus aeterna.
Per Dominum."

_Translation_--"O God, the Protector of all that hope in Thee, without
Whom nothing is sure, nothing is holy, bountifully bestow on us, Thy
mercy, that Thou being our ruler and our guide, we may so pass through
temporal blessings that we lose not the eternal. Through our Lord ..."
(Collect for third Sunday after Pentecost.)

"Omnipotens et misericors Deus qui beatam Joannam Franciscam tuo amore
succensam admirabili spiritus fortitudine per omnes vitae semitas in via
perfectionis donasti, quique per illam illustrare Ecclesiam tuam nova
prole voluisti: ejus meritis et precibus concede ut qui infirmitatis
nostrae conscii de tua virtute confidimus coelestis gratiae auxilio,
cuncta nobis adversantia vicamus. Per Dominum ..."

_Translation_-"Almighty and merciful God Who inflaming blessed Jane
Frances with love, didst endow her with a marvellous fortitude of spirit
to pursue the way of perfection In all the paths of life, and wast
pleased through her to enrich Thy Church with a new offspring, grant by
her merits and intercession that we, who, knowing our own weakness,
trust in Thy strength, may by the help of Thy heavenly grace overcome
all things that oppose us. Through our Lord" (Collect of St. Jane
Frances Fremiot De Chantal, August 21).

_Rubrics_. In Vespers and Lauds the collect is said after the antiphons
of the _Magnificat_ and _Benedictus_, unless the _Preces_ (q.v.) are to
be said in these hours. Then the _Preces_ are said after the antiphons,
and the collects follow after them immediately. The collect of a ferial
Office is found in Office of the previous Sunday, except in ferias of
Lent and Rogation days which have special and proper collects.

At Prime and the other Hours the collect is said after the little
respond, unless the _Preces_ be recited. They precede the collect. At
Compline the collect is said after the antiphon _Salva nos_ if the
_Preces_ be not recited.

At Prime and Compline the collects of the Psalter are never changed
except during the last three days of Holy Week. In this triduum, in all
hours up to and including None on Holy Saturday the collect is said
after the Psalm _Miserere_.

Before reciting the collect in the Office, everyone in deacon's orders
or in priesthood says _Dominus vobiscum, Et cum spiritu tuo_, and this
is said even if the Office be said privately. All others reciting the
Office say _Domine exaudi orationem meam. Et clamor meus ad te veniat_.
Then the word _Oremus_ is prefixed to the recitation of the collect, and
at the end, _Amen_ is said. If there be only one collect, the _Dominus
vobiscum_ or the _Domine exaudi_ with the responses _Et cum spiritu tuo;
Et clamor meus ad te veniat_ is repeated after the _Amen_. But if there
be more than one collect, before each is said its corresponding antiphon
and versicle and also the word, _Oremus_. After the last collect is
said, the _Dominus vobiscum_ and _Et cum spiritu tuo_ are repeated. Then
we add _Benedicamus Domino; Deo Gratias, Fidelium animae_.... This
latter verse is not a constant sequel to the _Benedicamus_, as we see in
Prime, where the verse _Pretiosa_ succeeds it; and again in Compline it
is succeeded by _Benedicat et custodiet_. The concluding words of the
prayers or collects vary. If the prayer is addressed to God the Father,
the concluding words are _Per Dominum_ (see the collects given above).
If the prayer be addressed to God the Son, the concluding words are _Qui
vivis et regnas_--e.g., Deus qui in tuae caritatis exemplum ad fidelium
redemptionem .... Qui vivis et regnas (Collect for St. Peter Nolasco's
feast, 3ist January). If in the beginning of the prayer mention is made
of God the Son, the ending should be _Per eundem, e.g.,_ Domine Deus
noster? qui, beatae Brigittae per Filium tuurn unigenitum secreta
coelestia revelasti; ... Per eundem Dominum (collect for feast, 8th
October). But if the mention of God the Son is made near the end of the
collect, the ending is _Qui tecum vivit et regnal, e.g._, "Famulorum
tuorum, quaesumus, Domine.... Genitricis Filii tui Domini nostri
intercessione salvemur: Qui tecum vivit et regnat" (collect of
Assumption, 15th August). If the name of the Holy Ghost occur in the
prayer, the conclusion is, _In unitate ejusdem Spiritus sancti, e.g._,
"Deus, qui hodierna die corda ... in eodem spiritu recta ... _in imitate
ejusdem Spiritus_" (collect: for Pentecost Sunday).

The following lines, giving the rules for terminations, are well known
and are useful, as a help to the memory:--

     _Per Dominum_ dicas, si Patrem quilibet oras
     Si Christum memores, _Per eundem_, dicere debes
     Si loqueris Christo, _Qui vivis_ scire memento;
     _Qui tecum_, si sit collectae finisin ipso
     Si Flamen memores _ejusdem_ die prope finem

When there are several collects an ending or conclusion is added to the
first and last only. _Dominus vobiscum_ is said before the first collect
only, but each collect is preceded by the word _Oremus_, unless in the
Office for the Dead.

_Explanation of the Rubric_. Where a feast is transferred either
occasionally or always and its collect contains words such as _Hanc
diem, hodiernom diem_, it is not allowed to change the wording, without
permission of the Congregation of Rites (S.R.C., 7th September, 1916).

If the collect of a commemoration be of the same form as the prayer of
the feast, the former is taken from the common of saints, in
proper place.

_Dominus vobiscum_. This salutation is of great antiquity. It was the
greeting of Booz to his harvestmen (Ruth, ii. 4). The prophet used the
selfsame salutation to Azas. And the Angel Gabriel expressed the same
idea, _Dominns tecum_, to the Blessed Virgin. It was blessed and
honoured by our Lord Himself, when to His apostles he said "Ecce ego
vobiscum sum omnibus diebus" (St. Matt. 28. 20). This beautiful
salutation passed into Church liturgy at an early date, probably in
apostolic times. Its use in liturgy was mentioned at the Council of
Braga (563), and it is found in the Sacramentarium Gelasianum (sixth
century). These words are called the divine salutation. They mean that
the priest who utters them is at peace with all clergy and people and
thus wishes God to remain with them--the highest and holiest of wishes.
For the presence of God, Who is the source of every good and the author
of every best gift, is a certain pledge of divine protection and of that
peace and consolation which the world cannot give. This formula is used
even in private recitation of the Office, as the priest prays in union
with and in the name of the Church.

The words _Et cum spiritu tuo_ add a new and further significance to the
salutation; for it is the spirit, the human soul, that prays, and when
the spirit prays in the name of the Church for her children, its work
is a work of high spiritual order, demanding the use of all the
soul's powers,

_Oremus._ This exhortation is of very great antiquity, and in this form
is found in the liturgies of St. James and of St. Mark. In those days it
was said by the priest in a loud voice. The priest, the mediator,
following the example of the great Mediator, Christ, calls others to
join with him in prayer. St. Augustine tells us, that sometimes after
pronouncing the word _Oremus_, the priest paused for a while and the
people prayed in silence, and then the priest "collected" the united
prayers of the congregation and offered them to God, hence the name
_collect_ (St. Augustine, Epistle 107), (_cf._ Probst., _Abendl
Messe_, p. 126).

_Invocation and Conclusion_. Prayer is addressed generally to God the
Father. This practice is in accordance with the example and doctrine of
Christ, "Father, I give Thee thanks" (St. John, xi, 41); "Amen, amen, I
say to you; if you ask the Father anything in My name, he will give it
to you" (St. John, xvi. 23). "And He taught us to say 'Our Father.'" In
the early ages of the Church, seldom was prayer addressed to God, the
Son. Innocent III. tells us that the reason for the practice was a fear
that such prayer might lead the catechumens, the Jews or the Pagans
converted to Christianity, to allege or to believe that Christians
worshipped several Gods. However, with the advent of the early heresies,
it became necessary to formulate prayers witnessing the divinity of
Christ and His equality in all things to the Father and the Holy Ghost.
In some of the great prayers of the liturgy, the three Persons of the
Holy Trinity are named to show their equality and unity of nature and
substance. Nearly all the prayers of this kind are the products of the
Church during the storms of early heresy against the divinity, nature or
personality of Christ.

The conclusions of the prayers generally contain the words _Per Dominum
nostrum Jesum Christum_, because all graces come through Jesus Christ,
our Lord and Saviour, Who pleads, as Mediator between God and Man, as He
Himself has said, "No man cometh to the Father but by Me" (St.
John, xiv. 6).

Hence, in every collect, we may distinguish five parts: the invocation,
the motive, the petition, the purpose, the conclusion.

(1) The Invocation takes some form such as _Deus, Domine_.

(2) The motive is commonly introduced by the relative _qui_; e.g., Deus,
_qui corda fidelium sancti spiritus illustratione docuisti_.

(3) The petition, the body or centre or substance of the prayer, is
always noted for the solemn simplicity of language, which marks
liturgical prayer, e.g., _Multiplica_ super nos misericordiam tuam.

(4) The purpose is an enforcement of the petition. It has reference,
generally, to the need of the petitions and is marked usually with the
word _ut_. "Multiplica super nos misericordiam tuam, _ut_ quae, nobis
agendis praecipis, te miserante adimplere possimus" (prayer for feast of
St. Patrick).

(5) The _conclusion_ varies, e.g., "Per Dominum nostrum," "Per eundem
Dominum," etc.

"Those who pay intelligent attention to the liturgical chant at High
Mass, and in particular to the chant of the celebrant, will be able to
discover for themselves that the intonations used in the singing of the
collect and the Post-Communion serve, as a rule, to mark off two at
least of the main divisions indicated. Two inflections, a greater and a
lesser, occur in the body of the prayer, the greater for the most part
coming at the close of the 'motive,' while the lessor concludes the
'petition' and produces the purpose of the prayer. When the prayers are
correctly printed, as in the authentic 'Missale Romanum,' the place of
the inflexions is indicated by a colon, 'punctum principals,' and a
semicolon, 'semi-punctum,' respectively. These steps, it will he
observed, indicate, not precisely 'breaks in the sense' (as Haberl
incorrectly says) but rather the logical divisions of the sentence,
which is not quite the same thing" (Father Lucas, S.J., _Holy Mass_,
chap, vi.).

The question is often asked, why _Dominus vobiscum_ is said after the
collect, or prayer. Writers on liturgy reply that it is so placed
because Christ frequently used the salutation _Pax vobis_, and the
priest in public prayer holds the place of Christ, and as he, the
priest, used this formula of salvation before the collect to obtain the
spirit of prayer and the grace of God, he repeats it so that these gifts
may be retained.

In the collects, the fatherland of the saints is rarely found, because
the saints' true home and fatherland is heaven, where they were born
again to life eternal, and their fatherland is not this valley of exile
where they spent their temporal life. Nor are their surnames given in
the collects (see the collect of St. Jane Frances Fremiot de Chantel
given on p. 180). But it is not infrequent in the collects to find
certain appellations characterising a saint or noting some special
prerogative or wonderful gift of grace. The Church's collects record the
wonderful gifts of St. John Chrysostom ("the golden-mouthed"), St. Peter
Chrysologus ("qui ob auream ejus eloquentiam Chrysologi cognomen adeptus
est") (_Rom. Brev_.). Sometimes the nation or earthly home of a saint is
given in a collect to distinguish one saint from another. This is seen
in the case of saints bearing the name of Mary, which if used absolutely
or unqualifiedly refers to the Mother of God. See the collects for St.
Mary Magdalen, St. Mary of Egypt, etc.

The collect or prayer is placed at the end of the Hours to collect or
gather up the fruits of all the prayers that precede; to beg from God
that His grace may follow our actions as it precedes them; that the
prayer may be a shield and buckler against all temptations which may be
encountered. The prayers at Prime and at Compline never vary, to remind
us, the old writers tell us, that all our acts should be invariably
referred to God. In the early ages of the Church, all public prayers,
both in Mass and in Office were offered up by both priests and people
with outstretched arms. This practice is observed still, in a certain
way, in Mass.

_Benedicamus_ is the prayer to thank God for all His graces.

_Fidelium animae_. This prayer is said after every Hour, unless where
the hour is said in choir and followed immediately by Mass. It Is
omitted, too, before the Litany.

De Precibus (Title XXXIV.). These are prayers which are said at some of
canonical Hours, before the collect or oratio. They commence with Kyrie
eleison or Pater Noster. They consist of versicles and responses and
these differ from other versicles and responses, which are generally
historic, e.g., In omnem terram exivit sonus eorum, Amavit eum Dominus
et laudavit eum. But the versicles and responses of the _preces_ are
always a call to God or an exhortation to praise God (e.g., Fiat
misericordia tua, Domine), super nos, Quemadmodum speravimus in te (see
Prime, infra, page 193). These prayers are of great antiquity, mention
of them being found in the works of Amalare (ninth century).

They are said in some Offices in Vespers, Compline, Lauds, Prime and
Little Hours. Before the reform of the Breviary by Pope Pius X,, the
Preces at Vespers contained six short prayers and the Psalm, Miserere.
In the new Breviary nine short prayers are given in the Preces--the six
former prayers being retained and three new ones, Pro Papa; Pro
antistite; Pro benefactoribus, being added. The Miserere is omitted. The
same additions were made in Lauds and the Psalm, De Profundis omitted.

In Prime and the Little Hours, the preces are unchanged standing in the
new Breviary as in the old.

_Rubrics_. The Preces are recited in the Office of--

(1) Prime and Compline on certain days;

(2) Lauds, Prime, Terce, Sext, None, Vespers and Compline of certain
feasts.

The preces feriales at Lauds and Vespers are the same in structure. They
have the same structure in Terce, Sext, None, but differ in character.
The preces dominicales at Prime and Compline have a form of their own,
additions being made in the preces of Prime when said on a feria.

1. The Preces Feriales are said at Lauds on Ferias of Lent, Advent and
Passiontide, Ember days, except Ember day at Pentecost and on Vigils
(except on Vigil of Christmas, Epiphany, Ascension, Friday after
Ascension and Vigil of Pentecost)--when the Office on those days is of
the current feria.

2. At Prime (i) Preces Dominicales are said in all semi-doubles,
simples, Ferial Offices.

(i) They are said at Little Hours if said at Lauds.

(ii) At Prime, Preces Feriales are said if they have been said at Lauds.

3. At Vespers Preces Feriales are said (1) on ferias of Advent and Lent
when office is of feria.

4. At Compline, Preces Dominicales are said on all (i) semi-doubles,
(ii) simples, (iii) all Ferias, _unless_ at Vespers a double or an
octave was celebrated.




SOME TEXTS AND INTENTIONS WHICH MAY HELP TOWARDS THE DEVOUT
   RECITATION OF LAUDS.

1. "And very early in the morning, the first day of the week, they come
to the sepulchre, the sun being now risen."

They said to one another, "Who shall roll us back the stone from the
door of the sepulchre?" (St. Mark, xv.).

2. "And looking, they saw the stone rolled back.... And entering the
sepulchre they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed with a
white robe; and they were astonished. Who sayeth to them, Be not
affrighted; you seek Jesus of Nazareth Who was crucified. He is risen,
He is not here" (St. Mark, xv.).

3. "Behold Jesus sayeth to her (Magdalen) 'Woman, why weepest thou?'"

4. "Behold Jesus met them (the women) saying to them 'All hail.'"

(5) "See my hands and feet, that it is I myself, handle and see" (St.
Luke, xxiv.).

6. "Bring hither thy hand and put it into My side and be not faithless."

7. "My Lord and my God" (St, John, xx.).

_General Intentions_. The wants of the Church, peace among
nations--vocations to the priesthood--Church students--souls in
Purgatory.

_Personal Intentions_. A glorious resurrection; fervour in saying the
Office; fervour in saying Mass; fervour in priestly work; forgiveness
of all sin.

_Special Intentions_. For Catholic Ireland; for the conversion of
America; for peace throughout the world.




PRIME (TITLE XV.).

_Etymology_. The name _Prime_ is derived from the Latin _prima_ because
this part of the Office was said at the first hour of the day, 6 a.m.,
with us, following the old Roman distribution of the day.

_Origin_. It was stated by some writers that this Hour was established
by St. Clement and should therefore date from almost apostolic times.
But modern writers, following the statement of Cassian, date the origin
of this Hour from about the year 382. It was believed, too, that the
monastery indicated by Cassian as the cradle of Prime was the monastery
of Bethlehem, St. Jerome's monastery. But it was probably established
not there, but in a monastery in the neighbourhood, Dair-er-Raociat
(convent of the shepherds) or in Seiar-en-Ganheim (enclosure of the
sheep). Cassian tells us the reason that led to the introduction of this
Hour. Lauds ended at dawn, and the monks retired to rest. As no other
choir work called them until Terce, at 9 a.m., some of them were
inclined to rest until that hour and to neglect the spiritual reading
and manual work laid down by their rule. To prevent this prolonged rest,
it was decided to introduce a short choir service, the recital of a few
psalms, and then the monks went to work until Terce (_Cath.
Encyclopedia_, "Prime").

_Contents_. Originally the matter for Prime was drawn from Lauds and was
a repetition of part of Lauds. Prime consists of two parts. The first
part consists of hymn, psalms, little chapter and collect. The prayers
and confiteor inserted before the collect and said on certain days are
adjuncts. The second part contains the Martyrology (when Prime is said
in choir) and other prayers peculiar to the Hour. "The reason for this
divergence may be traced to the fact that Prime is of monastic
institution and the second portion, which is said in the chapter house,
has reference to monastic customs. The Martyrology and Necrology having
been read, prayers were said for the dead recommended to the Community,
as benefactors, friends, patrons, protectors, etc. Then followed a
special prayer in preparation for manual labour of the day, and a
chapter of the rule was read, on which the Abbot briefly commented or
else gave some admonition to the Community. This monastic character will
be easily recognised by a glance at the formulas used. The prayer,
'Sancta Maria et omnes sancti' forms a natural conclusion, to the
reading of the Martyrology, The 'Deus in adjutorium,' the 'Pater Noster'
with accompanying versicles, and the collect, are the prayers before
manual labour: 'Respice,' etc., Look, O Lord, upon Thy servants and upon
Thy works... and direct Thou the work of our hands. 'Dirige et
sanctificare,' etc., 'Vouchsafe to direct and sanctify our senses, words
and actions,' etc. Whilst the 'Dominus nos benedicat' and the 'Fidelium
animae' are the conclusion of the prayers for the dead" (Dom Cabrol,
Introduction to the _Day Hours of the Church_).

_Structure_:-i. Pater, Ave, Credo, silently. 2. Deus in adjutorium. ...
Domine ad adjuvandum .. with sign of the cross, Gloria Patri. ... Sicut
erat. ... 3. Hymn, _fam lucis_. 4. Antiphon, first words only. 5. Psalms
for the Sunday or feria as rubrics direct, with the Athanasian Creed if
it be ordered, then the antiphon in full. 6. Regi saeculorum ... or,
Pacem et veritatem. ... Deo Gratias, Christie, Fili Dei vivi.... 7.
Preces, if they are ordered in the Office of the Day, Preces Dominicales
or Preces feriales as rubrics direct. These include versicles,
responses, confiteor, misereatur... indulgentiam... versicles responses.
8. Dominus vobiscum. Et cum spiritu tuo. Oremus, Domine Deus..... Amen.
Dominus vobiscum, Et cum spiritu tuo. 9. Benedicamus Domino, Deo
Gratias. 10. In choir, the martyrology is here read, 11. Pretiosa...
mors.... 12. Sancta Maria et omnes Sancti.... 13. Thrice, Deus in
adjutorium meum intende, Domine ad adjuvandum... without the sign of
