knowledge in countries and woods for twelve years, and one more year
unknown to us. That thirteenth year, instead of being over, is yet
running. Vibhatsu, therefore, who is still to live undiscovered hath
appeared before us. And if Vibhatsu hath come before the term of exile
is at end, the Pandavas shall have to pass another twelve years in the
woods. Whether it is due to forgetfulness (on their part) induced by
desire of dominion, or whether it is a mistake of ours, it behoveth
Bhishma to calculate the shortness or excess (of the promised period).
When an object of desire may or may not be attained, a doubt necessarily
attaches to one of the alternatives, and what is decided in one way
often ends differently.[55] Even moralists are puzzled in judging of
their own acts.[56] As regards ourselves, we have come hither to fight
with the Matsyas and to seize their kine stationed towards the north.
If, meanwhile, it is Arjuna that hath come, what fault can attach to us?
We have come hither to fight against the Matsyas on behalf of the
Trigartas; and as numerous were the acts represented unto us of the
oppressions committed by the Matsyas, it was for this that we promised
aid to the Trigartas who were overcome with fear. And it was agreed
between us that they should first seize, on the afternoon of the seventh
lunar day, the enormous wealth of kine that the Matsyas have, and that
we should, at sunrise of the eighteen day of the moon, seize these kine
when the king of the Matsyas would be pursuing those first seized. It
may be that the Trigartas are now bringing away the kine, or being
defeated, are coming towards us for negotiating with the king of the
Matsyas. Or, it may be, that having driven the Trigartas off, the king
of the Matsyas, at the head of this people and his whole army of fierce
warriors, appeareth on the scene and advanceth to make night-attacks
upon us. It may be that some one leader among them, endued with mighty
energy, is advancing for vanquishing us, or, it may be that the king
himself of the Matsyas is come. But be it the king of the Matsyas or
Vibhatsu, we must all fight him. Even this hath been our pledge. Why are
all these of foremost car-warriors,--Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and
Vikarna and Drona's son,--now sitting on their cars, panic-stricken? At
present there is nothing better than fighting. Therefore, make up your
minds. If, for the cattle we have seized, an encounter takes place with
the divine wielder himself of the thunderbolt or even with Yama, who is
there that will be liable to reach Hastinapura? Pierced by the shafts
(of the foe), how will the foot-soldiers, in flying through the deep
forest with their backs on the field, escape with life, when escape for
the cavalry is doubtful?' Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Karna said,
'Disregarding the preceptor, make all arrangements. He knoweth well the
intentions of the Pandavas and striketh terror in our hearts. I see that
his affection for Arjuna is very great. Seeing him only coming, he
chanteth his praises. Make ye such arrangements that our troops may not
break. Everything is in confusion for Drona's having only heard the
neigh of (Arjuna's) steeds. Make ye such arrangements that these troops,
come to a distant land in this hot season and in the midst of this
mighty forest, may not fall into confusion and be subjugated by the foe.
The Pandavas are always the special favourites of the preceptor. The
selfish Pandavas have stationed Drona amongst us. Indeed, he betrayeth
himself by his speech. Who would ever extol a person upon hearing the
neigh only of his steeds? Horses always neigh, whether walking or
standing, the winds blow at all times; and Indra also always showereth
rain. The roar of the clouds may frequently be heard. What hath Partha
to do with these, and why is he to be praised for these? All this (on
Drona's part), therefore, is due only to either the desire of doing good
to Arjuna or to his wrath and hatred towards us. Preceptors are wise,
and sinless, and very kind to all creatures. They, however, should never
be consulted at times of peril. It is in luxurious palaces, and
assemblies and pleasure-gardens, that learned men, capable of making
speeches, seem to be in their place. Performing many wonderful things,
in the assembly, it is there that learned men find their place, or even
there where sacrificial utensils and their proper placing and washing
are needed. In a knowledge of the lapses of others, in studying the
characters of men, in the science of horses and elephants and cars, in
treating the diseases of asses and camels and goats and sheeps and kine,
in planning buildings and gateways, and in pointing out the defects of
food and drink, the learned are truly in their own sphere. Disregarding
learned men that extol the heroism of the foe, make ye such arrangements
that the foe may be destroyed. Placing the kine securely, array the
troops in order of battle. Place guards in proper places so that we may
fight the foe.'"

    [54] The true reading is _Acharya_ in the dual number, meaning
    Drona and Kripa. Some texts read the word in the singular form.
    Nilakantha notices both these reading, but prefers the dual to
    the singular.

    [55] The meaning is rather doubtful. Duryodhana seems to say
    that 'the hostile appearance of Arjuna has been an act of
    imprudence on his part. The Pandavas, after the expiry of the
    thirteenth year, would claim their kingdom. I, Duryodhana, may
    or may not accede to their demand. When, therefore, it was not
    certain that Arjuna would be refused by me, his hostile
    appearance is unwise. He has come sure of victory, but he may
    yet be defeated.'

    [56] The sense seems to be that when moralists even are puzzled
    in judging of the propriety or otherwise of their acts, it can
    easily be imagined that the Pandavas, however virtuous, have, in
    the matter of this their appearance, acted wrongly, for, after
    all, the thirteenth year may not have really been over as
    believed by them. Or, it may mean, that as regards our presence
    here, we have not acted imprudently when even moralists cannot
    always arrive at right conclusion. It seems that for this
    Duryodhana proceeds to justify that presence in the following
    sentences.


SECTION XLVIII

"Karna said, 'I behold all these blessed ones, looking as if alarmed and
panic-struck and unresolved and unwilling to fight. If he that is come
is the king of the Matsyas or Vibhatsu, even I will resist him as the
banks resist the swelling sea. Shot from my bow these straight and
flying arrows, like gliding snakes, are all sure of aim. Discharged by
my light hands, these keen-edged arrows furnished with golden wings
shall cover Partha all over, like locusts shrouding a tree. Strongly
pressed by these winged arrows, the bow-string will cause these my
leathern fences to produce sounds that will be heard to resemble those
of a couple of kettle-drums. Having been engaged in ascetic austerities
for the (last) eight and five years, Vibhatsu will strike me but mildly
in this conflict, and the son of Kunti having become a Brahmana endued
with good qualities, hath thus become a fit person to quietly receive
shafts by thousands shot by me. This mighty bowman is indeed, celebrated
over the three worlds. I, too, am, by no means, inferior to Arjuna, that
foremost of human beings. With golden arrows furnished with vulturine
wings shot on all sides, let the firmament seem today to swarm with
fire-flies. Slaying Arjuna in battle, I will discharge today that debt,
difficult of repayments, but promised of old by me unto Dhritarashtra's
son. When man is there, even amongst all the gods and the _Asuras_, that
will endure to stand in the teeth of the straight arrows shot from my
bow? Let my flying arrows, winged and depressed at the middle, present
the spectacle of the coursing of the fire-flies through the welkin. Hard
though he be as Indra's thunderbolt and possessed of the energy of the
chief of the celestials, I will surely grind Partha, even as one
afflicts an elephant by means of burning brands. A heroic and mighty
car-warrior as he is, and the foremost of all wielders of weapons I
shall seize the unresisting Partha, even like Garuda seizing a snake.
Irresistible like fire, and fed by the fuel of swords, darts, and
arrows, the blazing Pandava-fire that consumeth foes, will be
extinguished even by myself who am like unto a mighty cloud incessantly
dropping an arrowy shower,--the multitude of cars (I will lead)
constituting its thunder, and the speed of my horses, the wind in
advance. Discharged from my bow, my arrows like venomous snakes will
pierce Partha's body, like serpent penetrating through an ant-hill.
Pierced with well-tempered and straight shafts endued with golden wings
and great energy, behold ye today the son of Kunti decked like a hill
covered with _Karnikara_ flowers. Having obtained weapons from that best
of ascetics--the son of Jamadagni, I would, relying on their energy,
fight with even the celestials. Struck with my javelin, the ape
stationed on his banner-top shall fall down today on the ground,
uttering terrible cries. The firmament will today be filled with the
cries of the (super-human) creatures stationed in the flagstaff of the
foe, and afflicted by me, they will fly away in all directions. I shall
today pluck up by the roots the long-existing dart in Duryodhana's heart
by throwing Arjuna down from his car. The Kauravas will today behold
Partha with his car broken, his horses killed, his valour gone, and
himself sighing like a snake. Let the Kauravas, following their own will
go away taking this wealth of kine, or, if they wish, let them stay on
their cars and witness my combat.'"


SECTION XLIX

"Kripa said, 'O Radheya, thy crooked heart always inclineth to war. Thou
knowest not the true nature of things; nor dost thou take into account
their after-consequences. There are various kinds of expedients
inferrable from the scriptures. Of these, a battle hath been regarded by
those acquainted with the past, as the most sinful. It is only when time
and place are favourable that military operations can lead to success.
In the present instance, however, the time being unfavourable, no good
results will be deprived. A display of prowess in proper time and place
becometh beneficial. It is by the favourableness or otherwise (of time
and place) that the opportuneness of an act is determined. Learned men
can never act according to the ideas of a car-maker. Considering all
this, an encounter with Partha is not advisible for us. Alone he saved
the Kurus (from the _Gandharvas_), and alone he satiated Agni. Alone he
led the life of a _Brahmacharin_ for five years (on the breast of
Himavat). Taking up Subhadra on his car, alone he challenged Krishna to
single combat. Alone he fought with Rudra who stood before him as a
forester. It was in this very forest that Partha rescued Krishna while
she was being taken away (by Jayadratha). It is he alone that hath, for
five years, studied the science of weapons under Indra. Alone
vanquishing all foes he hath spread the fame of the Kurus. Alone that
chastiser of foes vanquished in battle Chitrasena, the king of the
_Gandharvas_ and in a moment his invincible troops also. Alone he
overthrew in battle the fierce _Nivatakavachas_ and the _Kalakhanchas_,
that were both incapable of being slain by the gods themselves. What,
however, O Karna, hath been achieved by thee single-handed like any of
the sons of Pandu, each of whom had alone subjugated many lords of
earth? Even Indra himself is unfit to encounter Partha in battle. He,
therefore, that desireth to fight with Arjuna should take a sedative. As
to thyself, thou desirest to take out the fangs of an angry snake of
virulent poison by stretching forth thy right hand and extending thy
forefinger. Or, wandering alone in the forest thou desirest to ride an
infuriate elephant and go to a boar without a hook in hand. Or, rubbed
over with clarified butter and dressed in silken robes, thou desirest to
pass through the midst of a blazing fire fed with fat and tallow and
clarified butter. Who is there that would, binding his own hands and
feet and tying a huge stone unto his neck, cross the ocean swimming with
his bare arms? What manliness is there in such an act? O Karna, he is a
fool that would, without skill in weapons and without strength, desire
to fight with Partha who is so mighty and skilled in weapons.
Dishonestly deceived by us and liberated from thirteen years' exile,
will not the illustrious hero annihilate us? Having ignorantly come to a
place where Partha lay concealed like fire hidden in a well, we have,
indeed, exposed to a great danger. But irresistible though he be in
battle, we should fight against him. Let, therefore, our troops, clad in
mail, stand here arrayed in ranks and ready to strike. Let Drona and
Duryodhana and Bhishma and thyself and Drona's son and ourselves, all
fight with the son of Pritha. Do not, O Karna, act so rashly as to fight
alone. If we six car-warriors be united, we can then be a match for and
fight with that son of Pritha who is resolved to fight and who is as
fierce as the wielder of the thunderbolt. Aided by our troops arrayed in
ranks, ourselves--great bowmen--standing carefully will fight with
Arjuna even as the _Danavas_ encounter Vasava in battle.'"


SECTION L

"Aswatthaman said, 'The kine, O Karna, have not yet been won, nor have
they yet crossed the boundary (of their owner's dominions), nor have
they yet reached Hastinapura. Why dost thou, therefore, boast of
thyself? Having won numerous battles, and acquired enormous wealth, and
vanquished hostile hosts, men of true heroism speak not a word of their
prowess. Fire burneth mutely and mutely doth the sun shine. Mutely also
doth the Earth bear creatures, both mobile and immobile. The
Self-existent hath sanctioned such offices for the four orders that
having recourse to them each may acquire wealth without being
censurable. A Brahmana, having studied the _Vedas_, should perform
sacrifices himself, and officiate at the sacrifices of others. And a
Kshatriya, depending upon the bow, should perform sacrifices himself but
should never officiate at the sacrifices of others. And a Vaisya, having
earned wealth, should cause the rites enjoined in the _Vedas_ to be
performed for himself. A Sudra should always wait upon and serve the
other three orders. As regards those that live by practising the
profession of flowers and vendors of meat, they may earn wealth by
expedients fraught with deceit and fraud. Always acting according to the
dictates of the scriptures, the exalted sons of Pandu acquired the
sovereignty of the whole earth, and they always act respectfully towards
their superiors, even if the latter prove hostile to them. What
Kshatriya is there that expressed delight at having obtained a kingdom
by means of dice, like this wicked and shameless son of Dhritarashtra?
Having acquired wealth in this way by deceit and fraud like a vendor of
meat, who that is wise boast of it? In what single combat didst thou
vanquish Dhananjaya, or Nakula, or Sahadeva, although thou hast robbed
them of their wealth? In what battle didst thou defeat Yudhishthira, or
Bhima that foremost of strong men? In what battle was Indraprastha
conquered by thee? What thou hast done, however, O thou of wicked deeds,
is to drag that princess to court while she was ill and had but one
raiment on? Thou hast cut the mighty root, delicate as the sandal, of
the Pandava tree. Actuated by desire of wealth, when thou madest the
Pandavas act as slaves, rememberest thou what Vidura said! We see that
men and others, even insects and ants, show forgiveness according to
their power of endurance. The son of Pandu, however, is incapable of
forgiving the sufferings of Draupadi. Surely, Dhananjaya cometh here for
the destruction of the sons of Dhritarashtra. It is true, affecting
great wisdom, thou art for making speeches but will not Vibhatsu, that
slayer of foes, exterminate us all! If it be gods, or _Gandharvas_ or
_Asuras_, or _Rakshasas_, will Dhananjaya the son of Kunti, desist to
fight from panic? Inflamed with wrath upon whomsoever he will fall, even
him he will overthrow like a tree under the weight of Garuda! Superior
to thee in prowess, in bowmanship equal unto the lord himself of the
celestials, and in battle equal unto Vasudeva himself, who is there that
would not praise Partha? Counteracting celestial weapons with celestial,
and human weapons with human, what man is a match for Arjuna? Those
acquainted with the scriptures declare that a disciple is no way
inferior to a son, and it is for this that the son of Pandu is a
favourite of Drona. Employ thou the means now which thou hadst adopted
in the match at dice,--the same means, viz., by which thou hadst
subjugated Indraprastha, and the same means by which thou hadst dragged
Krishna to the assembly! This thy wise uncle, fully conversant with the
duties of the _Kshatriya_ order--this deceitful gambler Sakuni, the
prince of Gandhara, let _him_ fight now! The _Gandiva_, however, doth
not cast dice such as the _Krita_ or the _Dwapara_, but it shooteth upon
foes blazing and keen-edged shafts by myriads. The fierce arrows shot
from the _Gandiva_, endued with great energy and furnished with
vulturine wings, car, pierce even mountains. The destroyer of all, named
Yama, and Vayu, and the horse-faced Agni, leave some remnant behind, but
Dhananjaya inflamed with wrath never doth so. As thou hadst, aided by
thy uncle, played at dice in the assembly so do fight in this battle
protected by Suvala's son. Let the preceptor, if he chooses fight; I
shall not, however, fight with Dhananjaya. We are to fight with the king
of the Matsyas, if indeed, he cometh in the track of the kine.'"


SECTION LI

"Bhishma said, 'Drona's son observeth well, and Kripa too observeth
rightly. As for Karna, it is only out of regard for the duties of the
Kshatriya order that he desireth to fight. No man of wisdom can blame
the preceptor. I, however, am of opinion that fight we must, considering
both the time and the place. Why should not that man be bewildered who
hath five adversaries effulgent as five suns, who are heroic combatants
and who have just emerged from adversity? Even those conversant with
morality are bewildered in respect of their own interests. It is for
this, O king, that I tell thee this, whether my words be acceptable to
you or not. What Karna said unto thee was only for raising our
(drooping) courage. As regards thyself, O preceptor's son, forgive
everything. The business at hand is very grave. When the son of Kunti
hath come, this is not the time for quarrel. Everything should now be
forgiven by thyself and the preceptor Kripa. Like light in the sun, the
mastery of all weapons doth reside in you. As beauty is never separated
from _Chandramas_, so are the _Vedas_ and the _Brahma_ weapon both
established in you. It is often seen that the four _Vedas_ dwell in one
object and _Kshatriya_ attributes in another. We have never heard of
these two dwelling together in any other person than the preceptor of
the Bharata race and his son. Even this is what I think. In the
_Vedantas_, in the _Puranas_, and in old histories, who save Jamadagni,
O king, would be Drona's superior? A combination of the _Brahma_ weapon
with the _Vedas_,--this is never to be seen anywhere else. O preceptor's
son, do thou forgive. This is not the time for disunion. Let all of us,
uniting, fight with Indra's son who hath come. Of all the calamities
that may befall an army that have been enumerated by men of wisdom, the
worst is disunion among the leaders.' Aswatthaman said, 'O bull among
men, these thy just observations, need not be uttered in our presence;
the preceptor, however, filled with wrath, had spoken of Arjuna's
virtues. The virtues of even an enemy should be admitted, while the
faults of even one's preceptor may be pointed out; therefore one should,
to the best of his power, declare the merits of a son or a disciple.'

"Duryodhana said, 'Let the preceptor grant his forgiveness and let peace
be restored. If the preceptor be at one with us, whatever should be done
(in view of the present emergency) would seem to have been already
done.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then, O Bharata, Duryodhana assisted by Karna
