
1 Mac 15:35
And whereas thou demandest Joppa and Gazera, albeit they did
great harm unto the people in our country, yet will we give thee
an hundred talents for them. Hereunto Athenobius answered him
not a word;

1 Mac 15:36
But returned in a rage to the king, and made report unto him
of these speeches, and of the glory of Simon, and of all that he
had seen: whereupon the king was exceeding wroth.

1 Mac 15:37
In the mean time fled Tryphon by ship unto Orthosias.

1 Mac 15:38
Then the king made Cendebeus captain of the sea coast, and
gave him an host of footmen and horsemen,

1 Mac 15:39
And commanded him to remove his host toward Judea; also he
commanded him to build up Cedron, and to fortify the gates, and
to war against the people; but as for the king himself, he
pursued Tryphon.

1 Mac 15:40
So Cendebeus came to Jamnia and began to provoke the people
and to invade Judea, and to take the people prisoners, and slay
them.

1 Mac 15:41
And when he had built up Cedrou, he set horsemen there, and
an host of footmen, to the end that issuing out they might make
outroads upon the ways of Judea, as the king had commanded him.

1 Mac 16:1
Then came up John from Gazera, and told Simon his father what
Cendebeus had done.

1 Mac 16:2
Wherefore Simon called his two eldest sons, Judas and John,
and said unto them, I, and my brethren, and my father's house,
have ever from my youth unto this day fought against the enemies
of Israel; and things have prospered so well in our hands, that
we have delivered Israel oftentimes.

1 Mac 16:3
But now I am old, and ye, by God's mercy, are of a sufficient
age: be ye instead of me and my brother, and go and fight for
our nation, and the help from heaven be with you.

1 Mac 16:4
So he chose out of the country twenty thousand men of war
with horsemen, who went out against Cendebeus, and rested that
night at Modin.

1 Mac 16:5
And when as they rose in the morning, and went into the
plain, behold, a mighty great host both of footmen and horsemen
came against them: howbeit there was a water brook betwixt them.

1 Mac 16:6
So he and his people pitched over against them: and when he
saw that the people were afraid to go over the water brook, he
went first over himself, and then the men seeing him passed
through after him.

1 Mac 16:7
That done, he divided his men, and set the horsemen in the
midst of the footmen: for the enemies' horsemen were very many.

1 Mac 16:8
Then sounded they with the holy trumpets: whereupon Cendebeus
and his host were put to flight, so that many of them were
slain, and the remnant gat them to the strong hold.

1 Mac 16:9
At that time was Judas John's brother wounded; but John still
followed after them, until he came to Cedron, which Cendebeus
had built.

1 Mac 16:10
So they fled even unto the towers in the fields of Azotus;
wherefore he burned it with fire: so that there were slain of
them about two thousand men. Afterward he returned into the land
of Judea in peace.

1 Mac 16:11
Moreover in the plain of Jericho was Ptolemeus the son of
Abubus made captain, and he had abundance of silver and gold:

1 Mac 16:12
For he was the high priest's son in law.

1 Mac 16:13
Wherefore his heart being lifted up, he thought to get the
country to himself, and thereupon consulted deceitfully against
Simon and his sons to destroy them.

1 Mac 16:14
Now Simon was visiting the cities that were in the country,
and taking care for the good ordering of them; at which time he
came down himself to Jericho with his sons, Mattathias and
Judas, in the hundred threescore and seventeenth year, in the
eleventh month, called Sabat:

1 Mac 16:15
Where the son of Abubus receiving them deceitfully into a
little hold, called Docus, which he had built, made them a great
banquet: howbeit he had hid men there.

1 Mac 16:16
So when Simon and his sons had drunk largely, Ptolemee and
his men rose up, and took their weapons, and came upon Simon
into the banqueting place, and slew him, and his two sons, and
certain of his servants.

1 Mac 16:17
In which doing he committed a great treachery, and
recompensed evil for good.

1 Mac 16:18
Then Ptolemee wrote these things, and sent to the king, that
he should send him an host to aid him, and he would deliver him
the country and cities.

1 Mac 16:19
He sent others also to Gazera to kill John: and unto the
tribunes he sent letters to come unto him, that he might give
them silver, and gold, and rewards.

1 Mac 16:20
And others he sent to take Jerusalem, and the mountain of the
temple.

1 Mac 16:21
Now one had run afore to Gazera and told John that his father
and brethren were slain, and, quoth he, Ptolemee hath sent to
slay thee also.

1 Mac 16:22
Hereof when he heard, he was sore astonished: so he laid
hands on them that were come to destroy him, and slew them; for
he knew that they sought to make him away.

1 Mac 16:23
As concerning the rest of the acts of John, and his wars, and
worthy deeds which he did, and the building of the walls which
he made, and his doings,

1 Mac 16:24
Behold, these are written in the chronicles of his
priesthood, from the time he was made high priest after his
father.




The Second Book of the Maccabees



2 Mac 1:1
The brethren, the Jews that be at Jerusalem and in the land
of Judea, wish unto the brethren, the Jews that are throughout
Egypt health and peace:

2 Mac 1:2
God be gracious unto you, and remember his covenant that he
made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, his faithful servants;

2 Mac 1:3
And give you all an heart to serve him, and to do his will,
with a good courage and a willing mind;

2 Mac 1:4
And open your hearts in his law and commandments, and send
you peace,

2 Mac 1:5
And hear your prayers, and be at one with you, and never
forsake you in time of trouble.

2 Mac 1:6
And now we be here praying for you.

2 Mac 1:7
What time as Demetrius reigned, in the hundred threescore and
ninth year, we the Jews wrote unto you in the extremity of
trouble that came upon us in those years, from the time that
Jason and his company revolted from the holy land and kingdom,

2 Mac 1:8
And burned the porch, and shed innocent blood: then we prayed
unto the Lord, and were heard; we offered also sacrifices and
fine flour, and lighted the lamps, and set forth the loaves.

2 Mac 1:9
And now see that ye keep the feast of tabernacles in the
month Casleu.

2 Mac 1:10
In the hundred fourscore and eighth year, the people that
were at Jerusalem and in Judea, and the council, and Judas, sent
greeting and health unto Aristobulus, king Ptolemeus' master,
who was of the stock of the anointed priests, and to the Jews
that were in Egypt:

2 Mac 1:11
Insomuch as God hath delivered us from great perils, we thank
him highly, as having been in battle against a king.

2 Mac 1:12
For he cast them out that fought within the holy city.

2 Mac 1:13
For when the leader was come into Persia, and the army with
him that seemed invincible, they were slain in the temple of
Nanea by the deceit of Nanea's priests.

2 Mac 1:14
For Antiochus, as though he would marry her, came into the
place, and his friends that were with him, to receive money in
name of a dowry.

2 Mac 1:15
Which when the priests of Nanea had set forth, and he was
entered with a small company into the compass of the temple,
they shut the temple as soon as Antiochus was come in:

2 Mac 1:16
And opening a privy door of the roof, they threw stones like
thunderbolts, and struck down the captain, hewed them in pieces,
smote off their heads and cast them to those that were without.

2 Mac 1:17
Blessed be our God in all things, who hath delivered up the
ungodly.

2 Mac 1:18
Therefore whereas we are now purposed to keep the
purification of the temple upon the five and twentieth day of
the month Casleu, we thought it necessary to certify you
thereof, that ye also might keep it, as the feast of the
tabernacles, and of the fire, which was given us when Neemias
offered sacrifice, after that he had builded the temple and the
altar.

2 Mac 1:19
For when our fathers were led into Persia, the priests that
were then devout took the fire of the altar privily, and hid it
in an hollow place of a pit without water, where they kept it
sure, so that the place was unknown to all men.

2 Mac 1:20
Now after many years, when it pleased God, Neemias, being
sent from the king of Persia, did send of the posterity of those
priests that had hid it to the fire: but when they told us they
found no fire, but thick water;

2 Mac 1:21
Then commanded he them to draw it up, and to bring it; and
when the sacrifices were laid on, Neemias commanded the priests
to sprinkle the wood and the things laid thereupon with the
water.

2 Mac 1:22
When this was done, and the time came that the sun shone,
which afore was hid in the cloud, there was a great fire
kindled, so that every man marvelled.

2 Mac 1:23
And the priests made a prayer whilst the sacrifice was
consuming, I say, both the priests, and all the rest, Jonathan
beginning, and the rest answering thereunto, as Neemias did.

2 Mac 1:24
And the prayer was after this manner; O Lord, Lord God,
Creator of all things, who art fearful and strong, and
righteous, and merciful, and the only and gracious King,

2 Mac 1:25
The only giver of all things, the only just, almighty, and
everlasting, thou that deliverest Israel from all trouble, and
didst choose the fathers, and sanctify them:

2 Mac 1:26
Receive the sacrifice for thy whole people Israel, and
preserve thine own portion, and sanctify it.

2 Mac 1:27
Gather those together that are scattered from us, deliver
them that serve among the heathen, look upon them that are
despised and abhorred, and let the heathen know that thou art
our God.

2 Mac 1:28
Punish them that oppress us, and with pride do us wrong.

2 Mac 1:29
Plant thy people again in thy holy place, as Moses hath
spoken.

2 Mac 1:30
And the priests sung psalms of thanksgiving.

2 Mac 1:31
Now when the sacrifice was consumed, Neemias commanded the
water that was left to be poured on the great stones.

2 Mac 1:32
When this was done, there was kindled a flame: but it was
consumed by the light that shined from the altar.

2 Mac 1:33
So when this matter was known, it was told the king of
Persia, that in the place, where the priests that were led away
had hid the fire, there appeared water, and that Neemias had
purified the sacrifices therewith.

2 Mac 1:34
Then the king, inclosing the place, made it holy, after he
had tried the matter.

2 Mac 1:35
And the king took many gifts, and bestowed thereof on those
whom he would gratify.

2 Mac 1:36
And Neemias called this thing Naphthar, which is as much as
to say, a cleansing: but many men call it Nephi.

2 Mac 2:1
It is also found in the records, that Jeremy the prophet
commanded them that were carried away to take of the fire, as it
hath been signified:

2 Mac 2:2
And how that the prophet, having given them the law, charged
them not to forget the commandments of the Lord, and that they
should not err in their minds, when they see images of silver
and gold, with their ornaments.

2 Mac 2:3
And with other such speeches exhorted he them, that the law
should not depart from their hearts.

2 Mac 2:4
It was also contained in the same writing, that the prophet,
being warned of God, commanded the tabernacle and the ark to go
with him, as he went forth into the mountain, where Moses
climbed up, and saw the heritage of God.

2 Mac 2:5
And when Jeremy came thither, he found an hollow cave,
wherein he laid the tabernacle, and the ark, and the altar of
incense, and so stopped the door.

2 Mac 2:6
And some of those that followed him came to mark the way, but
they could not find it.

2 Mac 2:7
Which when Jeremy perceived, he blamed them, saying, As for
that place, it shall be unknown until the time that God gather
his people again together, and receive them unto mercy.

2 Mac 2:8
Then shall the Lord shew them these things, and the glory of
the Lord shall appear, and the cloud also, as it was shewed
under Moses, and as when Solomon desired that the place might be
honourably sanctified.

2 Mac 2:9
It was also declared, that he being wise offered the
sacrifice of dedication, and of the finishing of the temple.

2 Mac 2:10
And as when Moses prayed unto the Lord, the fire came down
from heaven, and consumed the sacrifices: even so prayed Solomon
also, and the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt
offerings.

2 Mac 2:11
And Moses said, Because the sin offering was not to be eaten,
it was consumed.

2 Mac 2:12
So Solomon kept those eight days.

2 Mac 2:13
The same things also were reported in the writings and
commentaries of Neemias; and how he founding a library gathered
together the acts of the kings, and the prophets, and of David,
and the epistles of the kings concerning the holy gifts.

2 Mac 2:14
In like manner also Judas gathered together all those things
that were lost by reason of the war we had, and they remain with
us,

2 Mac 2:15
Wherefore if ye have need thereof, send some to fetch them
unto you.

2 Mac 2:16
Whereas we then are about to celebrate the purification, we
have written unto you, and ye shall do well, if ye keep the same
days.

2 Mac 2:17
We hope also, that the God, that delivered all his people,
and gave them all an heritage, and the kingdom, and the
priesthood, and the sanctuary,

2 Mac 2:18
As he promised in the law, will shortly have mercy upon us,
and gather us together out of every land under heaven into the
holy place: for he hath delivered us out of great troubles, and
hath purified the place.

2 Mac 2:19
Now as concerning Judas Maccabeus, and his brethren, and the
purification of the great temple, and the dedication of the
altar,

2 Mac 2:20
And the wars against Antiochus Epiphanes, and Eupator his
son,

2 Mac 2:21
And the manifest signs that came from heaven unto those that
behaved themselves manfully to their honour for Judaism: so
that, being but a few, they overcame the whole country, and
chased barbarous multitudes,

2 Mac 2:22
And recovered again the temple renowned all the world over,
and freed the city, and upheld the laws which were going down,
the Lord being gracious unto them with all favour:

2 Mac 2:23
All these things, I say, being declared by Jason of Cyrene in
five books, we will assay to abridge in one volume.

2 Mac 2:24
For considering the infinite number, and the difficulty which
they find that desire to look into the narrations of the story,
for the variety of the matter,

2 Mac 2:25
We have been careful, that they that will read may have
delight, and that they that are desirous to commit to memory
might have ease, and that all into whose hands it comes might
have profit.

2 Mac 2:26
Therefore to us, that have taken upon us this painful labour
of abridging, it was not easy, but a matter of sweat and
watching;

2 Mac 2:27
Even as it is no ease unto him that prepareth a banquet, and
seeketh the benefit of others: yet for the pleasuring of many we
will undertake gladly this great pains;

2 Mac 2:28
Leaving to the author the exact handling of every particular,
and labouring to follow the rules of an abridgement.

2 Mac 2:29
For as the master builder of a new house must care for the
whole building; but he that undertaketh to set it out, and paint
it, must seek out fit things for the adorning thereof: even so I
think it is with us.

2 Mac 2:30
To stand upon every point, and go over things at large, and
to be curious in particulars, belongeth to the first author of
the story:

2 Mac 2:31
But to use brevity, and avoid much labouring of the work, is
to be granted to him that will make an abridgment.

2 Mac 2:32
Here then will we begin the story: only adding thus much to
that which hath been said, that it is a foolish thing to make a
long prologue, and to be short in the story itself.

2 Mac 3:1
Now when the holy city was inhabited with all peace, and the
laws were kept very well, because of the godliness of Onias the
high priest, and his hatred of wickedness,

2 Mac 3:2
It came to pass that even the kings themselves did honour the
place, and magnify the temple with their best gifts;

2 Mac 3:3
Insomuch that Seleucus of Asia of his own revenues bare all
the costs belonging to the service of the sacrifices.

2 Mac 3:4
But one Simon of the tribe of Benjamin, who was made governor
of the temple, fell out with the high priest about disorder in
the city.

2 Mac 3:5
And when he could not overcome Onias, he gat him to
Apollonius the son of Thraseas, who then was governor of
Celosyria and Phenice,

2 Mac 3:6
And told him that the treasury in Jerusalem was full of
infinite sums of money, so that the multitude of their riches,
which did not pertain to the account of the sacrifices, was
innumerable, and that it was possible to bring all into the
king's hand.

2 Mac 3:7
Now when Apollonius came to the king, and had shewed him of
the money whereof he was told, the king chose out Heliodorus his
treasurer, and sent him with a commandment to bring him the
foresaid money.

2 Mac 3:8
So forthwith Heliodorus took his journey; under a colour of
visiting the cities of Celosyria and Phenice, but indeed to
fulfil the king's purpose.

2 Mac 3:9
And when he was come to Jerusalem, and had been courteously
received of the high priest of the city, he told him what
intelligence was given of the money, and declared wherefore he
came, and asked if these things were so indeed.

2 Mac 3:10
Then the high priest told him that there was such money laid
up for the relief of widows and fatherless children:

2 Mac 3:11
And that some of it belonged to Hircanus son of Tobias, a man
of great dignity, and not as that wicked Simon had misinformed:
the sum whereof in all was four hundred talents of silver, and
two hundred of gold:

2 Mac 3:12
And that it was altogether impossible that such wrongs should
be done unto them, that had committed it to the holiness of the
place, and to the majesty and inviolable sanctity of the temple,
honoured over all the world.

2 Mac 3:13
But Heliodorus, because of the king's commandment given him,
said, That in any wise it must be brought into the king's
treasury.

2 Mac 3:14
So at the day which he appointed he entered in to order this
matter: wherefore there was no small agony throughout the whole
city.

2 Mac 3:15
But the priests, prostrating themselves before the altar in
their priests' vestments, called unto heaven upon him that made
a law concerning things given to be kept, that they should
safely be preserved for such as had committed them to be kept.

2 Mac 3:16
Then whoso had looked the high priest in the face, it would
have wounded his heart: for his countenance and the changing of
his colour declared the inward agony of his mind.

2 Mac 3:17
For the man was so compassed with fear and horror of the
body, that it was manifest to them that looked upon him, what
sorrow he had now in his heart.

2 Mac 3:18
Others ran flocking out of their houses to the general
supplication, because the place was like to come into contempt.

2 Mac 3:19
And the women, girt with sackcloth under their breasts,
abounded in the streets, and the virgins that were kept in ran,
some to the gates, and some to the walls, and others looked out
of the windows.

2 Mac 3:20
And all, holding their hands toward heaven, made
supplication.

2 Mac 3:21
Then it would have pitied a man to see the falling down of
the multitude of all sorts, and the fear of the high priest
being in such an agony.

2 Mac 3:22
They then called upon the Almighty Lord to keep the things
committed of trust safe and sure for those that had committed
them.

2 Mac 3:23
Nevertheless Heliodorus executed that which was decreed.

2 Mac 3:24
Now as he was there present himself with his guard about the
treasury, the Lord of spirits, and the Prince of all power,
caused a great apparition, so that all that presumed to come in
with him were astonished at the power of God, and fainted, and
were sore afraid.

2 Mac 3:25
For there appeared unto them an horse with a terrible rider
upon him, and adorned with a very fair covering, and he ran
fiercely, and smote at Heliodorus with his forefeet, and it
seemed that he that sat upon the horse had complete harness of
gold.

2 Mac 3:26
Moreover two other young men appeared before him, notable in
strength, excellent in beauty, and comely in apparel, who stood
by him on either side; and scourged him continually, and gave
him many sore stripes.

2 Mac 3:27
And Heliodorus fell suddenly unto the ground, and was
compassed with great darkness: but they that were with him
took him up, and put him into a litter.

2 Mac 3:28
Thus him, that lately came with a great train and with all
his guard into the said treasury, they carried out, being unable
to help himself with his weapons: and manifestly they
acknowledged the power of God.

2 Mac 3:29
For he by the hand of God was cast down, and lay speechless
without all hope of life.

2 Mac 3:30
But they praised the Lord, that had miraculously honoured his
own place: for the temple; which a little afore was full of fear
and trouble, when the Almighty Lord appeared, was filled with
joy and gladness.

2 Mac 3:31
Then straightways certain of Heliodorus' friends prayed
Onias, that he would call upon the most High to grant him his
life, who lay ready to give up the ghost.

2 Mac 3:32
So the high priest, suspecting lest the king should
misconceive that some treachery had been done to Heliodorus by
the Jews, offered a sacrifice for the health of the man.

2 Mac 3:33
Now as the high priest was making an atonement, the same
young men in the same clothing appeared and stood beside
Heliodorus, saying, Give Onias the high priest great thanks,
insomuch as for his sake the Lord hath granted thee life:

2 Mac 3:34
And seeing that thou hast been scourged from heaven, declare
unto all men the mighty power of God. And when they had spoken
these words, they appeared no more.

2 Mac 3:35
So Heliodorus, after he had offered sacrifice unto the Lord,
and made great vows unto him that had saved his life, and
saluted Onias, returned with his host to the king.

2 Mac 3:36
Then testified he to all men the works of the great God,
which he had seen with his eyes.

2 Mac 3:37
And when the king Heliodorus, who might be a fit man to be
sent yet once again to Jerusalem, he said,

2 Mac 3:38
If thou hast any enemy or traitor, send him thither, and thou
shalt receive him well scourged, if he escape with his life: for
in that place, no doubt; there is an especial power of God.

2 Mac 3:39
For he that dwelleth in heaven hath his eye on that place,
and defendeth it; and he beateth and destroyeth them that come
to hurt it.

2 Mac 3:40
And the things concerning Heliodorus, and the keeping of the
treasury, fell out on this sort.

2 Mac 4:1
This Simon now, of whom we spake afore, having been a
betrayer of the money, and of his country, slandered Onias, as
if he ha terrified Heliodorus, and been the worker of these
evils.

2 Mac 4:2
Thus was he bold to call him a traitor, that had deserved
well of the city, and tendered his own nation, and was so
zealous of the laws.

2 Mac 4:3
But when their hatred went so far, that by one of Simon's
faction murders were committed,

2 Mac 4:4
Onias seeing the danger of this contention, and that
Apollonius, as being the governor of Celosyria and Phenice, did
rage, and increase Simon's malice,

2 Mac 4:5
He went to the king, not to be an accuser of his countrymen,
but seeking the good of all, both publick and private:

2 Mac 4:6
For he saw that it was impossible that the state should
continue quiet, and Simon leave his folly, unless the king did
look thereunto.

2 Mac 4:7
But after the death of Seleucus, when Antiochus, called
Epiphanes, took the kingdom, Jason the brother of Onias laboured
underhand to be high priest,

2 Mac 4:8
Promising unto the king by intercession three hundred and
threescore talents of silver, and of another revenue eighty
talents:

2 Mac 4:9
Beside this, he promised to assign an hundred and fifty more,
if he might have licence to set him up a place for exercise, and
for the training up of youth in the fashions of the heathen, and
to write them of Jerusalem by the name of Antiochians.

2 Mac 4:10
Which when the king had granted, and he had gotten into his
hand the rule he forthwith brought his own nation to Greekish
fashion.

2 Mac 4:11
And the royal privileges granted of special favour to the
Jews by the means of John the father of Eupolemus, who went
ambassador to Rome for amity and aid, he took away; and putting
down the governments which were according to the law, he brought
up new customs against the law:

2 Mac 4:12
For he built gladly a place of exercise under the tower
itself, and brought the chief young men under his subjection,
and made them wear a hat.

2 Mac 4:13
Now such was the height of Greek fashions, and increase of
heathenish manners, through the exceeding profaneness of Jason,
that ungodly wretch, and no high priest;

2 Mac 4:14
That the priests had no courage to serve any more at the
altar, but despising the temple, and neglecting the sacrifices,
hastened to be partakers of the unlawful allowance in the place
of exercise, after the game of Discus called them forth;

2 Mac 4:15
Not setting by the honours of their fathers, but liking the
glory of the Grecians best of all.

2 Mac 4:16
By reason whereof sore calamity came upon them: for they had
them to be their enemies and avengers, whose custom they
followed so earnestly, and unto whom they desired to be like in
all things.

2 Mac 4:17
For it is not a light thing to do wickedly against the laws
of God: but the time following shall declare these things.

2 Mac 4:18
Now when the game that was used every faith year was kept at
Tyrus, the king being present,

2 Mac 4:19
This ungracious Jason sent special messengers from Jerusalem,
who were Antiochians, to carry three hundred drachms of silver
to the sacrifice of Hercules, which even the bearers thereof
thought fit not to bestow upon the sacrifice, because it was not
convenient, but to be reserved for other charges.

2 Mac 4:20
This money then, in regard of the sender, was appointed to
Hercules' sacrifice; but because of the bearers thereof, it was
employed to the making of gallies.

2 Mac 4:21
Now when Apollonius the son of Menestheus was sent into Egypt
for the coronation of king Ptolemeus Philometor, Antiochus,
understanding him not to be well affected to his affairs,
provided for his own safety: whereupon he came to Joppa, and
from thence to Jerusalem:

2 Mac 4:22
Where he was honourably received of Jason, and of the city,
and was brought in with torch alight, and with great shoutings:
and so afterward went with his host unto Phenice.

2 Mac 4:23
Three years afterward Jason sent Menelaus, the aforesaid
Simon's brother, to bear the money unto the king, and to put him
in mind of certain necessary matters.

2 Mac 4:24
But he being brought to the presence of the king, when he had
magnified him for the glorious appearance of his power, got the
priesthood to himself, offering more than Jason by three hundred
talents of silver.

2 Mac 4:25
So he came with the king's mandate, bringing nothing worthy
the high priesthood, but having the fury of a cruel tyrant, and
the rage of a savage beast.

2 Mac 4:26
Then Jason, who had undermined his own brother, being
undermined by another, was compelled to flee into the country of
the Ammonites.

2 Mac 4:27
So Menelaus got the principality: but as for the money that
he had promised unto the king, he took no good order for it,
albeit Sostratis the ruler of the castle required it:

2 Mac 4:28
For unto him appertained the gathering of the customs.
Wherefore they were both called before the king.

2 Mac 4:29
Now Menelaus left his brother Lysimachus in his stead in the
priesthood; and Sostratus left Crates, who was governor of the
Cyprians.

2 Mac 4:30
While those things were in doing, they of Tarsus and Mallos
made insurrection, because they were given to the king's
concubine, called Antiochus.

2 Mac 4:31
Then came the king in all haste to appease matters, leaving
Andronicus, a man in authority, for his deputy.

2 Mac 4:32
Now Menelaus, supposing that he had gotten a convenient time,
stole certain vessels of gold out of the temple, and gave some
of them to Andronicus, and some he sold into Tyrus and the
cities round about.

2 Mac 4:33
Which when Onias knew of a surety, he reproved him, and
withdrew himself into a sanctuary at Daphne, that lieth by
Antiochia.

2 Mac 4:34
Wherefore Menelaus, taking Andronicus apart, prayed, him to
get Onias into his hands; who being persuaded thereunto, and
coming to Onias in deceit, gave him his right hand with oaths;
and though he were suspected by him, yet persuaded he him to
come forth of the sanctuary: whom forthwith he shut up without
regard of justice.

2 Mac 4:35
For the which cause not only the Jews, but many also of other
nations, took great indignation, and were much grieved for the
unjust murder of the man.

2 Mac 4:36
And when the king was come again from the places about
Cilicia, the Jews that were in the city, and certain of the
Greeks that abhorred the fact also, complained because Onias was
slain without cause.

2 Mac 4:37
Therefore Antiochus was heartily sorry, and moved to pity,
and wept, because of the sober and modest behaviour of him that
was dead.

2 Mac 4:38
And being kindled with anger, forthwith he took away
Andronicus his purple, and rent off his clothes, and leading him
through the whole city unto that very place, where he had
committed impiety against Onias, there slew he the cursed
murderer. Thus the Lord rewarded him his punishment, as he had
deserved.

2 Mac 4:39
Now when many sacrileges had been committed in the city by
