to the believing Abraham.

Paul's words contain the implication of contrast. When he quotes
Scripture to the effect that all nations that share the faith of
faithful Abraham are to be blessed, Paul means to imply the contrast
that all nations are accursed without faith in Christ.


  VERSE 10. For as many as are of the works of the law are under the
  curse.

The curse of God is like a flood that swallows everything that is not of
faith. To avoid the curse we must hold on to the promise of the blessing
in Christ.

The reader is reminded that all this has no bearing upon civil laws,
customs, or political matters. Civil laws and ordinances have their
place and purpose. Let every government enact the best possible laws.
But civil righteousness will never deliver a person from the
condemnation of God's Law.

I have good reason for calling your attention to this. People easily
mistake civil righteousness for spiritual righteousness. In civil
life we must, of course, pay attention to laws and deeds, but in the
spiritual life we must not think to be justified by laws and works, but
always keep in mind the promise and blessing of Christ, our only Savior.

According to Paul everything that is not of faith is sin. When our
opponents hear us repeat this statement of Paul, they make it appear as
if we taught that governments should not be honored, as if we favored
rebellion against the constituted authorities, as if we condemned
all laws. Our opponents do us a great wrong, for we make a clear-cut
distinction between civil and spiritual affairs.

Governmental laws and ordinances are blessings of God for this life
only. As for everlasting life, temporal blessings are not good enough.
Unbelievers enjoy more temporal blessings than the Christians. Civil
or legal righteousness may be good enough for this life but not for the
life hereafter. Otherwise the infidels would be nearer heaven than the
Christians, for infidels often excel in civil righteousness.


  VERSE 10. For it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in
   all things which are written in the book of the law to do them.

Paul goes on to prove from this quotation out of the Book of Deuteronomy
that all men who are under the Law are under the sentence of sin, of
the wrath of God, and of everlasting death. Paul produces his proof in
a roundabout way. He turns the negative statement, "Cursed is every one
that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the
law to do them," into a positive statement, "As many as are of the works
of the law are under the curse." These two statements, one by Paul and
the other by Moses, appear to conflict. Paul declares, "Whosoever shall
do the works of the Law, is accursed." Moses declares, "Whosoever
shall not do the works of the Law, is accursed." How can these two
contradictory statements be reconciled? How can the one statement prove
the other? No person can hope to understand Paul unless he understands
the article of justification. These two statements are not at all
inconsistent.

We must bear in mind that to do the works of the Law does not mean only
to live up to the superficial requirements of the Law, but to obey the
spirit of the Law to perfection. But where will you find the person who
can do that? Let him step forward and we will praise him.

Our opponents have their answer ready-made. They quote Paul's own
statement in Romans 2:13, "The doers of the law shall be justified."
Very well. But let us first find out who the doers of the law are. They
call a "doer" of the Law one who performs the Law in its literal sense.
This is not to "do" the Law. This is to sin. When our opponents go about
to perform the Law they sin against the first, the second, and the third
commandments, in fact they sin against the whole Law. For God requires
above all that we worship Him in spirit and in faith. In observing the
Law for the purpose of obtaining righteousness without faith in Christ
these law-workers go smack against the Law and against God. They deny
the righteousness of God, His mercy, and His promises. They deny Christ
and all His benefits.

In their ignorance of the true purpose of the Law the exponents of the
Law abuse the Law, as Paul says, Romans 10:3, "For they, being
ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
God."

In their folly our opponents rush into the Scriptures, pick out a
sentence here and a sentence there about the Law and imagine they know
all about it. Their work-righteousness is plain idolatry and blasphemy
against God. No wonder they abide under the curse of God.

Because God saw that we could not fulfill the Law, He provided a way
of salvation long before the Law was ever given, a salvation that He
promised to Abraham, saying, "In thee shall all nations be blessed."

The very first thing for us to do is to believe in Christ. First, we
must receive the Holy Spirit, who enlightens and sanctifies us so that
we can begin to do the Law, i.e., to love God and our neighbor. Now, the
Holy Ghost is not obtained by the Law, but by faith in Christ. In the
last analysis, to do the Law means to believe in Jesus Christ. The tree
comes first, and then come the fruits.

The scholastics admit that a mere external and superficial performance
of the Law without sincerity and good will is plain hypocrisy. Judas
acted like the other disciples. What was wrong with Judas? Mark what
Rome answers, "Judas was a reprobate. His motives were perverse,
therefore his works were hypocritical and no good." Well, well. Rome
does admit, after all, that works in themselves do not justify unless
they issue from a sincere heart. Why do our opponents not profess the
same truth in spiritual matters? There, above all, faith must precede
everything. The heart must be purified by faith before a person can lift
a finger to please God.

There are two classes of doers of the Law, true doers and hypocritical
doers. The true doers of the Law are those who are moved by faith in
Christ to do the Law. The hypocritical doers of the Law are those who
seek to obtain righteousness by a mechanical performance of good works
while their hearts are far removed from God. They act like the foolish
carpenter who starts with the roof when he builds a house. Instead of
doing the Law, these law-conscious hypocrites break the Law. They break
the very first commandment of God by denying His promise in Christ. They
do not worship God in faith. They worship themselves.

No wonder Paul was able to foretell the abominations that Antichrist
would bring into the Church. That Antichrists would come, Christ Himself
prophesied, Matthew 24:5, "For many shall come in my name, saying, I am
Christ; and shall deceive many." Whoever seeks righteousness by works
denies God and makes himself God. He is an Antichrist because he
ascribes to his own works the omnipotent capability of conquering sin,
death, devil, hell, and the wrath of God. An Antichrist lays claim to
the honor of Christ. He is an idolater of himself. The law-righteous
person is the worst kind of infidel.

Those who intend to obtain righteousness by their own efforts do not say
in so many words: "I am God; I am Christ." But it amounts to that. They
usurp the divinity and office of Christ. The effect is the same as if
they said, "I am Christ; I am a Savior. I save myself and others." This
is the impression the monks give out.

The Pope is the Antichrist, because he is against Christ, because he
takes liberties with the things of God, because he lords it over the
temple of God.

I cannot tell you in words how criminal it is to seek righteousness
before God without faith in Christ, by the works of the Law. It is
the abomination standing in the holy place. It deposes the Creator and
deifies the creature.

The real doers of the Law are the true believers. The Holy Spirit
enables them to love God and their neighbor. But because we have only
the first-fruits of the Spirit and not the tenth-fruits, we do not
observe the Law perfectly. This imperfection of ours, however, is not
imputed to us, for Christ's sake.

Hence, the statement of Moses, "Cursed is every one that continueth not
in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them," is
not contrary to Paul. Moses requires perfect doers of the Law. But where
will you find them? Nowhere. Moses himself confessed that he was not a
perfect doer of the Law. He said to the Lord: "Pardon our iniquity and
our sin." Christ alone can make us innocent of any transgression. How
so? First, by the forgiveness of our sins and the imputation of His
righteousness. Secondly, by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who engenders
new life and activity in us.

                Objections to the Doctrine of Faith Disproved

Here we shall take the time to enter upon the objections which our
opponents raise against the doctrine of faith. There are many passages
in the Bible that deal with works and the reward of works which our
opponents cite against us in the belief that these will disprove the
doctrine of faith which we teach.

The scholastics grant that according to the reasonable order of nature
being precedes doing. They grant that any act is faulty unless it
proceeds from a right motive. They grant that a person must be right
before he can do right. Why don't they grant that the right inclination
of the heart toward God through faith in Christ must precede works?

In the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews we find a
catalogue of various works and deeds of the saints of the Bible. David,
who killed a lion and a bear, and defeated Goliath, is mentioned. In
the heroic deeds of David the scholastic can discover nothing more than
outward achievement. But the deeds of David must be evaluated according
to the personality of David. When we understand that David was a man of
faith, whose heart trusted in the Lord, we shall understand why he could
do such heroic deeds. David said: "The Lord that delivered me out of the
paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out
of the hand of this Philistine." Again: "Thou comest to me with a sword,
and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name
of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast
defied. This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee." (I Samuel 17:37, 45, 46.)
Before David could achieve a single heroic deed he was already a man
beloved of God, strong and constant in faith.

Of Abel it is said in the same Epistle: "By faith Abel offered unto God
a more excellent sacrifice than Cain." When the scholastics come upon
the parallel passage in Genesis 4:4 they get no further than the words:
"And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering." "Aha!" they
cry. "See, God has respect to offerings. Works do justify." With mud in
their eyes they cannot see that the text says in Genesis that the Lord
had respect to the person of Abel first. Abel pleased the Lord because
of his faith. Because the person of Abel pleased the Lord, the offering
of Abel pleased the Lord also. The Epistle to the Hebrews expressly
states: "By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice."

In our dealings with God the work is worth nothing without faith, for
"without faith it is impossible to please him." (Hebrews 11:6.) The
sacrifice of Abel was better than the sacrifice of Cain, because Abel
had faith. As to Cain he had no faith or trust in God's grace, but
strutted about in his own fancied worth. When God refused to recognize
Cain's worth, Cain got angry at God and at Abel. The Holy Spirit speaks
of faith in different ways in the Sacred Scriptures. Sometimes He speaks
of faith independently of other matters. When the Scriptures speak
of faith in the absolute or abstract, faith refers to justification
directly. But when the Scripture speaks of rewards and works it speaks
of compound or relative faith. We will furnish some examples. Galatians
5:6, "Faith which worketh by love." Leviticus 18:5, "Which if a man do,
he shall live in them." Matthew 19:17, "If thou wilt enter into life,
keep the commandments." Psalm 37:27, "Depart from evil, and do good." In
these and other passages where mention is made of doing, the Scriptures
always speak of a faithful doing, a doing inspired by faith. "Do this
and thou shalt live," means: First have faith in Christ, and Christ will
enable you to do and to live.

In the Word of God all things that are attributed to works are
attributable to faith. Faith is the divinity of works. Faith permeates
all the deeds of the believer, as Christ's divinity permeated His
humanity. Abraham was accounted righteous because faith pervaded his
whole personality and his every action.

When you read how the fathers, prophets, and kings accomplished great
deeds, remember to explain them as the Epistle to the Hebrews accounts
for them: "Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions." (Hebrews 11:33.) In
this way will we correctly interpret all those passages that seem to
support the righteousness of works. The Law is truly observed only
through faith. Hence, every "holy," "moral" law-worker is accursed.

Supposing that this explanation will not satisfy the scholastics,
supposing that they should completely wrap me up in their arguments
(they cannot do it), I would rather be wrong and give all credit to
Christ alone. Here is Christ. Paul, Christ's apostle, declares that
"Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us." (Gal. 3:13.) I hear with my own ears that I cannot be saved
except by the blood and death of Christ. I conclude, therefore, that it
is up to Christ to overcome my sins, and not up to the Law, or my own
efforts. If He is the price of my redemption, if He was made sin for my
justification, I don't give a care if you quote me a thousand Scripture
passages for the righteousness of works against the righteousness of
faith. I have the Author and Lord of the Scriptures on my side. I would
rather believe Him than all that riffraff of "pious" law-workers.


  VERSE 11. But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God,
  it is evident: for, The just shall live by faith.

The Apostle draws into his argument the testimony of the Prophet
Habakkuk: "The just shall live by his faith." This passage carries much
weight because it eliminates the Law and the deeds of the Law as factors
in the process of our justification.

The scholastics misconstrue this passage by saying: "The just shall live
by faith, if it is a working faith, or a faith formed and performed by
charitable works." Their annotation is a forgery. To speak of formed or
unformed faith, a sort of double faith, is contrary to the Scriptures.
If charitable works can form and perfect faith I am forced to say
eventually that charitable deeds constitute the essential factor in the
Christian religion. Christ and His benefits would be lost to us.


  VERSE 12. And the law is not of faith.

In direct opposition to the scholastics Paul declares: "The law is not
of faith." What is this charity the scholastics talk so much about? Does
not the Law command charity? The fact is the Law commands nothing but
charity, as we may gather from the following Scripture passages: "Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might" (Deut. 6:5.) "Strewing mercy unto thousands of
them that love me, and keep my commandments." (Exodus 20:6.) "On these
two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. 22:40.) If
the law requires charity, charity is part of the Law and not of faith.
Since Christ has displaced the Law which commands charity, it follows
that charity has been abrogated with the Law as a factor in our
justification, and only faith is left.


  VERSE 12. But, The man that doeth them shall live in them.

Paul undertakes to explain the difference between the righteousness of
the Law and the righteousness of faith. The righteousness of the Law is
the fulfillment of the Law according to the passage: "The man that doeth
them shall live in them." The righteousness of faith is to believe the
Gospel according to the passage: "The just shall live by faith." The
Law is a statement of debit, the Gospel a statement of credit. By this
distinction Paul explains why charity which is the commandment of
the Law cannot justify, because the Law contributes nothing to our
justification.

Indeed, works do follow after faith, but faith is not therefore a
meritorious work. Faith is a gift. The character and limitations of the
Law must be rigidly maintained.

When we believe in Christ we live by faith. When we believe in the Law
we may be active enough but we have no life. The function of the Law
is not to give life; the function of the Law is to kill. True, the Law
says: "The man that doeth them shall live in them." But where is the
