centuries of Mohammedanism on which they have looked down. But though
their silent prophecy is unheeded and unheard by the worshippers below,
it shall be proved true one day, and the crescent shall wane before the
steady light of the Sun of Righteousness. The words are carven deep over
the portals of the temple which Christ rears; and though men may not be
able to read them, and may not believe them if they do, though for
centuries traffickers have defiled its courts, and base-born usurpers
have set up their petty thrones, yet the writing stands sure, a dumb
witness against the transient lies, a patient prophet of the eternal
truth. And when all false faiths, and their priests who have oppressed
men and traduced God, have vanished; and when kings that have
prostituted their great and godlike office to personal advancement and
dynastic ambition are forgotten; and when every shrine reared for
obscene and bloody rites, or for superficial and formal worship, has
been cast to the ground, then from out of the confusion and desolation
shall gleam the temple of God, which is the refuge of men, and on the
one throne of the universe shall sit the Eternal Priest--our Brother,
Jesus the Christ.

        *        *        *        *        *


MALACHI


A DIALOGUE WITH GOD

     'A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be
     a Father, where is Mine honour? and if I be a master, where is My
     fear? saith the Lord of Hosts unto you, O priests, that despise My
     Name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised Thy Name? 7. Ye offer
     polluted bread upon Mine altar. And ye say, Wherein have we
     polluted Thee?'--MALACHI i. 6, 7.

A charactistic of this latest of the prophets is the vivacious dialogue
of which our text affords one example. God speaks and the people
question His word, which in reply He reiterates still more strongly. The
other instances of its occurrence may here be briefly noted, and we
shall find that they cover all the aspects of the divine speech to men,
whether He charges sin home upon them or pronounces threatenings of
judgment, or invites by gracious promises the penitent to return. His
charges of sin are repelled in our text and in the following verse by
the indignant question, 'Wherein have we polluted Thee?' And similarly
in the next chapter the divine accusation, 'Ye have wearied the Lord
with your words,' is thrown back with the contemptuous retort, 'Wherein
have we wearied Him?' And in like manner in the third chapter, 'Ye have
robbed Me,' calls forth no confession but only the defiant answer,'
Wherein have we robbed Thee?' And in a later verse, the accusation,
'Your words have been stout against Me,' is traversed by the question,
'What have we spoken so much against Thee?' Similarly the threatening of
judgment that the Lord will 'cut off' the men that 'profane the holiness
of the Lord' calls forth only the rebutting question, 'Wherefore?' (ii.
14). And even the gracious invitation, 'Return unto Me, and I will
return unto you,' evokes not penitence, but the stiff-necked reply,
'Wherein shall we return?' (iii. 7). In this sermon we may deal with the
first of these three cases, and consider, God's Indictment, and man's
plea of 'Not guilty.'

I. God's Indictment.

The precise nature of the charge is to be carefully considered. The Name
is the sum of the revealed character, and that Name has been despised.
The charge is not that it has been blasphemed, but that it has been
neglected, or under-estimated, or cared little about. The pollution of
the table of the Lord is the overt act by which the attitude of mind and
heart expressed in despising His Name is manifested; but the overt act
is secondary and not primary--a symptom of a deeper-lying disease. And
herein our Prophet is true to the whole tenor of the Old Testament
teaching, which draws its indictment against men primarily in regard to
their attitude, and only as a manifestation of that, to their acts. The
same deed may be, if estimated in relation to human law, a crime: if
estimated in relation to godless ethics, a wrong; and if estimated in
the only right way, namely, the attitude towards God which it reveals, a
sin. 'The despising of His Name' may be taken as the very definition of
sin. It is usual with men to-day to say that 'Sin is selfishness'; but
that statement does not go deep enough unless it be recognised that
self-regard only becomes sin when it rears its puny self in opposition
to, or in disregard of, the plain will of God. The 'New Theology,' of
course, minimises, even where it does not, as it to be consistent
should, deny the possibility of sin: for, if God is all and all is God,
there can be no opposition, there can be no divine will to be opposed,
and no human will to oppose it. But the fact of sin certified by men's
own consciences is the rock on which Pantheism must always strike and
sink. A superficial view of human history and of human nature may try to
explain away the fact of sin by shallow talk about 'heredity' and
'environment,' or about 'ignorance' and 'mistakes'; but after all such
euphemistic attempts to rechristen the ugly thing by beguiling names,
the fact remains, and conscience bears sometimes unwilling witness to
its existence, that men do set their own inclinations against God's
commands, and that there is in them that which is 'not subject to the
law of God, neither indeed can be.' The root of all sin is the
despising of His Name.

And as sin has but one root, it has many branches, and as working
backwards from deed to motive, we find one common element in all the
various acts; so working outwards from motive to deed, we have to see
one common character stamped upon a tragical variety of acts. The
poison-water is exhibited in many variously coloured and tasted
draughts, but however unlike each other they may be, it is always the
same.

The great effort of God's love is to press home this consciousness of
despising His Name upon all hearts. The sorrows, losses, and
disappointments which come to us all are not meant only to make us
suffer, but through suffering to lead us to recognise how far we have
wandered from our Father, and to bring us back to His heart and our
home. The beginning of all good in us is the contrite acknowledgment of
our evil. Christ's first preaching was the continuation of John's
message, 'Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand'; and His
tenderest revelation of the divine love incarnated in Himself was meant
to arouse the penitent confession, 'I am no more worthy to be called Thy
son,' and the quickening resolve, 'I will arise and go to my Father.'
There is no way to God but through the narrow gate of repentance. There
is no true reception of the gift of Christ which does not begin with a
vivid and heart-broken consciousness of my own sin. We can pass into,
and abide in, the large room of joyous acceptance and fellowship, but we
must reach it by a narrow path walled in by gloomy rocks and trodden
with bleeding feet. The penitent knowledge of oar sin is the first step
towards the triumphant knowledge of Christ's righteousness as ours. Only
they who have called out in the agony of their souls, 'Lord, save us, we
perish,' have truly learned the love of God, and truly possess the
salvation that is in Christ.

II. Man's plea of 'Not Guilty.'

That such an answer should be given to such a charge is a strange,
solemn fact, which tragically confirms the true indictment. The effect
of all sin is to make us less conscious of its presence, as persons in
an unventilated room are not aware of its closeness. It is with profound
truth that the Apostle speaks of being hardened by the 'deceitfulness'
of sin. It comes to us in a cloud and enfolds us in obscure mist. Like
white ants, it never works in the open, but makes a tunnel or burrows
under ground, and, hidden in some piece of furniture, eats away all its
substance whilst it seems perfectly solid. The man's perception of the
standard of duty is enfeebled. We lose our sense of the moral character
of any habitual action, just as a man who has lived all his life in a
slum sees little of its hideousness, and knows nothing of green fields
and fresh air. Conscience is silenced by being neglected. It can be
wrongly educated and perverted, so that it may regard sin as doing God's
service; and the only judgment in which it can be absolutely trusted is
the declaration that it is right to do right, while all its other
decisions as to what is right may be biassed by self-interest; but the
force with which it pronounces its only unalterable decision depends on
the whole tenor of the life of the man. The sins which are most in
accordance with our characters, and are therefore most deeply rooted in
us, are those which we are least likely to recognise as sins. So, the
more sinful we are, the less we know it; therefore there is need for a
fixed standard outside of us. The light on the deck cannot guide us;
there must be the lighthouse on the rock. This sad answer of the heart
untouched by God's appeal prevents all further access of God's love to
that heart. That love can only enter when the reply to its indictment
is, 'I have despised Thy name.'

Let us not forget the New Testament modification of the divine
accusation. 'In Christ' is the Name of God fully and finally revealed to
men. For us who live in the blaze of the ineffable brightness of the
revelation, our attitude towards Him who brings it is the test of our
'hallowing of the Name' which He brings. He Himself has varied Malachi's
indictment when He said, 'He that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent
Me.' Our sin is now to be measured by our under-estimate and neglect of
Him, and chiefly of His Cross. That Cross prevents our consciousness of
sin from becoming despair of pardon. Judas went out, and with bitter
weeping, himself ended his traitorous life. If God's last word to us
were, 'Ye have despised My Name,' and it sank into our souls, there
would be no hope for any of us. But the message which begins with the
universal indictment of sin passes into the message which holds forth
forgiveness and freedom as universal as the sin, and 'God hath concluded
all in unbelief that He may have mercy upon all.'


BLEMISHED OFFERINGS

     'Offer it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee, or
     accept thy person? saith the Lord of Hosts.'--MALACHI i. 8.

A word of explanation may indicate my purpose in selecting this, I am
afraid, unfamiliar text. The Prophet has been vehemently rebuking a
characteristic mean practice of the priests, who were offering maimed
and diseased animals in sacrifice. They were probably dishonest as well
as mean, because the worshippers would bring sound beasts, and the
priests, for their own profit, slipped in a worthless animal, and kept
the valuable one for themselves. They had become so habituated to this
piece of economical religion, that they saw no harm in it, and when they
offered the lame and the sick and the blind for sacrifice they said to
themselves, 'It is not evil.' And so Malachi, with the sudden sharp
thrust of my text, tries to rouse their torpid consciences. He says to
them: 'Take that diseased creature that you are not ashamed to lay on
God's altar, and try what the governor'--the official appointed by the
Persian Kings to rule over the returned exiles--'will think about it.
Will an offering of that sort be considered a compliment or an insult?
Do you think it will smooth your way or help your suit with him? Surely
God deserves as much reverence as the deputy of Artaxerxes. Surely what
is not good enough for a Persian satrap is not good enough for the Lord
of Hosts. Offer it to the governor, will he be pleased with it? Will he
accept thy person?'

Now, it seems to me that this cheap religion of the priests, and this
scathing irony of the Prophet's counsel need little modification to fit
us very closely. You will bear me witness, I think, that I do not often
speak to you about money. But I am going to try to bring out something
about the great subject of Christian administration of earthly
possessions from this text, because I believe that the Christian
consciousness of this generation does need a great deal of rousing and
instructing about this matter.

I. We note the startling and strange contrast which the text suggests.

The diseased lamb was laid without scruple or hesitation on God's altar,
and not one of these tricky priests durst have taken it to Court in
order to secure favour there. Generalise that, and it comes to this--the
gifts that we lavish on men are the condemnation of the gifts that we
bring to God; and further, we should be ashamed to offer to men what we
are not in the least ashamed to bring to God. Let me illustrate in one
or two points.

Let us contrast in our own consciences, for instance, the sort of love
that we give to one another with the sort of love that we bring to Him.
How strong, how perennially active, how delighting in sacrifice and
service, what a felt source of blessedness is the love that knits many
husbands and wives, many parents and children, many lovers and friends
together! And in dreadful contrast, how languid, how sporadic and
interrupted, how reluctant when called upon for service and sacrifice,
how little operative in our lives is the love we bring to God! We durst
not lay upon the altar of family affection, of wedded love, of true
friendship, a love of such a sort as we take to God and expect Him to he
satisfied with. It would be an insult if offered to 'the governor,' but
we think it good enough for the King of kings. Here a gushing flood,
there a straitened trickle coming drop by drop; here a glowing flame
that fills life with warmth and light, there a few dying embers. Measure
and contrast the love that is lavished by men upon one another, and the
love that is coldly brought to Him. And I think we must all bow our
heads penitently.

Contrast the trust that we put in one another, and the trust that we
direct to Him. In the one case it is absolute. 'I am as sure as I am of
my own existence that so-and-so will always be as true as steel to me,
and will never fail me, and whatever he, or she, does, or fails to do,
no shadow of suspicion, or mist of doubt, will creep across the sunshine
of our sky.' And in contrast to the firm grasp with which we clasp an
infirm human hand, there is a tremulous touch, scarcely a grasp at all,
which we lay upon the one Hand that is strong enough always to be
outstretched for our defence and our blessing. Contrast your confidence
in men, and your confidence in God. Are we not all committing the
absurdity of absolutely trusting that which has no stability or stay,
and refusing so to trust that which is the Rock of Ages? God's
faithfulness is absolute, our faith in it is tremulous. Men's
faithfulness is uncertain, our faith in it is entire.

We might contrast the submission and obedience with which we follow
those who have secured our confidence and evoked our love, as contrasted
with the rebellion, the reluctance, the self-will, which come in to
break and mar our submission to God. Men that will not take Jesus Christ
for their Master, and refuse to follow Him when He speaks, will bind
themselves to some human teacher, and enrol themselves as disciples in
some school of thought or science or philosophy, with a submission so
entire, that it puts to shame the submission which Christians render to
the Incarnate Truth Himself.

And so I might go on, all round the horizon of our human nature, and
signalise the difference that exists between the blemished sacrifices
which each part of our being dares to bring to God and expects Him to
accept, and the sacrifices, unblemished and spotless, which we carry to
one another.

But let me say a word more directly about the subject of which Malachi
is speaking. It seems to me that we may well take a very condemnatory
contrast between what we offer to God in regard to our administration of
earthly good, and what we offer on other altars. Contrast what you give,
for directly beneficent and Christian purposes, with what you spend,
without two thoughts, on your own comfort, indulgence, recreation,
tastes--sometimes doubtful tastes--and the like. Contrast England's
drink bill and England's missionary contribution. We spend L10,000,000
on some wretched war, and some of you think it is cheap at the price,
and the whole contributions of English Christians to missionary purposes
in a twelvemonth do not amount to a tenth of that sum. You offer that to
the spread of Christ's kingdom. 'Offer it to your Government,' and try
to compound for your share of the ten millions that you are going to
spend in shells and gunpowder by the amount you give to Christian
missions, and you will very soon have the tax-gatherer down on you.
'Will he be pleased with it?'

This one Missionary Society with which we are nominally connected has an
income of L70,000 a year. I suppose that is about a shilling per head
from the members of our congregations. Of this congregation there are
many that never give us a farthing, except, perhaps, the smallest coin
in their pockets when the collecting-box comes round. I do not suppose
that there is one of us that applies the underlying principle in our
text, of giving God our best, to this work. I am not going to urge you.
It is my business now simply to state, as boldly and strongly as I can,
the fact; and I say with all sadness, with self-condemnation, as well as
bringing an indictment against my brethren, but with the clearest
conviction that I am not exaggerating in the smallest degree, that the
contrast between what we lavish on other things and what we give for
God's work in the world, is a shameful contrast, like that other which
the Prophet gibbeted with his indignant eloquence.

II. And now let me come to another point--viz., that we have here
suggested and implied the true law and principle on which all Christian
giving of all sorts is to be regulated.

And that is--give the best. The diseased animal was no more fit for the
altar of God than it was for the shambles of the viceroy. It was the
entire and unblemished one that would be accepted in either case. But
for us Christian people that general principle has to be expanded. Let
me do it in two or three sentences.

The foundation of all is 'the unspeakable Gift.' Jesus Christ has given
Himself, God has given His Son. And Jesus Christ and God, in giving,
gave up that we might receive. Do you believe that? Do you believe it
about yourself? If you do, then the next step becomes certain. That
gift, truly received by any man, will infallibly lead to a kindred
(though infinitely inferior) self-surrender. If once we come within the
circle of the attraction of that great Sun, if I might so say, it will
sweep us clean out of our orbit, and turn us into satellites reflecting
His light. To have self for our centre is death and misery, to have
Christ for our centre is life and blessedness. And the one power that
decentralises a man, and sweeps him into an orbit around Jesus, is the
faithful acceptance of His great gift. Just as some little State will
give up its independence in order to be blessedly absorbed into a great
Empire, on the frontiers of which it maintains a precarious existence,
so a man is never so strong, never so blessed, never so truly himself,
as when the might of Christ's sacrifice has melted down all his
selfishness, and has made it flow out in rivers of self-surrender,
self-absorption, self-annihilation, and so self-preservation. 'He that
loseth his life shall find it.'

Then the next step is that this self-surrender, consequent upon my
faithful acceptance of the Lord's surrender for me, changes my whole
conception as to what I call my possessions. If I, in the depths of my
soul, have yielded myself to Jesus Christ, which I shall have done if I
have truly accepted Him as yielding Himself for me, then the yielding of
self draws after it, necessarily, and without a question, a new relation
between me and all that I have and all that I can do. Capacities,
faculties, means, opportunities, powers of brain and heart and mind, and
everything else--they all belong to Him. As in old times a nobleman came
and put his hands between the King's hands, and kneeling before him
surrendered his lands, and all his property, to the over-lord, and got
them back again for his own, so we shall do, in the measure in which we
have accepted Christ as our Saviour and our Guide. And so, because am
His, I shall feel that I am His steward to administer what He gives me,
not for myself, but for men and for God.

Then there follows another thing, and that is, that Christian giving,
not of money only, but of money in a very eminent degree, is only right
and truly Christian when you give yourself with your gift. A great many
of us put our sixpence, or our half-crown, or our sovereign, into the
plate, and no part of ourselves goes with it, except a little twinge of
unwillingness to part with it. That is how they fling bones to dogs.
That is not how you have to give your money and your efforts to God and
God's cause. Farmers nowadays sow their seed-corn out of a machine with
a number of little conical receptacles at the back of it and a small
hole in the bottom of each, and as the thing goes bumping along over the
furrows, out they fall. That drill does as well as, and better than, the
hand of the sower scattering the seed, but it does not do near as well
in the Christian agriculture in sowing the seed of the Kingdom.
Machine-work will not do there; we have to have the sower's hand, and
the sower's heart with his hand, as he scatters the seed. Brethren!
apply the lesson to yourselves, and let your sympathies and your prayers
and your wishes to help go along with your gifts, if you intend them to
be of any good.

And there is another thing, and that is that, somehow or other, if not
in the individual gifts, at all events in their aggregate, there must be
present the fact of sacrifice. 'I will not offer unto the Lord burnt
offerings of that which doth cost me nothing,' said the old king. And we
do not give as we ought, unless our gifts involve some measure of
sacrifice. From many a subscription list some of the biggest donations
would disappear, like the top-writing in one of those old manuscripts
where the Gospel has been half-erased and written over with some foolish
legend, which vanishes when the detergent liquid is applied to the
parchment, if that thought were brought to bear upon it. God asks how
much is kept, not how much is given.

Now, dear friends, these are all threadbare, elementary, 'A.B.C.'
truths. Are they the alphabet of our stewardship and administration of
our possessions?

III. One last suggestion I would make on this text is that it brings
before us the possible blessing and possible grave results of right or
wrong Christian giving.

'Will he be pleased with it? Or will he accept thy person?' Will the
governor think the hobbling creature, blind of an eye, and infected with
some sickness, to be a beautiful addition to his flock? Will it help
your suit with him? No!

It is New Testament teaching that our faithfulness in the administration
of earthly possessions of all sorts has a bearing on our spiritual life.
Remember our Lord's triple illustration of this principle, when He
speaks about faithfulness 'in that which is least,' leading on to the
possession of that which is the greatest; when He speaks of faithfulness
in regard to 'the unrighteous Mammon' leading on to being intrusted with
the true riches; when He speaks of faithfulness in our administration of
that which is another's--alien to ourselves, and which may pass into the
possession of a thousand more--leading on to our firmer hold, and our
deeper and fuller possession of the riches which, in the deepest sense
of the word, are our own. One very important element in the development
and advance of the religious life is our right use of these earthly
things. I have seen many a case in which a man was far better when he
was a poor man than he was when a rich one, in which slowly, stealthily,
certainly, the love of wealth has closed round a man like an iron band
round a sapling, and has hindered the growth of his Christian character,
and robbed him of the best things. And, God be thanked! one has seen
cases, too, in which, by their Christian use of outward possessions, men
have weakened the dominion of self upon themselves, have learned the
subordinate value of the wealth that can be counted and detached from
its possessor, and have grown in the grace and knowledge of the Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ. Dear friends, God has given all of us something in
charge, the faithful use of which is a potent factor in the growth of
our Christian characters.

It is New Testament teaching that our faithful administration of earthly
possessions has a bearing on the future. Remember what Jesus Christ
said, 'That when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting
habitations.' Remember what His Apostle says, 'Laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold on eternal life.' Let no fear of imperilling the great truth of
salvation by faith lead us to forget that the faith which saves
manifests its vitality and genuineness, by its effects upon our lives,
and that no small part of our lives is concerned with the right
acquisition and right use of these perishable outward gifts. And let us
take care that we do not, in our dread of damaging the free grace of
God, forget that although we do not earn blessedness, here or hereafter,
by gifts whilst we are living or legacies when we are dead, the
administration of money has an important part to play in shaping
Christian character, and the Christian character which we acquire here
settles our hereafter.

Brethren! we all need to revise our scale of giving, especially in
regard to missionary operations. And if we will do that at the foot of
the Cross, then we shall join the chorus, 'Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain to receive _riches_,' and we shall come to Him 'bringing our
silver and our gold with us,' rejoicing that He gives us the possibility
of sharing His blessedness, 'according to the word of the Lord Jesus
which He spake, It is more blessed to give than to receive.'


A DIALOGUE WITH GOD

     'The Lord will cut off the man that doeth this ... out of the tents
     of Jacob, ... 14. Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the Lord hath been
     witness between thee and the wife of thy youth.'--MALACHI ii. 12,
     14 (R.V.).

It is obvious from the whole context that divorce and foreign
inter-marriage were becoming increasingly prevalent in Malachi's time.
The conditions in these respects were nearly similar to that prevailing
in the times of Ezra and Nehemiah. It is these sins which the Prophet is
here vehemently condemning, and for which he threatens to cut off the
transgressors out of the tents of Jacob, and to regard no more their
offerings and simulated worship. They might cover 'the altar of the Lord
with tears,' but the sacrifice which they laid upon it was polluted by
the sins of their daily domestic life, and therefore was not 'regarded
by Him any more.' Malachi is true to the prophetic spirit when he
denounces a religion which has the form of godliness without its power
over the practical life. But his sharp accusations have their edge
turned by the question, 'Wherefore?' which again calls out from the
Prophet's lips a more sharply-pointed accusation, and a solemner warning
that none should 'deal treacherously against the wife of his youth,'
'for I hate putting away, saith the Lord.' We may dismiss any further
reference to the circumstances of the text, and regard it as but one
instance of man's way of treating the voice of God when it warns of the
consequences of the sin of man. Looked at from such a point of view the
words of our text bring before us God's merciful threatenings and man's
incredulous rejection of them.

I. God's merciful threatenings.

The fact of sin affects God's relation to and dealings with the sinner.
It does not prevent the flowing forth of His love, which is not drawn
out by anything in us, but wells up from the depths of His being, like
the Jordan from its source at Dan, a broad stream gushing forth from
the rock. But that love which is the outgoing of perfect moral purity
must necessarily become perfect opposition to its own opposite in the
sinfulness of man. The divine character is many-sided, and whilst 'to
the pure' it 'shows itself pure,' it cannot but be that 'to the froward'
it 'will show itself froward.' Man's sin has for its most certain and
dreadful consequence that, if we may so say, it forces God to present
the stern side of His nature which hates evil. But not merely does sin
thus modify the fact of the divine relation to men, but it throws men
into opposition in which they can see only the darkness which dwells in
the light of God. To the eye looking through a red tinted medium all
things are red, and even the crystal sea before the throne is 'a sea of
glass mingled with fire.'

No sin can stay our reception of a multitude of good gifts appealing to
our hearts and revealing the patient love of our Father in heaven, but
every sin draws after it as certainly as the shadow follows the
substance, evil consequences which work themselves out on the large
scale in nations and communities, and in the smaller spheres of
individual life. And surely it is the voice of love and not of anger
that comes to warn us of the death which is the wages of sin. It is not
God who has ordained that 'the soul that sinneth it shall die,' but it
is God who tells us so. The train is rushing full steam ahead to the
broken bridge, and will crash down the gulph and be huddled, a hideous
ruin, on the rocks; surely it is care for life that holds out the red
flag of danger, and surely God is not to be blamed if in spite of the
flag full speed is kept up and the crash comes.

The miseries and sufferings which follow our sins are self-inflicted,
and for the most part automatic. 'Whatsoever a man soweth, that'--and
not some other crop--'will he also reap.' The wages of sin are paid in
ready money; and it is as just to lay them at God's door as it would be
to charge Him with inflicting the disease which the dissolute man brings
upon himself. It is no arbitrary appointment of God's that 'he that
soweth to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption'; nor is it His
will acting as that of a jealous despot which makes it inevitably true
that here and hereafter, 'Every transgression and disobedience shall
receive its just recompense of reward,' and that to be parted from Him
is death.

If then we rightly understand the connection between sin and suffering,
and the fact that the sorrows which are but the echoes of preceding sins
have all a distinctly moral and restorative purpose, we are prepared
rightly to estimate how tenderly the God who warns us against our sins
by what men call threatenings loves us while He speaks.

II. Man's rejection of God's merciful threatenings.

It is the great mystery and tragedy of life that men oppose themselves
to God's merciful warnings that all sin is a bitter, because it is an
evil, thing. He has to lament, 'I have smitten your children, and they
have received no correction.' The question 'Wherefore?' is asked in very
various tones, but none of them has in it the accent of true conviction;
and there is a whole world of difference between the lowly petition,
'Show me wherefore Thou contendest with me,' and the curt,
self-complacent brushing aside of God's merciful threatenings in the
text. The last thing which most of us think of as the cause of our
misfortunes is ourselves; and we resent as almost an insult the word,
which if we were wise, we should welcome as the crowning proof of the
seeking love of our Father in heaven. We are more obstinate and foolish
than Balaam, who persisted in his purpose when the angel with the drawn
sword in his hand would have barred his way, not to the tree of life,
but to death. The awful mystery that a human will can, and the yet
sadder mystery that it does, set itself against the divine, is never
more unintelligible, never so stupid, and never so tragic as when God
says, 'Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die?' and we say, 'Why need I die?
I will not turn.'

The 'Wherefore?' of our text is widely asked in the present day as an
expression of utter bewilderment at the miseries of humanity, both in
the wide area of this disordered world and in the narrower field of
individual lives. There are whole schools of so-called political and
social thinkers who have yet to learn that the one thing which the world
and the individual need is not a change of conditions or environment,
but redemption from sin. Man's sorrows are but a symptom of his disease,
and he is no more to be healed by tinkering with these than a
fever-stricken patient can be restored to health by treating the
blotches on his skin which tell of the disease that courses through his
veins.

But sometimes the question is more than an expression of bewilderment;
it conceals an arraignment of God's justice, or even a denial that there
is a God at all. There are men among us who hesitate not to avow that
the miseries of the world have rooted out of their minds a belief in
Him; and who point to all the ills under which humanity staggers as
conclusive against the ancient faith of a God of love. They, too, forget
that that love is righteousness, and that if there be sin in the world
and God above it, He must necessarily war against it and hate it.

Our right response to God's merciful threatenings is to ask this
question in the right spirit. We are not wise if we turn a deaf ear to
His warnings, or go on in a headlong course which He by His providences
declared to be dangerous and fatal. We use them as wise men should, only
if our 'Wherefore?' is asked in order to learn our evil, and having
learned it, to purge our bosoms of the perilous stuff by confession and
to seek pardon and victory in Christ. Then we shall 'know the secret of
the Lord' which is 'with them that fear Him'; and the mysteries that
still hang over our own histories and the world's destiny will have
shining down upon them the steadfast light of that love which seeks to
make men blessed by making them good.


THE LAST WORD OF PROPHECY

     'Behold, I will send My messenger, and he shall prepare the way
     before Me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to His
     temple, even the Messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in:
     behold, He shall come, saith the Lord of Hosts. 2. But who may
     abide the day of His coming? and who shall stand when He appeareth?
     for He is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap: 3. And He
     shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and He shall purify
     the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may
     offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. 4. Then shall the
     offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in
     the days of old, and as in former years. 5. And I will come near to
     you to judgment; and I will be a swift Witness against the
     sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers,
     and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the
     widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from
     his right, and fear not Me, saith the Lord of Hosts. 6. For I am
     the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
     consumed. 7. Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away
     from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto Me, and I
     will return unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts. But ye said, Wherein
      shall we return? 8. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed Me.
     But ye say, Wherein have we robbed Thee? In tithes and offerings.
     9. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed Me, even this
     whole nation. 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that
     there may be meat in Mine house, and prove Me now herewith, saith
     the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven,
     and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
     receive it. 11. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and
     he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your
     vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord of
     Hosts. 12. And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be
     a delightsome land, saith the Lord of Hosts.'--MALACHI iii. 1-12.

Deep obscurity surrounds the person of this last of the prophets. It is
questioned whether Malachi is a proper name at all. It is the Hebrew
word rendered in verse 1 of our passage 'My messenger,' and this has led
many authorities to contend that the prophecy is in fact anonymous, the
name being only a designation of office. Whether this is so or not, the
name, if it is a name, is all that we know about him. The tenor of his
prophecy shows that he lived after the restoration of the Temple and its
worship, and the sins which he castigates are substantially those with
which Ezra and Nehemiah had to fight. One ancient Jewish authority
asserts that he was Ezra; but the statement has no confirmation, and if
it had been correct, we should not have expected that such an author
would have been anonymous. This dim figure, then, is the last of the
mighty line of prophets, and gives strong utterance to the 'hope of
Israel'! One clear voice, coming from we scarcely know whose lips,
proclaims for the last time, 'He comes! He comes!' and then all is
silence for four hundred years. Modern critics, indeed, hold that the
bulk of the Psalter is of later date; but that contention has much to do
before it can be regarded as established.

The first point worthy of notice in this passage, then, is the
concentration, in this last prophetic utterance, of that element of
forward-looking expectancy which marked all the earlier revelation. From
the beginning, the selectest spirits in Israel had set their faces and
pointed their fingers to a great future, which gathered distinctness as
the ages rolled, and culminated in the King from David's line, of whom
many psalms sung, and in the suffering Servant of the Lord, who shines
out from the pages of the second part of Isaiah's prophecy. This
Messianic hope runs through all the Old Testament, like a broadening
river. 'They that went before cried, Hosanna! Blessed is He that
cometh.'

That hope gives unity to the Old Testament, whatever criticism may have
to teach about the process of its production. The most important thing
about the book is that one purpose informs it all; and the student who
misses the truth that 'the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy'
has a less accurate conception of the meaning and inter-relations of the
Old Testament than the unlearned who has accepted that great truth. We
should be willing to learn all that modern scholarship has to teach
about the course of revelation. But we should take care that the new
knowledge does not darken the old certainty that the prophets 'testified
beforehand of the sufferings of Christ and of the glory that should
follow,' Here, at the very end, stands Malachi, reiterating the
assurance which had come down through the centuries. The prophets, as it
were, had lit a beacon which flamed through the darkness. Hand after
hand had flung new fuel on it when it burned low. It had lighted up many
a stormy night of exile and distress. Now we can dimly see one more, the
last of his order, casting his brand on the fire, which leaps up again;
and then he too passes into the darkness, but the beacon burns on.

The next point to note is the clear prophecy of a forerunner. 'My
messenger' is to come, and to 'prepare the way before Me.' Isaiah had
heard a voice calling, 'Prepare the way of the Lord,' and Malachi quotes
his words, and ascribes the same office to the 'messenger.' In the last
verses of his prophecy he calls this messenger 'Elijah the prophet.'
Here, then, we have a remarkable instance of a historical detail set
forth in prophecy. The coming of the Lord is to be immediately preceded
by the appearance of a prophet, whose function is to effect a moral and
religious reformation, which shall prepare a path for Him. This is no
vague ideal, but definite announcement of a definite fact, to be
realised in a historical personality. How came this half-anonymous Jew,
four hundred years beforehand, to hit upon the fact that the next
prophet in Israel would herald the immediate coming of the Lord? There
ought to be but one answer possible.

Another point to note is the peculiar relation between Jehovah and Him
who comes. Emphatically and broadly it is declared that Jehovah Himself
'shall suddenly come to His temple'; and then the prophecy immediately
passes on to speak of the coming of 'the Messenger of the covenant,'
and dwells for a time exclusively on his work of purifying; and then
again it glides, without conscious breach of continuity or mark of
transition, into, 'And _I_ will come near to you in judgment.' A
mysterious relationship of oneness and yet distinctness is here
shadowed, of which the solution is only found in the Christian truth
that the Word, which was Grod, and was in the beginning with God, became
flesh, and that in Him Jehovah in very deed tabernacled among men. The
expression 'the Messenger (or Angel) of the covenant' is connected with
the remarkable representations in other parts of the Old Testament, of
'the Angel of Jehovah,' in whom many commentators recognise a
pre-incarnate manifestation of the eternal Word. That 'Angel' had
redeemed Israel from Egypt, had led them through the desert, had been
the 'Captain of the Lord's host.' The name of Jehovah was 'in Him.' He
it is whose coming is here prophesied, and in His coming Jehovah comes
to His temple.

We next note the aspect of the coming which is prominent here. Not the
kingly, nor the redemptive, but the judicial, is uppermost. With keen
irony the Prophet contrasts the professed eagerness of the people for
the appearance of Jehovah and their shrinking terror when He does come.
He is 'the Lord whom ye seek'; the Messenger of the covenant is He 'whom
ye delight in.' But all that superficial and partially insincere longing
will turn into dread and unwillingness to abide His scrutiny. The images
of the refiner's fire and the fullers' soap imply painful processes, of
which the intention is to burn out the dross and beat out the filth. It
sounds like a prolongation of Malachi's voice when John the Baptist
peals out his herald cry of one whose 'fan was in His hand,' and who
should plunge men into a fiery baptism, and consume with fire that
destroyed what would not submit to be cast into the fire that cleansed.
Nor should we forget that our Lord has said, 'For judgment am I come
into the world.' He came to 'purify'; but if men would not let Him do
what He came for, He could not but be their bane instead of their
blessing.

The stone is laid. If we build on it, it is a sure foundation; if we
stumble over it, we are broken. The double aspect and effect of the
gospel, which was meant only to have the single operation of blessing,
are clearly set forth in this prophecy, which first promises purging
from sin, so that not only the 'sons of Levi' shall offer in
righteousness, but that the 'offerings of Judah and Jerusalem shall be
pleasant,' and then passes immediately to foretell that God will come in
judgment and witness against evil-doers. Judgment is the shadow of
salvation, and constantly attends on it. Neither Malachi nor the Baptist
gives a complete view of Messiah's work, but still less do they give an
erroneous one; for the central portion of both prophecies is His
purifying energy which both liken to cleansing fire.

That real and inward cleansing is the great work of Christ. It was
wrought on as many of His contemporaries as believed on Him, and for
such as did not He was a swift Witness against them. Nor are we to
forget that the prophecy is not exhausted yet; for there remains another
'day of His coming' for judgment. The prophets did not see the
perspective of the future, and often bring together events widely
separated in time, just as, to a spectator on a mountain, distances
between points far away towards the horizon are not measurable. We have
to allow for foreshortening.

This blending of events historically widely apart is to be kept in view
in interpreting Malachi's prediction that the coming would result in
Judah's and Israel's offerings being 'pleasant unto the Lord as in
former years.' That prediction is not yet fulfilled, whether we regard
the name of Israel and the relation expressed in it as having passed
over to the Christian Church, or whether we look forward to that
bringing in of all Israel which Paul says will be as 'life from the
dead.' But by slow degrees it is being fulfilled, and by Christ men are
being led to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God.

The more directly Messianic part of this prophecy is closed in verse 6
by a great saying, which at once gives the reason for the coming and for
its severe aspect of witness against sin. The unchangeableness of God,
which is declared in His very name, guarantees the continued existence
of Israel. As Paul says in regard to the same subject, 'The calling of
God is without change of purpose' (on His part). But it is as impossible
that God should leave them to their sins, which would destroy them, as
that He should Himself consume them. Therefore He will surely come; and
coming, will deliver from evil. But they who refuse to be so delivered
will forfeit that title and the pledge of preservation which it implies.

A new paragraph begins with verse 7, which is not closely connected with
the promises preceding. It recurs to the prevailing tone of Malachi, the
rebuke of negligence in attending to the legal obligations of worship.
That negligence is declared to be a reason for God's withdrawal from
them. But the 'return,' which is promised on condition of their renewed
obedience, can scarcely be identified with the coming just foretold.
That coming was to bring about offerings of righteousness which should
be pleasant to the Lord. This section (vs. 7-12) promises blessings as
results of such offerings, and a 'return' of Jehovah to His people
contingent upon their return to Him. If the two sections of this passage
are taken as closely connected, this one must describe the consequences
of the coming. But, more probably, this accusation of negligence and
promise of blessing on a change of conduct are independent of the
previous verses. We, however, may fairly take them as exhibiting the
obligations of those who have received that great gift of purifying from
Jesus Christ, and are thereby consecrated as His priests.

The key-word of the Christian life is 'sacrifice'--surrender, and that
to God. That is to be stamped on the inmost selves, and by the act of
the will, on the body as well. 'Yield yourselves to God, and your
members as instruments of righteousness to Him.' It is to be written on
possessions. Malachi necessarily keeps within the limits of the
sacrificial system, but his impetuous eloquence hits us no less. It is
still possible to 'rob God.' We do so when we keep anything as our own,
and use it at our own will, for our own purposes. Only when we recognise
His ownership of ourselves, and consequently of all that we call 'ours,'
do we give Him His due. All the slave's chattels belong to the owner to
whom he belongs. Such thorough-going surrender is the secret of thorough
possession. The true way to enjoy worldly goods is to give them to God.

The lattices of heaven are opened, not to pour down, as of old, fiery
