 while the giddy crowd around Him were shouting "Hosanna to the Son of
 David!" Remember Him in Pilate's judgment-hall, meek, self-possessed,
 standing in the serenity of Truth, while all around Him was
 agitation--hesitation in the breast of Pilate, hatred in the bosom of
 the Pharisees, and consternation in the heart of the disciples.

 And this in truth, is what we want: we want the vision of a calmer
 and simpler Beauty, to tranquillize us in the midst of artificial
 tastes--we want the draught of a purer spring to cool the flame of our
 excited life;--we want in other words, the Spirit of the Life of
 Christ, simple, natural, with power to calm and soothe the feelings
 which it rouses: the fulness of the Spirit which can never intoxicate!




 X.

 _Preached August 11, 1850._

 PURITY.


   "Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled
    and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and
    conscience is defiled."--Titus i. 15.

 For the evils of this world there are two classes of remedies--one is
 the world's, the other is God's. The world proposes to remedy evil by
 adjusting the circumstances of this life to man's desires. The world
 says, give us a perfect set of _circumstances_, and then we shall have
 a set of perfect men. This principle lies at the root of the system
 called Socialism. Socialism proceeds on the principle that all moral
 and even physical evil arises from unjust laws. If the cause be
 remedied, the effect will be good. But Christianity throws aside all
 that as merely chimerical. It proves that the fault is not in outward
 circumstances, but in ourselves. Like the wise physician, who, instead
 of busying himself with transcendental theories to improve the
 climate, and the outward circumstances of man, endeavours to relieve
 and get rid of the tendencies of disease which are from within,
 Christianity, leaving all outward circumstances to ameliorate
 themselves, fastens its attention on the spirit which has to deal with
 them. Christ has declared that the kingdom of heaven is from within.
 He said to the Pharisee, "Ye make clean the outside of the cup and
 platter, but within ye are full of extortion and excess." The remedy
 for all this is a large and liberal charity, so overflowing that "Unto
 the pure all things are pure." To internal purity all external things
 _become_ pure. The principle that St. Paul has here laid down is, that
 each man is the creator of his own world; he walks in a universe of
 his own creation.

 As the free air is to one out of health the cause of cold and diseased
 lungs, so to the healthy man it is a source of greater vigour. The
 rotten fruit is sweet to the worm, but nauseous to the palate of man.
 It is the same air and the same fruit acting differently upon
 different beings. To different men a different world--to one all
 pollution--to another all purity. To the noble all things are noble,
 to the mean all things are contemptible.

 The subject divides itself into two parts.

    I. The apostle's principle.
   II. The application of the principle.

 Here we have the same principle again; each man creates his own world.
 Take it in its simplest form. The eye creates the outward world it
 sees. We see not things as they are, but as God has made the eye to
 receive them.

 In its strictest sense, the creation of a new man is the creation of a
 new universe. Conceive an eye so constructed as that the planets and
 all within them should be minutely seen, and all that is near should
 be dim and invisible like things seen through a telescope, or as we
 see through a magnifying glass the plumage of the butterfly, and the
 bloom upon the peach; then it is manifestly clear that we have called
 into existence actually a new _creation_, and not new objects. The
 mind's eye creates a world for itself.

 Again, the visible world presents a different aspect to each
 individual man. You will say that the same things you see are seen by
 all--that the forest, the valley, the flood, and the sea, are the same
 to all; and yet all these things so seen, to different minds are a
 myriad of different universes. One man sees in that noble river an
 emblem of eternity; he closes his lips and feels that GOD is
 there. Another sees nothing in it but a very convenient road for
 transporting his spices, silks, and merchandise. To one this world
 appears useful, to another beautiful. Whence comes the difference?
 From the soul within us. It can make of this world a vast chaos--"a
 mighty maze without a plan;" or a mere machine--a collection of
 lifeless forces; or it can make it the Living Vesture of GOD,
 the tissue through which He can become visible to us. In the spirit in
 which we look on it the world is an arena for mere self-advancement,
 or a place for noble deeds, in which self is forgotten, and
 GOD is all.

 Observe, this effect is traceable even in that produced by our
 different and changeful moods. We make and unmake a world more than
 once in the space of a single day. In trifling moods all seems
 trivial. In serious moods all seems solemn. Is the song of the
 nightingale merry or plaintive? Is it the voice of joy or the
 harbinger of gloom? Sometimes one, and sometimes the other, according
 to our different moods. We hear the ocean furious or exulting. The
 thunder-claps are grand, or angry, according to the different states
 of our mind. Nay, the very church bells chime sadly or merrily, as our
 associations determine. They speak the language of our passing moods.
 The young adventurer revolving sanguine plans upon the milestone,
 hears them speak to him as God did to Hagar in the wilderness, bidding
 him back to perseverance and greatness. The soul spreads its own hue
 over everything; the shroud or wedding-garment of nature is woven in
 the loom of our own feelings. This universe is the express image and
 direct counterpart of the souls that dwell in it. Be noble-minded, and
 all Nature replies--I am divine, the child of God--be thou too, His
 child, and noble. Be mean, and all Nature dwindles into a contemptible
 smallness.

 In the second place, there are two ways in which this principle is
 true. To the pure, all things and all persons are pure, because their
 purity makes all seem pure.

 There are some who go through life complaining of this world; they say
 they have found nothing but treachery and deceit; the poor are
 ungrateful, and the rich are selfish, Yet we do not find such the best
 men. Experience tells us that each man most keenly and unerringly
 detects in others the vice with which he is most familiar himself.

 Persons seem to each man what he is himself. One who suspects
 hypocrisy in the world is rarely transparent; the man constantly on
 the watch for cheating is generally dishonest; he who suspects
 impurity is prurient. This is the principle to which Christ alludes
 when he says, "Give alms of such things as he have; and behold all
 things are clean unto you."


 Have a large charity! Large "charity hopeth all things." Look at that
 sublime apostle who saw the churches of Ephesus and Thessalonica pure,
 because he saw them in his own large love, and painted them, not as
 they were, but as his heart filled up the picture; he viewed them in
 the light of his own nobleness, as representations of his own purity.

 Once more, to the pure all _things_ are pure, as well as all persons.
 That which is natural lies not in things, but in the minds of men.
 There is a difference between prudery and modesty. Prudery detects
 wrong where no wrong is; the wrong lies in the thoughts, and not in
 the objects. There is something of over-sensitiveness and
 over-delicacy which shows not innocence, but an inflammable
 imagination. And men of the world cannot understand that those
 subjects and thoughts which to them are full of torture, can be
 harmless, suggesting nothing evil to the pure in heart.

 Here however, beware! No sentence of Scripture is more frequently in
 the lips of persons who permit themselves much license, than the text,
 "To the pure, all things are pure." Yes, all things natural, but not
 artificial--scenes which pamper the tastes, which excite the senses.
 Innocence feels healthily. To it all nature is pure. But, just as the
 dove trembles at the approach of the hawk, and the young calf shudders
 at the lion never seen before, so innocence shrinks instinctively from
 what is wrong by the same divine instinct. If that which is wrong
 seems pure, then the heart is not pure but vitiated. To the right
 minded all that is right in the course of this world seems pure.
 Abraham, looking forward to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah,
 entreated that it might be averted, and afterwards acquiesced! To the
 disordered mind "all things are out of course." This is the spirit
 which pervades the whole of the Ecclesiastes. There were two things
 which were perpetually suggesting themselves to the mind of Solomon;
 the intolerable sameness of this world, and the constant desire for
 change. And yet that same world, spread before the serene eye of God,
 was pronounced to be all "very good."

 This disordered universe is the picture of your own mind. We make a
 wilderness by encouraging artificial wants, by creating sensitive and
 selfish feelings; then we project everything stamped with the impress
 of our own feelings, and we gather the whole of creation into our own
 pained being--"the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain
 together until now." The world you complain of as impure and wrong is
 not God's world, but your world; the blight, the dullness, the blank,
 are all your own. The light which is in you has become darkness, and
 therefore the light itself is dark.

 Again, to the pure, all things not only seem pure, but are really so
 because they are made such.

 1. As regards persons. It is a marvellous thing to see how a pure and
 innocent heart purifies all that it approaches. The most ferocious
 natures are soothed and tamed by innocence. And so with human beings,
 there is a delicacy so pure, that vicious men in its presence become
 almost pure; all of purity which is in them is brought out; like
 attaches itself to like. The pure heart becomes a centre of
 attraction, round which similar atoms gather, and from which
 dissimilar ones are repelled. A corrupt heart elicits in an hour all
 that is bad in us; a spiritual one brings out and draws to itself all
 that is best and purest. Such was Christ. He stood in the world, the
 Light of the world, to which all sparks of light gradually gathered.
 He stood in the presence of impurity, and men became pure. Note this
 in the history of Zaccheus. In answer to the invitation of the Son of
 man, he says, "Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor,
 and if I have done wrong to any man I restore him fourfold." So also
 the Scribe, "Well, Master, thou hast well said, there is one God, and
 there is none other than He." To the pure Saviour, all was pure. He
 was lifted up on high, and drew all men unto Him.

 Lastly, all situations are pure to the pure. According to the world,
 some professions are reckoned honourable, and some dishonourable. Men
 judge according to a standard merely conventional, and not by that of
 moral rectitude. Yet it was in truth, the men who were in these
 situations which made them such. In the days of the Redeemer, the
 publican's occupation was a degraded one, merely because low base men
 filled that place. But since He was born into the world a poor,
 labouring man, poverty is noble and dignified, and toil is honourable.
 To the man who feels that "the king's daughter is all glorious
 within," no outward situation can seem inglorious or impure.

 There are three words which express almost the same thing, but whose
 meaning is entirely different. These are, the gibbet, the scaffold,
 and the cross. So far as we know, none die on the gibbet but men of
 dishonourable and base life. The scaffold suggests to our minds the
 noble deaths of our greatest martyrs. The cross was once a gibbet, but
 it is now the highest name we have, because He hung on it. Christ has
 purified and ennobled the cross. This principle runs through life. It
 is not the situation which makes the man, but the man who makes the
 situation. The slave may be a freeman. The monarch may be a slave.
 Situations are noble or ignoble, as we make them.

 From all this subject we learn to understand two things. Hence we
 understand the Fall. When man fell, the world fell with him. All
 creation received a shock. Thorns, briars, and thistles, sprang up.
 They were there before, but to the now restless and impatient hands of
 men they became obstacles and weeds. Death, which must ever have
 existed as a form of dissolution, a passing from one state to another,
 became a curse; the sting of death was sin--unchanged in itself, it
 changed in man. A dark, heavy cloud, rested on it--the shadow of his
 own guilty heart.

 Hence too, we understand the Millennium. The Bible says that these
 things are not to be for ever. There are glorious things to come. Just
 as in my former illustration, the alteration of the eye called new
 worlds into being, so now nothing more is needed than to re-create the
 soul--the mirror on which all things are reflected. Then is realized
 the prophecy of Isaiah, "Behold, I create all things new," "new
 heavens and a new earth."

 The conclusion of this verse proves to us why all these new creations
 were called into being--"wherein dwelleth righteousness." To be
 righteous makes all things new. We do not want a new world, we want
 _new hearts_. Let the Spirit of God purify society, and to the pure
 all things will be pure. The earth will put off the look of weariness
 and gloom which it has worn so long, and then the glorious language of
 the prophets will be fulfilled--"The forests will break out with
 singing, and the desert will blossom as the rose."




 XI.

 _Preached February 9, 1851._

 UNITY AND PEACE.


   "And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also
    ye are called in one body; and be ye thankful."--Colossians iii.
    15.

 There is something in these words that might surprise us. It might
 surprise us to find that peace is urged on us as a duty. There can be
 no duty except where there is a matter of obedience; and it might seem
 to us that peace is a something over which we have no power. It is a
 privilege to have peace, but it would appear as if there were no power
 of control within the mind of a man able to ensure that peace for
 itself. "Yet," says the apostle, "let the peace of God rule in your
 hearts."

 It would seem to _us_ as if peace were as far beyond our own control
 as happiness. Unquestionably, we are not masters on our own
 responsibility of our own happiness. Happiness is the gratification
 of every innocent desire; but it is not given to us to ensure the
 gratification of every desire; therefore, happiness is not a duty, and
 it is nowhere written in the Scripture, "You must be happy." But we
 find it written by the apostle Paul, "Be ye thankful," implying
 therefore, that peace is a duty. The apostle says, "Let the peace of
 God rule in your hearts;" from which we infer that peace is
 attainable, and within the reach of our own wills; that if there be
 not repose there is blame; if there be not peace but discord in the
 heart, there is something wrong.

 This is the more surprising when we remember the circumstances under
 which these words were written. They were written from Rome, where the
 apostle lay in prison, daily and hourly expecting a violent death.
 They were written in days of persecution, when false doctrines were
 rife, and religious animosities fierce; they were written in an
 epistle abounding with the most earnest and eager controversy, whereby
 it is therefore implied, that according to the conception of the
 Apostle Paul, it is possible for a Christian to live at the very point
 of death, and in the very midst of danger--that it is possible for him
 to be breathing the atmosphere of religious controversy--it is
 possible for him to be surrounded by bitterness, and even take up the
 pen of controversy himself--and yet his soul shall not lose its own
 deep peace, nor the power of the infinite repose and rest of God.
 Joined with the apostle's command to be at peace, we find another
 doctrine, the doctrine of the unity of the Church of Christ. "To the
 which ye are called in one body," in order that ye may be at peace; in
 other words, the unity of the Church of Christ is the basis on which,
 and on which alone, can be built the possibility of the inward peace
 of individuals.


 And thus, my Christian brethren, our subject divides itself into these
 two simple branches: in the first place, the unity of the Church of
 Christ; in the second place, the inward peace of the members of that
 Church.


 The first subject then, which we have to consider, is the Unity of the
 Church of Christ.

 And the first thing we have to do is both clearly to define and
 understand the meaning of that word "unity." I distinguish the unity
 of comprehensiveness from the unity of mere singularity. The word one,
 as oneness, is an ambiguous word. There is a oneness belonging to the
 army as well as to every soldier in the army. The army is one, and
 that is the oneness of unity; the soldier is one, but that is the
