
Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix): "Christ was known
to the demons only so far as He willed; not as the Author of eternal
life, but as the cause of certain temporal effects," from which they
formed a certain conjecture that Christ was the Son of God. But since
they also observed in Him certain signs of human frailty, they did
not know for certain that He was the Son of God: wherefore (the
devil) wished to tempt Him. This is implied by the words of Matt.
4:2, 3, saying that, after "He was hungry, the tempter" came "to
Him,"    because, as Hilary says (Super Matth., cap. iii), "Had not
Christ's weakness in hungering betrayed His human nature, the devil
would not have dared to tempt Him." Moreover, this appears from the
very manner of the temptation, when he said: "If Thou be the Son of
God." Which words Ambrose explains as follows (In Luc. iv): "What
means this way of addressing Him, save that, though he knew that the
Son of God was to come, yet he did not think that He had come in the
weakness of the flesh?"

Reply Obj. 2: Christ came to destroy the works of the devil, not by
powerful deeds, but rather by suffering from him and his members, so
as to conquer the devil by righteousness, not by power; thus
Augustine says (De Trin. xiii) that "the devil was to be overcome,
not by the power of God, but by righteousness." And therefore in
regard to Christ's temptation we must consider what He did of His own
will and what He suffered from the devil. For that He allowed Himself
to be tempted was due to His own will. Wherefore it is written (Matt.
4:1): "Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert, to be tempted by
the devil"; and Gregory (Hom. xvi in Evang.) says this is to be
understood of the Holy Ghost, to wit, that "thither did His Spirit
lead Him, where the wicked spirit would find Him and tempt Him." But
He suffered from the devil in being "taken up" on to "the pinnacle of
the Temple" and again "into a very high mountain." Nor is it strange,
as Gregory observes, "that He allowed Himself to be taken by him on
to a mountain, who allowed Himself to be crucified by His members."
And we understand Him to have been taken up by the devil, not, as it
were, by force, but because, as Origen says (Hom. xxi super Luc.),
"He followed Him in the course of His temptation like a wrestler
advancing of his own accord."

Reply Obj. 3: As the Apostle says (Heb. 4:15), Christ wished to be
"tempted in all things, without sin." Now temptation which comes from
an enemy can be without sin: because it comes about by merely outward
suggestion. But temptation which comes from the flesh cannot be
without sin, because such a temptation is caused by pleasure and
concupiscence; and, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix), "it is not
without sin that 'the flesh desireth against the spirit.'" And hence
Christ wished to be tempted by an enemy, but not by the flesh.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 41, Art. 2]

Whether Christ Should Have Been Tempted in the Desert?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have been tempted
in the desert. Because Christ wished to be tempted in order to give
us an example, as stated above (A. 1). But an example should be set
openly before those who are to follow it. Therefore He should not
have been tempted in the desert.

Obj. 2: Further, Chrysostom says (Hom. xii in Matth.): "Then most
especially does the devil assail by tempting us, when he sees us
alone. Thus did he tempt the woman in the beginning when he found her
apart from her husband." Hence it seems that, by going into the
desert to be tempted, He exposed Himself to temptation. Since,
therefore, His temptation is an example to us, it seems that others
too should take such steps as will lead them into temptation. And yet
this seems a dangerous thing to do, since rather should we avoid the
occasion of being tempted.

Obj. 3: Further, Matt. 4:5, Christ's second temptation is set down,
in which "the devil took" Christ up "into the Holy City, and set Him
upon the pinnacle of the Temple": which is certainly not in the
desert. Therefore He was not tempted in the desert only.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Mk. 1:13) that Jesus "was in the
desert forty days and forty nights, and was tempted by Satan."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1, ad 2), Christ of His own
free-will exposed Himself to be tempted by the devil, just as by His
own free-will He submitted to be killed by his members; else the
devil would not have dared to approach Him. Now the devil prefers to
assail a man who is alone, for, as it is written (Eccles. 4:12), "if
a man prevail against one, two shall withstand him." And so it was
that Christ went out into the desert, as to a field of battle, to be
tempted there by the devil. Hence Ambrose says on Luke 4:1, that
"Christ was led into the desert for the purpose of provoking the
devil. For had he," i.e. the devil, "not fought, He," i.e. Christ,
"would not have conquered." He adds other reasons, saying that
"Christ in doing this set forth the mystery of Adam's delivery from
exile," who had been expelled from paradise into the desert, and "set
an example to us, by showing that the devil envies those who strive
for better things."

Reply Obj. 1: Christ is set as an example to all through faith,
according to Heb. 12:2: "Looking on Jesus, the author and finisher of
faith." Now faith, as it is written (Rom. 10:17), "cometh by
hearing," but not by seeing: nay, it is even said (John 20:29):
"Blessed are they that have not seen and have believed." And
therefore, in order that Christ's temptation might be an example to
us, it behooved that men should not see it, and it was enough that
they should hear it related.

Reply Obj. 2: The occasions of temptation are twofold. One is on the
part of man--for instance, when a man causes himself to be near to
sin by not avoiding the occasion of sinning. And such occasions of
temptation should be avoided, as it is written of Lot (Gen. 19:17):
"Neither stay thou in all the country about" Sodom.

Another occasion of temptation is on the part of the devil, who
always "envies those who strive for better things," as Ambrose says
(In Luc. iv, 1). And such occasions of temptation are not to be
avoided. Hence Chrysostom says (Hom. v in Matth. [*From the
supposititious Opus Imperfectum]): "Not only Christ was led into the
desert by the Spirit, but all God's children that have the Holy
Ghost. For it is not enough for them to sit idle; the Holy Ghost
urges them to endeavor to do something great: which is for them to be
in the desert from the devil's standpoint, for no unrighteousness, in
which the devil delights, is there. Again, every good work, compared
to the flesh and the world, is the desert; because it is not
according to the will of the flesh and of the world." Now, there is
no danger in giving the devil such an occasion of temptation; since
the help of the Holy Ghost, who is the Author of the perfect deed, is
more powerful* than the assault of the envious devil. [*All the
codices read 'majus.' One of the earliest printed editions has
'magis,' which has much to commend it, since St. Thomas is commenting
the text quoted from St. Chrysostom. The translation would run thus:
'since rather is it (the temptation) a help from the Holy Ghost,
who,' etc.].

Reply Obj. 3: Some say that all the temptations took place in the
desert. Of these some say that Christ was led into the Holy City, not
really, but in an imaginary vision; while others say that the Holy
City itself, i.e. Jerusalem, is called "a desert," because it was
deserted by God. But there is no need for this explanation. For Mark
says that He was tempted in the desert by the devil, but not that He
was tempted in the desert only.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 41, Art. 3]

Whether Christ's Temptation Should Have Taken Place After His Fast?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's temptation should not have
taken place after His fast. For it has been said above (Q. 40, A. 2)
that an austere mode of life was not becoming to Christ. But it
savors of extreme austerity that He should have eaten nothing for
forty days and forty nights, for Gregory (Hom. xvi in Evang.)
explains the fact that "He fasted forty days and forty nights,"
saying that "during that time He partook of no food whatever." It
seems, therefore, that He should not thus have fasted before His
temptation.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Mk. 1:13) that "He was in the desert
forty days and forty nights; and was tempted by Satan." Now, He
fasted forty days and forty nights. Therefore it seems that He was
tempted by the devil, not after, but during, His fast.

Obj. 3: Further, we read that Christ fasted but once. But He was
tempted by the devil, not only once, for it is written (Luke 4:13)
"that all the temptation being ended, the devil departed from Him for
a time." As, therefore, He did not fast before the second temptation,
so neither should He have fasted before the first.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 4:2, 3): "When He had fasted
forty days and forty nights, afterwards He was hungry": and then "the
tempter came to Him."

_I answer that,_ It was becoming that Christ should wish to fast
before His temptation. First, in order to give us an example. For
since we are all in urgent need of strengthening ourselves against
temptation, as stated above (A. 1), by fasting before being tempted,
He teaches us the need of fasting in order to equip ourselves against
temptation. Hence the Apostle (2 Cor. 6:5, 7) reckons "fastings"
together with the "armor of justice."

Secondly, in order to show that the devil assails with temptations
even those who fast, as likewise those who are given to other good
works. And so Christ's temptation took place after His fast, as also
after His baptism. Hence since rather Chrysostom says (Hom. xiii super
Matth.): "To instruct thee how great a good is fasting, and how it is
a most powerful shield against the devil; and that after baptism thou
shouldst give thyself up, not to luxury, but to fasting; for this
cause Christ fasted, not as needing it Himself, but as teaching us."

Thirdly, because after the fast, hunger followed, which made the devil
dare to approach Him, as already stated (A. 1, ad 1). Now, when "our
Lord was hungry," says Hilary (Super Matth. iii), "it was not because
He was overcome by want of food, but because He abandoned His manhood
to its nature. For the devil was to be conquered, not by God, but by
the flesh." Wherefore Chrysostom too says: "He proceeded no farther
than Moses and Elias, lest His assumption of our flesh might seem
incredible."

Reply Obj. 1: It was becoming for Christ not to adopt an extreme form
of austere life in order to show Himself outwardly in conformity with
those to whom He preached. Now, no one should take up the office of
preacher unless he be already cleansed and perfect in virtue,
according to what is said of Christ, that "Jesus began to do and to
teach" (Acts 1:1). Consequently, immediately after His baptism Christ
adopted an austere form of life, in order to teach us the need of
taming the flesh before passing on to the office of preaching,
according to the Apostle (1 Cor. 9:27): "I chastise my body, and
bring it into subjection, lest perhaps when I have preached to
others, I myself should become a castaway."

Reply Obj. 2: These words of Mark may be understood as meaning that
"He was in the desert forty days and forty nights," and that He
fasted during that time: and the words, "and He was tempted by
Satan," may be taken as referring, not to the time during which He
fasted, but to the time that followed: since Matthew says that "after
He had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards He was hungry,"
thus affording the devil a pretext for approaching Him. And so the
words that follow, and the angels ministered to Him, are to be taken
in sequence, which is clear from the words of Matthew (4:11): "Then
the devil left Him," i.e. after the temptation, "and behold angels
came and ministered to Him." And as to the words inserted by Mark,
"and He was with the beasts," according to Chrysostom (Hom. xiii in
Matth.), they are set down in order to describe the desert as being
impassable to man and full of beasts.

On the other hand, according to Bede's exposition of Mk. 1:12, 13,
our Lord was tempted forty days and forty nights. But this is not to
be understood of the visible temptations which are related by Matthew
and Luke, and occurred after the fast, but of certain other assaults
which perhaps Christ suffered from the devil during that time of His
fast.

Reply Obj. 3: As Ambrose says on Luke 4:13, the devil departed from
Christ "for a time, because, later on, he returned, not to tempt Him,
but to assail Him openly"--namely, at the time of His Passion.
Nevertheless, He seemed in this later assault to tempt Christ to
dejection and hatred of His neighbor; just as in the desert he had
tempted Him to gluttonous pleasure and idolatrous contempt of God.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 41, Art. 4]

Whether the Mode and Order of the Temptation Were Becoming?

Objection 1: It would seem that the mode and order of the temptation
were unbecoming. For the devil tempts in order to induce us to sin.
But if Christ had assuaged His bodily hunger by changing the stones
into bread, He would not have sinned; just as neither did He sin when
He multiplied the loaves, which was no less a miracle, in order to
succor the hungry crowd. Therefore it seems that this was nowise a
temptation.

Obj. 2: Further, a counselor is inconsistent if he persuades the
contrary to what he intends. But when the devil set Christ on a
pinnacle of the Temple, he purposed to tempt Him to pride or
vainglory. Therefore it was inconsistent to urge Him to cast Himself
thence: for this would be contrary to pride or vainglory, which
always seeks to rise.

Obj. 3: Further, one temptation should lead to one sin. But in the
temptation on the mountain he counseled two sins--namely,
covetousness and idolatry. Therefore the mode of the temptation was
unfitting.

Obj. 4: Further, temptations are ordained to sin. But there are seven
deadly sins, as we have stated in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 84, A.
4). But the tempter only deals with three, viz. gluttony, vainglory,
and covetousness. Therefore the temptation seems to have been
incomplete.

Obj. 5: Further, after overcoming all the vices, man is still tempted
to pride or vainglory: since pride "worms itself in stealthily, and
destroys even good works," as Augustine says (Ep. ccxi). Therefore
Matthew unfittingly gives the last place to the temptation to
covetousness on the mountain, and the second place to the temptation
to vainglory in the Temple, especially since Luke puts them in the
reverse order.

Obj. 6: Further, Jerome says on Matt. 4:4 that "Christ purposed to
overcome the devil by humility, not by might." Therefore He should
not have repulsed him with a haughty rebuke, saying: "Begone, Satan."

Obj. 7: Further, the gospel narrative seems to be false. For it seems
impossible that Christ could have been set on a pinnacle of the
Temple without being seen by others. Nor is there to be found a
mountain so high that all the world can be seen from it, so that all
the kingdoms of the earth could be shown to Christ from its summit.
It seems, therefore, that Christ's temptation is unfittingly
described.

On the contrary is the authority of Scripture.

_I answer that,_ The temptation which comes from the enemy takes the
form of a suggestion, as Gregory says (Hom. xvi in Evang.). Now a
suggestion cannot be made to everybody in the same way; it must arise
from those things towards which each one has an inclination.
Consequently the devil does not straight away tempt the spiritual man
to grave sins, but he begins with lighter sins, so as gradually to
lead him to those of greater magnitude. Wherefore Gregory (Moral.
xxxi), expounding Job 39:25, "He smelleth the battle afar off, the
encouraging of the captains and the shouting of the army," says: "The
captains are fittingly described as encouraging, and the army as
shouting. Because vices begin by insinuating themselves into the mind
under some specious pretext: then they come on the mind in such
numbers as to drag it into all sorts of folly, deafening it with
their bestial clamor."

Thus, too, did the devil set about the temptation of the first man.
For at first he enticed his mind to consent to the eating of the
forbidden fruit, saying (Gen. 3:1): "Why hath God commanded you that
you should not eat of every tree of paradise?" Secondly [he tempted
him] to vainglory by saying: "Your eyes shall be opened." Thirdly, he
led the temptation to the extreme height of pride, saying: "You shall
be as gods, knowing good and evil." This same order did he observe in
tempting Christ. For at first he tempted Him to that which men
desire, however spiritual they may be--namely, the support of the
corporeal nature by food. Secondly, he advanced to that matter in
which spiritual men are sometimes found wanting, inasmuch as they do
certain things for show, which pertains to vainglory. Thirdly, he led
the temptation on to that in which no spiritual men, but only carnal
men, have a part--namely, to desire worldly riches and fame, to the
extent of holding God in contempt. And so in the first two
temptations he said: "If Thou be the Son of God"; but not in the
third, which is inapplicable to spiritual men, who are sons of God by
adoption, whereas it does apply to the two preceding temptations.

And Christ resisted these temptations by quoting the authority of the
Law, not by enforcing His power, "so as to give more honor to His
human nature and a greater punishment to His adversary, since the foe
of the human race was vanquished, not as by God, but as by man"; as
Pope Leo says (Serm. 1, De Quadrag. 3).

Reply Obj. 1: To make use of what is needful for self-support is not
the sin of gluttony; but if a man do anything inordinate out of the
desire for such support, it can pertain to the sin of gluttony. Now
it is inordinate for a man who has human assistance at his command to
seek to obtain food miraculously for mere bodily support. Hence the
Lord miraculously provided the children of Israel with manna in the
desert, where there was no means of obtaining food otherwise. And in
like fashion Christ miraculously provided the crowds with food in the
desert, when there was no other means of getting food. But in order
to assuage His hunger, He could have done otherwise than work a
miracle, as did John the Baptist, according to Matthew (3:4); or He
could have hastened to the neighboring country. Consequently the
devil esteemed that if Christ was a mere man, He would fall into sin
by attempting to assuage His hunger by a miracle.

Reply Obj. 2: It often happens that a man seeks to derive glory from
external humiliation, whereby he is exalted by reason of spiritual
good. Hence Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 12): "It must
be noted that it is possible to boast not only of the beauty and
splendor of material things, but even of filthy squalor." And this is
signified by the devil urging Christ to seek spiritual glory by
casting His body down.

Reply Obj. 3: It is a sin to desire worldly riches and honors in an
inordinate fashion. And the principal sign of this is when a man does
something wrong in order to acquire such things. And so the devil was
not satisfied with instigating to a desire for riches and honors, but
he went so far as to tempt Christ, for the sake of gaining possession
of these things, to fall down and adore him, which is a very great
crime, and against God. Nor does he say merely, "if Thou wilt adore
me," but he adds, "if, falling down"; because, as Ambrose says on
Luke 4:5: "Ambition harbors yet another danger within itself: for,
while seeking to rule, it will serve; it will bow in submission that
it may be crowned with honor; and the higher it aims, the lower it
abases itself."

In like manner [the devil] in the preceding temptations tried to lead
[Christ] from the desire of one sin to the commission of another;
thus from the desire of food he tried to lead Him to the vanity of
the needless working of a miracle; and from the desire of glory to
tempt God by casting Himself headlong.

Reply Obj. 4: As Ambrose says on Luke 4:13, Scripture would not have
said that "'all the temptation being ended, the devil departed from
Him,' unless the matter of all sins were included in the three
temptations already related. For the causes of temptations are the
causes of desires"--namely, "lust of the flesh, hope of glory,
eagerness for power."

Reply Obj. 5: As Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. ii): "It is not
certain which happened first; whether the kingdoms of the earth were
first shown to Him, and afterwards He was set on the pinnacle of the
Temple; or the latter first, and the former afterwards. However, it
matters not, provided it be made clear that all these things did take
place." It may be that the Evangelists set these things in different
orders, because sometimes cupidity arises from vainglory, sometimes
the reverse happens.

Reply Obj. 6: When Christ had suffered the wrong of being tempted by
the devil saying, "If Thou be the Son of God cast Thyself down," He
was not troubled, nor did He upbraid the devil. But when the devil
usurped to himself the honor due to God, saying, "All these things
will I give Thee, if, falling down, Thou wilt adore me," He was
exasperated, and repulsed him, saying, "Begone, Satan": that we might
learn from His example to bear bravely insults leveled at ourselves,
but not to allow ourselves so much as to listen to those which are
aimed at God.

Reply Obj. 7: As Chrysostom says (Hom. v in Matth.): "The devil set
Him" (on a pinnacle of the Temple) "that He might be seen by all,
whereas, unawares to the devil, He acted in such sort that He was
seen by none."

In regard to the words, "'He showed Him all the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them,' we are not to understand that He saw
the very kingdoms, with the cities and inhabitants, their gold and
silver: but that the devil pointed out the quarters in which each
kingdom or city lay, and set forth to Him in words their glory and
estate." Or, again, as Origen says (Hom. xxx in Luc.), "he showed Him
how, by means of the various vices, he was the lord of the world."
_______________________

QUESTION 42

OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider Christ's doctrine, about which there are four
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Christ should have preached to the Jews only, or to the
Gentiles also?

(2) Whether in preaching He should have avoided the opposition of the
Jews?

(3) Whether He should have preached in an open or in a hidden manner?

(4) Whether He should have preached by word only, or also by writing?

Concerning the time when He began to teach, we have spoken above when
treating of His baptism (Q. 29, A. 3).
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 42, Art. 1]

Whether Christ Should Have Preached Not Only to the Jews, but Also to
the Gentiles?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should have preached not only
to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles. For it is written (Isa. 49:6):
"It is a small thing that thou shouldst be My servant to raise up the
tribes of Israel [Vulg.: 'Jacob'] and to convert the dregs of Jacob
[Vulg.: 'Israel']: behold, I have given thee to be the light of the
Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation even to the farthest part
of the earth." But Christ gave light and salvation through His
doctrine. Therefore it seems that it was "a small thing" that He
preached to Jews alone, and not to the Gentiles.

Obj. 2: Further, as it is written (Matt. 7:29): "He was teaching them
as one having power." Now the power of doctrine is made more manifest
in the instruction of those who, like the Gentiles, have received no
tidings whatever; hence the Apostle says (Rom. 15:20): "I have so
preached the [Vulg.: 'this'] gospel, not where Christ was named, lest
I should build upon another man's foundation." Therefore much rather
should Christ have preached to the Gentiles than to the Jews.

Obj. 3: Further, it is more useful to instruct many than one. But
Christ instructed some individual Gentiles, such as the Samaritan
woman (John 4) and the Chananaean woman (Matt. 15). Much more reason,
therefore, was there for Christ to preach to the Gentiles in general.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord said (Matt. 15:24): "I was not sent but
to the sheep that are lost of the house of Israel." And (Rom. 10:15)
it is written: "How shall they preach unless they be sent?" Therefore
Christ should not have preached to the Gentiles.

_I answer that,_ It was fitting that Christ's preaching, whether
through Himself or through His apostles, should be directed at first
to the Jews alone. First, in order to show that by His coming the
promises were fulfilled which had been made to the Jews of old, and
not to the Gentiles. Thus the Apostle says (Rom. 15:8): "I say that
Christ . . . was minister of the circumcision," i.e. the apostle and
preacher of the Jews, "for the truth of God, to confirm the promises
made unto the fathers."

Secondly, in order to show that His coming was of God; because, as is
written Rom. 13:1: "Those things which are of God are well ordered
[Vulg.: 'those that are, are ordained of God']." Now the right order
demanded that the doctrine of Christ should be made known first to
the Jews, who, by believing in and worshiping one God, were nearer to
God, and that it should be transmitted through them to the Gentiles:
just as in the heavenly hierarchy the Divine enlightenment comes to
the lower angels through the higher. Hence on Matt. 15:24, "I was not
sent but to the sheep that are lost in the house of Israel," Jerome
says: "He does not mean by this that He was not sent to the Gentiles,
but that He was sent to the Jews first." And so we read (Isa. 66:19):
"I will send of them that shall be saved," i.e. of the Jews, "to the
Gentiles . . . and they shall declare My glory unto the Gentiles."

Thirdly, in order to deprive the Jews of ground for quibbling. Hence
on Matt. 10:5, "Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles." Jerome says:
"It behooved Christ's coming to be announced to the Jews first, lest
they should have a valid excuse, and say that they had rejected our
Lord because He had sent His apostles to the Gentiles and Samaritans."

Fourthly, because it was through the triumph of the cross that Christ
merited power and lordship over the Gentiles. Hence it is written
(Apoc. 2:26, 28): "He that shall overcome . . . I will give him power
over the nations . . . as I also have received of My Father"; and
that because He became "obedient unto the death of the cross, God
hath exalted Him . . . that in the name of Jesus every knee should
bow . . ." and that "every tongue should confess Him" (Phil. 2:8-11).
Consequently He did not wish His doctrine to be preached to the
Gentiles before His Passion: it was after His Passion that He said to
His disciples (Matt. 28:19): "Going, teach ye all nations." For this
reason it was that when, shortly before His Passion, certain Gentiles
wished to see Jesus, He said: "Unless the grain of wheat falling into
the ground dieth, itself remaineth alone: but if it die it bringeth
forth much fruit" (John 12:20-25); and as Augustine says, commenting
on this passage: "He called Himself the grain of wheat that must be
mortified by the unbelief of the Jews, multiplied by the faith of the
nations."

Reply Obj. 1: Christ was given to be the light and salvation of the
Gentiles through His disciples, whom He sent to preach to them.

Reply Obj. 2: It is a sign, not of lesser, but of greater power to do
something by means of others rather than by oneself. And thus the
Divine power of Christ was specially shown in this, that He bestowed
on the teaching of His disciples such a power that they converted the
Gentiles to Christ, although these had heard nothing of Him.

Now the power of Christ's teaching is to be considered in the
miracles by which He confirmed His doctrine, in the efficacy of His
persuasion, and in the authority of His words, for He spoke as being
Himself above the Law when He said: "But I say to you" (Matt. 5:22,
28, 32, 34, 39, 44); and, again, in the force of His righteousness
shown in His sinless manner of life.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as it was unfitting that Christ should at the
outset make His doctrine known to the Gentiles equally with the Jews,
in order that He might appear as being sent to the Jews, as to the
first-born people; so neither was it fitting for Him to neglect the
Gentiles altogether, lest they should be deprived of the hope of
salvation. For this reason certain individual Gentiles were admitted,
on account of the excellence of their faith and devotedness.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 42, Art. 2]

Whether Christ Should Have Preached to the Jews Without Offending
Them?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should have preached to the
Jews without offending them. For, as Augustine says (De Agone Christ.
xi): "In the Man Jesus Christ, a model of life is given us by the Son
of God." But we should avoid offending not only the faithful, but
even unbelievers, according to 1 Cor. 10:32: "Be without offense to
the Jews, and to the Gentiles, and to the Church of God." Therefore
it seems that, in His teaching, Christ should also have avoided
giving offense to the Jews.

Obj. 2: Further, no wise man should do anything that will hinder the
result of his labor. Now through the disturbance which His teaching
occasioned among the Jews, it was deprived of its results; for it is
written (Luke 11:53, 54) that when our Lord reproved the Pharisees
and Scribes, they "began vehemently to urge Him, end to oppress His
mouth about many things; lying in wait for Him, and seeking to catch
something from His mouth, that they might accuse Him." It seems
therefore unfitting that He should have given them offense by His
teaching.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Tim. 5:1): "An ancient man
rebuke not; but entreat him as a father." But the priests and princes
of the Jews were the elders of that people. Therefore it seems that
they should not have been rebuked with severity.

_On the contrary,_ It was foretold (Isa. 8:14) that Christ would be
"for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to the two houses
of Israel."

_I answer that,_ The salvation of the multitude is to be preferred to
the peace of any individuals whatsoever. Consequently, when certain
ones, by their perverseness, hinder the salvation of the multitude,
the preacher and the teacher should not fear to offend those men, in
order that he may insure the salvation of the multitude. Now the
Scribes and Pharisees and the princes of the Jews were by their
malice a considerable hindrance to the salvation of the people, both
because they opposed themselves to Christ's doctrine, which was the
only way to salvation, and because their evil ways corrupted the
morals of the people. For which reason our Lord, undeterred by their
taking offense, publicly taught the truth which they hated, and
condemned their vices. Hence we read (Matt. 15:12, 14) that when the
disciples of our Lord said: "Dost Thou know that the Pharisees, when
they heard this word, were scandalized?" He answered: "Let them
alone: they are blind and leaders of the blind; and if the blind lead
the blind, both fall into the pit."

Reply Obj. 1: A man ought so to avoid giving offense, as neither by
wrong deed or word to be the occasion of anyone's downfall. "But if
scandal arise from truth, the scandal should be borne rather than the
truth be set aside," as Gregory says (Hom. vii in Ezech.).

Reply Obj. 2: By publicly reproving the Scribes and Pharisees, Christ
promoted rather than hindered the effect of His teaching. Because
when the people came to know the vices of those men, they were less
inclined to be prejudiced against Christ by hearing what was said of
Him by the Scribes and Pharisees, who were ever withstanding His
doctrine.

Reply Obj. 3: This saying of the Apostle is to be understood of those
elders whose years are reckoned not only in age and authority, but
also in probity; according to Num. 11:16: "Gather unto Me seventy men
of the ancients of Israel, whom thou knowest to be ancients . . . of
the people." But if by sinning openly they turn the authority of
their years into an instrument of wickedness, they should be rebuked
openly and severely, as also Daniel says (Dan. 13:52): "O thou that
art grown old in evil days," etc.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 42, Art. 3]

Whether Christ Should Have Taught All Things Openly?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have taught all
things openly. For we read that He taught many things to His
disciples apart: as is seen clearly in the sermon at the Supper.
Wherefore He said: "That which you heard in the ear in the chambers
shall be preached on the housetops" [*St. Thomas, probably quoting
from memory, combines Matt. 10:27 with Luke 12:3]. Therefore He did
not teach all things openly.

Obj. 2: Further, the depths of wisdom should not be expounded save to
the perfect, according to 1 Cor. 2:6: "We speak wisdom among the
perfect." Now Christ's doctrine contained the most profound wisdom.
Therefore it should not have been made known to the imperfect crowd.

Obj. 3: Further, it comes to the same, to hide the truth, whether by
saying nothing or by making use of a language that is difficult to
understand. Now Christ, by speaking to the multitudes a language they
would not understand, hid from them the truth that He preached; since
"without parables He did not speak to them" (Matt. 13:34). In the
same way, therefore, He could have hidden it from them by saying
nothing at all.

_On the contrary,_ He says Himself (John 18:20): "In secret I have
spoken nothing."

_I answer that,_ Anyone's doctrine may be hidden in three ways.
First, on the part of the intention of the teacher, who does not wish
to make his doctrine known to many, but rather to hide it. And this
may happen in two ways--sometimes through envy on the part of the
teacher, who desires to excel in his knowledge, wherefore he is
unwilling to communicate it to others. But this was not the case with
Christ, in whose person the following words are spoken (Wis. 7:13):
"Which I have learned without guile, and communicate without envy,
and her riches I hide not." But sometimes this happens through the
vileness of the things taught; thus Augustine says on John 16:12:
"There are some things so bad that no sort of human modesty can bear
them." Wherefore of heretical doctrine it is written (Prov. 9:17):
"Stolen waters are sweeter." Now, Christ's doctrine is "not of error
nor of uncleanness" (1 Thess. 2:3). Wherefore our Lord says (Mk.
4:21): "Doth a candle," i.e. true and pure doctrine, "come in to be
put under a bushel?"

Secondly, doctrine is hidden because it is put before few. And thus,
again, did Christ teach nothing in secret: for He propounded His
entire doctrine either to the whole crowd or to His disciples
gathered together. Hence Augustine says on John 18:20: "How can it
be said that He speaks in secret when He speaks before so many
men? . . . especially if what He says to few He wishes through them
to be made known to many?"

Thirdly, doctrine is hidden, as to the manner in which it is
propounded. And thus Christ spoke certain things in secret to the
crowds, by employing parables in teaching them spiritual mysteries
which they were either unable or unworthy to grasp: and yet it was
better for them to be instructed in the knowledge of spiritual
things, albeit hidden under the garb of parables, than to be deprived
of it altogether. Nevertheless our Lord expounded the open and
unveiled truth of these parables to His disciples, so that they might
hand it down to others worthy of it; according to 2 Tim. 2:2: "The
things which thou hast heard of me by many witnesses, the same
command to faithful men, who shall be fit to teach others." This is
foreshadowed, Num. 4, where the sons of Aaron are commanded to wrap
up the sacred vessels that were to be carried by the Levites.

Reply Obj. 1: As Hilary says, commenting on the passage quoted, "we
do not read that our Lord was wont to preach at night, and expound
His doctrine in the dark: but He says this because His speech is
darkness to the carnal-minded, and His words are night to the
unbeliever. His meaning, therefore, is that whatever He said we also
should say in the midst of unbelievers, by openly believing and
professing it."

Or, according to Jerome, He speaks comparatively--that is to say,
because He was instructing them in Judea, which was a small place
compared with the whole world, where Christ's doctrine was to be
published by the preaching of the apostles.

Reply Obj. 2: By His doctrine our Lord did not make known all the
depths of His wisdom, neither to the multitudes, nor, indeed, to His
disciples, to whom He said (John 16:12): "I have yet many things to
say to you, but you cannot bear them now." Yet whatever things out of
His wisdom He judged it right to make known to others, He expounded,
not in secret, but openly; although He was not understood by all.
Hence Augustine says on John 18:20: "We must understand this, 'I have
spoken openly to the world,' as though our Lord had said, 'Many have
heard Me' . . . and, again, it was not 'openly,' because they did not
understand."

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above, our Lord spoke to the multitudes in
parables, because they were neither able nor worthy to receive the
naked truth, which He revealed to His disciples.

And when it is said that "without parables He did not speak to them,"
according to Chrysostom (Hom. xlvii in Matth.), we are to understand
this of that particular sermon, since on other occasions He said many
things to the multitude without parables. Or, as Augustine says (De
Qq. Evang., qu. xvii), this means, "not that He spoke nothing
literally, but that He scarcely ever spoke without introducing a
parable, although He also spoke some things in the literal sense."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 42, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Should Have Committed His Doctrine to Writing?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should have committed His
doctrine to writing. For the purpose of writing is to hand down
doctrine to posterity. Now Christ's doctrine was destined to endure
for ever, according to Luke 21:33: "Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but My words shall not pass away." Therefore it seems that Christ
should have committed His doctrine to writing.

Obj. 2: Further, the Old Law was a foreshadowing of Christ, according
to Heb. 10:1: "The Law has [Vulg.: 'having'] a shadow of the good
things to come." Now the Old Law was put into writing by God,
according to Ex. 24:12: "I will give thee" two "tables of stone and
the law, and the commandments which I have written." Therefore it
seems that Christ also should have put His doctrine into writing.

Obj. 3: Further, to Christ, who came to enlighten them that sit in
darkness (Luke 1:79), it belonged to remove occasions of error, and
to open out the road to faith. Now He would have done this by putting
His teaching into writing: for Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. i)
that "some there are who wonder why our Lord wrote nothing, so that
we have to believe what others have written about Him. Especially do
those pagans ask this question who dare not blame or blaspheme
Christ, and who ascribe to Him most excellent, but merely human,
wisdom. These say that the disciples made out the Master to be more
than He really was when they said that He was the Son of God and the
Word of God, by whom all things were made." And farther on he adds:
"It seems as though they were prepared to believe whatever He might
have written of Himself, but not what others at their discretion
published about Him." Therefore it seems that Christ should have
Himself committed His doctrine to writing.

_On the contrary,_ No books written by Him were to be found in the
canon of Scripture.

_I answer that,_ It was fitting that Christ should not commit His
doctrine to writing. First, on account of His dignity: for the more
excellent the teacher, the more excellent should be his manner of
teaching. Consequently it was fitting that Christ, as the most
excellent of teachers, should adopt that manner of teaching whereby
His doctrine is imprinted on the hearts of His hearers; wherefore it
is written (Matt. 7:29) that "He was teaching them as one having
power." And so it was that among the Gentiles, Pythagoras and
Socrates, who were teachers of great excellence, were unwilling to
write anything. For writings are ordained, as to an end, unto the
imprinting of doctrine in the hearts of the hearers.

Secondly, on account of the excellence of Christ's doctrine, which
cannot be expressed in writing; according to John 21:25: "There are
also many other things which Jesus did: which, if they were written
everyone, the world itself, I think, would not be able to contain the
books that should be written." Which Augustine explains by saying:
"We are not to believe that in respect of space the world could not
contain them . . . but that by the capacity of the readers they could
not be comprehended." And if Christ had committed His doctrine to
writing, men would have had no deeper thought of His doctrine than
that which appears on the surface of the writing.

Thirdly, that His doctrine might reach all in an orderly manner:
Himself teaching His disciples immediately, and they subsequently
teaching others, by preaching and writing: whereas if He Himself had
written, His doctrine would have reached all immediately.

Hence it is said of Wisdom (Prov. 9:3) that "she hath sent her maids
to invite to the tower." It is to be observed, however, that, as
Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. i), some of the Gentiles thought
that Christ wrote certain books treating of the magic art whereby He
worked miracles: which art is condemned by the Christian learning.
"And yet they who claim to have read those books of Christ do none of
those things which they marvel at His doing according to those same
books. Moreover, it is by a Divine judgment that they err so far as
to assert that these books were, as it were, entitled as letters to
Peter and Paul, for that they found them in several places depicted
in company with Christ. No wonder that the inventors were deceived by
the painters: for as long as Christ lived in the mortal flesh with
His disciples, Paul was no disciple of His."

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says in the same book: "Christ is the head
of all His disciples who are members of His body. Consequently, when
they put into writing what He showed forth and said to them, by no
means must we say that He wrote nothing: since His members put forth
that which they knew under His dictation. For at His command they,
being His hands, as it were, wrote whatever He wished us to read
concerning His deeds and words."

Reply Obj. 2: Since the old Law was given under the form of sensible
signs, therefore also was it fittingly written with sensible signs.
But Christ's doctrine, which is "the law of the spirit of life" (Rom.
8:2), had to be "written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the
heart," as the Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:3).

Reply Obj. 3: Those who were unwilling to believe what the apostles
wrote of Christ would have refused to believe the writings of Christ,
whom they deemed to work miracles by the magic art.
_______________________

QUESTION 43

OF THE MIRACLES WORKED BY CHRIST, IN GENERAL
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the miracles worked by Christ: (1) In general;
(2) Specifically, of each kind of miracle; (3) In particular, of His
transfiguration.

Concerning the first, there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Christ should have worked miracles?

(2) Whether He worked them by Divine power?

(3) When did He begin to work miracles?

(4) Whether His miracles are a sufficient proof of His Godhead?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 43, Art. 1]

Whether Christ Should Have Worked Miracles?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have worked
miracles. For Christ's deeds should have been consistent with His
words. But He Himself said (Matt. 16:4): "A wicked and adulterous
generation seeketh after a sign; and a sign shall not be given it,
but the sign of Jonas the prophet." Therefore He should not have
worked miracles.

Obj. 2: Further, just as Christ, at His second coming, is to come
with great power and majesty, as is written Matt. 24:30, so at His
first coming He came in infirmity, according to Isa. 53:3: "A man of
sorrows and acquainted with infirmity." But the working of miracles
belongs to power rather than to infirmity. Therefore it was not
fitting that He should work miracles in His first coming.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ came that He might save men by faith;
according to Heb. 12:2: "Looking on Jesus, the author and finisher of
faith." But miracles lessen the merit of faith; hence our Lord says
(John 4:48): "Unless you see signs and wonders you believe not."
Therefore it seems that Christ should not have worked miracles.

_On the contrary,_ It was said in the person of His adversaries (John
11:47): "What do we; for this man doth many miracles?"

_I answer that,_ God enables man to work miracles for two reasons.
First and principally, in confirmation of the doctrine that a man
teaches. For since those things which are of faith surpass human
reason, they cannot be proved by human arguments, but need to be
proved by the argument of Divine power: so that when a man does works
that God alone can do, we may believe that what he says is from God:
just as when a man is the bearer of letters sealed with the king's
ring, it is to be believed that what they contain expresses the
king's will.

Secondly, in order to make known God's presence in a man by the grace
of the Holy Ghost: so that when a man does the works of God we may
believe that God dwells in him by His grace. Wherefore it is written
(Gal. 3:5): "He who giveth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles
among you."

Now both these things were to be made known to men concerning
Christ--namely, that God dwelt in Him by grace, not of adoption, but
of union: and that His supernatural doctrine was from God. And
therefore it was most fitting that He should work miracles. Wherefore
He Himself says (John 10:38): "Though you will not believe Me,
believe the works"; and (John 5:36): "The works which the Father hath
given Me to perfect . . . themselves . . . give testimony to Me."

Reply Obj. 1: These words, "a sign shall not be given it, but the
sign of Jonas," mean, as Chrysostom says (Hom. xliii in Matth.), that
"they did not receive a sign such as they sought, viz. from heaven":
but not that He gave them no sign at all. Or that "He worked signs
not for the sake of those whom He knew to be hardened, but to amend
others." Therefore those signs were given, not to them, but to others.

Reply Obj. 2: Although Christ came "in the infirmity" of the flesh,
which is manifested in the passions, yet He came "in the power of
God" [*Cf. 2 Cor. 13:4], and this had to be made manifest by miracles.

Reply Obj. 3: Miracles lessen the merit of faith in so far as those
are shown to be hard of heart who are unwilling to believe what is
proved from the Scriptures unless (they are convinced) by miracles.
Yet it is better for them to be converted to the faith even by
miracles than that they should remain altogether in their unbelief.
For it is written (1 Cor. 14:22) that signs are given "to
unbelievers," viz. that they may be converted to the faith.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 43, Art. 2]

Whether Christ Worked Miracles by Divine Power?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not work miracles by
Divine power. For the Divine power is omnipotent. But it seems that
Christ was not omnipotent in working miracles; for it is written (Mk.
6:5) that "He could not do any miracles there," i.e. in His own
country. Therefore it seems that He did not work miracles by Divine
power.

Obj. 2: Further, God does not pray. But Christ sometimes prayed when
working miracles; as may be seen in the raising of Lazarus (John
11:41, 42), and in the multiplication of the loaves, as related Matt.
14:19. Therefore it seems that He did not work miracles by Divine
power.

Obj. 3: Further, what is done by Divine power cannot be done by the
power of any creature. But the things which Christ did could be done
also by the power of a creature: wherefore the Pharisees said (Luke
11:15) that He cast out devils "by Beelzebub the prince of devils."
Therefore it seems that Christ did not work miracles by Divine power.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord said (John 14:10): "The Father who
abideth in Me, He doth the works."

_I answer that,_ as stated in the First Part (Q. 110, A. 4), true
miracles cannot be wrought save by Divine power: because God alone
can change the order of nature; and this is what is meant by a
miracle. Wherefore Pope Leo says (Ep. ad Flav. xxviii) that, while
there are two natures in Christ, there is "one," viz. the Divine,
which shines forth in miracles; and "another," viz. the human, "which
submits to insults"; yet "each communicates its actions to the
other": in as far as the human nature is the instrument of the Divine
action, and the human action receives power from the Divine Nature,
as stated above (Q. 19, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: When it is said that "He could not do any miracles
there," it is not to be understood that He could not do them
absolutely, but that it was not fitting for Him to do them: for it
was unfitting for Him to work miracles among unbelievers. Wherefore
it is said farther on: "And He wondered because of their unbelief."
In like manner it is said (Gen. 18:17): "Can I hide from Abraham what
I am about to do?" and Gen. 19:22: "I cannot do anything till thou go
in thither."

Reply Obj. 2: As Chrysostom says on Matt. 14:19, "He took the five
loaves and the two fishes, and, looking up to heaven, He blessed and
brake: It was to be believed of Him, both that He is of the Father
and that He is equal to Him . . . Therefore that He might prove both,
He works miracles now with authority, now with prayer . . . in the
lesser things, indeed, He looks up to heaven"--for instance, in
multiplying the loaves--"but in the greater, which belong to God
alone, He acts with authority; for example, when He forgave sins and
raised the dead."

When it is said that in raising Lazarus He lifted up His eyes (John
11:41), this was not because He needed to pray, but because He wished
to teach us how to pray. Wherefore He said: "Because of the people
who stand about have I said it: that they may believe that Thou hast
sent Me."

Reply Obj. 3: Christ cast out demons otherwise than they are cast out
by the power of demons. For demons are cast out from bodies by the
power of higher demons in such a way that they retain their power
over the soul: since the devil does not work against his own kingdom.
On the other hand, Christ cast out demons, not only from the body,
but still more from the soul. For this reason our Lord rebuked the
blasphemy of the Jews, who said that He cast out demons by the power
of the demons: first, by saying that Satan is not divided against
himself; secondly, by quoting the instance of others who cast out
demons by the Spirit of God; thirdly, because He could not have cast
out a demon unless He had overcome Him by Divine power; fourthly,
because there was nothing in common between His works and their
effects and those of Satan; since Satan's purpose was to "scatter"
those whom Christ "gathered" together [*Cf. Matt. 12:24-30; Mk. 3:22;
Luke 11:15-32].
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 43, Art. 3]

Whether Christ Began to Work Miracles When He Changed Water into Wine
at the Marriage Feast?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not begin to work miracles
when He changed water into wine at the marriage feast. For we read in
the book _De Infantia Salvatoris_ that Christ worked many miracles in
His childhood. But the miracle of changing water into wine at the
marriage feast took place in the thirtieth or thirty-first year of
His age. Therefore it seems that it was not then that He began to
work miracles.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ worked miracles by Divine power. Now He was
possessed of Divine power from the first moment of His conception;
for from that instant He was both God and man. Therefore it seems
that He worked miracles from the very first.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ began to gather His disciples after His
baptism and temptation, as related Matt. 4:18 and John 1:35. But the
disciples gathered around Him, principally on account of His
miracles: thus it is written (Luke 5:4) that He called Peter when "he
was astonished at" the miracle which He had worked in "the draught of
fishes." Therefore it seems that He worked other miracles before that
of the marriage feast.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (John 2:11): "This beginning of
miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee."

_I answer that,_ Christ worked miracles in order to confirm His
doctrine, and in order to show forth His Divine power. Therefore, as
to the first, it was unbecoming for Him to work miracles before He
began to teach. And it was unfitting that He should begin to teach
until He reached the perfect age, as we stated above, in speaking of
His baptism (Q. 39, A. 3). But as to the second, it was right that He
should so manifest His Godhead by working miracles that men should
believe in the reality of His manhood. And, consequently, as
Chrysostom says (Hom. xxi in Joan.), "it was fitting that He should
not begin to work wonders from His early years: for men would have
deemed the Incarnation to be imaginary and would have crucified Him
before the proper time."

Reply Obj. 1: As Chrysostom says (Hom. xvii in Joan.), in regard to
the saying of John the Baptist, "'That He may be made manifest in
Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water,' it is clear that
the wonders which some pretend to have been worked by Christ in His
childhood are untrue and fictitious. For had Christ worked miracles
from His early years, John would by no means have been unacquainted
with Him, nor would the rest of the people have stood in need of a
teacher to point Him out to them."

Reply Obj. 2: What the Divine power achieved in Christ was in
proportion to the needs of the salvation of mankind, the achievement
of which was the purpose of His taking flesh. Consequently He so
worked miracles by the Divine power as not to prejudice our belief in
the reality of His flesh.

Reply Obj. 3: The disciples were to be commended precisely because
they followed Christ "without having seen Him work any miracles," as
Gregory says in a homily (Hom. v in Evang.). And, as Chrysostom says
(Hom. xxiii in Joan.), "the need for working miracles arose then,
especially when the disciples were already gathered around and
attached to Him, and attentive to what was going on around them.
Hence it is added: 'And His disciples believed in Him,'" not because
they then believed in Him for the first time, but because then "they
believed with greater discernment and perfection." Or they are called
"disciples" because "they were to be disciples later on," as
Augustine observes (De Consensu Evang. ii).
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 43, Art. 4]

Whether the Miracles Which Christ Worked Were a Sufficient Proof of
His Godhead?

Objection 1: It would seem that the miracles which Christ worked were
not a sufficient proof of His Godhead. For it is proper to Christ to
be both God and man. But the miracles which Christ worked have been
done by others also. Therefore they were not a sufficient proof of
His Godhead.

Obj. 2: Further, no power surpasses that of the Godhead. But some
have worked greater miracles than Christ, for it is written (John
14:12): "He that believeth in Me, the works that I do, he also shall
do, and greater than these shall he do." Therefore it seems that the
miracles which Christ worked are not sufficient proof of His Godhead.

Obj. 3: Further, the particular is not a sufficient proof of the
universal. But any one of Christ's miracles was one particular work.
Therefore none of them was a sufficient proof of His Godhead, by
reason of which He had universal power over all things.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord said (John 5:36): "The works which the
Father hath given Me to perfect . . . themselves . . . give testimony
of Me."

_I answer that,_ The miracles which Christ worked were a sufficient
proof of His Godhead in three respects. First, as to the very nature
of the works, which surpassed the entire capability of created power,
and therefore could not be done save by Divine power. For this reason
the blind man, after his sight had been restored, said (John 9:32,
33): "From the beginning of the world it has not been heard, that any
man hath opened the eyes of one born blind. Unless this man were of
God, he could not do anything."

Secondly, as to the way in which He worked miracles--namely, because
He worked miracles as though of His own power, and not by praying, as
others do. Wherefore it is written (Luke 6:19) that "virtue went out
from Him and healed all." Whereby it is proved, as Cyril says
(Comment. in Lucam) that "He did not receive power from another, but,
being God by nature, He showed His own power over the sick. And this
is how He worked countless miracles." Hence on Matt. 8:16: "He cast
out spirits with His word, and all that were sick He healed,"
Chrysostom says: "Mark how great a multitude of persons healed, the
Evangelists pass quickly over, not mentioning one by one . . . but in
one word traversing an unspeakable sea of miracles." And thus it was
shown that His power was co-equal with that of God the Father,
according to John 5:19: "What things soever" the Father "doth, these
the Son doth also in like manner"; and, again (John 5:21): "As the
Father raiseth up the dead and giveth life, so the Son also giveth
life to whom He will."

Thirdly, from the very fact that He taught that He was God; for
unless this were true it would not be confirmed by miracles worked by
Divine power. Hence it was said (Mk. 1:27): "What is this new
doctrine? For with power He commandeth the unclean spirits, and they
obey Him."

Reply Obj. 1: This was the argument of the Gentiles. Wherefore
Augustine says (Ep. ad Volusian. cxxxvii): "No suitable wonders, say
they, show forth the presence of so great majesty, for the ghostly
cleansing" whereby He cast out demons, "the cure of the sick, the
raising of the dead to life, if other miracles be taken into account,
are small things before God." To this Augustine answers thus: "We own
that the prophets did as much . . . But even Moses himself and the
other prophets made Christ the Lord the object of their prophecy, and
gave Him great glory . . . He, therefore, chose to do similar things
to avoid the inconsistency of failing to do what He had done through
others. Yet still He was bound to do something which no other had
done: to be born of a virgin, to rise from the dead, and to ascend
into heaven. If anyone deem this a slight thing for God to do, I know
not what more he can expect. Having become man, ought He to have made
another world, that we might believe Him to be Him by whom the world
was made? But in this world neither a greater world could be made nor
one equal to it: and if He had made a lesser world in comparison with
this, that too would have been deemed a small thing."

As to the miracles worked by others, Christ did greater still. Hence
on John 15:24: "If I had not done in [Douay: 'among'] them the works
that no other men hath done," etc., Augustine says: "None of the
works of Christ seem to be greater than the raising of the dead:
which thing we know the ancient prophets also did . . . Yet Christ
did some works 'which no other man hath done.' But we are told in
answer that others did works which He did not, and which none other
did . . . But to heal with so great a power so many defects and
ailments and grievances of mortal men, this we read concerning none
soever of the men of old. To say nothing of those, each of whom by
His bidding, as they came in His way, He made whole . . . Mark saith
(6:56): 'Whithersoever He entered, into towns or into villages or
into cities, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought Him that
they might touch but the hem of His garment: and as many as touched
Him were made whole.' These things none other did in them; for when
He saith 'In them,' it is not to be understood to mean 'Among them,'
or 'In their presence,' but wholly 'In them,' because He healed them
. . . Therefore whatever works He did in them are works that none
ever did; since if ever any other man did any one of them, by His
doing he did it; whereas these works He did, not by their doing, but
by Himself."

Reply Obj. 2: Augustine explains this passage of John as follows
(Tract. lxxi): "What are these 'greater works' which believers in Him
would do? That, as they passed by, their very shadow healed the sick?
For it is greater that a shadow should heal than the hem of a garment
. . . When, however, He said these words, it was the deeds and works
of His words that He spoke of: for when He said . . . 'The Father who
abideth in Me, He doth the works,' what works did He mean, then, but
the words He was speaking? . . . and the fruits of those same words
was the faith of those (who believed): but when the disciples
preached the Gospel, not some few like those, but the very nations
believed . . . (Tract. lxxii). Did not that rich man go away from His
presence sorrowful? . . . and yet afterwards, what one individual,
having heard from Him, did not, that many did when He spake by the
mouth of His disciples . . . Behold, He did greater works when spoken
of by men believing than when speaking to men hearing. But there is
yet this difficulty: that He did these 'greater works' by the
apostles: whereas He saith as meaning not only them: . . . 'He that
believeth in Me' . . . Listen! . . . 'He that believeth in Me, the
works that I do, he also shall do': first, 'I do,' then 'he also
shall do,' because I do that he may do. What works--but that from
ungodly he should be made righteous? . . . Which thing Christ worketh
in him, truly, but not without him. Yes, I may affirm this to be
altogether greater than to create" [*The words 'to create' are not in
the text of St. Augustine] "heaven and earth . . . for 'heaven and
earth shall pass away'; but the salvation and justification of the
predestinate shall remain . . . But also in the heavens . . . the
angels are the works of Christ: and does that man do greater works
than these, who co-operates with Christ in the work of his
justification? . . . let him, who can, judge whether it be greater to
create a righteous being than to justify an ungodly one. Certainly if
both are works of equal power, the latter is a work of greater mercy."

"But there is no need for us to understand all the works of Christ,
where He saith 'Greater than these shall he do.' For by 'these' He
meant, perhaps, those which He was doing at that hour: now at that
time He was speaking words of faith: . . . and certainly it is less
to preach words of righteousness, which thing He did without us, than
to justify the ungodly, which thing He so doth in us that we also do
it ourselves."

Reply Obj. 3: When some particular work is proper to some agent, then
that particular work is a sufficient proof of the whole power of that
agent: thus, since the act of reasoning is proper to man, the mere
fact that someone reasons about any particular proposition proves him
to be a man. In like manner, since it is proper to God to work
miracles by His own power, any single miracle worked by Christ by His
own power is a sufficient proof that He is God.
_______________________

QUESTION 44

OF (CHRIST'S) MIRACLES CONSIDERED SPECIFICALLY
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider each kind of miracle:

(1) The miracles which He worked in spiritual substances;

(2) The miracles which He worked in heavenly bodies;

(3) The miracles which He worked in man;

(4) The miracles which He worked in irrational creatures.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 44, Art. 1]

Whether Those Miracles Were Fitting Which Christ Worked in Spiritual
Substances?

Objection 1: It would seem that those miracles were unfitting which
Christ worked in spiritual substances. For among spiritual substances
the holy angels are above the demons; for, as Augustine says (De
Trin. iii): "The treacherous and sinful rational spirit of life is
ruled by the rational, pious, and just spirit of life." But we read
of no miracles worked by Christ in the good angels. Therefore neither
should He have worked miracles in the demons.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ's miracles were ordained to make known His
Godhead. But Christ's Godhead was not to be made known to the demons:
since this would have hindered the mystery of His Passion, according
to 1 Cor. 2:8: "If they had known it, they would never have crucified
the Lord of glory." Therefore He should not have worked miracles in
the demons.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ's miracles were ordained to the glory of God:
hence it is written (Matt. 9:8) that "the multitudes seeing" that the
man sick of the palsy had been healed by Christ, "feared, and
glorified God that gave such power to men." But the demons have no
part in glorifying God; since "praise is not seemly in the mouth of a
sinner" (Ecclus. 15:9). For which reason also "He suffered them not
to speak" (Mk. 1:34; Luke 4:41) those things which reflected glory on
Him. Therefore it seems that it was unfitting for Him to work
miracles in the demons.

Obj. 4: Further, Christ's miracles are ordained to the salvation of
mankind. But sometimes the casting out of demons from men was
detrimental to man, in some cases to the body: thus it is related
(Mk. 9:24, 25) that a demon at Christ's command, "crying out and
greatly tearing" the man, "went out of him; and he became as dead, so
that many said: He is dead"; sometimes also to things: as when He
sent the demons, at their own request, into the swine, which they
cast headlong into the sea; wherefore the inhabitants of those parts
"besought Him that He would depart from their coasts" (Matt.
8:31-34). Therefore it seems unfitting that He should have worked
such like miracles.

_On the contrary,_ this was foretold (Zech. 13:2), where it is
written: "I will take away . . . the unclean spirit out of the earth."

_I answer that,_ The miracles worked by Christ were arguments for the
faith which He taught. Now, by the power of His Godhead He was to
rescue those who would believe in Him, from the power of the demons;
according to John 12:31: "Now shall the prince of this world be cast
out." Consequently it was fitting that, among other miracles, He
should also deliver those who were obsessed by demons.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as men were to be delivered by Christ from the
power of the demons, so by Him were they to be brought to the
companionship of the angels, according to Col. 1:20: "Making peace
through the blood of His cross, both as to the things on earth and
the things that are in heaven." Therefore it was not fitting to show
forth to men other miracles as regards the angels, except by angels
appearing to men: as happened in His Nativity, His Resurrection, and
His Ascension.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix): "Christ was known
to the demons just as much as He willed; and He willed just as far as
there was need. But He was known to them, not as to the holy angels,
by that which is eternal life, but by certain temporal effects of His
power." First, when they saw that Christ was hungry after fasting
they deemed Him not to be the Son of God. Hence, on Luke 4:3, "If
Thou be the Son of God," etc., Ambrose says: "What means this way of
addressing Him? save that, though He knew that the Son of God was to
come, yet he did not think that He had come in the weakness of the
flesh?" But afterwards, when he saw Him work miracles, he had a sort
of conjectural suspicion that He was the Son of God. Hence on Mk.
1:24, "I know who Thou art, the Holy one of God," Chrysostom [*Victor
of Antioch. Cf. Catena Aurea] says that "he had no certain or firm
knowledge of God's coming." Yet he knew that He was "the Christ
promised in the Law," wherefore it is said (Luke 4:41) that "they
knew that He was Christ." But it was rather from suspicion than from
certainty that they confessed Him to be the Son of God. Hence Bede
says on Luke 4:41: "The demons confess the Son of God, and, as stated
farther on, 'they knew that He was Christ.' For when the devil saw
Him weakened by His fast, He knew Him to be a real man: but when He
failed to overcome Him by temptation, He doubted lest He should be
the Son of God. And now from the power of His miracles He either
knew, or rather suspected that He was the Son of God. His reason
therefore for persuading the Jews to crucify Him was not that he
deemed Him not to be Christ or the Son of God, but because he did not
foresee that he would be the loser by His death. For the Apostle says
of this mystery" (1 Cor. 2:7, 8), "which is hidden from the
beginning, that 'none of the princes of this world knew it,' for if
they had known it they would never have crucified the Lord of glory."

Reply Obj. 3: The miracles which Christ worked in expelling demons
were for the benefit, not of the demons, but of men, that they might
glorify Him. Wherefore He forbade them to speak in His praise. First,
to give us an example. For, as Athanasius says, "He restrained his
speech, although he was confessing the truth; to teach us not to care
about such things, although it may seem that what is said is true.
For it is wrong to seek to learn from the devil when we have the
Divine Scripture": Besides, it is dangerous, since the demons
frequently mix falsehood with truth. Or, as Chrysostom [*Cyril of
Alexandria, Comment. in Luc.] says: "It was not meet for them to
usurp the prerogative of the apostolic office. Nor was it fitting
that the mystery of Christ should be proclaimed by a corrupt tongue"
because "praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner" [*Cf.
Theophylact, Enarr. in Luc.]. Thirdly, because, as Bede says, "He did
not wish the envy of the Jews to be aroused thereby" [*Bede, Expos.
in Luc. iv, 41]. Hence "even the apostles are commanded to be silent
about Him, lest, if His Divine majesty were proclaimed, the gift of
His Passion should be deferred."

Reply Obj. 4: Christ came specially to teach and to work miracles for
the good of man, and principally as to the salvation of his soul.
Consequently, He allowed the demons, that He cast out, to do man some
harm, either in his body or in his goods, for the salvation of man's
soul--namely, for man's instruction. Hence Chrysostom says on Matt.
8:32 that Christ let the demons depart into the swine, "not as
yielding to the demons, but first, to show . . . how harmful are the
demons who attack men; secondly, that all might learn that the demons
would not dare to hurt even the swine, except He allow them; thirdly,
that they would have treated those men more grievously than they
treated the swine, unless they had been protected by God's
providence."

And for the same motives He allowed the man, who was being delivered
from the demons, to suffer grievously for the moment; yet did He
release him at once from that distress. By this, moreover, we are
taught, as Bede says on Mk. 9:25, that "often, when after falling
into sin we strive to return to God, we experience further and more
grievous attacks from the old enemy. This he does, either that he may
inspire us with a distaste for virtue, or that he may avenge the
shame of having been cast out." For the man who was healed "became as
dead," says Jerome, "because to those who are healed it is said, 'You
are dead; and your life is hid with Christ in God'" (Col. 3:3)
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 44, Art. 2]

Whether It Was Fitting That Christ Should Work Miracles in the
Heavenly Bodies?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was unfitting that Christ should
work miracles in the heavenly bodies. For, as Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. iv), "it beseems Divine providence not to destroy, but to
preserve, nature." Now, the heavenly bodies are by nature
incorruptible and unchangeable, as is proved _De Coelo_ i. Therefore
it was unfitting that Christ should cause any change in the order of
the heavenly bodies.

Obj. 2: Further, the course of time is marked out by the movement of
the heavenly bodies, according to Gen. 1:14: "Let there be lights
made in the firmament of heaven . . . and let them be for signs, and
for seasons, and for days and years." Consequently if the movement of
the heavenly bodies be changed, the distinction and order of the
seasons is changed. But there is no report of this having been
perceived by astronomers, "who gaze at the stars and observe the
months," as it is written (Isa. 47:13). Therefore it seems that
Christ did not work any change in the movements of the heavenly
bodies.

Obj. 3: Further, it was more fitting that Christ should work miracles
in life and when teaching, than in death: both because, as it is
written (2 Cor. 13:4), "He was crucified through weakness, yet He
liveth by the power of God," by which He worked miracles; and because
His miracles were in confirmation of His doctrine. But there is no
record of Christ having worked any miracles in the heavenly bodies
during His lifetime: nay, more; when the Pharisees asked Him to give
"a sign from heaven," He refused, as Matthew relates (12, 16).
Therefore it seems that neither in His death should He have worked
any miracles in the heavenly bodies.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 23:44, 45): "There was
darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour; and the sun was
darkened."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 43, A. 4) it behooved Christ's
miracles to be a sufficient proof of His Godhead. Now this is not so
sufficiently proved by changes wrought in the lower bodies, which
changes can be brought about by other causes, as it is by changes
wrought in the course of the heavenly bodies, which have been
established by God alone in an unchangeable order. This is what
Dionysius says in his epistle to Polycarp: "We must recognize that no
alteration can take place in the order end movement of the heavens
that is not caused by Him who made all and changes all by His word."
Therefore it was fitting that Christ should work miracles even in the
heavenly bodies.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as it is natural to the lower bodies to be moved
by the heavenly bodies, which are higher in the order of nature, so
is it natural to any creature whatsoever to be changed by God,
according to His will. Hence Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxvi;
quoted by the gloss on Rom. 11:24: "Contrary to nature thou wert
grafted," etc.): "God, the Creator and Author of all natures, does
nothing contrary to nature: for whatsoever He does in each thing,
that is its nature." Consequently the nature of a heavenly body is
not destroyed when God changes its course: but it would be if the
change were due to any other cause.

Reply Obj. 2: The order of the seasons was not disturbed by the
miracle worked by Christ. For, according to some, this gloom or
darkening of the sun, which occurred at the time of Christ's passion,
was caused by the sun withdrawing its rays, without any change in the
movement of the heavenly bodies, which measures the duration of the
seasons. Hence Jerome says on Matt. 27:45: "It seems as though the
'greater light' withdrew its rays, lest it should look on its Lord
hanging on the Cross, or bestow its radiancy on the impious
blasphemers." And this withdrawal of the rays is not to be understood
as though it were in the sun's power to send forth or withdraw its
rays: for it sheds its light, not from choice, but by nature, as
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv). But the sun is said to withdraw its
rays in so far as the Divine power caused the sun's rays not to reach
the earth. On the other hand, Origen says this was caused by clouds
coming between (the earth and the sun). Hence on Matt. 27:45 he says:
"We must therefore suppose that many large and very dense clouds were
massed together over Jerusalem and the land of Judea; so that it was
exceedingly dark from the sixth to the ninth hour. Hence I am of
opinion that, just as the other signs which occurred at the time of
the Passion"--namely, "the rending of the veil, the quaking of the
earth," etc.--"took place in Jerusalem only, so this also: . . . or
if anyone prefer, it may be extended to the whole of Judea," since it
is said that "'there was darkness over the whole earth,' which
expression refers to the land of Judea, as may be gathered from 3
Kings 18:10, where Abdias says to Elias: 'As the Lord thy God liveth,
there is no nation or kingdom whither my lord hath not sent to seek
thee': which shows that they sought him among the nations in the
neighborhood of Judea."

On this point, however, credence is to be given rather to Dionysius,
who is an eyewitness as to this having occurred by the moon eclipsing
the sun. For he says (Ep. ad Polycarp): "Without any doubt we saw the
moon encroach on the sun," he being in Egypt at the time, as he says
in the same letter. And in this he points out four miracles. The
first is that the natural eclipse of the sun by interposition of the
moon never takes place except when the sun and moon are in
conjunction. But then the sun and moon were in opposition, it being
the fifteenth day, since it was the Jewish Passover. Wherefore he
says: "For it was not the time of conjunction."--The second miracle
is that whereas at the sixth hour the moon was seen, together with
the sun, in the middle of the heavens, in the evening it was seen to
be in its place, i.e. in the east, opposite the sun. Wherefore he
says: "Again we saw it," i.e. the moon, "return supernaturally into
opposition with the sun," so as to be diametrically opposite, having
withdrawn from the sun "at the ninth hour," when the darkness ceased,
"until evening." From this it is clear that the wonted course of the
seasons was not disturbed, because the Divine power caused the moon
both to approach the sun supernaturally at an unwonted season, and to
withdraw from the sun and return to its proper place according to the
season. The third miracle was that the eclipse of the sun naturally
always begins in that part of the sun which is to the west and
spreads towards the east: and this is because the moon's proper
movement from west to east is more rapid than that of the sun, and
consequently the moon, coming up from the west, overtakes the sun and
passes it on its eastward course. But in this case the moon had
already passed the sun, and was distant from it by the length of half
the heavenly circle, being opposite to it: consequently it had to
return eastwards towards the sun, so as to come into apparent contact
with it from the east, and continue in a westerly direction. This is
what he refers to when he says: "Moreover, we saw the eclipse begin
to the east and spread towards the western edge of the sun," for it
was a total eclipse, "and afterwards pass away." The fourth miracle
consisted in this, that in a natural eclipse that part of the sun
which is first eclipsed is the first to reappear (because the moon,
coming in front of the sun, by its natural movement passes on to the
east, so as to come away first from the western portion of the sun,
which was the first part to be eclipsed), whereas in this case the
moon, while returning miraculously from the east to the west, did not
pass the sun so as to be to the west of it: but having reached the
western edge of the sun returned towards the east: so that the last
portion of the sun to be eclipsed was the first to reappear.
Consequently the eclipse began towards the east, whereas the sun
began to reappear towards the west. And to this he refers by saying:
"Again we observed that the occultation and emersion did not begin
from the same point," i.e. on the same side of the sun, "but on
opposite sides."

Chrysostom adds a fifth miracle (Hom. lxxxviii in Matth.), saying
that "the darkness in this case lasted for three hours, whereas an
eclipse of the sun lasts but a short time, for it is soon over, as
those know who have seen one." Hence we are given to understand that
the moon was stationary below the sun, except we prefer to say that
the duration of the darkness was measured from the first moment of
occultation of the sun to the moment when the sun had completely
emerged from the eclipse.

But, as Origen says (on Matt. 27:45), "against this the children of
this world object: How is it such a phenomenal occurrence is not
related by any writer, whether Greek or barbarian?" And he says that
someone of the name of Phlegon "relates in his chronicles that this
took place during the reign of Tiberius Caesar, but he does not say
that it occurred at the full moon." It may be, therefore, that
because it was not the time for an eclipse, the various astronomers
living then throughout the world were not on the look-out for one,
and that they ascribed this darkness to some disturbance of the
atmosphere. But in Egypt, where clouds are few on account of the
tranquillity of the air, Dionysius and his companions were
considerably astonished so as to make the aforesaid observations
about this darkness.

Reply Obj. 3: Then, above all, was there need for miraculous proof of
Christ's Godhead, when the weakness of human nature was most apparent
in Him. Hence it was that at His birth a new star appeared in the
heavens. Wherefore Maximus says (Serm. de Nativ. viii): "If thou
disdain the manger, raise thine eyes a little and gaze on the new
star in the heavens, proclaiming to the world the birth of our Lord."
But in His Passion yet greater weakness appeared in His manhood.
Therefore there was need for yet greater miracles in the greater
lights of the world. And, as Chrysostom says (Hom. lxxxviii in
Matth.): "This is the sign which He promised to them who sought for
one saying: 'An evil and adulterous generation seeketh a sign; and a
sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet,'
referring to His Cross . . . and Resurrection . . . For it was much
more wonderful that this should happen when He was crucified than
when He was walking on earth."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 44, Art. 3]

Whether Christ Worked Miracles Fittingly on Men?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ worked miracles unfittingly on
men. For in man the soul is of more import than the body. Now Christ
worked many miracles on bodies, but we do not read of His working any
miracles on souls: for neither did He convert any unbelievers to the
faith mightily, but by persuading and convincing them with outward
miracles, nor is it related of Him that He made wise men out of
fools. Therefore it seems that He worked miracles on men in an
unfitting manner.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated above (Q. 43, A. 2), Christ worked
miracles by Divine power: to which it is proper to work suddenly,
perfectly, and without any assistance. Now Christ did not always heal
men suddenly as to their bodies: for it is written (Mk. 8:22-25)
that, "taking the blind man by the hand, He led him out of the town;
and, spitting upon his eyes, laying His hands on him, He asked him if
he saw anything. And, looking up, he said: I see men as it were trees
walking. After that again He laid His hands upon his eyes, and he
began to see, and was restored, so that he saw all things clearly."
It is clear from this that He did not heal him suddenly, but at first
imperfectly, and by means of His spittle. Therefore it seems that He
worked miracles on men unfittingly.

Obj. 3: Further, there is no need to remove at the same time things
which do not follow from one another. Now bodily ailments are not
always the result of sin, as appears from our Lord's words (John
9:3): "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents, that he should
be born blind." It was unseemly, therefore, for Him to forgive the
sins of those who sought the healing of the body, as He is related to
have done in the case of the man sick of the palsy (Matt. 9:2): the
more that the healing of the body, being of less account than the
forgiveness of sins, does not seem a sufficient argument for the
power of forgiving sins.

Obj. 4: Further, Christ's miracles were worked in order to confirm
His doctrine, and witness to His Godhead, as stated above (Q. 43, A.
4). Now no man should hinder the purpose of his own work. Therefore
it seems unfitting that Christ commanded those who had been healed
miraculously to tell no one, as appears from Matt. 9:30 and Mk. 8:26:
the more so, since He commanded others to proclaim the miracles
worked on them; thus it is related (Mk. 5:19) that, after delivering
a man from the demons, He said to him: "Go into thy house to thy
friends, and tell them, how great things the Lord hath done for thee."

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Mk. 7:37): "He hath done all things
well: He hath made both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak."

_I answer that,_ The means should be proportionate to the end. Now
Christ came into the world and taught in order to save man, according
to John 3:17: "For God sent not His Son into the world to judge the
world, but that the world may be saved by Him." Therefore it was
fitting that Christ, by miraculously healing men in particular,
should prove Himself to be the universal and spiritual Saviour of all.

Reply Obj. 1: The means are distinct from the end. Now the end for
which Christ's miracles were worked was the health of the rational
part, which is healed by the light of wisdom, and the gift of
righteousness: the former of which presupposes the latter, since, as
it is written (Wis. 1:4): "Wisdom will not enter into a malicious
soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins." Now it was unfitting that
man should be made righteous unless he willed: for this would be both
against the nature of righteousness, which implies rectitude of the
will, and contrary to the very nature of man, which requires to be
led to good by the free-will, not by force. Christ, therefore,
justified man inwardly by the Divine power, but not against man's
will. Nor did this pertain to His miracles, but to the end of His
miracles. In like manner by the Divine power He infused wisdom into
the simple minds of His disciples: hence He said to them (Luke
21:15): "I will give you a mouth and wisdom" which "all your
adversaries will not be able to resist and gainsay." And this, in so
far as the enlightenment was inward, is not to be reckoned as a
miracle, but only as regards the outward action--namely, in so far as
men saw that those who had been unlettered and simple spoke with such
wisdom and constancy. Wherefore it is written (Acts 4:13) that the
Jews, "seeing the constancy of Peter and of John, understanding that
they were illiterate and ignorant men . . . wondered."--And though
such like spiritual effects are different from visible miracles, yet
do they testify to Christ's doctrine and power, according to Heb.
2:4: "God also bearing them witness by signs and wonders and divers
miracles, and distributions of the Holy Ghost."

Nevertheless Christ did work some miracles on the soul of man,
principally by changing its lower powers. Hence Jerome, commenting on
Matt. 9:9, "He rose up and followed Him," says: "Such was the
splendor and majesty of His hidden Godhead, which shone forth even in
His human countenance, that those who gazed on it were drawn to Him
at first sight." And on Matt. 21:12, "(Jesus) cast out all them that
sold and bought," the same Jerome says: "Of all the signs worked by
our Lord, this seems to me the most wondrous--that one man, at that
time despised, could, with the blows of one scourge, cast out such a
multitude. For a fiery and heavenly light flashed from His eyes, and
the majesty of His Godhead shone in His countenance." And Origen says
on John 2:15 that "this was a greater miracle than when He changed
water into wine, for there He shows His power over inanimate matter,
whereas here He tames the minds of thousands of men." Again, on John
18:6, "They went backward and fell to the ground," Augustine says:
"Though that crowd was fierce in hate and terrible with arms, yet did
that one word . . . without any weapon, smite them through, drive
them back, lay them prostrate: for God lay hidden in that flesh."
Moreover, to this must be referred what Luke says (4:30) --namely,
that Jesus, "passing through the midst of them, went His way," on
which Chrysostom observes (Hom. xlviii in Joan.): "That He stood in
the midst of those who were lying in wait for Him, and was not seized
by them, shows the power of His Godhead"; and, again, that which is
written John 8:59, "Jesus hid Himself and went out of the Temple," on
which Theophylact says: "He did not hide Himself in a corner of the
Temple, as if afraid, or take shelter behind a wall or pillar; but by
His heavenly power making Himself invisible to those who were
threatening Him, He passed through the midst of them."

From all these instances it is clear that Christ, when He willed,
changed the minds of men by His Divine power, not only by the
bestowal of righteousness and the infusion of wisdom, which pertains
to the end of miracles, but also by outwardly drawing men to Himself,
or by terrifying or stupefying them, which pertains to the miraculous
itself.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ came to save the world, not only by Divine
power, but also through the mystery of His Incarnation. Consequently
in healing the sick He frequently not only made use of His Divine
power, healing by way of command, but also by applying something
pertaining to His human nature. Hence on Luke 4:40, "He, laying His
hands on every one of them, healed them," Cyril says: "Although, as
God, He might, by one word, have driven out all diseases, yet He
touched them, showing that His own flesh was endowed with a healing
virtue." And on Mk. 8:23, "Spitting upon his eyes, laying His hands
on him," etc., Chrysostom [*Victor of Antioch] says: "He spat and
laid His hands upon the blind man, wishing to show that His Divine
word, accompanied by His operation, works wonders: for the hand
signifies operation; the spittle signifies the word which proceeds
from the mouth." Again, on John 9:6, "He made clay of the spittle,
and spread the clay upon the eyes of the blind man," Augustine says:
"Of His spittle He made clay--because 'the Word was made flesh.'" Or,
again, as Chrysostom says, to signify that it was He who made man of
"the slime of the earth."

It is furthermore to be observed concerning Christ's miracles that
generally what He did was most perfect. Hence on John 2:10, "Every
man at first setteth forth good wine," Chrysostom says: "Christ's
miracles are such as to far surpass the works of nature in splendor
and usefulness." Likewise in an instant He conferred perfect health
on the sick. Hence on Matt. 8:15, "She arose and ministered to them,"
Jerome says: "Health restored by our Lord returns wholly and
instantly."

There was, however, special reason for the contrary happening in the
case of the man born blind, and this was his want of faith, as
Chrysostom [*Victor of Antioch] says. Or as Bede observes on Mk.
8:23: "Whom He might have healed wholly and instantly by a single
word, He heals little by little, to show the extent of human
blindness, which hardly, and that only by degrees, can come back to
the light: and to point out that each step forward in the way of
perfection is due to the help of His grace."

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 43, A. 2), Christ worked miracles
by Divine power. Now "the works of God are perfect" (Deut. 32:4). But
nothing is perfect except it attain its end. Now the end of the
outward healing worked by Christ is the healing of the soul.
Consequently it was not fitting that Christ should heal a man's body
without healing his soul. Wherefore on John 7:23, "I have healed the
whole man on a Sabbath day," Augustine says: "Because he was cured,
so as to be whole in body; he believed, so as to be whole in soul."
To the man sick of the palsy it is said specially, "Thy sins are
forgiven thee," because, as Jerome observes on Matt. 9:5, 6: "We are
hereby given to understand that ailments of the body are frequently
due to sin: for which reason, perhaps, first are his sins forgiven,
that the cause of the ailment being removed, health may return."
Wherefore, also (John 4:14), it is said: "Sin no more, lest some
worse thing happen to thee." Whence, says Chrysostom, "we learn that
his sickness was the result of sin."

Nevertheless, as Chrysostom says on Matt. 9:5: "By how much a soul is
of more account than a body, by so much is the forgiving of sins a
greater work than healing the body; but because the one is unseen He
does the lesser and more manifest thing in order to prove the greater
and more unseen."

Reply Obj. 4: On Matt. 9:30, "See that no man know this," Chrysostom
says: "If in another place we find Him saying, 'Go and declare the
glory of God' (cf. Mk. 5:19; Luke 8:39), that is not contrary to
this. For He instructs us to forbid them that would praise us on our
own account: but if the glory be referred to God, then we must not
forbid, but command, that it be done."
