And on earth, among men, there should be unity.  "Be ye perfect," said
our Lord, "even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect."  The
Father is love, the Son is love, and the Holy Ghost is the love of the
Father and of the Son, and this love requires the same of us--even love,
or unity.

This is what God wills on earth, our living unity, even as it exists in
Heaven between the Three Persons of the glorious Trinity.

But there are three great hindrances to Christian Unity.

I.  _Selfishness_.  Each man seeks his own interest, not the general
interest.  Let his own selfish interests be touched, and all concord is
at an end.  Look at two little dogs playing together, they put their paws
on each other's shoulders, and dance round each other, and roll each
other over, and are full of affectionate play.  Throw them a bone, and it
is a true bone of contention at once.  All their affection is dead, and
they are fighting each other for the bone.  It is the same with men, they
are perfectly friendly with each other so long as no little bone comes in
the way--some little money matter--and then there is no end to the
snarling and snapping and growling.  How often it is that the dearest
friends fall out about money!  This has been so often noticed that it has
become a common saying, "Have no money dealings with your friend."  Even
near relations become bitter, and are estranged, over some provision in a
will.  All this arises from self-seeking.  Each cares for himself, and
not for others.

Now look at the Holy Trinity.  The Three Persons share in equal Power,
Majesty, and Eternity.  The Father commits all power unto the Son, the
Son gives all honour to the Father, the Son gives over to the Holy Ghost
the government of His Church.  The Father shares with the Son and the
Holy Ghost the Divine nature, wisdom, and glory.  All three are equally
eternal, equally almighty, equally perfect.

II.  _Pride_.  Each man seeks to place himself before another.  'I am as
good as another, or I am above so-and-so,' is a common thought.  No man
is content with what he is, he desires to thrust himself ahead of
another.  The whole of society is like a cabbage-stalk covered with
caterpillars, and none is satisfied till it has crawled to the top.  The
caterpillar at the bottom bites the one above him, gets over his back,
and then exults, 'There is a caterpillar nearer the bottom of the
cabbage-stalk than I,' and so all the way up the stalk, those below
scrambling over those above, and they at the top--at the proud elevation
and unique honour of being at the head of a cabbage-stalk--tumble off,
and are buried in the soil.

Was there any such pride of place in the angel host?  Yes--once.  The
Devil wanted to be at the top, and he fell.  The other angels are content
where they are, and they remain angels.  If they began pushing ahead of
each other, cherubim wanting to be above seraphim, and angels envious of
archangels, what a falling there would be from heaven!  Falling stars
indeed!  All turning into devils.  Look at the Blessed Trinity.  God the
Son says, "My Father is greater than I."  He places Himself in the lowest
rank.  He calls Himself "The Son of Man"; there is no boasting, "I am the
Son of God."

III.  _Obstinacy_.  That is the third source of discord.  Each man
follows his own will, his dogged, headlong will, regardless of the wishes
and advice of others.

In the Book of Judges we read that Samson caught three hundred foxes and
tied them together by their tails, and put burning brands between them,
where their tails were tied.  What was the consequence?  The wretched
creatures dashed in opposite directions, each wanted to get away from the
brand that scorched his tail, and so each wanted to go exactly in a
different direction from the fox to which he was tied, and so the whole
lot went dashing in a mad, disorderly manner among the standing corn, and
destroyed a whole harvest.

That is something like a great number of people I know.  They will tear
off in their own direction, and drag others after them who wish to go in
another direction, and the fire of discord is between them.

Look at the Blessed Trinity.  Christ said, "I came not to do mine own
will, but the will of Him that sent me."

"Let us make man," was said at the Creation.  God the Father did not say
"I will make man," nor God the Son "I will make man in My image," nor God
the Holy Ghost "I will make man, and breathe My spirit into him," but all
united in one work, and that work was very good.

CONCLUSION.--When Julian the Apostate was Emperor, three Christian
soldiers were brought before him.  Their names were Emmanuel, Sabael, and
Ismael.  He ordered them to be examined apart, lest they should encourage
one another in their faith and endurance under torture.  Emmanuel, seeing
his object, said, "Tyrant! we Three are one in one Trinity."

Now, listen to our Lord's prayer, "I pray not for these alone, but for
those also which shall believe on Me through their word, that they all
may be one; as Thou, Father, art in me, and I in Thee."




XXXVIII.

_GREAT SURPRISES._

1st Sunday after Trinity.

S. Luke xvi. 23.

"In hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments."


INTRODUCTION.--What a great surprise for Dives!  So utterly unawaited!
Dives, who had lived so comfortably, clothed in purple and fine linen,
and had had such a good coat, and such excellent dinners, and such a
cellar of wine, and such good friends at his dinners, goes to sleep one
night after a banquet, and wakes up, and lo!--he is in hell.  Surprise
number one.

He feels the flames, he perceives himself surrounded by demons, his
tongue is burning with thirst, and he lifts up his eyes and
sees!--surprise number two!--Lazarus, the poor dirty wretch who had
lain full of sores at his door.  He did not know that the fellow was
dead.  And--surprise number three!--this wretched fellow is in Paradise.

There is another story of a great surprise in the Gospels.  That is of
the man who laid up for himself great possessions, and said to himself,
"Soul! thou hast much goods laid up for many years,--I will pull down
my barns and build greater--take thy ease, eat, drink and be merry."
That night he died, and when his soul came to realise the fact that he
had nothing left of all he had laid by--that was a great surprise, and
a very unpleasant one.

SUBJECT.--Let us take care that we do not have some such a great and
unpleasant surprise ourselves.  "Take heed," says our Lord, "to
yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day
come upon you unawares."

I.  Now I am going to tell you a story of another great surprise.  The
king of Syria was engaged in war with the king of Israel, and one of
the servants of the king of Syria told him that Elisha the Prophet saw
and knew all that was planned by him against the king of Israel, and
that he told the king of Israel, so that the Syrians were never able to
catch him at a disadvantage, and defeat him.  Then the king of Syria
enquired where this prophet lived, and was told that he was then at
Dothan.

"Therefore sent he thither horses and chariots, and a great host: and
they came by night and compassed the city about."  Then Elisha prayed
to God to deceive and blind the eyes of the soldiers, and he went out
of the gates of Dothan to them, and said, "This is not the way, neither
is this the city; follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom you
seek."  So he went before, and led them along the road to Samaria, the
capital of the king of Israel.  Then he brought them all in through the
gates, and they followed, as docile as lambs, and when they were in the
market-place, he said, "Lord, open the eyes of these men, that they may
see."  And the Lord opened their eyes, and lo! they were in the
market-place in the midst of Samaria, and all around them were the
soldiers of their enemy, the king of Israel, with swords drawn, and in
the windows were others armed with stones and javelins and molten lead
to hurl down on them.  Here was an unpleasant surprise!

The king of Israel and all his soldiers were eager to be at them and
cut them to pieces, but Elisha was too good-hearted for that, he
persuaded the king to be generous, to give them their breakfast and
send them home.  So "He prepared great provisions for them; and when
they had eaten and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their
master."  They were lucky to be let off so easily, and they owed their
lives to there being a Saint of God there to intercede for them.  But
you may be assured to their dying day they carried with them a lively
recollection of the very unpleasant surprise it was to them when their
eyes were opened, and they found themselves in the midst of their
enemies, when they fondly supposed themselves in the humble and
undefended little town of Dothan.

II.  Now for you!--Whither are you going?  Whither are you being led?
Are you at all aware?  I very much fear that a great many of you are as
blind and as ignorant of the road you are treading as were those
soldiers of the king of Syria.  You are going on headlong, chattering
with one another, laughing and singing, in open order, very little
discipline, and perfectly confident that you will come to no harm.
Take care!  Some day your eyes will be opened, and you will experience
an unpleasant surprise.  Then, when your eyes are opened you will see
yourselves surrounded by the enemies of your souls, ready to drag you
to destruction, and no help near.  Very unexpected was this case of the
Syrians, that the prophet prayed for them, and that instead of being
put to death they were fed and sent away in peace.  That is not what
you must expect.  Dives, when his eyes were opened, cried to Abraham,
but got no help, no, not even a drop of water to cool his tongue.

III.  No man need go blindly to destruction, for God has given him
guidance, and power of seeing whither he goes.  The prophet led these
soldiers of Syria into the midst of their enemies, but God's good
Spirit, which is our guide, will lead us into the Land of Righteousness
if we will listen to His voice, and go where he points the way.

We have no right to plead blindness and ignorance, if hereafter we find
that we have gone astray, and our eyes are opened when we are in the
midst of our enemies, for blindness can not come upon us unless we
wilfully shut our eyes to the light, and with the teaching of Christ
and His Church ever sounding in our ears, we have no right to plead
ignorance.

Moreover, God is so merciful, that He never allows any to go to
destruction unwarned of their danger.  As He sent His angel to stand in
the way of Balaam, so will He send some check, and throw some obstacle
in the road you are treading, to bring you to your senses in time, and
will not allow you to perish, unless you wilfully and deliberately
persist in the road of evil, knowing the consequences, and knowing
whither you are going.

CONCLUSION.--Lastly.  It was a great surprise to Lazarus when he found
himself in Paradise.  He had no doubt hoped and prayed to be admitted
there, but when he found himself there, he was amazed to see how far
its happiness and its peace surpassed his expectations.  So with those
of us who are found meet to enter Heaven.  However great our
anticipations, they will be surpassed.  Eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man, to conceive those
good things which God hath prepared for those who love Him.

May He bring us all to that glad surprise.




XXXIX.

_THE HOLY COMMUNION._

2nd Sunday after Trinity.

S. Luke xiv. 16.

"A certain man made a great supper."


INTRODUCTION.--When the fulness of time was come, God the Eternal
Father said: "In burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin, I have no
pleasure."  Then said the Son, "Lo, I come."  He came that He might
take away the valueless sacrifice, and establish the one full and
perfect propitiation for the sins of the world.  And indeed it was
time.  All creation was groaning and travailing in pain, and waiting
for redemption, then said He--"Lo, I come."  The souls of the faithful
were in Hades, prophets, patriarchs, and kings, desirous to see His
Day, prisoners of Hope, desirous to be released by His Blood of the
Covenant,--then said He--"Lo, I come."

Men wandered in darkness, desiring light, the whole head was sick, and
the whole heart faint, and in their error, darkly, and in their
sickness, faintly, they sought the Lord, if haply they might feel after
Him; then said He--"Lo, I come."

They knew not the way of God how they might walk, and they needed a
guide; then said He--"Lo, I come."

They were sunk in sin, and found that the old bloody sacrifices and
burnt offerings could not take away guilt, they needed a more perfect
sacrifice; then said He--"Lo, I come."  They knew not what the nature
of God was, and they formed to themselves gods, in the likeness of men.
How should they know without a teacher?  Then said He--"Lo, I come."

Nor is this all.  At this day, still His answer is, promptly, when He
is needed--"Lo, I come."

Does any father desire his dear little one to be taken into the arms of
Christ and blessed, still His answer is--"Lo, I come."

Does any man need direction, guidance, help in the way of life?  He
says, "Lo, I come; I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee."

Does any desire sustaining food by the way?  He says--"Lo, I come, and
the Bread I give is My flesh, which I give for the life of the world."

Is any burdened with the weight of sin, and desires pardon and
reconciliation, He says--"Lo, I come, though thy sins be as scarlet,
they shall be made as white as wool."

Is any in sorrow, and heart sore?  He says, "Lo, I come to bind up the
broken-hearted."

Is any dying?--He is still ready with His answer, "Lo, I come, when
thou goest through the waters I am with thee."

You see how striking is the readiness of Our Blessed Lord.  Now look at
to-day's Gospel, and see how this is met by man.  Christ is represented
as having made a great supper, the Holy Eucharist, and to that he
invites all Christians, and He sends forth His messengers to bid them
come, then they all with one consent begin to make excuse.  The
messengers go to the man who has bought oxen, and invite him to the
supper of his lord, and his answer is, "I pray thee, have me excused."
They go to a man who has bought a farm, and his answer is, "I pray
thee, have me excused."  They go to a man who has married a wife, and
his answer is, "I cannot come."

"Lo, I come!" says Christ.  "I cannot come," says man.  "Lo, I come to
man," says Christ.  "I cannot come to Christ," says man.

I.  It was the rule among the early Christians to communicate every
Lord's Day.  The rule of the Church, as laid down in the service-books,
then ordered that all those who were open and scandalous livers, all
those who had committed some deadly sin, and had not been reconciled to
God, should leave church before the Consecration, after the reading of
the Gospel.  Now suppose some good old bishop of that day were to rise
from the dead, and come into this church, what would he see?--Directly
the sermon is over,--a rush of almost all in the church, men, women,
and children, running out of the door, and only three or four, or at
most a dozen, remaining to partake of the Lord's Body.  That is what he
would see.  Now, what would he say?--He would lift up his hands in
horror, and say, "What is this?  All these notorious sinners!  All
these open profligates!  All these burdened with mortal sin, cutting
them off from the grace of God!  Take me back to my grave, I do not
want to see any more of such horrible days."

But if I happened to be present, I would say to him.  "You are jumping
to conclusions too rashly.  Times are altered.  It is not the criminals
and profligates who go out of church before the Consecration of the
Blessed Sacrament, and are unworthy to eat of the Lord's Body, it is
those who cannot make up their minds to do exactly what the Lord
commanded; it is those who are half-hearted, who wish to serve God, but
do not want to serve Him very much."  Then, I doubt not, the old bishop
would turn upon me with a wrathful face, and say, "Let me go back to my
grave!  This is worse!  A thousand times worse!  The whole Christian
world has grown cold of heart, and dead of faith, if all with one
consent begin to make excuse, and say, 'I cannot come.'  I had rather
they were either hot or cold, but because they are neither hot nor
cold--away!  I cannot bear to look at their faces!  Let me go back to
my grave."

III.  I know what is passing in your minds as well as if you had got
glass skulls.  And this is what I see that not a few of you are
thinking.  "Ha! there is the Parson at it again! always hammering away
at Communion.  Can he not leave us alone?  Let him talk to us of other
matters; let him preach to us some real stinging gospel truth, and make
us wince.  Anything but this eternal preaching about coming to
Communion."  Now I will tell you why I preach about this, and hammer,
hammer, at it.  Because it is good stinging gospel truth, and the
grumbling that is going on is because your consciences really are
wincing at what I say.

Listen:--other folks talked like you in olden times.  When the children
of Israel came out of Egypt, God in mercy sent them Bread from Heaven,
the manna, to feed them on their way through the wilderness.  What said
the people in return for the blessing?  Were they very grateful?  Were
they very eager to gather up the Angels' food?  By no means, they sat
grumbling in their tents and said, "Our soul is dried away; there is
nothing beside this manna before our eyes."  Put into modern language
that is, "Our souls have dried up for want of preaching of free
justification, and no good at all in keeping the law; we don't want any
of your Sacramental teaching, no Communion for us, we can do very well
without that, our soul abhorreth this light food, as for this Holy
Communion, there is nothing but that preached to us, year in, year out."

Well!  If this Sacramental teaching be not God's own blessed Gospel,
there is no meaning in words.  Listen to this!  I never said anything
so strong, and this is what Christ Himself spake:--"I am the Bread of
Life.  Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.  I
am the living bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is My
flesh, which I give for the life of the world."  "Verily, verily, I say
unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His
blood, ye have no life in you.  Whoso eateth My flesh, and drinketh My
blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day.  For
My flesh is meat indeed, and My blood is drink indeed."

Now--mark you.  When Jesus said this, many of His disciples said, "This
is a hard saying"--and, from that time they went back, and walked no
more with Him.  It is so still, it will be so always.  Just as many of
the old Israelites loathed the manna and said, "Our souls are dried
away; there is nothing but this manna before our eyes," so there always
will be faithless disciples who when they hear the invitation to
partake of the Body of Christ, the true Manna, will say, "This is a
hard saying," and will thenceforth no more walk with Him.




XL.

_RECEIVING AND REJECTING._

3rd Sunday after Trinity.

S. Luke, xv. 2.

"This Man receiveth sinners."


INTRODUCTION.--In to-day's Gospel our Lord represents Himself as a Good
Shepherd seeking His lost sheep, going out into the wilderness after
them, to bring them back into the fold.

The fold is that place where He keeps His flock shut behind the hurdles
of the Ten Commandments.  Every now and then a sheep leaps one of these
hurdles, or pushes his way between them, and runs away into forbidden
pastures.  Then the Good Shepherd goes after the erring sheep, and
brings it back.  "And when he cometh home, he calleth together his
friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice with me, for I have
found my sheep which was lost."

SUBJECT.--Christ is not always to be regarded as the Saviour receiving
sinners.  The time will come when He will be the Judge, rejecting them.
He is a shepherd now, bringing back the straying sheep, and replacing
them in the fold, but one day He will do just the contrary, He will go
to His fold, and pick out the incorrigibly bad sheep, and cast them out.

I.  We will consider Him now as the Good Shepherd.  What is His purpose
in bringing back the straying sheep?  That they may remain within
bounds for the future.  Christ has come to save sinners, that is to
say, He brings them to repentance, and pardons their transgressions, in
order that, for the future, they may walk in newness of life, and not
commit the sins of which they were guilty before.  Thus if He brings
back one who has been a liar, it is to truth that he returns, and
Christ expects him to speak the truth ever after.  If He brings back a
drunkard, it is to temperance, and He expects him to be sober for the
future.  If He brings back one who has sinned through impurity, it is
to chastity and modesty.  This is what S. Paul means when he says, "Put
off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the spirit of your
mind.  Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbour.  Let him that stole steal no more, let no corrupt
conversation proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the
use of edifying.  Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice.  And
be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another."

II.  We will consider Christ as the Judge.  The time will come when He
will separate the bad from the good, when He will go over His fold, and
pick out all those diseased sheep which are good for nothing, and which
taint and infect the others, and will cast them outside.

That is to say, the time will come, when Christ will no more call
sinners to Him, and bring them to His Church, but will examine those
who are in His Church, and unless they have mended their ways, unless
they have become better for being there, He will throw them out, and
have nothing further to do with them.

When Joshua was leading the people of God into the Promised Land, God
said to Joshua, "Up!  Sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves
against to-morrow."

In what did this sanctification consist?  "Joshua rose early in the
morning, and brought Israel by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was
taken: and he brought the family of Judah; and took the family of the
Zarhites: and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and
Zabdi was taken: and he brought his household man by man; and Achan,
the son of Carmi was taken."  Then Joshua learned how this man had
sinned and incurred the anger of God, and he and all Israel carried him
and his family outside the camp unto the valley of Achor, "and all
Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they
had stoned them with stones."  That was the sanctification of
Israel,--the putting away the black sheep out of the flock.

When Jesus sat with His Twelve in the supper chamber, at the Last
Supper, Judas rose and went out, and when he was gone forth, Jesus
said, "Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in Him."
A little while before, while Judas was in the room, we are told, "Jesus
was troubled in spirit."  But the moment the evil one among the
Apostles was cast forth, the glorification of the Son of Man began.

So it is now, and so will it be hereafter.

Now, as long as there is evil in the Church, as long as there are
sinners who will not amend, as long as there are tares growing up with
the wheat,--so long "Jesus is troubled in spirit."  But when the great
Day comes, when our true Joshua will lead the people of God into the
Promised Land, then He will sanctify His people by casting out from
among them the Achans; then from the company of His Elect the Judases
will be banished, and the Son of Man will be glorified indeed.

CONCLUSION.--Therefore, my Brethren, be careful to amend.  You may have
