[Sidenote: 29. Notices of them in the Koran.]

The treachery of the Bani Kainukaa, Nazeer and Koreiza, and Khyber is
noticed in the Koran in the following verses:--

58. "They with whom thou hadst leagued, but who ever afterwards break
their league, and fear not God!"

59. "And if thou capture them in battle, then (_by the example of their
fate_) put to flight those who are behind them--they will perhaps be
warned:"--

60. "Or, if thou fear treachery from any people, throw back _their
treaty_ to them in like manner: verily, God loveth not the treacherous."

61. "And think not that the infidels shall get the better of Us! Verily,
they shall not find God to be weak."

62. "Make ready then against them what force ye can, and squadrons of
horse whereby ye may strike terror into the enemy of God and your enemy,
and into others beside them whom ye know not, _but_ whom God knoweth;
And all that you expend for the cause of God shall be repaid you; and ye
shall not be wronged."

63. "But if they lean to peace, lean thou also to it; and put thy trust
in God: He verily is the Hearing, the Knowing."

64. "But if they seek to betray thee, then verily God will be
all-sufficient for thee. He it is who strengthened thee with his help
and with the faithful and made their heart one. Hadst thou spent all the
riches of the earth, thou wouldst not have united their hearts; but God
hath united them: He verily is Mighty, Wise."

65. "O Prophet! God and such of the faithful as follow thee will be
all-sufficient for thee!"

66. "O Prophet! stir up the faithful to the fight...."--Sura, viii.

26. "And He caused those of the people of the Book (the Jews) who had
aided _the confederates_, to come down out of their fortresses, and cast
dismay into their hearts: a part ye slew, a part ye took
prisoners."--Sura, xxxiii.

29. "Make war upon such of those to whom the Scriptures have been
given,[183] as believe not in God, or in the last day, and who forbid
not that which God and his apostles have forbidden, and who profess not
the profession of the Truth, until they pay tribute out of hand, and
they be humbled."

124. "Believers! wage war against such of the unbelievers as are your
neighbours, and let them assuredly find rigour in you: and know that God
is with those who fear Him."--Sura, ix.

[Sidenote: 30. The judgment of Sad.]

The Bani Koreiza had surrendered themselves to the judgment of _Sad_, an
_Awsite_ of their allies, Bani Aws. To this Mohammad agreed. Sad decreed
that the male captives should be slaughtered. Mohammad, disapproving the
judgment, remarked to Sad: "Thou hast decided like the decision of a
king," meaning thereby a despotic monarch. The best authentic tradition
in Bokhari (Kitab-ul-Jihad) has the word '_Malik_,' monarch; but in
other three places of Bokhari, Kitabul Monakib, Maghazi, and Istizan,
the narrator has a doubt whether the word was _Allah_ or _Malik_.
Moslim, in his collection, has also '_Malik_,' and in one place the
sentence is not given at all. It was only to eulogize the memory of Sad
after his death, that some of the narrators of the story gave out that
Mohammad had said that Sad had decided like the decision of a _Malak_,
angel; or some narrators interpreted the word _Malik_, king, as meaning
God; and therefore put the word _Allah_ in their traditions. Mohammad
never said _Malak_, meaning angel, or _Malik_, allegorically meaning
_Allah_; he simply said _Malik_, literally meaning a king or monarch.

[Sidenote: 31. Defensive character of the expedition against the Jews
of Khyber.]

The expedition against the Jews of Khyber was purely defensive in its
character. They had, since the Jews of the tribe of Nazeer and Koreiza
being banished from Medina in consequence of their treason against the
Moslem commonwealth, had joined them, been guilty of inciting the
surrounding tribes to attack upon Medina, and had made alliance with the
Bani Ghatafan, who had taken a prominent part among the confederates
who had besieged Medina at the battle of the Ditch, to make a combined
attack upon Medina. They, especially Abul Hukeik, the chief of Bani
Nazeer, had excited the Bani Fezara and other Beduoin tribes to commit
incursions on Medina. They had made a combination with the Bani Sad-Ibn
Bakr to make inroads on the Moslims. Bani Sad, a branch of Hawazin, were
among the confederates who had besieged Medina. Lately, Oseir Ibn Zarim,
the chief of Nazeer at Khyber, maintained the same relations with Bani
Ghatafan, as their former chief had, to make a combined attack on
Medina. The Bani Ghatafan, with their branches of Bani Fezara and Bani
Murra, in league with those of Khyber, were always plotting mischief in
the vicinity of Fadak at Khyber. They (the Ghatafan) had continued for a
long time to alarm Medina with threatened attacks. At the seventh year
of the Hegira timely information was received by Mohammad of the
combined preparation of Khyber and Ghatafan. He rapidly set forth in his
defence, and marched to Khyber at once. He took up a position at Raji,
between Khyber and Ghatafan, to cut off their mutual assistance. So it
was not a sudden and unprovoked invasion, as Sir W. Muir calls it. He
writes: "Mahomet probably waited for some act of aggression on the part
of the Jews of Kheibar (it was the fertile lands and villages of that
tribe which he had destined for his followers), or on the part of their
allies, the Bani Ghatafan, to furnish the excuse for an attack. But no
such opportunity offering, he resolved, in the autumn of this year, on a
sudden and unprovoked invasion of their territory."[184] It will appear
from what I have stated above, that the invasion of Khyber was purely
defensive in its character.

[Footnote 181: Hishamee, p. 545. Gottengen, 1859; or, The Life of
Muhammad, by Abd etl Malik ibn Hisham. London: Truebner and Co., 1867.]

[Footnote 182: Hishamee, p. 757.]

[Footnote 183: The Jews of Khyber, if it does not relate to Tabook. Sir
W. Muir calls this hostile declaration against Jews and Christians, and
says,--"The exclusion and growingly intolerant position of Islam is
sufficiently manifested by the ban issued against the Jews and
Christians, as unfit for the sacred rites and holy precincts of the
Meccan temple; and by the divine commands to war against them until, in
confession of the superiority of Islam, they should consent to the
payment of a tribute."--Life of Mahomet, Vol. II, p. 289. The command
referred to by Sir W. Muir refers to the treatment of those who took up
arms against the Mussalmans, rather than to their ordinary condition. No
ban was issued against the Jews and Christians, as unfit for the sacred
rites and holy precincts of the Meccan temple. On the contrary, the
Christians of Najran, when arrived at Medina, were accommodated by the
Prophet in his Mosque, and they used to say their prayers there.]

[Footnote 184: Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 61.]


_The Christians or Romans._

[Sidenote: 32. Tabuk, the last expedition.]

The last expedition of Mohammad was that of Tabuk, and it was also
purely defensive. The travellers and traders arriving from Syria brought
news of the gathering of a large army on the borders of Syria. A year's
pay, they said, had been advanced by the Greek or Roman Emperor, who was
then at Hims, in order that the soldiers might be well-furnished for a
long campaign; the tribes of the Syrian desert, the Bani Lakhm, Judzam,
Amila, and Ghussan were flocking around the Roman Eagles, and the
vanguard was already at Balca. Mohammad at once resolved to meet this
danger. When he arrived in the vicinity of the Syrian border at Tabuk,
he found no troops to oppose him. There were no signs of impending
danger, and he therefore returned with his army to Medina. This was in
the ninth year of the Hegira.

[Sidenote: 33. The conclusion.]

This concludes the description of all the wars of the Prophet. I hope I
have shown, on good and reasonable grounds, and from the surest and most
authentic sources, that the wars were not of an offensive and aggressive
character; but, on the contrary, they were wars of defence and
protection. The early Moslems were wronged, because they believed in the
faith of Mohammad; they were deprived of their civil and religious
rights, were driven forth from their homes and their properties, and
after all were attacked first, by the Koreish and their confederates,
the Jews and other Arabian tribes. They fought neither for revenge, nor
to impose the faith of Mohammad by force of arms, nor for the plunder of
the caravans which passed in proximity to their city. The permission to
fight was only given to the believers because they were fought against
or were attacked first, and had been wronged and driven from their homes
without just cause. They therefore took up arms against those who first
compelled them to fly from their homes, and then attacked them. This was
in full accordance, therefore, with the law of nations and the sacred
law of nature. The people of Medina had only pledged themselves to
protect Mohammad from his enemies. They could not, and would not, have
gone forth or allowed Mohammad and his _ansars_ to go forth to plunder
the caravan of the Koreish passing by Medina.


_The Intolerance._

[Sidenote: 34. Mohammad never taught intolerance.]

Those people are greatly mistaken who say, that "the one common duty
laid upon the Faithful is to be the agents of God's vengeance on those
who believe not. These are to be slaughtered until they pay tribute,
when they are allowed to go to Hell in their own way without further
molestation."[185] Mohammad did not wage war against the Koreish and the
Jews because they did not believe in his mission, nor because he was to
be the instrument of God's vengeance on them; on the contrary, he said,
"He was no more than a warner."

"The truth is from your Lord, let him then who will, believe; and let
him who will, be an unbeliever."[186]

"Let there be no compulsion in religion."[187] "Verily, they who
believe, and the Jews, and the Sabeites, and the Christians, whoever of
them believeth in God and in the last day, and doth what is right, on
them shall come no fear, neither shall they be put to grief."[188] Even
during active hostilities, those who did not believe were allowed to
come and hear the preaching, and were then conveyed to their place of
safety.[189] Nor were the wars of Mohammad to exact tribute from the
unbelievers. The tribute was only imposed upon those who had sought his
protection, and even then they were exempted from other regular taxes
which the Moslems paid to their Commonwealth.

On the contrary, as has already been shown, Mohammad merely took up
arms in the instances of self-preservation. Had he neglected to defend
himself after his settlement at Medina against the continued attacks of
the Koreish and their allies, he with his followers would, in all
probability, have been exterminated. They fought in defence of their
lives as well as their moral and religious liberties.

[Sidenote: 35. In what sense the wars were religious wars.]

In this sense the contest might be called a religious war, as the
hostilities were commenced on religious grounds. Because the Koreish
persecuted the Moslems, and expelled them for the reason that they had
forsaken the religion of their forefathers, _i.e._, idolatry, and
embraced the faith of Islam, the worship of One True God; but it was
never a religious war in the sense of attacking the unbelievers
aggressively to impose his own religion forcibly on them. How much is
Sir W. Muir in the wrong, who says, that fighting was prescribed on
religious grounds? "Hostilities," he says, "indeed, were justified by
the 'expulsion' of the believers from Mecca. But the main and true issue
of the warfare was not disguised to be the victory of Islam. They were
to fight '_until the religion became the Lord's alone_.'"[190]

[Sidenote: 36. The alleged verses of intolerance explained.]

The verses of the Koran referred to above are as follows:

186. "And fight for the cause of God against those who fight against
you: but commit not the injustice of _attacking them first_: verily God
loveth not the unjust."

187. "And kill them wherever ye shall find them, and eject them from
whatever place they have ejected you; for (_fitnah_) persecution or
civil discord is worse than slaughter but attack them not at the sacred
Mosque, until they attack you therein, but if they attack you, then slay
them--Such is the recompense of the infidel!"

188. "But if they desist, then verily God is Gracious, Merciful."

189. "And do battle against them until there be no more (_fitnah_)
persecution or civil discord and the only worship be that of God: but if
they desist, then let there be no hostility, save against
wrong-doers."--Sura, ii.

These verses generally, and the last one especially, show that the
warfare was prescribed on the ground of self-preservation, and to secure
peace, safety and religious liberty, to prevent (_fitnah_) persecution.

By preventing or removing the persecution (_fitnah_), the religion of
the Moslems was to be free and pure from intolerance and compulsion to
revert to idolatry, or in other words, to be the only or wholly of God.
That is, when you are free and unpersecuted in your religion, and not
forced to worship idols and renounce Islam, then your religion will be
pure and free. You shall have no fear of being forced to join other gods
with God.

The same verse is repeated in Chapter VIII.

39. "Say to the unbelievers: If they desist,[191] what is now past shall
be forgiven them, but if they return _to it_,[192] they have already
before them the doom of the former."[193]

40. "Fight then against them till _fitnah_ (civil strife or persecution)
be at an end, and the religion be all of it God's, and if they desist,
verily God beholdeth what they do."

This shows that the fighting prescribed here against the Koreish was
only in the case of their not desisting, and it was only to prevent and
suppress their _fitnah_, and when their intolerance and persecution was
suppressed, or was no more, then the Moslem religion was to become all
of it God's. They were not forced to join any god with the true God.

[Sidenote: 37. Sir W. Muir quoted.]

Sir W. Muir, in his last chapter on the person and character of
Mohammad, observes in reviewing the Medina period: "Intolerance quickly
took the place of freedom; force, of persuasion." ... "Slay the
unbelievers wheresoever ye find them" was now the watchword of
Islam:--"Fight in the ways of God until opposition be crushed, and the
Religion becometh the Lord's alone!"[194] Here, Sir W. Muir plainly
contradicts himself. He has already admitted at the 136th page of the
fourth volume of his work that the course pursued by Mohammad at Medina
was to leave the conversion of the people to be gradually accomplished
without compulsion, and the same measure he intended to adopt at his
triumphal entry into Mecca. His words are: "This movement obliged
Mahomet to cut short of his stay at Mecca. Although the city had
cheerfully accepted his supremacy, all its inhabitants had not yet
embraced the new religion, or formally acknowledged his prophetic claim.
Perhaps, he intended to follow the course he had pursued at Medina, and
leave the conversion of the people to be gradually accomplished without
compulsion." This was at the end of the eighth year after the Hegira.

Mohammad died at the beginning of the eleventh year, then the question
naturally comes up, when was that alleged change to intolerance, and
how Sir W. Muir says, this change is traced from the period of
Mohammad's arrival at Medina? In the action taken in the fifth year of
the Hegira against the Jewish tribe of Koreiza, who had treasoned
against the city, Sir W. Muir admits that up to that period Mohammad did
not profess to force men to join Islam, or to punish them for not
embracing it. His words are: "The ostensible grounds upon which Mahomet
proceeded were purely political, for as yet he did not profess _to
force_ men to join Islam, or to punish them for not embracing it."[195]
In a foot-note he remarks: "He still continued to reiterate in his
Revelations the axiom used at Mecca, 'I am only a public preacher,' as
will be shown in the next chapter." Further, Sir W. Muir, in his account
of the first two years after Mohammad's arrival at Medina, admits in a
foot-note (p. 32, Vol. III), that "as yet we have no distinct
development of the intention of Mahomet to impose his religion on others
by force: it would have been dangerous in the present state of parties
to advance this principle."

[Sidenote: 38. Comment on the above quotation.]

It will appear from the foregoing statements that in each of the three
distinct periods of Mohammad's sojourn in Medina, _i.e._, the first two
years, the fifth year, and the eighth year, Sir W. Muir has himself
admitted that Mohammad had no intention to impose his religion by force,
and did not profess to force people to join Islam, or punish them for
not embracing it, and that the conversion of the people at Medina was
gradually accomplished without compulsion, and the same course he
followed at his taking of Mecca. Then there is no room left for the
uncalled for and self-contradictory remark of Sir W. Muir, that at
Medina "Intolerance quickly took place of freedom; force, of
persuasion." Up to the end of the eighth year when Mecca was captured,
there was admittedly no persecution or constraint put in requisition to
enforce religion. Mohammad breathed his last early in the eleventh year.
During the two years that intervened, the din of war had ceased to
sound, deputations continued to reach the Prophet from all quarters of
Arabia, and not a single instance of intolerance or compulsory adoption
of faith is found on record.[196]

Mohammad, neither sooner, nor later, in his stay at Medina, swerved
from the policy of forbearance and persuasion he himself had chalked out
for the success of his mission. At Medina, he always preached his
liberal profession of respect for other creeds, and reiterated
assurances to the people that he was merely a preacher, and expressly
gave out that compulsion in religion was out of question with him.

These are his revelations during the Medina period. "Verily, they who
believe (Moslems), and they who follow the Jewish religion, and the
Christians, and the Sabeites,--whoever believeth in God and the last
day, and doeth that which is right, shall have their reward with their
Lord: and fear shall not _come_ upon them, neither shall they be
grieved."

     _Sura II_, 59.

"And say to those who have been given the Scripture, and to the common
folk, Do you surrender yourselves unto God? Then, if they become
Moslems, are they guided aright; but if they turn away, then thy duty is
only preaching and God's eye is on his servants."

     _Sura III_, 19.

"The Apostle is only bound to preach: and God knoweth what ye bring to
light, and what ye conceal."

     _Sura V_, 99.

"Say: Obey God and obey the Apostle. But if ye turn back, _still_ the
burden of his duty is on him only, and the burden of your duty rests on
you. And if ye obey him, ye shall have guidance; But plain preaching is
all that devolves upon the Apostle."

     _Sura XXIV_, 53.

"Let there be no compulsion in religion. Now is the right way made
distinct from error; whoever therefore denieth Taghoot,[197] and
believeth in God, hath taken hold on a strong handle that hath no flaw
therein: And God is He who Heareth, Knoweth."

     _Sura II_, 237.

"Whoso obeyeth the Apostle, in so doing obeyeth God and _as to those_
who turn back _from thee_, We have not sent thee to be their keeper."

     _Sura IV_, 82.

[Sidenote: 39. The object of Mohammad's wars.]

"Slay the unbelievers wherever ye find them" was never the watchword of
Islam. It was only said in self-preservation and war of defence, and
concerned only those who had taken up arms against the Moslems.

The verses--Suras II, 189; and VIII, 40--have been quoted above in
paras. 17 and 37 (pp. 18, 21, 44 and 45), and they fully show by their
context and scope that they only enjoined war against the Meccans, who
used to come to war upon the Moslems. The object of making war is
precisely set forth in these verses, and appears to mean that civil
feuds and persecutions be at an end. But Sir W. Muir wrongly translates
_Fitnah_ as _opposition_. He himself has translated the meaning of the
word in question as _persecution_, in Vol. II, p. 147, foot-note; in
translating the tenth verse of the Sura LXXXV he writes: "Verily, they
who persecute the believers, male and female, and repent themselves
not." The original word there is _Fatanoo_,[198] from _Fitnah_. I do not
know why he should put a twofold version on the same word occurring in
the same book. (Suras II, 187; VIII, 40.)

[Footnote 185: Islam under the Arabs, by Major R.D. Osborne, London,
1876, p. 27.]

[Footnote 186: XVIII, 28.]

[Footnote 187: II, 257.]

[Footnote 188: V, 73.]

[Footnote 189: IX, 6.]

[Footnote 190: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, p. 79.]

[Footnote 191: From attacking and persecuting you and preventing you
from entering your homes and visiting the sacred mosque.]

[Footnote 192: That is, if again attack you and commit aggressions.]

[Footnote 193: Meaning those who were defeated at Badr.]

[Footnote 194: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 319.]

[Footnote 195: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, p. 282.]

[Footnote 196: There is only one instance of intolerance, _i.e._, making
converts at the point of sword, which Sir W. Muir, so zealous in
accusing Mohammad of religious persecution during the Medina period, has
succeeded in finding out during the ten eventful years of Mohammad's
sojourn in Medina. I refer to the story of Khalid's mission in the
beginning of the tenth year A.H., to Bani Haris, a Christian tribe at
Najran, whose people had entered into a covenant of peace with Mohammad,
and to whom an ample pledge had been guaranteed to follow their own
faith. According to Sir W. Muir, Khalid was instructed to call on the
people to embrace Islam, and if they declined, he was, after three days,
to attack and force them to submit (Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p.
224). The version of the story thus given by the Biographers of Mohammad
is too absurd to be believed; because it is a well-established fact that
the Bani Haris, or the Christians of Najran, had sent a deputation to
Mohammad only a year ago, _i.e._, in A.H. 9, and obtained terms of
security from him (Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. II, p. 299; Ibn Hisham,
p. 401). It is quite an unfounded, though a very ingenious, excuse of
Sir W. Muir to make the Bani Haris consist of two sects,--one of
Christians, and the other of idolators,--and to say that the operations
of Khalid were directed against the portion of Bani Haris still
benighted with paganism; thus reconciling the apocryphal tradition with
the fact of the Bani Haris being at a treaty of security, toleration and
freedom, with Mohammad.

"I conclude," he writes in a note, "the operations of Khalid were
directed against the portion of Bani Harith still idolaters:--at all
events not against the Christian portion already under treaty" (The Life
of Mahomet, Vol. IV, foot-note, p. 224). See the account of the
conversion of Bani Harith to Christianity long before Islam in Hishamee,
pp. 20-22. Gibbon, Chapter XLII, Vol. V, p. 207, foot-note; and Muir's
Vol. I, p. ccxxviii.]

[Footnote 197: A name applied to an idol or idols--especially Allat and
