for a month, and are given work in teaching orphan children, or go out
to the city missions and the night-schools under the care of a
deaconess. If the probation has proved satisfactory the candidate enters
the training-school called "the Willows," a mile or two from the Central
House, a pleasant home which about three years ago came into the
possession of the institution and the inmates of the school, formerly
accommodated in five small houses, are now gathered, at slightly greater
expense, under one roof in the larger, pleasanter home. The following
extracts, taken from a little circular called "A Missionary
Training-school," will give us a good idea of the life of the embryo
deaconesses, and the instruction, practical and theoretical, that they
receive. "The house, which lies a little back from the road, is entered
through a conservatory passage, and on the other side of the spacious
hall, with its illuminated motto, 'Peace be to this house,' above the
fireplace, are the lady superintendent's sitting-room and the large
dining-room, where, on the day when I visited 'the Willows,' about
thirty of us sat down to dinner. Several others were absent in
connection with their medical studies. Both these rooms open on a
terrace, and beyond stretches a garden which, even in lifeless
winter-time, looked inviting, and, in its spring beauty and summer
loveliness, must be in itself a training for the young natures which are
learning in the slums of Bethnal Green and Hoxton their hard
acquaintance with sin and sorrow. Perhaps in these days of strain and
toil too little has been thought of the need of young hearts for some
gentle relief from the first shock of meeting with the evil with which
older workers have a mournful familiarity."

The inmates of the Training-school are not deaconesses alone. The school
was started to prepare workers for the foreign field, but the crying
need of the vast metropolis turned attention to the home field. The
Church of England Zenana Society sends its candidates to Mrs.
Pennefather for training, and she is glad to accept them, believing that
a variety of companionship is needed by those who, in zeal for their
personal work, might lose the broad sympathy for all kinds of Christian
labor, which is an invaluable cultivation for wise and useful laborers.

The several classes who pass through the course of training may be
designated as follows:

a.) Those who pass on to the deaconess house.

b.) Candidates for (1) the Church of England Zenana Society; (2) the
Church Missionary Society.

c.) Those who receive medical training for working among the women and
children of India.

d.) Those who are as yet unconnected with any society.

e.) When vacancies occur some few are received who merely return to home
or parish work, but who are greatly benefitted by training and
experience.

"The general routine of life seems to be as follows: Prayers at eight
o'clock, then breakfast, followed by a certain amount of domestic duty
which falls to the lot of each. For it is not forgotten that these years
of training are not for the sake of home life, but as preparation for
the self-denials of missionary life. Speaking broadly, the mornings seem
to be chiefly devoted to classes; afternoons to out of door and district
work; and thus theory and practice pleasantly relieve and support each
other."

There are regular Bible-classes held by different clergymen, and once a
fortnight there are lectures on the history of missionary work. There
are classes in Hindustani, drawing, and singing, and for those whose
education is defective, elementary classes in arithmetic, geometry, and
short-hand. The probationers are also given training in the duties of
the store-room, and the order and method that they are taught in caring
for the minutest details must certainly form valuable habits in all
those who have any desire to profit by the instruction they receive.

For those who are destined for medical work among the women of India
there is a special course of medical training, both theoretical and
practical.

The age requirement is not so strictly maintained at Mildmay as at many
other deaconess houses, but, as a rule, ladies from about twenty to
thirty years of age are preferred as students in the training-school.
The sum of three hundred dollars is charged for the year's expenses at
the training-school, medical students paying one hundred dollars
additional.

Our study of the Mildmay Institutions has been somewhat extensive. As
was said at the beginning of the chapter, the great freedom and
simplicity of the Mildmay methods, as well as the happy faculty that its
directors possess of utilizing all varieties of individual talent, make
this deaconess establishment one that is full of valuable suggestions to
the similar institutions that are now arising in American Methodism. No
working force is wasted; if a deaconess possess a special talent, she is
given a field in which to exercise it; and if exceptional conditions
arise workers are found ready to meet them. This training provides
well-equipped missionaries for the foreign field, and equally
well-prepared missionaries for the great field of the present hour--the
home mission work in the crowded wards of great cities.

The annual expenses of the Mildmay Institutions vary from one hundred
and ten thousand to one hundred and twenty thousand dollars. Sixty
thousand dollars are received in voluntary contributions, and the
remaining sum is generally obtained from friends who are immediately
concerned in the work.

It is certainly a marvelous tribute to Christian faith, although it is
never heralded as such, that an establishment of the extent and
magnitude of Mildmay has been maintained for years with no permanent
endowment to fall back upon, and that annually the renewed self-denial
of constant friends has to supply the large amount of money needed to
meet the entire expenses. Besides those outward and visible services
which it renders "for the love of Christ, and in his name" Mildmay
furnishes a constant testimony to the fidelity of the Christian faith in
the hearts of many believers.


  [65] _Life and Letters of the Rev. W. Pennefather_, p. 279.
  [66] _Ibid._, p. 305.
  [67] _Life and Letters of the Rev. W. Pennefather_, p. 435.
  [68] _Life and Letters of the Rev. W. Pennefather_, p. 471.
  [69] _Life and Letters of the Rev. W. Pennefather_, p. 471.
  [70] _Mildmay Deaconesses and their Work_, p. 7.
  [71] _Mildmay Deaconesses and their Work_, p. 6.
  [72] _A Retrospect of Mildmay Work During the Year 1887._
  [73] _Mildmay Deaconesses and their Work_, p. 13.
  [74] _A Light in a Dark Place_, p. 21.




CHAPTER XII.

DEACONESSES IN SCOTLAND.


When Fliedner went on his second tour to England he extended his journey
to Scotland, and ventured to Edinburgh at a time when the cholera was
sweeping with fearful ravages through the city in order to become
acquainted with Dr. Chalmers. The great Scotch divine and his good
deeds, that were connected with all kinds of charitable endeavor, moved
the German pastor to admiration and stirred him to holy emulation. On
the other hand, that Chalmers was profoundly touched by the work that
Fliedner had accomplished in Germany there can be no doubt; we have his
own words to testify to the importance he attached to the diaconate of
women. In his lectures on Romans, he says: "Here, too, we are presented
with a most useful indication, the employment of female agency, under
the eye and with the sanction of an apostle, in the business of the
Church. It is well to have inspired authority for a practice too little
known, and too little preached on in modern times. Phebe belonged to
the order of deaconesses, in which capacity she had been the helper of
many, including Paul himself. In what respect she served them is not
particularly specified. Like the women in the gospels who waited on our
Saviour, she may have ministered to them of her substance, though there
can be little doubt that, as the holder of an official station in the
Church, she ministered to them by her services also." It is but
recently, however, that deaconesses have become incorporated into the
religious life of Scotland, and, so far, they do not exist in connection
with the Free Church, of which Chalmers was the able and heroic leader,
but only in connection with the national Church--the old historic Church
of Scotland. Within this Church the question has assumed the form, not
alone of the revival of the apostolic order of deaconesses, but also of
the organization of all the manifold activities of women within the
Church into one whole, which is put under the authority and direction of
the officers of the Church.

Isolated attempts in this direction had previously been made, but in
1885 the first definite steps were taken when the Committee on Christian
Life and Work, of which Dr. Charteris was the Convener, presented to the
General Assembly a report on "The need of an organization of women's
work in the Church," part of which is as follows: "The organization of
women's work in the Church has become a subject of pressing interest.
The Assembly has already sanctioned and regulated the organization of
women's work in collecting for foreign missions, and in sending out and
superintending missionaries. The great and growing strength of the
movement thus recognized is one of the most gratifying things in our
mission; ... but of still older date, and not less powerful, is the part
taken by women in the home work of the parish church. Lady visitors are
carrying messages of divine truth and of human sympathy into the
dwellings of the poor both in town and country. Many have been trained
as nurses that they may be skilled ministrants to the suffering and
sick; and there can be little doubt that the greater part of the actual
personal help which ministers receive in parishes is from the women of
the congregations. But those who have done most of the good work are
most instant in asking from the Church some means of doing still more.
From ministers and from their female helpers have come many requests to
the committee for some provision for training; some recognition and
organization of those who are trained.... In the Church of England are
many homes for nurses and deaconesses; training institutions for female
mission work of every kind; and the rapidity with which they are
multiplying proves of itself how much they are needed; also
non-conformist institutions of the kind, and some separate from all
Churches. Your committee believe that the time has fully come for our
Church's taking steps to supply her own wants in this important
department of mission work."[75]

The General Assembly then directed the committee to inquire into the
subject of women's work in the Church, and to bring up a definite report
to the next assembly. The committee accepted the task, sent out requests
to every parish for suggestions as to the forms of Christian work to be
carried on by women, and the best means of making preparation for their
special training, and prepared themselves by personal inspection of the
leading institutions for training women workers in England to be able to
answer intelligently the same questions. A scheme was reported in 1886
which should incorporate all existing parish organizations, such as
Sabbath-school teachers' and women's societies of all kinds, and should
aim at increasing their number and working power. In 1887 regulations
were perfected for working this scheme, and the approval of this by the
Assembly of 1887 made the new plan a part of the organized work of the
Church.

The comprehensive character of the new departure in the Church of
Scotland is plainly seen from a view of the organization as it now
exists. The three grades into which the Christian women workers are
divided embrace every kind of work done in connection with the Church.
The first grade is general in its character, and forms an association
called the Women's Guild. In each parish the members of Bible-classes,
of Young Women's Congregational Associations, of mission working
parties, of Dorcas societies, as well as tract distributers,
Sabbath-school teachers, members of the Church choir, and any who are
engaged in the service of Christ in the Church are all to be accepted as
members of the guild. The next higher grade is the Women Workers' Guild,
for which a certain age is required, and an experience of at least three
years, with the approval of the kirk session which enrolls them. In
connection with this guild are associates, who have a similar relation
to the members of the Women Workers' Guild that the associates have to
deaconesses in the English deaconess houses. They are not pledged to
regular or constant service, but engage to do some work or contribute
some money every year. They can go to the deaconess house, put on the
garb of the deaconess while there, and as long as they remain can assume
the responsibilities and enjoy the privileges belonging to deaconesses.
The third higher grade is that of the deaconesses. Any one desiring to
become a deaconess "must purpose to devote herself, so long as she shall
occupy the position of a deaconess, especially to Christian work in
connection with the Church, as the chief object of her life."[76]
Provision was also made for a training-school and home where deaconesses
could be prepared for their duties.

There are a great many ladies who for a long time have been engaged in
doing the practical work of a deaconess without being clothed in the
garb, or invested with the office. The Church of Scotland recognized
these workers by providing two classes of deaconesses, who should be
equal in position, but have different spheres of activity. Those who for
seven years had been known as active workers, and who have given their
lives largely to Christian service, are accepted as deaconesses of the
first class, and are free to work wherever they find themselves most
useful within the limits of the Church. The second class embraces those
who shall have received training in the deaconess institution, or have
been in connection with it for at least two years.

When the measure was finally passed by the General Assembly there was no
delay in carrying into execution the details indicated by the plan of
work. The Deaconess Institution and Training Home was at once started.
It was located at Edinburgh, as the most central and convenient place
for the institution, and as furnishing the most available advantages for
the instruction and training of the deaconesses. From here as a center
the work is expected to penetrate into every part of Scotland by means
of the trained workers whose services will be available for all parts of
the country when desired by the ministers and kirk sessions. With true
Scotch prudence and wisdom it was arranged that the lady who was chosen
to be the superintendent should fit herself thoroughly for the duties of
her responsible place by becoming familiar with the workings of similar
institutions in England. She was accordingly given six months' leave of
absence, which she spent among the great London Homes, and only assumed
the duties of her position May 1, 1888. Meanwhile the Home had opened
under the temporary care of a lady who had been a worker in Mrs.
Meredith's Prison Mission, and for six years a Mildmay deaconess. It had
from the beginning the warm co-operation of sympathizing, influential
friends. Regular courses of lectures were arranged on subjects connected
with Christian work, and as similar courses will be demanded of like
institutions in America it may be interesting to give the syllabus in
full:


                          SYLLABUS OF LECTURES.
                          (On Tuesdays at 12.)

                1. B.--Professor Charteris. Four Lectures.
                        "How to Begin a Mission."

  Nov. 29.--1. Whom to visit, and why. The ills we know of, bodily,
    spiritual, social; and seek to lessen.
  Dec.  6.--2. How to induce the people who belong to no church--perhaps
    care for none--to come in.
  Dec. 13.--3. What to do with the children; (a) to attract, (b) to
    influence them.
  Dec. 20.--4. What agencies besides Sunday services prove best.

                  2. C.--Dr. P. A. Young. Six Lectures.
                "Medical Hygiene for the Use of Visitors."

  Jan.  3.--1. Object and scope of the course of lectures; short sketch
    of the structure and functions of the human body, including a
    brief description of the functions of digestion, absorption,
    circulation, respiration, excretion, secretion, and enervation.
  Jan. 10.--2. Fractures, how to recognize and treat them temporarily;
    bleeding, and how to treat it; the use of the triangular bandage.
  Jan. 17.--3. Treatment of fainting, choking, burns and scalds, bites
    from animals, bruises and tears from machinery, convulsions,
    sunstroke, persons found insensible, suspected poisoning and
    frostbite; how to lift and carry an injured person.
  Jan. 24.--4. Sick-room, its selection, preparation, cleaning, warming,
    ventilation, and furnishing, bed and bedding, infection and
    disinfection.
  Jan. 31.--5. Washing and dressing patients, bed-making, changing
    sheets, lifting helpless patients, food administration, medicines
    and stimulants, what to observe regarding a sick person.
  Feb.  7.--6. Taking temperature, baths, bedsores, nursing sick
    children, application of local remedies, poultices, fomentations,
    blisters, etc.; management of convalescents.

                3. D.--Rev. George Wilson. Four Lectures.
             "Difficulties Encountered by District Visitors."

  Feb. 14.--1. Difficulties proceeding from indifference.
  Feb. 21.--2. Difficulties proceeding from ignorance.
  Feb. 28.--3. Difficulties proceeding from adversity.
  Mar.  6.--4. Difficulties proceeding from anxiety.
               Note.--Questions invited from the ladies.

              4. E.--Rev. Dr. Norman Macleod. Four Lectures.
  "Some Qualifications of a Church Worker, especially among the Poor."

  March 13.--1. Motives and aims.
  March 20.--2. Difficulties and hindrances, how to overcome them.
  March 27.--3. Conditions of success.
  April  3.--4. Helps, agencies, etc.

                5. F.--Rev. John McMurtrie. Two Lectures.
            "History and Methods of Missions to the Heathen."

  April 10.--1. History of missions.
  April 17.--2. Methods of missions.


Another wise provision in this Scotch home is the arrangement by which
those who do not wish to become deaconesses, but who want to become
competent Christian workers in their own homes, can come here and spend
some months in receiving training and instruction in various methods of
Christian work. There is no department in life in which many blunders
and much loss of time and usefulness cannot be prevented by making use
