
Such then are the contents of our Sumerian document, and from the
details which have been given it will have been seen that its story, so
far as concerns the Deluge, is in essentials the same as that we already
find in the Gilgamesh Epic. It is true that this earlier version has
reached us in a magical setting, and to some extent in an abbreviated
form. In the next lecture I shall have occasion to refer to another
early mythological text from Nippur, which was thought by its first
interpreter to include a second Sumerian Version of the Deluge legend.
That suggestion has not been substantiated, though we shall see that
the contents of the document are of a very interesting character. But
in view of the discussion that has taken place in the United States
over the interpretation of the second text, and of the doubts that have
subsequently been expressed in some quarters as to the recent discovery
of any new form of the Deluge legend, it may be well to formulate
briefly the proof that in the inscription published by Dr. Poebel an
early Sumerian Version of the Deluge story has actually been recovered.
Any one who has followed the detailed analysis of the new text which
has been attempted in the preceding paragraphs will, I venture to think,
agree that the following conclusions may be drawn:

(i) The points of general resemblance presented by the narrative to that
in the Gilgamesh Epic are sufficiently close in themselves to show
that we are dealing with a Sumerian Version of that story. And this
conclusion is further supported (a) by the occurrence throughout the
text of the attested Sumerian equivalent of the Semitic word, employed
in the Babylonian Versions, for the "Flood" or "Deluge", and (b) by the
use of precisely the same term for the hero's "great boat", which is
already familiar to us from an early Babylonian Version.

(ii) The close correspondence in language between portions of the
Sumerian legend and the Gilgamesh Epic suggest that the one version was
ultimately derived from the other. And this conclusion in its turn is
confirmed (a) by the identity in meaning of the Sumerian and Babylonian
names for the Deluge hero, which are actually found equated in a
late explanatory text, and (b) by small points of difference in the
Babylonian form of the story which correspond to later political and
religious developments and suggest the work of Semitic redactors.

The cumulative effect of such general and detailed evidence is
overwhelming, and we may dismiss all doubts as to the validity of Dr.
Poebel's claim. We have indeed recovered a very early, and in some of
its features a very primitive, form of the Deluge narrative which till
now has reached us only in Semitic and Greek renderings; and the stream
of tradition has been tapped at a point far above any at which we have
hitherto approached it. What evidence, we may ask, does this early
Sumerian Version offer with regard to the origin and literary history of
the Hebrew Versions?

The general dependence of the biblical Versions upon the Babylonian
legend as a whole has long been recognized, and needs no further
demonstration; and it has already been observed that the parallelisms
with the version in the Gilgamesh Epic are on the whole more detailed
and striking in the earlier than in the later Hebrew Version.(1) In the
course of our analysis of the Sumerian text its more striking points of
agreement or divergence, in relation to the Hebrew Versions, were noted
under the different sections of its narrative. It was also obvious that,
in many features in which the Hebrew Versions differ from the Gilgamesh
Epic, the latter finds Sumerian support. These facts confirm the
conclusion, which we should naturally base on grounds of historical
probability, that while the Semitic-Babylonian Versions were derived
from Sumer, the Hebrew accounts were equally clearly derived from
Babylon. But there are one or two pieces of evidence which are
apparently at variance with this conclusion, and these call for some
explanation.

     (1) For details see especially Skinner, _Genesis_, pp. 177
     ff.

Not too much significance should be attached to the apparent omission of
the episode of the birds from the Sumerian narrative, in which it would
agree with the later as against the earlier Hebrew Version; for, apart
from its epitomized character, there is so much missing from the text
that the absence of this episode cannot be regarded as established with
certainty. And in any case it could be balanced by the Sumerian order
of Creation of men before animals, which agrees with the earlier Hebrew
Version against the later. But there is one very striking point in which
our new Sumerian text agrees with both the Hebrew Versions as against
the Gilgamesh Epic and Berossus; and that is in the character of
Ziusudu, which presents so close a parallel to the piety of Noah. As we
have already seen, the latter is due to no Hebrew idealization of the
story, but represents a genuine strand of the original tradition, which
is completely absent from the Babylonian Versions. But the Babylonian
Versions are the media through which it has generally been assumed that
the tradition of the Deluge reached the Hebrews. What explanation have
we of this fact?

This grouping of Sumerian and Hebrew authorities, against the extant
sources from Babylon, is emphasized by the general framework of the
Sumerian story. For the literary connexion which we have in Genesis
between the Creation and the Deluge narratives has hitherto found no
parallel in the cuneiform texts. In Babylon and Assyria the myth of
Creation and the Deluge legend have been divorced. From the one
a complete epic has been evolved in accordance with the tenets of
Babylonian theology, the Creation myth being combined in the process
with other myths of a somewhat analogous character. The Deluge legend
has survived as an isolated story in more than one setting, the
principal Semitic Version being recounted to the national hero
Gilgamesh, towards the close of the composite epic of his adventures
which grew up around the nucleus of his name. It is one of the chief
surprises of the newly discovered Sumerian Version that the Hebrew
connexion of the narratives is seen to be on the lines of very primitive
tradition. Noah's reputation for piety does not stand alone. His line of
descent from Adam, and the thread of narrative connecting the creation
of the world with its partial destruction by the Deluge, already appear
in Sumerian form at a time when the city of Babylon itself had
not secured its later power. How then are we to account for this
correspondence of Sumerian and Hebrew traditions, on points completely
wanting in our intermediate authorities, from which, however, other
evidence suggests that the Hebrew narratives were derived?

At the risk of anticipating some of the conclusions to be drawn in the
next lecture, it may be well to define an answer now. It is possible
that those who still accept the traditional authorship of the Pentateuch
may be inclined to see in this correspondence of Hebrew and Sumerian
ideas a confirmation of their own hypothesis. But it should be pointed
out at once that this is not an inevitable deduction from the evidence.
Indeed, it is directly contradicted by the rest of the evidence we have
summarized, while it would leave completely unexplained some significant
features of the problem. It is true that certain important details of
the Sumerian tradition, while not affecting Babylon and Assyria,
have left their stamp upon the Hebrew narratives; but that is not an
exhaustive statement of the case. For we have also seen that a more
complete survival of Sumerian tradition has taken place in the
history of Berossus. There we traced the same general framework of the
narratives, with a far closer correspondence in detail. The kingly rank
of Ziusudu is in complete harmony with the Berossian conception of
a series of supreme Antediluvian rulers, and the names of two of the
Antediluvian cites are among those of their newly recovered Sumerian
prototypes. There can thus be no suggestion that the Greek reproductions
of the Sumerian tradition were in their turn due to Hebrew influence. On
the contrary we have in them a parallel case of survival in a far more
complete form.

The inference we may obviously draw is that the Sumerian narrative
continued in existence, in a literary form that closely resembled the
original version, into the later historical periods. In this there would
be nothing to surprise us, when we recall the careful preservation
and study of ancient Sumerian religious texts by the later Semitic
priesthood of the country. Each ancient cult-centre in Babylonia
continued to cling to its own local traditions, and the Sumerian desire
for their preservation, which was inherited by their Semitic guardians,
was in great measure unaffected by political occurrences elsewhere.
Hence it was that Ashur-bani-pal, when forming his library at Nineveh,
was able to draw upon so rich a store of the more ancient literary texts
of Babylonia. The Sumerian Version of the Deluge and of Antediluvian
history may well have survived in a less epitomized form than that
in which we have recovered it; and, like other ancient texts, it was
probably provided with a Semitic translation. Indeed its literary study
and reproduction may have continued without interruption in Babylon
itself. But even if Sumerian tradition died out in the capital under
the influence of the Babylonian priesthood, its re-introduction may
well have taken place in Neo-Babylonian times. Perhaps the antiquarian
researches of Nabonidus were characteristic of his period; and in any
case the collection of his country's gods into the capital must have
been accompanied by a renewed interest in the more ancient versions
of the past with which their cults were peculiarly associated. In
the extant summary from Berossus we may possibly see evidence of a
subsequent attempt to combine with these more ancient traditions the
continued religious dominance of Marduk and of Babylon.

Our conclusion, that the Sumerian form of the tradition did not die out,
leaves the question as to the periods during which Babylonian influence
may have acted upon Hebrew tradition in great measure unaffected; and
we may therefore postpone its further consideration to the next lecture.
To-day the only question that remains to be considered concerns the
effect of our new evidence upon the wider problem of Deluge stories as
a whole. What light does it throw on the general character of Deluge
stories and their suggested Egyptian origin?

One thing that strikes me forcibly in reading this early text is the
complete absence of any trace or indication of astrological _motif_.
It is true that Ziusudu sacrifices to the Sun-god; but the episode
is inherent in the story, the appearance of the Sun after the storm
following the natural sequence of events and furnishing assurance to the
king of his eventual survival. To identify the worshipper with his
god and to transfer Ziusudu's material craft to the heavens is surely
without justification from the simple narrative. We have here no
prototype of Ra sailing the heavenly ocean. And the destructive flood
itself is not only of an equally material and mundane character, but is
in complete harmony with its Babylonian setting.

In the matter of floods the Tigris and Euphrates present a striking
contrast to the Nile. It is true that the life-blood of each country is
its river-water, but the conditions of its use are very different, and
in Mesopotamia it becomes a curse when out of control. In both countries
the river-water must be used for maturing the crops. But while the rains
of Abyssinia cause the Nile to rise between August and October, thus
securing both summer and winter crops, the melting snows of Armenia and
the Taurus flood the Mesopotamian rivers between March and May. In Egypt
the Nile flood is gentle; it is never abrupt, and the river gives ample
warning of its rise and fall. It contains just enough sediment to enrich
the land without choking the canals; and the water, after filling its
historic basins, may when necessary be discharged into the falling river
in November. Thus Egypt receives a full and regular supply of water, and
there is no difficulty in disposing of any surplus. The growth in such a
country of a legend of world-wide destruction by flood is inconceivable.

In Mesopotamia, on the other hand, the floods, which come too late for
the winter crops, are followed by the rainless summer months; and not
only must the flood-water be controlled, but some portion of it must be
detained artificially, if it is to be of use during the burning months
of July, August, and September, when the rivers are at their lowest.
Moreover, heavy rain in April and a warm south wind melting the snow in
the hills may bring down such floods that the channels cannot contain
them; the dams are then breached and the country is laid waste. Here
there is first too much water and then too little.

The great danger from flood in Babylonia, both in its range of action
and in its destructive effect, is due to the strangely flat character
of the Tigris and Euphrates delta.(1) Hence after a severe breach in
the Tigris or Euphrates, the river after inundating the country may
make itself a new channel miles away from the old one. To mitigate the
danger, the floods may be dealt with in two ways--by a multiplication
of canals to spread the water, and by providing escapes for it into
depressions in the surrounding desert, which in their turn become
centres of fertility. Both methods were employed in antiquity; and it
may be added that in any scheme for the future prosperity of the country
they must be employed again, of course with the increased efficiency of
modern apparatus.(2) But while the Babylonians succeeded in controlling
the Euphrates, the Tigris was never really tamed,(3) and whenever it
burst its right bank the southern plains were devastated. We could not
have more suitable soil for the growth of a Deluge story.

     (1) Baghdad, though 300 miles by crow-fly from the sea and
     500 by river, is only 120 ft. above sea-level.

     (2) The Babylonians controlled the Euphrates, and at the
     same time provided against its time of "low supply", by
     escapes into two depressions in the western desert to the
     NW. of Babylon, known to-day as the Habbaniyah and Abu Dis
     depressions, which lie S. of the modern town of Ramadi and
     N. of Kerbela. That these depressions were actually used as
     reservoirs in antiquity is proved by the presence along
     their edges of thick beds of Euphrates shells. In addition
     to canals and escapes, the Babylonian system included well-
     constructed dikes protected by brushwood. By cutting an
     eight-mile channel through a low hill between the Habbaniyah
     and Abu Dis depressions and by building a short dam 50 ft.
     high across the latter's narrow outlet, Sir William
     Willcocks estimates that a reservoir could be obtained
     holding eighteen milliards of tons of water. See his work
     _The Irrigations of Mesopotamia_ (E. and F. N. Spon, 1911),
     _Geographical Journal_, Vol. XL, No. 2 (Aug., 1912), pp. 129
     ff., and the articles in _The Near East_ cited on p. 97, n.
     1, and p. 98, n. 2. Sir William Willcocks's volume and
     subsequent papers form the best introduction to the study of
     Babylonian Deluge tradition on its material side.

     (3) Their works carried out on the Tigris were effective for
     irrigation; but the Babylonians never succeeded in
     controlling its floods as they did those of the Euphrates. A
     massive earthen dam, the remains of which are still known as
     "Nimrod's Dam", was thrown across the Tigris above the point
     where it entered its delta; this served to turn the river
     over hard conglomerate rock and kept it at a high level so
     that it could irrigate the country on both banks. Above the
     dam were the heads of the later Nahrwan Canal, a great
     stream 400 ft. wide and 17 ft. deep, which supplied the
     country east of the river. The Nar Sharri or "King's Canal",
     the Nahar Malkha of the Greeks and the Nahr el-Malik of the
     Arabs, protected the right bank of the Tigris by its own
     high artificial banks, which can still be traced for
     hundreds of miles; but it took its supply from the Euphrates
     at Sippar, where the ground is some 25 ft. higher than on
     the Tigris. The Tigris usually flooded its left bank; it was
     the right bank which was protected, and a breach here meant
     disaster. Cf. Willcocks, op. cit., and _The Near East_,
     Sept. 29, 1916 (Vol. XI, No. 282), p. 522.

It was only by constant and unremitting attention that disaster from
flood could be averted; and the difficulties of the problem were and are
increased by the fact that the flood-water of the Mesopotamian rivers
contains five times as much sediment as the Nile. In fact, one of
the most pressing of the problems the Sumerian and early Babylonian
engineers had to solve was the keeping of the canals free from silt.(1)
What the floods, if left unchecked, may do in Mesopotamia, is well
illustrated by the decay of the ancient canal-system, which has been
the immediate cause of the country's present state of sordid desolation.
That the decay was gradual was not the fault of the rivers, but was
due to the sound principles on which the old system of control had been
evolved through many centuries of labour. At the time of the Moslem
conquest the system had already begun to fail. In the fifth century
there had been bad floods; but worse came in A.D. 629, when both rivers
burst their banks and played havoc with the dikes and embankments. It
is related that the Sassanian king Parwiz, the contemporary of Mohammed,
crucified in one day forty canal-workers at a certain breach, and yet
was unable to master the flood.(2) All repairs were suspended during the
anarchy of the Moslem invasion. As a consequence the Tigris left its
old bed for the Shatt el-Hai at Kut, and pouring its own and its
tributaries' waters into the Euphrates formed the Great Euphrates Swamp,
two hundred miles long and fifty broad. But even then what was left of
the old system was sufficient to support the splendour of the Eastern
Caliphate.

     (1) Cf. _Letters of Hammurabi_, Vol. III, pp. xxxvi ff.; it
     was the duty of every village or town upon the banks of the
     main canals in Babylonia to keep its own section clear of
     silt, and of course it was also responsible for its own
     smaller irrigation-channels. While the invention of the
     system of basin-irrigation was practically forced on Egypt,
     the extraordinary fertility of Babylonia was won in the
     teeth of nature by the system of perennial irrigation, or
     irrigation all the year round. In Babylonia the water was
     led into small fields of two or three acres, while the Nile
     valley was irrigated in great basins each containing some
     thirty to forty thousand acres. The Babylonian method gives
     far more profitable results, and Sir William Willcocks
     points out that Egypt to-day is gradually abandoning its own
     system and adopting that of its ancient rival; see _The Near
     East_, Sept. 29, 1916, p. 521.

     (2) See Le Strange, _The Lands of the Eastern Caliphate_, p.
     27.

The second great blow to the system followed the Mongol conquest, when
the Nahrwan Canal, to the east of the Tigris, had its head swept away
by flood and the area it had irrigated became desert. Then, in about
the fifteenth century, the Tigris returned to its old course; the Shatt
el-Hai shrank, and much of the Great Swamp dried up into the desert
it is to-day.(1) Things became worse during the centuries of Turkish
misrule. But the silting up of the Hillah, or main, branch of the
Euphrates about 1865, and the transference of a great part of its stream
into the Hindiyah Canal, caused even the Turks to take action. They
constructed the old Hindiyah Barrage in 1890, but it gave way in 1903
and the state of things was even worse than before; for the Hillah
branch then dried entirely.(2)

     (1) This illustrates the damage the Tigris itself is capable
     of inflicting on the country. It may be added that Sir
     William Willcocks proposes to control the Tigris floods by
     an escape into the Tharthar depression, a great salt pan at
     the tail of Wadi Tharthar, which lies 14 ft. below sea level
     and is 200 ft. lower than the flood-level of the Tigris some
     thirty-two miles away. The escape would leave the Tigris to
     the S. of Samarra, the proposed Beled Barrage being built
     below it and up-stream of "Nimrod's Dam". The Tharthar
     escape would drain into the Euphrates, and the latter's
     Habbaniyah escape would receive any surplus water from the
     Tigris, a second barrage being thrown across the Euphrates
     up-stream of Fallujah, where there is an outcrop of
     limestone near the head of the Sakhlawiyah Canal. The
     Tharthar depression, besides disposing of the Tigris flood-
     water, would thus probably feed the Euphrates; and a second
     barrage on the Tigris, to be built at Kut, would supply
     water to the Shatt el-Hai. When the country is freed from
     danger of flood, the Baghdad Railway could be run through
     the cultivated land instead of through the eastern desert;
     see Willcocks, _The Near East_, Oct. 6, 1916 (Vol. XI, No.
     283), p. 545 f.

     (2) It was then that Sir William Willcocks designed the new
     Hindiyah Barrage, which was completed in 1913. The Hindiyah
     branch, to-day the main stream of the Euphrates, is the old
     low-lying Pallacopas Canal, which branched westward above
