12. _The Eutychians_.  Granting there were not two Persons, we suppose
that there were not two Natures.  We hold that there was but one Nature
_mono physite_ (_mono physis_)--originally two distinct natures, but,
after union, only one: the human nature being transubstantiated into
the divine.

13. _The Catholick Church_.  This also is faulty.  For (Council of
Chalcedon 451) in Christ, two distinct natures are united in one person
without any change, mixture, or confusion.

14. _Honorius Bishop of Rome and the Monothelites_.  Then perhaps the
human will of Christ was subservient to the Divine Will, so as always
to move in unison with it.

15. _The Catholick Church_.  (3rd Council of Constantinople 680--6th
General Council.) No!  You would destroy the truth of His humanity.


It is obvious that we are here returning to some part of the earlier
errors, and that everything possible {123} had been suggested, and
settled.  Even orthodox people, who incline to hold that Christ's human
knowledge was divinely acquired, or His human temptations divinely
resisted, are but repeating the errors of old days.

Thus the Controversies, however disfigured by excess of language and
temper, &c. are the meditations of the Church on the Nature of Her Lord
and Her God.

Some of them are perhaps too much of the disposition of S. Thomas, who
must push his hands against the scars of the Lord's Body; but the Lord
has ever been patient towards the devout and warm-hearted men, who
share with S. Thomas, not only his doubt, but that devotion which
destroys intrusive impertinence.

The following interesting argument as to the date of this "Creed" is
worthy of study.

The Athanasian Creed appears on the scene at the close of these loud
meditations.  It is unconscious of the theory that Eutyches started,
because it uses phrases which he might have perverted, e.g.

  One, not by conversion &c.
  As the reasonable soul &c.

Thus its date is given by internal evidence as previous to 451.

The same sort of argument may apply to Nestorius, who was condemned
431.  But this is more doubtful.  It insists on "one Son, not three
Sons"--but says nothing of "one Son, not two Sons" which was the
Nestorian error.

{124}

These two points may be summarised.

_Monophysites_ (condemned 451 at Ephesus) insisted on _One Nature_, to
defend One Person:

opposing

_Nestorians_ (condemned 431 at Chalcedon), who insisted on _Two
Natures_ almost, if not quite, to the assertion of _Two Persons_.

[Transcriber's note: refer to Footnote 1 on page 176 referring to an
error in the above two paragraphs.]

The date is limited in lateness by the above.  It must have been before
the middle of 400-500, i.e. before the complete development of the
controversy condemned in 451.

And it could not be earlier than 416, because it plainly condemns
Apollinarians, who denied a human Soul to Christ, and said the Godhead
was in place of a human soul (360-373): and because several of S.
Augustine's expressions appear in it, whose books on the Trinity
appeared about 416, and later.

Moreover the 'Filioque[1]' appears in it, and S. Augustine was the
first to give this prominence.

Thus the date is fixed between 420 and 440.

And it is Latin, in the construction of its Sentences, not Greek; and
Gallic, in its first reception, and chief, earliest, and most numerous,
MSS and commentaries.

The Roman Church did not adopt it till 930, though Charlemagne
presented it to the Pope in 722.

Thus Waterland dates it in France between 420 and 431.  Within those
dates the authors possible are, not Athanasius, for he died about 373,
but

  Hilary of Arles, Bp. 429-449.
  Victricius of Rouen.
  Vincentius of Lerins, 434.

{125}

These arguments apply, however, not to the Creed as it now stands, but
to the documents from which it was compounded, and to the language
which it has retained.

This Psalm, or Creed, or discussion of the Creeds, appears to be formed
by the union of two documents, one of which was a discussion of the
nature of God, and the other a discussion of the Person of Christ.  An
article by Professor Lumby in the S.P.C.K. Prayer Book will be
accessible to all our readers.  The former document occupies 28, and
the latter, 14 verses.

The doctrine that there is a God, and particularly that there is but
one God, may be called the Catholic Religion, in a very wide sense: for
it is held by Jews, Turks, and many others who are not Christians.

The Christian Verity is the Truth that God was made man, that Jesus is
God and Man, yet not two, but one Christ.  This involves the Doctrine
of the Holy Trinity.

The Catholic Faith includes both the Catholic Religion and the
Christian Verity.

_vv._ 9 and 12: the word _incomprehensible_ is the Latin word
_immensus_, elsewhere rendered _infinite_.  (See Article I.)  _vv._
21-23 show that there are statements which can be made of each Person,
which cannot be made of the other Persons of the Godhead: 6-18 have
been showing that there are statements which can be made of each
Person, which can also be made of the other Persons--statements
involving Godhead.  24-27 state the inference which is to be drawn from
the former verses, an inference previously stated in 3-5.

{126}

_v._ 31.  The word Substance occurs frequently in the discussion of the
Godhead of our Lord, and also in the debates about the Holy Communion.
Substance is the Essential Existence: it has no necessary connection
with ideas like 'hard' and 'soft,' 'heavy' and 'light'; if we are
thinking of a spirit there is no question of Matter, for the Substance,
i.e. the Essential Being, of a spirit is not of the nature of Matter.
The phrase in the Nicene Creed _Being-of-one-substance-with_ (_the
Father_) is a translation of the word Consubstantial.

The name _Quicunque Vult_, by which this psalm is sometimes mentioned
is from the first words of the Latin original _Quicunque vult salvus
esse_=Whosoever will be safe.  This phrase "be safe" occurs again in
verse 28, and again in the last verse of the psalm, where _quam
nisi--salvus esse non poterit_ should be translated _which except a man
have believed faithfully and firmly, he cannot be safe_.  The
substitution of another idea--"be saved,"--is of the nature of an
addition to the meaning.

The addition is, however, independently stated in verse 2.

These verses are to be understood, like the Bible statements of similar
character, as the warning which overhangs all our actions.  They say
nothing of what allowance God makes for involuntary ignorance,
prejudice, difficult perplexities, and other infirmities.  They declare
our responsibility when we look up to God, and reflect on our own
actions, or on God's Being.



[1] It was used as a Psalm at Prime following cxix. 1-32.  Nor did it
disturb the use of the Apostles' Creed.  Bishop Barry has suggested
that until 1662 this use of both was continued.  But Bishop Cosin,
whose notes and suggestions and personal influence had so much to do
with the Revision of 1662, had a note 'though it be not here set down,
yet I believe the meaning was that the Apostles' Creed should be
omitted that day, when this of Athanasius was repeated.'  And words
were inserted in the rubrics to make this quite clear.

[2] See Appendix E.




{127}

CHAPTER XIII.

THE SERVICE OF PRAYER.

If we have understood the Method of Praise which, in these Services,
uses ancient forms in an ordered variety, we shall be prepared to find
similar order, and similar use of variety, in the Prayers.  The Map of
the Services on p. 28 should be examined afresh, in order that we may
grasp the unity of the Prayers, as well as the unity of the Praises.

There is the Lord's Prayer _set_ for prayer (see p. 16), at the
beginning of the Prayers, to strike the keynote.  Verses and Responds
follow next, asking for such things as will be again asked for, in the
Collects which are to come after them.  The Collects may be divided
into two classes, viz.,

1. Those for spiritual needs--_First, Second, and Third Collects_.

2. Those for physical needs, and earthly relations.


Worship-Forms used in the Prayer Service.

See _Table of Worship-Forms_ (p. 21).

The Preces are Interjectional.  The Collects are of the Amen form.  The
Anthem should be {128} Antiphonal.  The Litany, when used, contains
examples of four of the Worship-forms.  Thus, the attention of
worshippers is arrested, and their unity of heart and voice maintained.

Another purpose is served by the mutual relation in which these forms
stand to one another.  We shall show, in the Chapter on the Litany,
that a Collect may be preceded by a Verse and Respond, which anticipate
briefly the prayer of the Collect.  Thus the Verse and Respond, which
are Interjectional, belong to the Collect.  This tie between
Interjectional prayers and Amen prayers is very remarkable in the
Morning and Evening Services.  Six couplets of Interjected prayers,
which for the sake of distinction are called Preces, anticipate the
petitions of the six (or more) Collects which follow.  They correspond
Couplet and Collect, Couplet and Collect; and, being grouped so that
all the couplets come first, the whole prayer Service is made one.

The Anthem is used to strengthen this unity.  Unfortunately the
Revisers stopped short of making an Antiphoner, or Anthem-book; but we
may suppose that the provision made here for Anthems was intended as a
promise of such a book.  Our Hymn Books, which were recognised, when,
in 1879, shortened Services were permitted, contain a good number of
suitable hymns admitting antiphonal arrangement.  They should supply
some grave thought of God's help, or Christ's mediation, or our
dependence on Him.  The Anthem is a bond of union, not a musical
interruption.  (See Chap. xiv.)

{129}

THE PRAYER SERVICE.

I. Preces and Collects.  Morning and Evening Rubrics.

The directions concerning the Services are to be found in the Rubrics:
which are placed either (1) in the Prefaces and Tables at the beginning
of the Prayer Book; or (2) at the beginning or end of a Service; or (3)
at some break or pause in the Service.  By the correction of mistakes,
the later Revisions have left very little ambiguity; but some instances
remain, which may usually be interpreted by the analogy of other parts
of the Book.  A plain instance is the omission of a direction that the
Sermon is to be preached from the pulpit: but it is directed that after
it the Priest shall return to the Lord's Table.

Bishop Cosin who took a leading part in the Revision of 1661-2, and had
been preparing notes for it for about 40 years, made the remark: "the
book does not everywhere enjoin and prescribe every little order, what
should be said or done, but take it for granted that people are
acquainted with such common, and things always used already."

The two Services, which are here considered together, are still printed
together as parts of the same Chapter (see p. 25): and the Morning
Service has always had rubrics which applied to both Morning and
Evening: (see Rubrics, about the use of _Gloria Patri_ after Canticles,
cf. p. 4: and about the First Lessons).

{130}

Before 1662 a rubric, after the Canticles at Evensong, referred back to
Mattins for directions &c. about the rest of the Service.  The Second
and Third Collects, being different from the Morning Collects, were, of
course, printed in full: everything else was read from the Morning
Service.

In 1662 the Evening Service was for the first time printed out in full.

The words of the Evening rubric about the Collects were retained, and
not made like the Morning rubric: also the words _all kneeling_, which
were, at that time, added to the Morning rubric, were, through
forgetfulness, not added to the slightly different Evening Rubric.  The
word _all_ includes the Minister; for the people are already kneeling.

The Rubrics after the Collects.

The amendment of rubrics in this part of the Services, which was
effected in 1662, completed the directions for continuing the Service
after the Collects.  Until that time, the prayers for the Sovereign,
for the Royal Family, and for the Clergy and People, were printed after
the Prayer, _We humbly beseech thee_, in the Litany; and were followed
by the second of our Ember Week prayers, and the Prayer of S.
Chrysostom.  But it was plain that the Services were not to end with
the Third Collect: for, at the end of the Communion Service, six
Collects were printed, as they still are, with the provision that they
may be said "after the Collects" of Morning and Evening Prayer.
Moreover, the inclusion, in the Preces, of prayers for the Sovereign
and for the Clergy implied that Collects for {131} them would follow.
We may infer that these Services used to end much as they do now.  It
was therefore a useful improvement to make the rubrics complete, and to
print the prayers in this place.  Perhaps the six Collects after the
Communion Service would be more used, if they had, at the same time,
been printed with the Occasional Prayers and Thanksgivings.

At the same time, a Rubric was inserted here providing for an Anthem,
or musical prayer, to be sung (in places where there are singers),
between the Three Collects and the other Prayers.


The Lord's Prayer as set for the Service of prayer.

We have before explained that the Doxology is not added here, but the
Lesser Litany is prefixed to it.  The thoughts will now be different
from those which occupied our hearts at the beginning of the Praises.
The following may be suggested:

  Hallowed be Thy Name    . . . . . . Ask for Reverence.
  Thy kingdom come        . . . . . . Devotion.
  Thy will be done        . . . . . . Obedience.
  Give us our daily bread . . . . . . Support, Health,
                                        Teaching, Communion.
  Forgive us              . . . . . . Forgiveness.
  Lead us                 . . . . . . Guidance.
  Deliver us              . . . . . . Deliverance.

Then the Priest is directed to stand up: thus reminding us again that
we are approaching the Majesty on High.  The people, though still
kneeling, {132} are included in his priestly action, and take an equal
share of the petitions, which form the Preces (=prayers L.).  Each
verse is to be said by the Minister, and its Respond by the People.


A. The Preces.

These interjected prayers do not follow exactly the order of the
Collects and Prayers, which are to come next to them.  The second
couplet belongs to the two prayers, _for the King_ and _for the Royal
Family_: the third and fourth couplets belong to the prayer, _for the
Clergy and People_.  The first, fifth, and sixth couplets belong to the
first, second, and third Collects respectively.  The Great Breviary of
1531, according to the use of Sarum, had the 5th of these couplets as
an Antiphon for our 2nd Morning Collect for Peace, to be used at Lauds,
and also as an Antiphon at Vespers, for our 2nd Evening Collect for
Peace.  The Student will find that this using of the old materials is
characteristic of the Revision of 1549.  All the Preces are from the
Day Hours.  With the exception of the Couplet just mentioned, they are
verses of the Psalms: First Couplet from the 85th Psalm, verse 7:
Second, from the 20th, _v._ 9: Third, from the 132nd, _vv._ 9 and 16:
