assured of English assistance. A large army attacked Toulouse, but
after a struggle lasting four days the Calvinists were defeated and
driven off with severe loss. In Normandy and other centres where they
were strong they carried on the war with unheard of cruelty; but as
they were in a hopeless minority and as the English failed to give
them the necessary assistance they lost many of their strongholds, and
finally suffered a terrible defeat at Dreux where the Prince de Conde
was taken prisoner (Dec. 1562). Coligny escaped to Orleans, which city
was besieged by the Duke of Guise, who was murdered during the siege
by one of the followers of Coligny.[6] Before his execution the
prisoner accused Coligny and Beza as being accessories to his crime,
but it is only fair to say that Coligny denied under oath the truth of
this statement.

Though the Catholics were victorious the awful struggle had cost them
dearly. Their ablest leader the Duke of Guise had fallen, as had also
Antoine de Bourbon, King of Navarre, who had been converted from
Calvinism; many of their churches and most valuable shrines were
destroyed; and to make matters worse they recognised that the struggle
had been fought in vain, as the regent proclaimed a general amnesty
and concluded a peace with the Huguenots (Peace of Amboise, 1563),
whereby Calvinist nobles and their followers were allowed free
exercise of their religion with certain restrictions.

Neither side was satisfied with these terms. Coligny and the Prince de
Conde were annoyed furthermore by the fact that the regent broke off
her close relations with them, and began to lean towards the Catholic
side and toward an alliance with Spain. After raising large sums of
money and arming their forces for a new effort they determined to
seize the king and his court at Monceau, but the Constable de
Montmorency with six thousand trusty Swiss soldiers hastened to the
king's defence, and brought him safely from the midst of his enemies
(1567). This attempt together with the terrible slaughter of Catholics
at Nimes (29 Sept.)[7] led to the outbreak of the second civil war.
The Catholic forces were successful at St. Denis though they lost one
of their ablest generals, the Constable de Montmorency, and were
deprived of the fruits of their victory by the intervention of the
Elector of the Palatinate. Owing to the mediation of the latter a new
treaty was made in 1568, but as the Huguenots continued to seek
alliances with England, Germany, and the Netherlands, Charles IX.
recalled the concessions he had made, and forbade the exercise of
Calvinist worship under penalty of death.

Thereupon the third civil war broke out (1569). The Huguenots received
assistance from England, the Netherlands, and Germany, while the
Catholics were supported by Spain and the Pope. The war was carried on
with relentless cruelty on both sides. In the battle of Jarnac the
Huguenot forces were defeated, and the Prince de Conde was slain
(1569). The struggle was however continued by Coligny supported by
Henry King of Navarre and the young de Conde. By wonderful exertions
Coligny put a new army into the field only however to suffer another
terrible defeat at Montcontour, where the Huguenots were almost
annihilated. It seemed that the long struggle was to end at last and
that peace was to be restored to France. But unfortunately at this
juncture some of his courtiers succeeded in convincing Charles IX.
that his brother, the Duke of Anjou, who with the young Duke of Guise
was mainly responsible for the Catholic victories, might use his
recognised military ability and his influence with the people to make
himself king of France. Alarmed by the prospect of such a contingency
Charles IX., already jealous of his brother's triumphs, turned against
the Catholic party and concluded the Peace of St. Germain-en-Laye with
the Huguenots (1570).

According to the terms of this Peace the Huguenots were allowed free
exercise of their religion in France with the sole exception of the
capital. They were not to be excluded from any office of the state,
and four of the strongest fortresses of the country, La Rochelle,
Montauban, Cognac, and La Charite were to be delivered to them for
their protection and as a guarantee of good faith. The whole policy of
Charles IX. underwent a complete change. Obsessed with the idea that
the Catholic party, led by the Duke of Anjou, was becoming too
powerful to be trusted, he turned to Coligny and the Calvinists, broke
off the alliance concluded with Spain the previous year, and sought to
bring over France to the side of England and of the rebel subjects of
Spain in the Netherlands. Coligny was invited to court, where he soon
became the most trusted and influential councillor of the king. He
endeavoured to embitter the mind of Charles IX. against his mother,
against the Duke of Anjou and the family of Guise. No effort was
spared by him to bring France into the closest relations with England
and the Netherlands against Spain, and as a sign of the reconciliation
that had been effected between the court and the Huguenots a marriage
was arranged between Henry, the Calvinist King of Navarre and Margaret
of Valois, the sister of Charles IX.

The Catholics were highly indignant at this sudden change of policy.
Mindful of the misfortunes brought upon their country by the Huguenots
and of the losses and cruelties they had suffered at the hands of this
implacable minority, they resented the domination of Coligny, whom
they regarded as their most dangerous enemy, and they were embittered
by the thought that the victories they had won at so much cost had
resulted only in their own downfall and in the triumph of their worst
enemies. Catharine de' Medici, the queen-mother, felt more acutely
than the rest the influence of Coligny. She believed that he was using
his power to alienate the young king from herself, and to win him from
the policy she had advocated. She was only waiting an opportunity to
wreak her vengeance on Coligny and the whole Huguenot party, knowing
well as she did that she could count upon the popular feeling of the
nation to support her.

The opportunity came on the occasion of the marriage between the King
of Navarre and Margaret of Valois. The leading Calvinists anxious to
take part in the ceremony flocked to Paris, where they and their
followers paraded the streets armed to the teeth and with the air of
conquerors. Catharine de' Medici took steps to secure the murder of
Coligny on the 22nd August, 1572, but the attempt failed. Such a step
served, however, to embitter feelings on both sides, and to arouse the
queen-mother to make one final effort for the destruction of her
Huguenot opponents. In an audience with the king she represented to
him that the Calvinists were plotting to take his life, and that the
only way to secure himself against them was to anticipate them. In
view of the previous history of the party and the suspicious
temperament of the king, it required little to convince him of the
truth of this allegation, and at last he signed an order that on a
certain pre-arranged signal having been given the soldiers should let
loose on the Huguenots. On the night preceding the feast of St.
Bartholomew (23-24 Aug.) the bells of the church of St. Germain-en-
Laye were rung, and the troops sallied forth to carry out their
instructions. Rumours of a Huguenot plot had been spread through the
city. The people were alarmed, and the general body of the citizens
took up arms to support the soldiers. In the melee that followed over
a thousand Calvinists including Coligny were put to death. The
movement spread through the provinces where about the same number
suffered as in the capital, though many of the Catholic clergy, as for
example, the Bishop of Lisieux, exerted themselves to put an end to
the butchery.

This event is known in history as the massacre of St. Bartholomew. The
massacre was in no sense a premeditated affair. It was a sudden
outburst of popular indignation brought about by the machinations of
the queen-mother, and was neither encouraged nor approved by the
bishops of the Catholic Church. The king presented himself before the
Parliament of Paris on the day following the massacre, and declared
that he alone was responsible for what had happened. He explained that
a plot had been formed against his life and that he had taken the only
measures that it was possible for him to take. This was the account of
the affair that was forwarded to the French diplomatic representatives
abroad, and which they gave at all courts to which they were
accredited. Gregory XIII., acting on the report of the French
ambassador, ordered that a /Te Deum/ should be sung in thanksgiving
for the safety of the king and royal family, and not, as has been so
often alleged, as a sign of rejoicing for the murder of the
Calvinists. On the contrary he was deeply pained when he learned the
true state of affairs. The massacre of St. Bartholomew was indeed
unjustifiable, but it was done neither to promote religion nor at the
instigation of the Church. It was merely political in its object as
far as the king and the queen-mother were concerned, and it was a
sudden popular outburst in so far as the citizens of Paris or the
people of the country took part in it. In judging the responsibility
and blame for what took place nobody can put out of mind the terrible
excesses, of which the Huguenots had been guilty during their long
struggle against their own countrymen. The German Lutherans, who
looked upon the slaughter as a judgment from Heaven on the Calvinist
heretics, were rejoiced at their execution.[8]

The Huguenots flew to arms to avenge their brethren who had fallen,
and the fourth civil war began. The Duke of Anjou laid siege to their
strongest fortress, La Rochelle, but failed to take it, and on his
election as King of Poland (1573) a treaty was concluded according to
which the Huguenots were allowed free exercise of their religion. A
large number of French politicians were at last growing tired of a
struggle which was costing their country so dearly, and were anxious
to conclude peace even though it were necessary to yield to the
demands of the Huguenots. At the head of this party stood some of the
most powerful nobles of France including the Duc d'Alencon, and when
on the death of Charles IX. the Duke of Anjou succeeded as Henry III.
(1575-89) his sympathies were entirely with the party of the moderates
as against the extremists of both sides. By the terms of the Peace of
Beaulieu (1576) the Huguenots were assured of complete freedom except
in Paris and at the French Court, and of full civil rights, and as a
guarantee of good faith they were continued in possession of their
fortresses.

Indignant at such concessions the Catholic party formed the League[9]
with the young Duke of Guise at its head. Henry III., finding that it
was impossible to oppose this combination with any hope of success,
determined to control it by becoming himself its leader. The
concessions made to the Huguenots were recalled (1577), and the fifth
civil war broke out. This was brought to an end by the Peace of
Poitiers (1577). The Huguenot party, under the King of Navarre and the
young Prince de Conde, continued to make headway against the League,
and sought to strengthen themselves by an alliance with England and
the Netherlands.

The question of the succession to the French throne became serious for
both parties. Henry III. was childless, and on the death of the heir-
apparent, his brother the Duke of Anjou (Alencon, 1584), the
succession devolved apparently on Henry King of Navarre, but as he was
a Calvinist the Catholics were unwilling to recognise him. The League
declared Cardinal de Bourbon son of the Duke of Vendome as the lawful
heir to the French throne, though many of its out and out supporters
were in favour of the Duke of Guise. An attempt was made to get the
approval of the Pope for the League and its policy, but both George
XIII. and Sixtus V. were not inclined to support its pretensions. At
the earnest request of Spain the latter, however, issued a
constitution in 1585, by which he declared that Henry of Navarre and
the Prince de Conde, as notorious heretics excommunicated by the
Church, had forfeited all claim to the throne of France. Henry of
Navarre lodged a solemn protest in Rome, and he appealed to the
Parliament of Paris, which refused to approve of the publication of
the papal document. Both sides had recourse once more to arms, and the
Huguenots under the leadership of Henry of Navarre were victorious in
the battle of Coutras (1587). The League however continued the
struggle, captured some of the principal cities such as Lyons,
Orleans, and Bourges, while Henry III. favoured both parties in turn.
Overawed by the successful exploits of the Duke of Guise he pledged
himself to put down the Huguenots, and the French people were called
upon by royal proclamation to swear that they would never accept a
heretic as their king (1588).

But in his heart Henry III. favoured the cause of the King of Navarre,
if for no other reason because he wished to escape from the
dictatorship of the Duke of Guise. In 1588 he procured the murder of
the two greatest leaders of the League, Henry Duke of Guise and his
brother Louis the Cardinal-archbishop of Lyons. This outrage drew upon
him the wrath of the League and of the great body of the French
Catholics. Charles de Lorraine, brother of the murdered Duke of Guise,
put himself at the head of the king's enemies. Sixtus V. issued a
strong condemnation of the murder of the cardinal-archbishop, and the
Sorbonne declared that the nation no longer owed any allegiance to the
king. The war was renewed vigorously on both sides, the League being
supported by Philip II. of Spain and its opponents by Protestant
troops from Germany and Switzerland. While the combined forces of
Henry III. and of the King of Navarre were besieging Paris, Henry III.
was assassinated (1589).

Thereupon Henry of Navarre had himself proclaimed King of France under
the title of Henry IV., but the League refused to recognise his claims
and put forward instead the aged Cardinal de Bourbon, then a prisoner
in the hands of the King of Navarre. The Cardinal also was proclaimed
king (Charles X.). Spain, too, refused to acknowledge Henry IV., and
assisted the League with both money and soldiers. The Popes, Sixtus V.
Gregory VIX. and Clement VIII. adopted an attitude of great reserve.
While they were not inclined to support the demands of the League in
their entirety they were unshaken in their reserve to acknowledge no
heretic as king of France. Henry IV., though supported by many of the
moderate Catholics (/Les Politiques/), began to recognise that as a
Calvinist he could never hope for peaceful possession of the French
throne. He determined, therefore, to yield to the entreaties of his
most powerful supporters and to make his submission to the Catholic
Church. In July 1593 he read a public recantation in the Church of St.
Denis, and was absolved conditionally from the censures he had
incurred. The following year he made his formal entrance into Paris,
where he was welcomed by the people, and acknowledged as lawful king
of France by the Sorbonne. Having pledged himself to accept the
decrees of the Council of Trent, to abide by the terms of the
Concordat of 1516, and to rear his heir and successor as a Catholic he
was reconciled to the Holy See. The League dissolved itself in a short
time, and so far as Catholics were concerned peace was restored to
France.

The Huguenots, Henry IV.'s former co-religionists, were deeply pained
at the step taken by their leader, and they insisted that their
demands must be satisfied. Henry IV., more anxious for the unity and
welfare of France than for the triumph of either religious party,
determined to put an end to the civil strife by the publication of the
Edict of Nantes (1598). The principal articles of the Edict were that
the Calvinists should enjoy freedom of worship throughout the greater
part of the kingdom, that they should be eligible for all positions of
honour and trust in the state, that they should have for their own use
the Universities of Montauban, Montpelier, Sedan, and Samur, that the
funds for the upkeep of these universities and for the maintenance of
their religion should be supplied by the state, and that for a period
of eight years they should have possession of some of the principal
fortresses. On their side they engaged to break off all alliances with
foreigners, to allow Catholic worship to be restored in the places
where it had been suppressed, to observe the marriage laws of the
Catholic Church, and to abstain from anything that might be regarded
as a violation of Catholic holidays. Such concessions were regarded
with great disfavour by the Pope, the clergy, and the vast majority of
the French people as being opposed to the entire national tradition of
France, and it required all the efforts of the king to secure for them
the approval of the Paris Parliament (1599). Similarly the Calvinists
were not content with what had been conceded to them, nor were they
willing to abide by the terms of the Edict of Nantes in so far as to
allow the establishment of Catholic worship in the places which were
under their control. Their public attacks on the Blessed Eucharist and
on the Pope were very irritating to their countrymen, but Henry IV.,
who was a good king deeply interested especially in the welfare of the
lower classes, continued to keep the peace between both parties. His
sympathies were, however, with the Protestants of Germany, and he was
actually on his way to take part in a war against the Emperor when he
was assassinated (1610).

He was succeeded by his son Louis XIII. (1610-43) who was then a boy
of nine years. His mother Mary de' Medici, who acted as regent
approved the terms of the Edict of Nantes, but the Huguenots relying
on the weakness of the government refused to carry out those portions
of the Edict favourable to Catholics, and made demands for greater
privileges. They rose in rebellion several times especially in the
South, entered into alliance with every rebel noble who took up arms
against the king, and acted generally as if they formed a state within
a state. Cardinal Richelieu who was for years the actual ruler of
France (1624-42),[10] inspired solely by political motives, determined
to put an end to a condition of affairs that was highly dangerous to
the strength and national unity of the kingdom. He saw that it was
impossible for France to extend her power so long as there existed at
home a well-organised body of citizens prepared to enter into
treasonable relations with foreign enemies, and to turn to their own
advantage their country's difficulties. His opportunity came when the
Huguenots having concluded an alliance with England rose in rebellion
(1627). He laid siege to their strongest fortress, La Rochelle, drove
back the fleet which England sent to their assistance, and compelled
the city to surrender (1628). By this strong measure he put an end to
the power of the Huguenots in France and secured peace and unity for
the country, while at the same time he treated the conquered with
comparative mildness, confirming the Edict of Nantes (Edict of Nimes,
1629), proclaiming a general amnesty, and restoring the leaders of the
rebellion to the property and positions they had forfeited.

During the reign of Louis XIV. (1643-1715) the whole tendency of the
government was dangerous to the Huguenots. Louis XIV. was determined
to make himself absolute ruler of France, and, therefore, he could
regard only with the highest disfavour the presence in his territories
of a well-organised privileged party like the Huguenots. An
opportunity of carrying out his designs came in 1659, when with the
approval of the Synod of Montpazier they attempted to negotiate an
alliance with England. They were punished with great severity,
forbidden to preach in any place without express permission, to attack
Catholic doctrines publicly, or to intermarry with Catholics. Converts
from Calvinism were encouraged by promises of special concessions.
Owing to the disfavour of the king and the energetic action of the
clergy and bishops, whose education and culture at that time stood
exceedingly high, large numbers of the Huguenots returned to the
Church so that in some places, as for example in Normandy, where once
they could boast of considerable influence, the sect became almost
extinct.

The severity of the measures taken by Louis XIV. led to new
rebellions, which were suppressed with great severity. Finally in 1685
a royal proclamation appeared announcing the revocation of all the
privileges granted to the Huguenots and more particularly all those
contained in the Edict of Nantes (1685). The churches which they had
built recently were to be destroyed, their religious assembles were
forbidden, and their clergy were offered their choice between
submission to the Church or exile. The prime minister Louvois sent
soldiers to enforce this proclamation, and the unfortunate Huguenots
were treated with great harshness and cruelty. Many of them, unwilling
to change their religion and unable to endure their hard lot at home,
left the country and sought refuge in England, Germany, Denmark, and
Holland. The revocation of the Edict of Nantes was not due to the
religious zeal of Louis XIV. or of his ministers. Indeed at the very
time that Louis XIV. was engaged in dragooning the Huguenots into the
Catholic Church he was in bitter conflict with the Pope, and was
committed to a policy that seemed destined to end in national schism.
Some of the French bishops, notably Fenelon, disapproved of this
attempt at conversion by violence, and Pope Innocent XI., having no
representative in Paris at the time, instructed his nuncio at London
to induce James II. of England to bring pressure to bear on Louis XIV.
to favour the Huguenots.[11] Several times during the reign of Louis
the Calvinists rose in arms to defend their religion but without
effect. After his death the decrees against them were not enforced
with much severity, but it was only in 1787 that a measure of almost
complete political equality was granted to them by Louis XVI.
                              ----------

[1] Lefranc, /Les idees religieuses de Marguerite de Navarre/, 1898.

[2] Thomas, /Le Concordat de 1516/, 3 vols., 1910.

[3] Forneron, /Les Ducs de Guise/, 1877.

[4] De Ruble, /Antoine de Bourbon/, 2 vols., 1881-2.

[5] Marcks, /Gaspard von Coligny/, 1892. Delaborde, /Gaspard de
    Coligny/, 3 vols., 1879-83.

[6] De Ruble, /L'assassinat de Francois de Lorraine/, 1898.

[7] Rouquette, /L'inquisition protestante, Les Saint-Barthelemy
    calvinistes/, 1906.

[8] On the massacre of St. Bartholomew, cf. De la Ferriere, /La St.
    Barthelemy/, 1892. Fauriel, /Essai sur les evenements qui ont
    precede et amene la St. Barthelemy/, 1838. Bordier, /La St.
    Barthelemy et la critique moderne/, 1879. Hanoteaux, /Etudes
    historiques sur le XVIe et le XVIIe siecle en France/, 1886.
    Vacandard, /Etudes de critique et d'histoire religieuse/, 1905.
    Id., /Les papes et la St. Barthelemy/ (/Rev. du Cler. Francais/,
    1904).

[9] Richard, /La papaute et la ligue francaise/, 1901. De Chalambert,
    /Histoire de la Ligue sous Henri III. et Henri IV./, 1898. De
    l'Epinois, /La Ligue et les papes/, 1886.

[10] Caillet, /L'Administration en France sous le ministere du
    cardinal de Richelieu/, 2 vols., 1863.

[11] Gerin, /Le Pape, Innocent XI. et la Revocation de l'Edit de
    Nantes/ (/Rev. des Quest. Historiques/, xxiv.).


                  (c) Calvinism in the Netherlands.

  Cramer-Piper, /Bibliotheca Reformatoria Neerlandica/, 1903-11.
  Juste, /Histoire de la revolution des Pays Bas sous Philippe II./,
  2 vols., 1863-7. De Lettenhove, /Les Huguenots et les Gueux/, 6
  vols., 1882-5. Gossart, /La domination espagnole dans les Pays Bas
  a la fin du regne de Philippe II./, 1906. Holzwarth, /Der Abfall
  der Niederlanden/, 2 Bde, 1865-72.

The Netherlands formed part of the vast territories ruled over by
Charles V. For many reasons it was not to be wondered at that the
people should sympathise with the great religious revolt in Germany.
They were allied closely with the Germans by blood and language. Like
them, too, they looked upon Spain and upon the Spaniards with feelings
of distrust. Again, as in other parts of the world, so too in the
Netherlands the wealth of the Church had led to grave abuses as well
as to a loss of respect for ecclesiastical authority, the latter of
which was fostered in the minds of some by the spirit of mysticism
that flourished in the land of St. Thomas a Kempis.

Yet, notwithstanding these favourable circumstances, the Reformation
made little progress in the Netherlands during the reign of Charles V.
He was a man who understood the people and who respected their rights
and privileges. He visited the country frequently, was always ready to
listen to their demands, and he took care not to offend their national
instincts by a display of Spanish troops or Spanish officials.
Besides, having a freer hand to deal with the new religious movement
in the Netherlands than he had in Germany, he was determined to
preserve his hereditary dominions from the dimensions and civil strife
that had done so much to weaken the empire. He insisted on the
proclamation and execution of the decree of the Diet of Worms against
Luther, forbade the spread of heretical writings, introduced the
Inquisition, and punished with great severity those who were found
guilty of attempting to tamper with the faith of the people. But
despite his efforts the trouble that had broken out in the
neighbouring countries, France and Germany, could not fail to find an
echo in the Netherlands, and the views of Calvin and Luther found some
support.

In 1555 Charles retired and was succeeded by his son Philip II. (1555-
98). The new ruler unlike his father made no effort to win the
affections of his subjects in the Netherlands, or to attach them to
himself by bonds of loyalty. On the contrary he came amongst them only
too seldom, and after 1559 he never set foot in the country. He showed
himself careless about their commercial interests, regardless of their
constitutional rights and privileges, and indifferent to their
national prepossessions. Instead of relying on the native officials
and nobles to carry on the administration of the kingdom, he sought to
strengthen his own power by appointing Spaniards to offices of trust
and by sending Spanish troops to suppress all symptoms of discontent.
He set aside the Grand Council which by custom had the rights of a
parliament, and without consultation with the authorities in the
Netherlands he decided upon a new ecclesiastical division of the
country. Hitherto there were only four bishops, whose Sees were
subject to foreign metropolitans. Philip decided that the time had
come when the number of bishoprics should be increased, and the
jurisdiction of foreign metropolitans should be abolished. The main
reason that influenced him to adopt this decision was the fact that,
as matters stood, a complete and far-reaching scheme of reform could
not be put into operation. In conjunction with Pope Paul IV. he
arranged (1559) that the Spanish Netherlands should be placed under
the three newly-erected archiepiscopal Sees of Utrecht, Cambrai, and
Mechlin, and that suitable provision should be made for the
maintenance of the new bishops out of the possessions of the
monasteries and of the ecclesiastical institutions as well as from the
contributions of the laity.

Many of the nobles were already tired of the Spanish rule, and were
not unwilling to look favourably on the religious struggle as a means
of securing independence. They objected to several unconstitutional
acts of which the government of Philip II. had been guilty. They
disliked Cardinal de Granvelle, the prime minister in the Netherlands,
and insisted on his recall. They objected to the introduction of the
Inquisition, and they protested against the new diocesan division as
unnecessary, burdensome to the country, and an infringement of the
rights and privileges of certain individuals. The clergy and people,
whose positions were affected by the new arrangement, supported them
strongly in their opposition to this measure. The leaders of this
movement were the Count of Egmont and William of Orange,[1] the latter
of whom was a clever politician of boundless ambitions, who was not
without hope that a rebellion against Spain might be the means of
securing supreme power in the Netherlands. His brother, the Prince of
Nassau, had adopted Calvinism, and William himself was not troubled
with any particularly strong religious convictions. By his marriage
