    ask him about this saying.


It is not strange that artists love to paint the contrast between the
picture of Jesus on the mountain encompassed by glory and of the demoniac
boy surrounded by the multitudes on the plain; yet it requires no canvas
or artificial color to heighten the contrast presented by the historian in
his simple story. Jesus long before had learned what it was to exchange
the glories of heaven for the shadows and sufferings of earth and the
compassion which drew him from the skies was never withheld, even at times
when he naturally might have been absorbed in thoughts concerning his
coming suffering and redeeming work. He was instantly moved with tender
pity as he heard the agonizing words of the father and saw the distress of
the son. However, he was even more moved by the unbelief and sin and
anguish and godlessness of the world which he had come to save, and of
which this scene was but a symbol and a picture. "O faithless and perverse
generation," he cried, "how long shall I be with you, and bear with you?"
Can it not be said reverently that the contrasted experiences of the
mountain and the plain made Jesus for the moment homesick for heaven? Yet
Jesus neither hesitated nor delayed in the path of duty or in the presence
of human need. He "rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the boy, and
gave him back to his father."

While all were wondering and astonished at his divine power and marvelous
works, he turned to his disciples to impress upon them the dark secret
which was resting on his soul. He told them that the time was near when he
was to be given up to suffer and to die; "But they understood not this
saying." Here was a Man whose sympathy was tender toward all; but who
sympathized with him? How often some one of his followers has borne a
burden of hidden sorrow, even in the company of friends and when
surrounded by admiring throngs!



6. Jesus Rebuking Pride and Bigotry. Ch. 9:46-50


    46 And there arose a reasoning among them, which of them was the
    greatest. 47 But when Jesus saw the reasoning of their heart, he
    took a little child, and set him by his side, 48 and said unto
    them, Whosoever shall receive this little child in my name
    receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that
    sent me: for he that is least among you all, the same is great.


    49 And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out
    demons in thy name; and we forbade him, because he followeth not
    with us. 50 But Jesus said unto him, Forbid _him_ not: for he that
    is not against you is for you.


This was no new dispute in which the followers of Jesus were engaged. The
question was as to which of them should be the greatest in his Kingdom.
There was something admirable in the discussion, for it revealed their
faith. To them the Master was yet to be King of kings and Lord of lords,
and they desired to have places nearest to his throne. Our conception of
his Kingdom may be more correct, but if its glories were as real to us as
they were to them, if we had faith enough to see this Kingdom in its real
importance, we, too, might at times question what our relative places in
this Kingdom are or will be.

However, Jesus rebuked them, for there is no place for pride among the
followers of Christ. Our nearness to him is not won by selfish effort or
granted by arbitrary decree; it is conditioned upon the humble service we
may render in his name. "He took a little child, and set him by his side;"
not because a child is a picture of humility--most children are
self-conscious and absurdly proud--but because the care of a child is a
symbol of humble service, and it was this spirit which Jesus praised. To
care for a child, or for men and women who like children are in need of
our help and sympathy and support, if done for the sake of Christ and in
the name of Christ, is a service rendered to the Master himself and not
only to him but also to his Father. The willingness to undertake such
humble service is the measure of true greatness.

The mention of service in the mind of the Master reminded John of a recent
incident which he felt to be quite to his credit; so "John answered and
said, Master, we saw one casting out demons in thy name; and we forbade
him, because he followeth not with us." There was something admirable in
the spirit and action of John. He was so devoted to Christ that he wished
everyone professing his name to join the company of disciples, to live and
to labor and to suffer with them. There is always something admirable in
loyalty to a denomination or a sect. If one has found what he believes to
be the highest form of Christian life and service, if one feels that he is
treading the surest and shortest road to heaven, it is certainly
commendable in him to wish others to share his peculiar blessedness.

Jesus, however, rebuked him, and said, "Forbid him not: for he that is not
against you is for you." After all, there is no place for bigotry among
the followers of Christ. We may love and admire our sect or society, but
we are never to stop the work of a fellow Christian however much he may
differ from us. There are only two questions to ask: First, Is he casting
out demons? That is to say, is he really accomplishing good? Second, Is he
doing the work in the name of a divine, crucified, risen Christ? If so,
"Forbid him not." We must not expect all Christians to repeat the same
creed or to enjoy the same ritual or to accept the same polity or to
employ the same methods of work. We should remember the word of the
Master, "He that is not against you is for you."





V. THE JOURNEYS TOWARD JERUSALEM. CHS. 9:51 TO 19:28




A. The First Stages. Ch. 9:51 to 13:21



1. The Inhospitable Samaritans. Ch. 9:51-56


    51 And it came to pass, when the days were well-nigh come that he
    should be received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to
    Jerusalem, 52 and sent messengers before his face: and they went,
    and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for
    him. 53 And they did not receive him, because his face was _as
    though he were_ going to Jerusalem. 54 And when his disciples
    James and John saw _this_, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we bid
    fire to come down from heaven, and consume them? 55 But he turned,
    and rebuked them. 56 And they went to another village.


The record of the last journeys of our Lord toward Jerusalem forms a
unique feature in the Gospel of Luke. In the other Gospels some of these
incidents are included but they occupy only one or two chapters; here,
however, they fill ten chapters with events most of which are no where
else related.

The direction of the journeying was first eastward through the borders of
Galilee and Samaria, then across the Jordan and then southward through the
region of Perea. This region is not so designated in the Bible but is
described by the phrase, "beyond the Jordan," and as most of these
incidents occurred there, this period of the life of Jesus is commonly
called his "Perean ministry." Luke here emphasizes the divine prevision
and at the same time the human courage of our Lord. He indicates that
Jesus saw plainly his coming death and also his glorious ascension, but
that he unfalteringly moved forward to the intervening agonies of the
cross.

The first incident of these journeys was in a village of the Samaritans.
Certain messengers had gone before to prepare entertainment for the large
company which followed Jesus, but the Samaritans would not receive him;
then his disciples, James and John, suggested that they should "bid fire
to come down from heaven and consume them." There was something admirable
in the indignation of these disciples. The Samaritans were moved by a
narrow and provincial prejudice and they were offering to Jesus a
gratuitous insult. It sometimes seems that the genius for indignation has
disappeared, and it is refreshing to see men who feel deeply any
disrespect to Christ, any injury to his cause.

But Jesus rebuked his disciples, "And they went to another village." There
may be place for righteous indignation, but there is no place among the
followers of Christ for anger, for intolerance, or for revenge. This is
not a time of judgment, but of grace. It is not for us to attempt to
administer vengeance, but to preach the gospel of love.



2. Jesus Rebuking Rashness, Insincerity, and Indecision. Ch. 9:57-62


    57 And as they went on the way, a certain man said unto him, I
    will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. 58 And Jesus said unto
    him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven _have_
    nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 59 And
    he said unto another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, suffer me
    first to go and bury my father. 60 But he said unto him, Leave the
    dead to bury their own dead; but go thou and publish abroad the
    kingdom of God. 61 And another also said, I will follow thee,
    Lord; but first suffer me to bid farewell to them that are at my
    house. 62 But Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to
    the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.


These three incidents show how carefully Jesus was sifting those who
wished to become his followers and how deeply he appreciated the fact that
he was passing through this region for the last time. The first of the
three men with whom Jesus spoke was being swept along by his emotions, by
the sight of the crowd which was following the Master, and by the thought
that it would be a great privilege to be in such company. He had not for a
moment realized that it might involve sacrifice and pain to become a
disciple of the Master. It was for this reason that Jesus turned to him
with a statement which implies a rebuke and suggests that the Master
realized the thoughtlessness and rashness which were prompting this
professed follower. "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven
have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." Of course
Jesus is eager to have men vow their allegiance to him and openly
acknowledge their discipleship; but among his followers there is no place
for rashness. He would have us count the cost.

In the case of the next man, when he was bidden to follow Christ, he
offered an excuse, "Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father." This
was a natural request and it seemed that a tender duty made it necessary
for him to decline the invitation of the Master. There seems something
rather severe in the reply, "Leave the dead to bury their own dead; but go
thou and publish abroad the kingdom of God." It is evident that Jesus had
looked into the heart of this man and saw that he was making a selfish
excuse out of a sacred duty. If his reply was sincere, it none the less
merited a reproof, for a more sacred duty than caring for the dead was
laid upon him by the invitation of the living Christ. No tie, however
tender, can be regarded as a sufficient excuse for refusing to become a
follower of Christ. Jesus was passing that way for the last time. Prompt
obedience was absolutely necessary. Those who were spiritually "dead" and
who had not heard the summons of the Master could provide the needed
burial; but it was possible for the one who had been called by Christ to
perform a more sacred task: he could begin to proclaim the gospel of
salvation and of life.

In the case of the third possible disciple, there was no carelessness; he
had counted the cost; it was not his intention to make any excuse; he was
sincere and definite in his intention, but he wished to delay. He was not
quite certain that it was best just then to leave his family and his
friends. At least he wished to delay long enough to return to his home and
to bid them farewell. But Jesus rebuked him; "No man, having put his hand
to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God." Such
hesitation indicates that one has not appreciated the glory and privilege
involved in the call of Christ or that he still weighs against it the
sacrifices it involves. He is self-condemned. There is no place for
indecision among those who are to be heirs of the Kingdom of God.



3. The Mission of the Seventy. Ch. 10:1-24


    1 Now after these things the Lord appointed seventy others, and
    sent them two and two before his face into every city and place,
    whither he himself was about to come. 2 And he said unto them, The
    harvest indeed is plenteous, but the laborers are few: pray ye
    therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he send forth laborers
    into his harvest. 3 Go your ways; behold, I send you forth as
    lambs in the midst of wolves. 4 Carry no purse, no wallet, no
    shoes; and salute no man on the way. 5 And into whatsoever house
    ye shall enter, first say, Peace _be_ to this house. 6 And if a
    son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him: but if not,
    it shall turn to you again. 7 And in that same house remain,
    eating and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is
    worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. 8 And into
    whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as
    are set before you: 9 and heal the sick that are therein, and say
    unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 10 But into
    whatsoever city ye shall enter, and they receive you not, go out
    into the streets thereof and say, 11 Even the dust from your city,
    that cleaveth to our feet, we wipe off against you: nevertheless
    know this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh. 12 I say unto
    you, It shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for
    that city. 13 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida!
    for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which
    were done in you, they would have repented long ago, sitting in
    sackcloth and ashes. 14 But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre
    and Sidon in the judgment, than for you. 15 And thou, Capernaum,
    shalt thou be exalted unto heaven? thou shalt be brought down unto
    Hades. 16 He that heareth you heareth me; and he that rejecteth
    you rejecteth me; and he that rejecteth me rejecteth him that sent
    me.


    17 And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the
    demons are subject unto us in thy name. 18 And he said unto them,
    I beheld Satan fallen as lightning from heaven. 19 Behold, I have
    given you authority to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over
    all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall in any wise hurt
    you. 20 Nevertheless in this rejoice not, that the spirits are
    subject unto you; but rejoice that your names are written in
    heaven.


    21 In that same hour he rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and said, I
    thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou didst
    hide these things from the wise and understanding, and didst
    reveal them unto babes: yea, Father; for so it was well-pleasing
    in thy sight. 22 All things have been delivered unto me of my
    Father: and no one knoweth who the Son is, save the Father; and
    who the Father is, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
    willeth to reveal _him_. 23 And turning to the disciples, he said
    privately, Blessed _are_ the eyes which see the things that ye
    see: 24 for I say unto you, that many prophets and kings desired
    to see the things which ye see, and saw them not; and to hear the
    things which ye hear, and heard them not.


The sending out of the seventy messengers who were to prepare the way for
the ministry of Jesus is recorded by Luke alone. This is in harmony with
the fact that only in this Gospel do we read of the extended journeys
toward Jerusalem made by our Lord on the occasion of which the Seventy
were sent forth. The work was for only a limited time and their office was
temporary; but in his instructions to them Jesus suggested many principles
of life which apply to his followers in all the ages. He first intimated
the reason for their being chosen. It was because the harvest field in
which they were to work was so great and the laborers so few. He intimated
that before the world can receive the message which the Seventy were sent
to deliver, they and their successors must earnestly pray the Lord of the
harvest to send forth more laborers into the field. This is a prayer which
all who serve the Master may offer earnestly and at all times. The work
seems to be only begun. Our sympathy with the Master will make us yearn to
see the work accomplished with more speed, which can only be possible when
larger numbers of laborers are secured. V. 2.

Jesus told his messengers that as they went forth they must expect to meet
with dangers. "I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves." They
were, however, to encumber themselves with nothing superfluous and they
were to waste no time in idle ceremonies; they must journey as men who are
impelled by one supreme motive. Vs. 3, 4.

As they entered a home they were to offer the peace which the gospel can
