low tones, which grew firmer and louder as he proceeded to expound
a code of laws which combined all the good points of the various
existing regulations which the Asegeir had collected. His speech
being finished, the speaker vanished as suddenly and mysteriously as
he had appeared, and the twelve jurists, recovering power of speech,
simultaneously exclaimed that Forseti himself had been among them, and
had delivered the code of laws by which the Frisians should henceforth
be judged. In commemoration of the god's appearance they declared the
island upon which they stood to be holy, and they pronounced a solemn
curse upon any who might dare to desecrate its sanctity by quarrel
or bloodshed. Accordingly this island, known as Forseti's land or
Heligoland (holy land), was greatly respected by all the Northern
nations, and even the boldest vikings refrained from raiding its
shores, lest they should suffer shipwreck or meet a shameful death
in punishment for their crime.

Solemn judicial assemblies were frequently held upon this sacred isle,
the jurists always drawing water and drinking it in silence, in memory
of Forseti's visit. The waters of his spring were, moreover, considered
to be so holy that all who drank of them were held to be sacred, and
even the cattle who had tasted of them might not be slain. As Forseti
was said to hold his assizes in spring, summer, and autumn, but never
in winter, it became customary, in all the Northern countries, to
dispense justice in those seasons, the people declaring that it was
only when the light shone clearly in the heavens that right could
become apparent to all, and that it would be utterly impossible to
render an equitable verdict during the dark winter season. Forseti
is seldom mentioned except in connection with Balder. He apparently
had no share in the closing battle in which all the other gods played
such prominent parts.






CHAPTER XIII: HEIMDALL


The Watchman of the Gods

In the course of a walk along the sea-shore Odin once beheld nine
beautiful giantesses, the wave maidens, Gialp, Greip, Egia, Augeia,
Ulfrun, Aurgiafa, Sindur, Atla, and Iarnsaxa, sound asleep on the
white sand. The god of the sky was so charmed with these beautiful
creatures that, as the Eddas relate, he wedded all nine of them,
and they combined, at the same moment, to bring forth a son, who
received the name of Heimdall.


    "Born was I of mothers nine,
    Son I am of sisters nine."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


The nine mothers proceeded to nourish their babe on the strength of the
earth, the moisture of the sea, and the heat of the sun, which singular
diet proved so strengthening that the new god acquired his full growth
in a remarkably short space of time, and hastened to join his father
in Asgard. He found the gods proudly contemplating the rainbow bridge
Bifroest, which they had just constructed out of fire, air, and water,
the three materials which can still plainly be seen in its long arch,
where glow the three primary colours: the red representing the fire,
the blue the air, and the green the cool depths of the sea.



The Guardian of the Rainbow

This bridge connected heaven and earth, and ended under the shade of
the mighty world-tree Yggdrasil, close beside the fountain where Mimir
kept guard, and the only drawback to prevent the complete enjoyment
of the glorious spectacle, was the fear lest the frost-giants should
make their way over it and so gain entrance into Asgard.

The gods had been debating the advisability of appointing a trustworthy
guardian, and they hailed the new recruit as one well-fitted to fulfil
the onerous duties of the office.

Heimdall gladly undertook the responsibility and henceforth, night
and day, he kept vigilant watch over the rainbow highway into Asgard.


    "Bifroest i' th' east shone forth in brightest green;
    On its top, in snow-white sheen,
    Heimdal at his post was seen."

            Oehlenschlaeger (Pigott's tr.).

To enable their watchman to detect the approach of any enemy from afar,
the assembled gods bestowed upon him senses so keen that he is said
to have been able to hear the grass grow on the hillside, and the
wool on the sheep's back; to see one hundred miles off as plainly by
night as by day; and with all this he required less sleep than a bird.


    "'Mongst shivering giants wider known
    Than him who sits unmoved on high,
    The guard of heaven, with sleepless eye."

            Lay of Skirner (Herbert's tr.).

Heimdall was provided further with a flashing sword and a marvellous
trumpet, called Giallar-horn, which the gods bade him blow whenever he
saw their enemies approach, declaring that its sound would rouse all
creatures in heaven, earth, and Nifl-heim. Its last dread blast would
announce the arrival of that day when the final battle would be fought.


    "To battle the gods are called
    By the ancient
    Gjallar-horn.
    Loud blows Heimdall,
    His sound is in the air."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


To keep this instrument, which was a symbol of the crescent moon,
ever at hand, Heimdall either hung it on a branch of Yggdrasil above
his head or sank it in the waters of Mimir's well. In the latter it
lay side by side with Odin's eye, which was an emblem of the moon at
its full.

Heimdall's palace, called Himinbiorg, was situated on the highest
point of the bridge, and here the gods often visited him to quaff
the delicious mead which he set before them.


    "'Tis Himminbjorg called
    Where Heimdal, they say,
    Hath dwelling and rule.
    There the gods' warder drinks,
    In peaceful old halls,
    Gladsome the good mead."

            Norse Mythology (R. B. Anderson).


Heimdall was always depicted in resplendent white armour, and he was
therefore called the bright god. He was also known as the light,
innocent, and graceful god, all of which names he fully deserved,
for he was as good as he was beautiful, and all the gods loved
him. Connected on his mothers' side with the sea, he was sometimes
included with the Vanas; and as the ancient Northmen, especially the
Icelanders, to whom the surrounding sea appeared the most important
element, fancied that all things had risen out of it, they attributed
to him an all-embracing knowledge and imagined him particularly wise.


    "Of AEsir the brightest--
    He well foresaw
    Like other Vanir."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Heimdall was further distinguished by his golden teeth, which
flashed when he smiled, and won for him the surname of Gullintani
(golden-toothed). He was also the proud possessor of a swift,
golden-maned steed called Gull-top, which bore him to and fro over
the quivering rainbow bridge. This he crossed many times a day, but
particularly in the early morn, at which time, as herald of the day,
he bore the name of Heimdellinger.


    "Early up Bifroest
    Ran Ulfrun's son,
    The mighty hornblower
    Of Himinbioerg."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).



Loki and Freya

His extreme acuteness of hearing caused Heimdall to be disturbed
one night by the sound of soft, catlike footsteps in the direction
of Freya's palace, Folkvang. Projecting his eagle gaze through the
darkness, Heimdall perceived that the sound was produced by Loki,
who, having stealthily entered the palace as a fly, had approached
Freya's bedside, and was trying to steal her shining golden necklace,
Brisinga-men, the emblem of the fruitfulness of the earth.

Heimdall saw that the goddess was resting in her sleep in such a
way that no one could possibly unclasp the necklace without awaking
her. Loki stood hesitatingly by the bedside for a few moments, and
then began rapidly to mutter the runes which enabled the gods to
change their form at will. As he did this, Heimdall saw him shrivel
up until he was changed to the size and form of a flea, when he crept
under the bed-clothes and bit Freya's side, thus causing her to change
her position without being roused from sleep.

The clasp was now in view, and Loki, cautiously unfastening it,
secured the coveted treasure, and forthwith proceeded to steal away
with it. Heimdall immediately started out in pursuit of the midnight
thief, and quickly overtaking him, he drew his sword from its scabbard,
with intent to cut off his head, when the god transformed himself into
a flickering blue flame. Quick as thought, Heimdall changed himself
into a cloud and sent down a deluge of rain to quench the fire;
but Loki as promptly altered his form to that of a huge polar bear,
and opened wide his jaws to swallow the water. Heimdall, nothing
daunted, then likewise assumed the form of a bear, and attacked
fiercely; but the combat threatening to end disastrously for Loki,
the latter changed himself into a seal, and, Heimdall imitating him,
a last struggle took place, which ended in Loki being forced to give
up the necklace, which was duly restored to Freya.

In this myth, Loki is an emblem of drought, or of the baleful effects
of the too ardent heat of the sun, which comes to rob the earth
(Freya) of its most cherished ornament (Brisinga-men). Heimdall is a
personification of the gentle rain and dew, which after struggling
for a while with his foe, the drought, eventually conquers him and
forces him to relinquish his prize.



Heimdall's Names

Heimdall has several other names, among which we find those of
Hallinskide and Irmin, for at times he takes Odin's place and is
identified with that god, as well as with the other sword-gods, Er,
Heru, Cheru and Tyr, who are all noted for their shining weapons. He,
however, is most generally known as warder of the rainbow, and god
of heaven, and of the fruitful rains and dews which bring refreshment
to the earth.

Heimdall also shared with Bragi the honour of welcoming heroes to
Valhalla, and, under the name of Riger, was considered the divine
sire of the various classes which compose the human race, as appears
in the following story:

The Story of Riger


    "Sacred children,
    Great and small,
    Sons of Heimdall!"

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Heimdall left his place in Asgard one day to wander upon the earth,
as the gods were wont to do. He had not gone far ere he came to a poor
hut on the seashore, where he found Ai (great grandfather) and Edda
(great grandmother), a poor but worthy couple, who hospitably invited
him to share their meagre meal of porridge. Heimdall, who gave his
name as Riger, gladly accepted this invitation, and remained with
the couple three whole days, teaching them many things. At the end of
that time he left to resume his journey. Some time after his visit,
Edda bore a dark-skinned thick-set boy, whom she called Thrall.

Thrall soon showed uncommon physical strength and a great aptitude
for all heavy work; and when he had grown up he took to wife Thyr,
a heavily built girl with sunburnt hands and flat feet, who, like
her husband, laboured early and late. Many children were born to
this couple and from them all the serfs or thralls of the Northland
were descended.


    "They had children
    Lived and were happy;
     
    They laid fences,
    Enriched the plow-land,
    Tended swine,
    Herded goats,
    Dug peat."

            Rigsmal (Du Chaillu's version).


After leaving the poor hut on the barren seacoast Riger had
pushed inland, where ere long he came to cultivated fields and a
thrifty farmhouse. Entering this comfortable dwelling, he found Afi
(grandfather) and Amma (grandmother), who hospitably invited him to
sit down with them and share the plain but bountiful fare which was
prepared for their meal.

Riger accepted the invitation and he remained three days with
his hosts, imparting the while all manner of useful knowledge to
them. After his departure from their house, Amma gave birth to a
blue-eyed sturdy boy, whom she called Karl. As he grew up he exhibited
great skill in agricultural pursuits, and in due course he married
a buxom and thrifty wife named Snor, who bore him many children,
from whom the race of husbandmen is descended.


    "He did grow
    And thrive well;
    He broke oxen,
    Made plows;
    Timbered houses,
    Made barns,
    Made carts,
    And drove the plow."

            Rigsmal (Du Chaillu's version).


Leaving the house of this second couple, Riger continued his journey
until he came to a hill, upon which was perched a stately castle. Here
he was received by Fadir (father) and Modir (mother), who, delicately
nurtured and luxuriously clad, received him cordially, and set before
him dainty meats and rich wines.

Riger tarried three days with this couple, afterwards returning to
Himinbiorg to resume his post as guardian of Asa-bridge; and ere long
the lady of the castle bore a handsome, slenderly built little son,
whom she called Jarl. This child early showed a great taste for the
hunt and all manner of martial exercises, learned to understand runes,
and lived to do great deeds of valour which made his name distinguished
and added glory to his race. Having attained manhood, Jarl married
Erna, an aristocratic, slender-waisted maiden, who ruled his household
wisely and bore him many children, all destined to rule, the youngest
of whom, Konur, became the first king of Denmark. This myth well
illustrates the marked sense of class among the Northern races.


    "Up grew
    The sons of Jarl;
    They brake horses,
    Bent shields,
    Smoothed shafts,
    Shook ash spears
    But Kon, the young,
    Knew runes,
    Everlasting runes
    And life runes."

            Rigsmal (Du Chaillu's version).






CHAPTER XIV: HERMOD


The Nimble God

Another of Odin's sons was Hermod, his special attendant, a bright
and beautiful young god, who was gifted with great rapidity of motion
and was therefore designated as the swift or nimble god.


    "But there was one, the first of all the gods
    For speed, and Hermod was his name in Heaven;
    Most fleet he was."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).


On account of this important attribute Hermod was usually employed
by the gods as messenger, and at a mere sign from Odin he was always
ready to speed to any part of creation. As a special mark of favour,
Allfather gave him a magnificent corselet and helmet, which he
often donned when he prepared to take part in war, and sometimes
Odin entrusted to his care the precious spear Gungnir, bidding him
cast it over the heads of combatants about to engage in battle,
that their ardour might be kindled into murderous fury.


    "Let us Odin pray
    Into our minds to enter;
    He gives and grants
    Gold to the deserving.
    He gave to Hermod
    A helm and corselet."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Hermod delighted in battle, and was often called "the valiant in
battle," and confounded with the god of the universe, Irmin. It is
said that he sometimes accompanied the Valkyrs on their ride to earth,
and frequently escorted the warriors to Valhalla, wherefore he was
considered the leader of the heroic dead.


    "To him spake Hermoder and Brage:
      'We meet thee and greet thee from all,
    To the gods thou art known by thy valour,
      And they bid thee a guest to their hall.'"

            Owen Meredith.


Hermod's distinctive attribute, besides his corselet and helm, was a
wand or staff called Gambantein, the emblem of his office, which he
carried with him wherever he went.



Hermod and the Soothsayer

Once, oppressed by shadowy fears for the future, and unable to obtain
from the Norns satisfactory answers to his questions, Odin bade Hermod
don his armour and saddle Sleipnir, which he alone, besides Odin, was
allowed to ride, and hasten off to the land of the Finns. This people,
who lived in the frozen regions of the pole, besides being able to
call up the cold storms which swept down from the North, bringing much
ice and snow in their train, were supposed to have great occult powers.

The most noted of these Finnish magicians was Rossthiof (the horse
thief) who was wont to entice travellers into his realm by magic
arts, that he might rob and slay them; and he had power to predict
the future, although he was always very reluctant to do so.

Hermod, "the swift," rode rapidly northward, with directions to seek
this Finn, and instead of his own wand, he carried Odin's runic staff,
which Allfather had given him for the purpose of dispelling any
obstacles that Rossthiof might conjure up to hinder his advance. In
spite, therefore, of phantom-like monsters and of invisible snares
and pitfalls, Hermod was enabled safely to reach the magician's abode,
and upon the giant attacking him, he was able to master him with ease,
and he bound him hand and foot, declaring that he would not set him
free until he promised to reveal all that he wished to know.

Rossthiof, seeing that there was no hope of escape, pledged himself
to do as his captor wished, and upon being set at liberty, he began
forthwith to mutter incantations, at the mere sound of which the sun
hid behind the clouds, the earth trembled and quivered, and the storm
winds howled like a pack of hungry wolves.

Pointing to the horizon, the magician bade Hermod look, and the
swift god saw in the distance a great stream of blood reddening the
ground. While he gazed wonderingly at this stream, a beautiful woman
suddenly appeared, and a moment later a little boy stood beside
her. To the god's amazement, this child grew with such marvellous
rapidity that he soon attained his full growth, and Hermod further
noticed that he fiercely brandished a bow and arrows.

Rossthiof now began to explain the omens which his art had conjured
up, and he declared that the stream of blood portended the murder
of one of Odin's sons, but that if the father of the gods should woo
and win Rinda, in the land of the Ruthenes (Russia), she would bear
him a son who would attain his full growth in a few hours and would
avenge his brother's death.


    "Rind a son shall bear,
      In the western halls:
    He shall slay Odin's son,
      When one night old."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Hermod listened attentively to the words of Rossthiof and upon his
return to Asgard he reported all he had seen and heard to Odin,
whose fears were confirmed and who thus definitely ascertained that
he was doomed to lose a son by violent death. He consoled himself,
however, with the thought that another of his descendants would avenge
the crime and thereby obtain the satisfaction which a true Northman
ever required.




