gracious bounty of Christ towards returning sinners, the prophets have
left us many predictions. "Woe be to the shepherds of Israel," saith
Ezekiel, "who have not sought that which was lost: but with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were scattered, because there is no
shepherd. Behold, I, even I, will both search my sheep, and seek them out.
As a shepherd seeketh out his flock, in the day that he is among his sheep
that are scattered; so will I seek that which was lost, and bring again
that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and
will strengthen that which was sick." Ezek. 34:2, 4, 12, 16. And the
prophet Isaiah says, "He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall
gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom." Isai. 40:11.
Nor should only the _gracious nature_ of Christ move thee to _repentance_;
but more especially his extreme _sorrow_, and most innocent blood shed on
thine account. For consider within thyself:

(1.) That he laid down his life, not for heaven or earth, but for thy
soul. And wilt thou, by sin and impenitence, wantonly cast away so great
and valuable a treasure?

(2.) Remember, that thou couldest not have been redeemed by any other or
less price than the precious blood of Christ (1 Pet. 1:19). Why shouldest
thou deprive thyself of a ransom so inestimable as the Redeemer has paid
for thee?

(3.) Call to mind, that Christ has redeemed thee from the world, from sin
and the devil. And dost thou desire to continue longer in the service of
so hard and cruel a master?

(4.) Be assured, that without unfeigned repentance, the merit of Christ
will avail thee nothing; yea, that thou tramplest under foot his blood,
and dost "despite unto the Spirit of grace." Heb. 10:29.

(5.) Lastly, consider how sharp and cruel were the sufferings which thy
Saviour underwent on thy account! How he wept and sorrowed, trembled and
feared! Heb. 5:7. How grievously he was wounded for thy transgressions
(Isa. 53:5), and, at last, as a worm (Ps. 22:6), and cursed (Gal. 3:13),
hung upon a tree! How loudly this mournful scene calls on thee to repent!

III. THREATS OF TEMPORAL PUNISHMENT.

9. "God judgeth the righteous," saith the Psalmist, "and God is angry with
the wicked every day. If he turn not, he will whet his sword: he hath bent
his bow, and made it ready: he hath also prepared for him the instruments
of death: he ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors." Ps. 7:11-13.

10. This wrath and revenge, no man will ever be able to escape, as the
prophet Amos affirms: "He that escapeth of them shall not be delivered.
Though they climb up to heaven, thence I will bring them down: and though
they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command
the serpent, and he shall bite them. Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are
upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face of the
earth." Amos 9:1-3, 8. "Their blood shall be poured out as dust," saith
Zephaniah, 1:17, 18, "and their flesh as the dung. Neither their silver,
nor their gold, shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord's
wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy."
Such terrible threatenings as these should lead us to unfeigned
repentance; this being the only means by which to prevent impending
desolation, and the total destruction of nations and cities; as evidently
appears from the example of Nineveh. Jonah 3:5, 10. "At what instant I
shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up,
and to pull down, and to destroy it; if that nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them." Jer. 18:7, 8.

IV. DEATH.

11. God has concealed the time of our death from us, that thereby we may
be kept in the daily and uninterrupted practice of true repentance, as not
knowing which hour may be our last. "The whole life of a man is given him
for repentance," saith St. Bernard. And this repentance is a Christian's
daily cross and tribulation. Thus it is said in the Psalms: "I am ready to
halt, and my sorrow is continually before me." Ps. 38:17; 73:14. God has
promised grace to the penitent, but he has not promised to sinners another
day in which to repent. "It is appointed unto men once to die; but after
this the judgment." Heb. 9:27. Such as God shall find thee, as such will
he judge thee: wherefore, live in such a manner as thou wouldest wish to
have done, when thou art dying. Consider seriously in thy mind, where they
now are, who but a few years ago wasted their lives with lust and vanity,
and freely enjoyed the "good things" of this world? Luke 16:25. They are
all gone to their own place, where they wait for the day of judgment.
Wherefore, "come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." Rev. 18:4.

V. THE LAST JUDGMENT.

12. For after death, there is neither place nor time for repentance. It is
in this world that eternal life is either lost or obtained. Those that
repent betimes, shall not be condemned in judgment; but the impenitent
will hear the awful sentence: "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire." Matt. 25:41. "Behold, therefore, now is the accepted time; behold,
now is the day of salvation!" (2 Cor. 6:2), which will be followed by the
day of judgment in the other world. "To-day, therefore, if ye will hear
his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation; lest I swear in
my wrath, that ye shall not enter into my rest." Ps. 95:7, 8, 11; Heb.
3:7, 8, 11. "For we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, whether it be good
or bad." 2 Cor. 5:10. Those, therefore, who here repent, "shall have their
sins covered" (Ps. 32:1), and "they shall no more be mentioned unto them,"
as the prophet declares. Ezek. 33:16. Lay hold, therefore, on the offer of
mercy betimes, know and confess thy sins, O man, that they may be remitted
and forgotten.

VI. ETERNAL PAINS OF HELL.

13. With this present life, the season of the mercy of God closes. It will
then be said: "Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things." Luke 16:25. Thy life is now over. Thou art now dead! Dead to God
forever, to whom thou didst refuse to live in time! There is no redemption
from hell. Ps. 49:14-20. How can the damned enjoy the goodness of God, to
which they were dead whilst they were alive, and to which they will now
continue dead to all eternity! Remember, therefore, that now is the only
time for mercy, and the hour of visitation to repent; whereas, there the
damned so die, as, notwithstanding, always to live; and so live, as yet to
die eternally. All the senses will there suffer torment. The sight shall
be punished with eternal darkness; the ears shall be filled with weeping
and gnashing of teeth; the smell with stench of fire and brimstone; the
taste with the bitterness of eternal death; and the feeling with a sense
of endless tortures and miseries.

VII. THE JOY OF ETERNAL LIFE.

14. Is it not a very high degree of folly, to prefer a short perishing
pleasure to an eternal joy; and a worthless trifle, to the glorious
presence of God? Now none shall enter into this, but he who has thoroughly
washed himself, and "made white his robes in the blood of the Lamb." Rev.
3:14. "For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie." Rev.
22:15. None of those, who, having been here invited to the feast of
Christ, yet refused to come, "shall taste of his supper." Luke 14:24. The
highest joy of eternal life, will consist in "seeing God as he is." 1 John
3:2. _To see God_, is all in all, and an eternal reward. "Ye shall see
me," says our Lord, "and your heart shall rejoice; and your joy no man
taketh from you." John 16:19, 22. This sight of the face of God is the joy
of the angels; it is their life, and the invisible food by which they are
sustained. Now as this vision of God creates the most exalted joy, so to
be banished from it, is to suffer the greatest, the most terrible, and the
most severe torment, and eternal misery.




Chapter IX.


   Showing What Repentance Is, And The Manner In Which The Sinner Truly
      Repents; Also, How The Goodness Of God Leads Us To Repentance.


    _Therefore also now, saith the Lord, turn ye even to me with all
    your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:
    and rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
    your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
    great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil_.--JOEL 2:12, 13.


The Lord, whose mercy is infinite, by no means seeks our destruction, but
rather our life and happiness. He best knows the wretched and deplorable
condition into which we are fallen by sin; and he is also desirous to
reclaim us from that dangerous state, and to preserve us from everlasting
ruin. It is for this reason, that he so earnestly invites the soul to
repentance, and engages us to the same by many strong and powerful
motives.

2. Sometimes God is pleased to stir us up by terrible _threatenings_.
"Behold," says he, "I will bring evil upon this people; because they have
not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it." Jer. 6:19.
Again, "And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the Lord, and
I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not;
therefore, will I cast you out of my sight." Jer. 7:13, 15. This dreadful
proclamation of both temporal and eternal calamities, should strike fear
and terror into us: for the threatening of God is not an empty voice, nor
a sound that vanishes into nothing, but it is accompanied with many
terrible effects, and consuming wrath, as will in its time more fully
appear, and which we even feel already by sad experience; since miseries
and calamities, like a flood, seem to carry all before them. Nay, they
will undoubtedly multiply upon us, and exert themselves with the utmost
fury and fierceness, except we betimes prevent them by a sincere
repentance. Thus the wrath of God shall be poured forth in wars, famines,
pestilence, fire, and inundations, till he has at length destroyed our
very _foundations_, as he did once to the city of Jerusalem. Lam. 4:11.

3. But if the proclamation of wrath and judgment cannot prevail upon us,
yet ought God's abounding _goodness_, attended as it is with so many
endearing marks of love, to melt our hearts, and to soften them into true
and earnest repentance. For thus hath the Lord spoken by the prophet:
"Return, thou backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to fall
upon you: for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep anger for
ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against
the Lord thy God." Jer. 3:12, 13. In these words, God makes a free offer
of his grace, entreats and adjures us to return to him again, for he is
willing to accept our repentance.

4. The passages that have been quoted, are a convincing proof that God, by
his grace, mercy, patience, and clemency, strongly invites us to true
repentance. There are chiefly three things in those scriptures, which
deserve a more particular observation: namely, the _nature_ of repentance,
or what it is to repent; that is, to turn unto the Lord:--the _manner_ in
which repentance is to be wrought out; that is, by fasting, weeping, and
mourning:--the _motive_ to engage us in so holy an exercise, which is the
paternal goodness of God; "_for I am merciful_."

As to the _first_, we know that _to repent_, is nothing else but to be
led, through the _law_ of God, to acknowledge the natural blindness of our
hearts, and that detestable impurity which lurks within. Next, we ought to
regard this as the very source whence all other sins proceed, and whereby
we depart from God, the supreme and eternal Good, deserving not only
various punishments here, but also his everlasting wrath in hell
hereafter. All this ought to awaken in us sorrow and distress, not so much
by reason of the threatened punishment, as rather on account of the
heinousness of the many provocations offered to a merciful Father, who in
his very nature is love and kindness. This being done, we may then raise
again our souls by virtue of the _Gospel_, and with a well-grounded faith,
rely on the favor of God, and on the sure remission of sin promised in
Christ Jesus. This must necessarily be attended with a serious amendment
of life, with a constant purification of the heart by faith, with a
mortification of all evil desires, and with a sincere abnegation of our
own will, so opposite to that of God. In a word, it will be accompanied
with a new life acceptable unto God in Christ, and with fruit worthy of
repentance; suitably to what God enjoins by the prophet: "Wash ye, make
you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease
to do evil, learn to do well. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow." Isaiah 1:16, 18.

5. But alas! here is the difficulty! These things are much more easily
said, than reduced to practice. The reason is, because hardly any will
earnestly engage in so weighty a work, or search into the true original
cause of the many dreadful disorders that appear in our lives and conduct.
Man flatters himself with a confident opinion of his own goodness, and
cherishes the affection of the old man. There are few who care to see
their hearts in their inward and native depravity; or to be made sensible
of that vein of evil nature which runs through all their actions, even the
best and most shining. And thus Christ himself, and the grace of God,
manifested by him, are wantonly disregarded.

6. And yet Joel (2:12) requires us to "turn unto God with all our heart,
with fasting, with weeping, and with mourning." Hereby he intimates that
we are turned away from God; have forsaken the fountain of living waters
(Jer. 2:13); and are now unable to attain life and happiness again, unless
we "_search_ our ways," and "_return_" unto him from whom we are gone
astray. Lam. 3:40. It is for this purpose that the Prophet charges
"backsliding children" to return, with the promise annexed, that the "Lord
will heal their backslidings." Jer. 3:22. For this verily is the will of
God, that we should see and confess our misery, in order that he may
compassionately heal it.

7. But since, by nature, we are so blind as to be utterly unable of
ourselves sufficiently to discover our own wretchedness; God has been
pleased to afford means, with a view to bringing us to a sound knowledge
of ourselves. This is done by his holy Word and the Sacraments, which are
always accompanied with his grace and Spirit. By these the Father draws,
allures, and calls us to himself, as so many lost and wandering sheep.
John 6:44. For as a straying sheep cannot of itself return, but must of
necessity be sought and brought back to the fold by the shepherd, so we
would forever go astray in the wilderness of sin and error, did not God
himself carefully seek us; and this the examples of Peter and Paul
abundantly confirm. Therefore the prophet says: "Turn thou me, O Lord, and
I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God." Jer. 31:18. "Heal me, O
Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art
my praise." Jer. 17:14. "For it is God," says the apostle, "which worketh
in us, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure." Phil. 2:13.

8. When, therefore, the Lord graciously awakens us by these means, and
invites us to repentance, it is our part, not to withstand his grace and
Spirit; (as it is said, "To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts") (Ps. 95:7, 8); but to confess the sin which he thus reproves in
us, and by no means make light of the grace offered to us in the Gospel.
Then God will assuredly have mercy upon us, as he himself declares: "Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon." Isa. 55:7.

9. Upon this account the work of conversion, though it is entirely a work
of God's grace, is yet in one respect ascribed to us; namely, as we _give_
up ourselves to the Lord, and to his operations, and do not wantonly
resist his Spirit, despise his grace, and cast it from us; or, as the
apostle expresses it, do not put his Word from us, nor stop our ears
against it, as did the Jews of old. Acts 13:46; 7:57. On the contrary,
when the severity of the _law_ has laid open our spiritual diseases, and
we have felt the bitterness thereof; let us avail ourselves of the
_Gospel_ as a healing remedy, and suffer our heavenly Physician to restore
us to health.

10. An image of this we have in a straying sheep. If it but hear at a
distance the voice of the shepherd, it starts back immediately, and
returns to him. And how willingly would the lost sinner follow the voice
of his Shepherd, if sin had not so perverted him, as to reduce him lower
than the very beasts in stupidity and dulness! Of this indeed the prophet
complains: "The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but
Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider." Isa. 1:3. "Shall they
fall," asks another prophet, "and not arise? Shall he turn away, and not
return? The stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times, and the
turtle, and the crane, and the swallow, observe the times of their coming:
but my people know not the judgment of the Lord." Jer. 8:4, 7.

11. We ought, therefore, most fervently to implore the Lord, not to
withdraw from us his gracious assistance, without which we must certainly
go astray. For since sin and the old Adam constantly abide in our corrupt
flesh and blood, we have need of daily, yea, hourly supplies of grace, for
repressing the tyranny of sin, and for nourishing the life of God within
us. The grace of God is the life of our soul, as the soul is the life of
the body. And as the life of the body, without the free enjoyment of the
air, must soon be extinct; so the vital flame of the inward life will
speedily languish, without a daily supply of grace to support it. For this
reason Solomon prayed: "The Lord our God be with us; let him not leave us,
nor forsake us; that he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all
his ways." 1 Kings 8:57.

12. This is a lesson which ought not to be learned in a light and general
manner, but by a close and practical application be brought home to every
one in particular. Let, therefore, every one look into his own heart and
seek its renewal, that so all may be reformed in time. Let us remember
that comfortable exhortation, and the promise annexed thereto: "Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near." Isa.
55:6. "And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with
all your heart, saith the Lord." Jer. 29:13.

13. But in order to true repentance, it is not enough to refrain only from
gross sins, and foul visible transgressions; but the heart, whence all
those evils proceed, is to be changed and purified; that so inward pride,
covetousness, and lust, with all sinful affections, may be mortified at
last. For whilst the heart is unchanged, unreformed, and unrenewed; that
is, whilst our own corrupt temper, our inward malice, wrath, hatred,
enmity, revenge, lying, and deceit, are quietly suffered within us; all
our boasts of, and pretences to, and formalities in, religion, are but
mere show and hypocrisy. God requires no less than a new heart, and "a new
creature in Christ Jesus." 2 Cor. 5:17. No one is so holy, so good, and so
thoroughly cleansed, but he will still find something in his own heart to
be thrown out, or to be amended and rectified. "As a fountain casteth out
her waters, so Jerusalem casteth out her wickedness." Jer. 6:7. This is
the first head, relating to the nature of repentance, of which more has
been said in Book I.

14. Let us now consider, in the second place, the _manner_ of our
returning to God: "with all the heart," says the prophet, "with fasting,
with weeping, and with mourning." Wretched mortals can weep floods of
tears for empty and perishing goods, whilst they stand unmoved at the
miserable state of their souls, and at the loss of an eternal and
incorruptible inheritance! In this they are altogether unlike David, who,
by his example, sets a most shining pattern of sincere and unfeigned
repentance before us. See Ps. 6, and Ps. 38. "For the Lord looketh on the
heart" (1 Sam. 16:7), and "trieth the heart and reins." Ps. 7:9.

15. What the prophet says of fasting, is to be understood of a general
fast enjoined by the prophet to all the people. In such a fast the whole
body of a nation were wont to be concerned. They publicly confessed their
sins; they deplored and bewailed them; and thus humbling themselves before
God, fasted both inwardly and outwardly. And in this order they begged
remission of sin, and deprecated the judgments of God gathering over them.
Such a general fast and public repentance as this, such sincere
conversion, prayer, faith, confession, and supplication, are the most
effectual means to appease the wrath of an offended God, and to avert his
judgments from whole kingdoms and nations. This plainly appears from the
history of the defeat of the other tribes of Israel, by that of Benjamin;
in which the former having in two battles lost forty thousand men, all
went up and came before the Lord, with weeping and mourning, and there
fasted the whole day, from morning to night. Judges 20:26. A similar
illustrious example is recorded of the fast of the Ninevites (Jonah 3:5,
10): and of the children of Israel, who, being beaten by the Philistines,
kept a fast for seven days together, after Saul and Jonathan were slain in
the battle. 1 Chron. 10:12.

16. Such solemn penitential fasts were also in use in the primitive
Church, when the Christians met together, and in any great public calamity
humbled themselves before the Lord. Not, surely, to obtain remission of
sin by such performances, as so many meritorious acts of devotion; but by
a contrite, sober, and humble heart, to deprecate the judgments that were
ready to break in upon them. And such fasts might with propriety still be
observed.

17. Fasts such as these, accompanied with true repentance, would prove an
impregnable wall and fortification against all our enemies; a sovereign
medicine in all pestilential diseases; and a safeguard about all our
estates and possessions. An example of this we have in Job, who, whenever
his children had spent any day in mirth and feasting, "offered up unto God
prayers and sacrifices for them" (Job 1:4, 5); and thus, as it were,
fortified his house by prayer against the insults of wicked men and
devils.

18. In great public calamities the Lord looks out for such men as may,
like a bulwark, oppose his wrath when ready to make a breach. "I sought
for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap
before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none.
Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed
them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I recompensed upon
their heads, saith the Lord God." Ezek. 22:30, 31. We may also remember,
on this occasion, the intercession of Abraham. Gen. 18:23.

19. Thus the prophet Daniel was a wall of defence when he made confession
to God of the sins of all the people. Dan. 9:4, 5, etc. And the prophet
Joel, in very moving terms, describes such a penitential fast: "Blow the
trumpet in Zion; sanctify a fast; call a solemn assembly; gather the
people; sanctify the congregation; assemble the elders; gather the
children, and those that suck the breasts; let the bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. Let the priests, the
ministers of the Lord, say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine
heritage to reproach." Joel 2:15-17.

20. Such public fasts ought to be celebrated by the whole multitude,
without hypocrisy, with ardent zeal and devotion; for it is the will of
God, that every one readily confess his sins. He requires true humility,
sincere repentance, and a turning to him with our whole heart. Hence the
prophet commands the "heart, and not the garments," to be rent. The Jews,
at the hearing of any sad or terrible evil, were accustomed to rend their
clothes, in order to evidence thereby the inward sorrow with which they
were affected. This, however, like their fasting, was often a mere
formality, and their grief was only pretended. Wherefore, the prophet
reproves them, saying, "Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a
man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to
spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Wilt thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to
loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy
house? When thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide
not thyself from thine own flesh?" Isa. 58:5-7.

21. These words explain the nature of a true fast; which is then only
kept, when, on the one hand, we abstain from sin, subdue the wanton lusts
of the flesh, and keep the old man, with all his members, under constant
restraint and subjection: and, on the other, when we are fervent in works
of charity, in the practice of patience and mercy, and of the other
virtues springing up from a contrite, sincere, and penitent heart. And it
is with regard to these inward acts of humiliation, that the prophet bids
us _rend our hearts_. For as the wounds of the heart must necessarily be
very painful; so the grief occasioned by our sins should affect us, as if
our very hearts were bruised and crushed. And this "broken spirit," this
"contrite heart," is that _sacrifice_ which is so highly acceptable to
God. Ps. 51:17. Such a heart has, by faith, obtained a due fitness to
receive the influence of the grace of God, the consolations of the Holy
Spirit, and the merit and blood of Jesus Christ. As a hard and massive
stone cannot be penetrated by the oil or water poured upon it, until it be
broken to pieces; so the sovereign balm of God's grace and consolation
cannot comfort and quicken the heart, except it be first broken and
softened into humility, that so by faith it may partake of the merit of
Christ. "Not the whole, but the sick, have need of a physician." Matt. 9:
12. Let no one think that he belongs to Christ, unless he has first
"crucified the flesh, with its affections and lusts." Gal. 5:24. The blood
of Christ will be of no profit to any except to those who embrace it with
a contrite, afflicted, penitent, humble and believing heart.

22. As for the _motives_ to repentance, which make up the third head, they
are thus expressed by the prophet: "Turn unto the Lord, _for_ he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth
him of the evil." Joel 2:12, 13. He lays down in these words, a gradual
display of the manifold mercies offered to returning sinners. As if he had
said, "If you think it a small thing that I am _gracious_, then know that
I am _merciful_ also: if this be not enough, I am likewise _patient_ and
_slow to anger_: if this will not yet suffice, then I am, moreover, of
_great kindness_. If, after all, you still require something more, then
understand, that I easily _repent_ of intended punishments; yea, even when
my avenging hand is lifting up, I am ready to let fall the rod, upon your
serious repentance."

23. First, then, the prophet calls God _gracious_ (Ps. 103:8); that is,
ready to be entreated and reconciled. God is easy to be prevailed with,
forgives offences, deals not in strict justice and the rigor of the law,
according to what we have deserved. And all these marks of mercy should
lead us to repentance. There are many admirable promises, all tending to
the same end. "If thou afflict them, they will cry unto me, and I will
surely hear; for I am gracious." Ex. 22:23, 27. "Therefore will the Lord
wait that he may be gracious unto you. Thou shalt weep no more; he will be
very gracious unto thee, at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it,
he will answer thee." Isa. 30:18. That is, the Most High is so rich in
grace, that he waits for you. In him there is _expecting grace_, by which
he readily receives those that truly return: _prevenient grace_, expressed
by the Psalmist--"Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent (_that is_, meet,
_or_ anticipate) us" (Ps. 79:8): _protecting grace_, noticed by the same
prophet; "He that trusteth in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about"
(Ps. 32:10): _preserving grace_; "Surely," says David, "mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life." Ps. 23:6. Of this we have given examples in
the preceding chapter. With this agree also the words of Scripture: "With
the Lord there is mercy; and with him is plenteous redemption." Ps. 130:7.
Wherefore, let the divine clemency and grace move thee to sincere and
unfeigned repentance.

24. Secondly, the prophet declares that God is _merciful_. To be
_merciful_, is to be easily moved by the miseries of another, and from the
very heart to compassionate his case. This is to be seen in parents, who,
not only with unfeigned tenderness love their children, but are at the
same time so deeply touched with their misery and weakness, as to be
willing even to die for them, if that were possible. Thus David, when he
lamented the death of his son Absalom, mournfully exclaimed: "O my son
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom,
my son, my son!" 2 Sam. 18:33. But these bowels of mercy, this ardent,
cordial, and tender affection, are infinitely more conspicuous in God
himself, who, from an abounding sense of love and kindness, has given up
his Son to death, and thereby transcended all the affections of earthly
parents. This is declared by the prophet: "Can a woman forget her sucking
child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea,
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee." Isa. 49:15. And by another,
"Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spake against
him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled
for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord." Jer. 31:20.
And again by another, "The Lord thy God is a merciful God; he will not
forget the covenant of thy fathers, which he sware unto them." Deut. 4:31.
And David confirms it: "The Lord is merciful and gracious." Ps. 103:8. And
again, calling to mind this mercy, when of three punishments he had it in
his power to choose which he pleased, he answered, "Let us fall now into
the hand of the Lord; for his mercies are great." 2 Sam. 24:14. Would to
God that his paternal mercy might also allure us to unfeigned repentance!
St. Paul himself refers to this most powerful inducement, when he
beseeches us "by the _mercies_ of God, etc." Rom. 12:1.

25. The third appellation given to God by the prophet is, that he is
patient, or _slow to anger_. He is not easily moved to wrath; he suffers
many provocations offered him, and gives time for repentance and
conversion. All which he has abundantly evidenced by many real
demonstrations, powerful enough to convince us, that even in God himself,
"Love beareth all things, endureth all things" (1 Cor. 13:7), even as
parents bear with their children. To this purpose says St. Peter, "The
Lord is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance." 2 Pet. 3:9. And again, "Account that
the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation." 2 Pet. 3:15. And Paul
wishes, that "the goodness of God may lead us to repentance." Rom. 2:4. To
this long-suffering of God it was entirely due, that he granted the old
world a hundred and twenty years in which to repent; bearing all that time
with their provocations, and waiting for repentance. Gen. 6:3. And O! how
much time hath he given us to repent in, and to work out our salvation!
But this divine grace is abused by those who only grow more wanton by
mercies, and "turn even the grace of God itself into lasciviousness."
Jude, ver. 4. But by this they only hasten their ruin, and render more
grievous the punishment which they deserve. If one, and then another of
these many and provoking affronts, with which men offend an omnipotent
God, were daily put upon a mere mortal, nothing certainly could be
expected but the utmost severity of his resentment. How inconceivably
great then must be the patience of God, who not only pardons offences so
numerous and so heinous, but also returns all manner of kindness to the
offender himself. O! that the inconceivable patience of the Lord might
inspire us with a hatred of sin, and lead us all to repentance!

26. Fourthly, God is represented to be _of great kindness_; so great
indeed, that no sin, how great soever, can surpass it. For as God is
essentially and wholly good, so is he desirous to communicate himself
wholly to men, provided they be willing to receive and admit him. Yea, by
his nature he can be and do nothing but good. He takes a pleasure therein,
and "rejoiceth over us to do us good." Jer. 32:41. His mercy is as great
as himself, that is, infinite. It extends to all mankind. "Thy mercy, O
Lord, is in the heavens." Ps. 36:5. "As the heaven is high above the
earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him." Ps. 103:11. And
we read in the Lamentations: "It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not: they are new every morning:
great is thy faithfulness." Lam. 3:22. See, therefore, O man! that a
goodness so inexpressible be no longer abused, but that it animate thee to
sincere repentance.

27. And lastly, the prophet says of the Lord, "_It repenteth him of the
evil._" This is as if he would say: "It is the nature of God, to punish
with reluctance; and when he is even constrained thereto, it is not for
our destruction, but salvation, that we be not condemned with the world."
1 Cor. 11:32. He then doth "his strange work" (of punishment), that he may
bring to pass his own work (of mercy). Isa. 28:21. Thus he repented of the
evil he had designed against Nineveh. Jonah 3:10. And, therefore, "it is
good, that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord. For the Lord will not cast off for ever: but though he cause
grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his
mercies. For he doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men." Lam. 3:26, 31-33. Therefore, repent of thy sins.

28. For as soon as thou repentest of sin, and supplicatest the Lord in
true faith, God will also repent of the punishment he intended to inflict.
The words of the Lord to Jonah are very memorable: "Doest thou well to be
angry for the gourd? Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou
hast not labored, neither madest it grow, which came up in a night, and
perished in a night: and should not I spare Nineveh, that great city,
wherein are more than six score thousand persons?" Jonah 4:9-11. This
boundless mercy is still the same even at this day, and will continue so
forever to penitent and returning sinners. Go, therefore, O man, and let
this overflowing mercy of God lead thee to repentance!




Chapter X.


                 The Four Properties Of True Repentance.


    _I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping,
    because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted
    me up, and cast me down. My days are like a shadow that declineth;
    and I am withered like grass. But thou, O Lord, shalt endure for
    ever, and thy remembrance unto all generations._--PS. 102:9, etc.


In these words _four properties_ of true repentance are enjoined on a
sinner. The _first_ is, _to account himself unworthy of all the mercies of
God_. This is contained in these words: "I have eaten ashes like bread,
and mingled my drink with weeping:" that is, There is nothing I can take
any more delight in, and I account myself unworthy of any good or
delicious fare. This, however pleasing it may be to the palate of others,
is not more savory to me than mere ashes.--The same regard to our own
unworthiness is thus inculcated by the Lord: "If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me."
Luke 9:23. And, "If any man come to me, and hate not his own life, he
cannot be my disciple." Luke 14:26. Herein is expressed a threefold
reference which a true Christian ought to have to his own unworthiness.

2. (_a_) _First_ then, he is commanded to _deny himself_: that is, to die
to self-will, to self-love, and self-honor, esteeming himself utterly
unworthy of any of the benefits conferred by God on other men; or judging
himself not "worthy of the least of all the mercies" of God (Gen. 32:10);
and reputing himself the most inconsiderable, not only of all men, but
even of all other creatures; after the words of the Psalm: "I am a worm,
and no man." Ps. 22:6. In this manner, for a man to despise himself, is
truly to _deny himself_.

3. (_b_) He is commanded, _secondly_, to _hate himself_; that is, to
condemn in himself whatever is pleasing and acceptable to the flesh; as
honor, luxury, revenge, anger, avarice, and whatever else savors of the
flesh. He is to crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts, and to
abhor in himself its whole offspring, as the work of the devil himself,
tending only to increase and nourish the perverse seed of original
depravity. And such self-abhorrence in a sinner, will then of necessity be
followed by pleading _guilty_, and by looking upon himself as one worthy
of eternal death.

4. (_c_) The _third_ lesson enjoined in these words, consists in _taking
up the cross, and in following the Lord_: that is, that we, not with a
morose and discontented, but with a ready mind, bear all manner of
sufferings, and deem ourselves worthy, not only of these, but even of far
more grievous afflictions. Thus Christ himself, whose example is set
before us, "endured the cross, and despised the shame" (Heb. 12:2),
thereby teaching us, that in "quietness and confidence shall be our
strength." Isa. 30:15. And all that is comprehended in the imitation of,
or following after, Christ.

5. Upon the whole, these things make it appear, that a soul truly humble
and penitent, thinks itself unworthy of all divine benefits, and even of
daily food and refreshment. And this accords with the example of Christ
himself, who, parched with thirst on the cross, and having vinegar given
him mixed with gall, said no more, than, "It is finished." John 19:30.
This was the reason also, that the true penitents under the old law judged
themselves entirely unworthy of any good thing. They put sackcloth on
their bodies, and sat in ashes. They satisfied their hunger with bread
taken from the ashes, and quenched their thirst with water mingled with
tears; as a testimony that they did not deserve any cleaner or better
food, but merited rather to eat and to drink with their food, the very
tears that trickled upon it.

6. Now the _cause_ of this great self-abasement, was that profound sense
with which they were affected, that, on account of their sin, they
deserved an eternal curse and condemnation. This consideration lays the
returning sinner very low. He deems himself utterly unworthy even of the
least of the benefits of God. An illustration of this we have in
Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan. When David was raised to the royal
dignity, he called to mind the kindness of his friend Jonathan, who
formerly had delivered him out of the hand of his father Saul; and
commanding search to be made, whether there remained any of Jonathan's
family, to whom he might make a suitable return of thanks; he at last
found Mephibosheth, a lame and poor man, who, being ordered by David to
eat bread at the king's table, bowed himself, and exclaimed: "What is thy
servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?" 2 Sam.
9:8. This is a pattern, indeed, of a soul truly contrite in spirit and
penitent in heart, and, therefore, sensible of both its own unworthiness,
and of all the mercies bestowed on it by the Lord. And truly we may, with
far greater reason, make use of the same humble speech, whenever the Lord
our God vouchsafes to us, as it were, the food of his own table, and in
the Holy Supper gives us his body and blood to eat and drink.

7. In like manner does the Prodigal Son, after his repentance, express his
sorrowful mind to his Father: "Father," says he, "I am no more worthy to
be called thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants." Luke 15:19. The
woman of Canaan was even content to be called a dog, if she were but
permitted to "eat of the crumbs falling from the master's table." Matt.
15:27. Peter says to the Lord: "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man!"
(Luke 5:8); that is, I am not worthy that thou shouldest have any further
converse with me. And the centurion of Capernaum was of the same mind:
"Lord," says he, "I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof."
Matt. 8:8. So also St. Paul professes himself to be "not meet to be called
an apostle" (1 Cor. 15:9): and declares, that he "counted not his life
dear unto him, so that he might finish his course with joy." Acts 20:24.
This inward sense of self-abasement David expresses when he speaks of
"eating ashes like bread, and mingling his drink with weeping." If the
heart of a Christian be brought to a sense of this vileness, then it is
truly contrite and humble, and fit to be made a living sacrifice unto the
Lord. Ps. 51:19.

8. A _second_ property of true repentance, is, _to grieve at nothing so
much as at the offences offered to God himself_. This is intimated in
these words: "Because of thine indignation and thy wrath, for thou hast
lifted me up, and cast me down." That is, Of all my other miseries and
griefs, the greatest and most insupportable, is the sense I have of my
having so heinously offended the infinitely good, holy, and righteous God.

9. Since God is nothing but love, grace, righteousness, goodness, and
mercy, yea, the original source of all virtue, He must of necessity be
offended with every sin committed by men; since the nature of sin is
directly opposite to the nature of God. Thus by injustice, the justice of
God is offended, he being justice itself. By lying, the truth of God is
offended, he being truth itself. By hatred the love of God is offended, he
being love itself. In a word, since God is the perfection of all virtue,
goodness, and love, it can be no other than diabolical malice to offend
such infinite goodness, such immense love, nay, _Love_ itself. Had he at
any time injured us, it might be no such great wonder, if we hated him,
and offended him in our turn: but now, that he gives us nothing but what
is good--soul, body, and life itself; that he feeds and clothes us; that he
heals our body when it is sick; yea, pardons our sins when we pour out to
him our souls; is ready to receive us into favor, as often as we return;
now that he has given us his only Son with the Holy Spirit, yea, and
Himself too, and adopted us into the number of his children: and having
done all this for men, to be yet offended, opposed, and hated by them, is
a madness, a malice altogether unaccountable and monstrous. Would it not
be most wicked and impious to kill him who gave thee life; to beat and
wound him, who kindly embraced and cherished thee in his bosom; to insult
and affront him, who heaped honors and dignities upon thee; and to disown
and reject him, who had chosen thee for his son? But all these, and far
greater indignities, thou offerest to thy heavenly Father, to the supreme,
the righteous, the holy God, whom angels adore and fear, and whom seraphim
worship with the acclamations of "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts;
the whole earth is full of his glory!" Isa. 6:3. And thou, who art but
dust and ashes, art not afraid to offend him! If a penitent man earnestly
calls to mind this monstrous sin, it is impossible but he must be affected
with the keenest sorrow of heart, and feel the smart of his wounded
conscience to equal and even exceed that of a wounded body. And there is
all the reason in the world why it should be so. For hence must
necessarily arise a dread and terror, _inwardly_ threatening the
conscience with wrath and judgment, and _outwardly_ setting before it the
approach of temporal calamities: whence a man, even as Job complains (ch.
6:1, etc.), finds no rest, takes no delight in anything, loathing even his
meat and drink. These terrible pangs of conscience are described by David:
"Thine arrows," says he, "stick fast in me: and thy hand presseth me
sore." Ps. 38:2. For as a wound grievously smarts and grows worse whilst
the arrow remains fixed in it; so also it is with the conscience, whilst
the sting of sin and judgment is not taken away. And these lashes and
clamors proceed from nothing but the sentence of divine justice proclaimed
in the conscience, and the terrors of hell and death attending it.
Therefore, David exclaims, "Thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down:"
like one thrown down from a lofty rock into a low valley, who is so
bruised and maimed, that not one sound limb remains.

10. But how terrible soever the fear of the judgments of God may prove to
an awakened conscience, yet is there some ground of comfort; since the
prophet tells us, that these arrows, these threats, these terrors, are the
arrows and terrors of GOD himself. And it is God, who having thereby
wounded and broken the heart, heals and restores it again. It is HE that
killeth, and it is He that maketh alive; He boweth down, and He raiseth
again (Ps. 146:8); He bringeth down to the grave, and He bringeth up
again. 1 Sam. 2:6.

11. Whosoever, therefore, accounts and feels nothing to be more bitter and
grievous, than to have offended _God_, the infinite Good, and Love itself;
he only has experimentally learned the doctrine of contrition, and laid a
firm foundation for sound and genuine godliness. This was one of David's
acts of repentance: "Against THEE," says he, "Thee only, have I sinned."
Ps. 51:4. As if he had said, "This is my anguish and sorrow, that I have
offended THEE." And Daniel thus expresses himself: "Lord, righteousness
belongeth unto THEE, but unto us, confusion of face," because we have
offended so righteous a God. Dan. 9:7.

12. The _third_ property of repentance is contained in these words: "My
days are like a shadow that declineth; and I am withered like grass." That
is, a heart truly penitent, is deeply sensible of its own weakness. It
entirely despairs of its own strength and ability, knowing itself to be as
destitute of life and power, as the very shadow; and as empty of spirit
and moisture, as the grass that fadeth away. The same is affirmed in
another Psalm: "Behold, thou hast made my days as a handbreadth, and mine
age is as nothing before thee: verily, every man at his best state is
altogether vanity." Ps. 39:5.

13. O! how noble a step would it be toward the attainment of substantial
wisdom, were man but sensible of his own NOTHINGNESS! Man is nothing, as a
shadow is nothing. As a shadow is without life, and without substance of
itself, and vanishes at the departure of the sun; so is the condition of
man, whenever the Lord withdraws the light of life from him! And it is
worthy of observation, that, the nearer the sun is, the less are the
shadows observed to be; and on the contrary, the farther the sun removes
from us, the larger the shadows appear. The same happens to man: the more
of God and his gifts is present with a good man, the less he esteems
himself, the less he boasts of himself, and of what he calls _his_. On the
contrary, the farther a man is removed from God, the greater he is in his
own eyes; the more he is puffed up with his parts and abilities, the more
he extends the bounds of his pride, and the less he knows how to keep
within proper compass. Again, as shadows at the setting of the sun are
greatest, though then just ready to disappear and vanish away; their
greatness being but a forerunner of their approaching end; so it is with
the shadows of this world, and the whole train of vain pomps and
pleasures. They pass away suddenly when we are most lifted up by them. As
the shadows vanish upon the withdrawing of the sun; so when an empty man
becomes great in his own eyes, the divine sun sets upon him unexpectedly,
and he returns to be _nothing_, even when he thought to be _something_.
Moreover, as the shadow has no life of itself, but entirely moves with the
motion of the sun, upon which it depends: so man of his own nature, is
nothing but a body destitute of life and motion; and it is God alone who
is able to put life and motion in it. The shadow of a tall and goodly tree
moves not, except as the tree itself is moved; so man only liveth and
moveth in God (Acts 17:28), of whom he is a shadow and reflected image.
The hour of death will at length fully declare, that man's "days on the
earth are as a shadow" (1 Chron. 29:15; Job 8:9), as a vain shew or image
(Ps. 39:5); nay, as grass which grows up, but soon withereth when it is
mown down: so fades our life away immediately, when it is cut down by the
fatal scythe of death. Ps. 102:3, 11; Ps. 103:15. Lo! thus are our days
consumed like smoke, and we are "gone like the shadow when it declineth."
Ps. 109:23.

14. Now when a man by true humility is thoroughly persuaded of all this,
and is convinced that he is nothing in the sight of God but a lifeless
shadow, then, verily, his repentance is unfeigned, and his heart right
before the Lord. And as it is appointed unto all men once to undergo a
natural death, so ought all daily to die unto sin, that they may live unto
God, and depart happily out of this mortal life, when all the shadows
disappear. This daily dying to the world, as it is the best exercise, so
it is also the best preparation for the hour of death; and if we earnestly
practise the former, we shall then be fitted for undergoing the latter.
That which we most frequently practise, becomes most perfect to us.

15. The _fourth_ property of true repentance, is _union with God_, implied
in these words: _But thou, O Lord, shalt endure forever, and thy
remembrance unto all generations._ As if the prophet had said: "Though I
am persuaded, that I am a perishing shadow, and wither like grass (Ps.
102:11), yet I am no less certain, that in _thee_ I shall abide for ever;
for thou thyself art eternal." As by sin a man is divorced from God, so by
true conversion, he is again united to him. Even as the Person of Christ
is indivisible, and as the eternal Deity united the human nature in Christ
Jesus with itself in so firm a bond, as is not to be dissolved by death
itself (the humanity of Christ remaining in perpetual union with the
Divinity, and with the glory therein residing): so, in the work of true
conversion to God, penitent and believing souls are so closely and
intimately united to God, that neither life nor death can separate them
from him (Rom. 8:38): for "he that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit"
(1 Cor. 6:17), God betrothing us unto himself forever. Hosea 2:19. In a
word, Christ himself is our only Witness; and he is the Book of Life
wherein we are plainly taught, that as his human nature abides eternally
united with the divine, so all believers shall be eternally united with
their Lord and Head, being _one spirit_ with him. Now, as God is eternal,
and Christ eternal; so the promises of God in Christ are also eternal and
inviolable, he having made with us a covenant of everlasting grace. Ps.
111:5. Therefore, though a true Christian be forsaken of the world; be
vexed and tormented by sin, death, hell, and the devil himself; nay,
though even his own flesh and heart fail at last, and be wholly consumed,
yet is God "the strength of his heart, and his portion for ever." Ps.
73:26.




Chapter XI.


 Showing That The Fruit Of Conversion Is The New Creature; Also, That The
 Christian Is, By Faith, A Lord Over All, And, By Love, A Servant Of All;
             And, That The Life Of Christ Is A Mirror For Us.


    _If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature._--2 COR. 5:17.


All that are in Christ by faith, are "new creatures;" that is, they are
the children of God, are righteous before God, have forgiveness of sin,
and the Holy Ghost; they are partakers of the divine nature (2 Peter 1:4),
are heirs of everlasting life, and are liberated in their consciences from
the law, the curse, death, the devil, hell, and damnation. All, whatever
appertains to their salvation, is in them begotten of Christ by grace, and
is conceived by them through faith; hence, neither time nor place, neither
law, nor commandment, nor ceremonies, nor anything whatsoever, can be any
hindrance to them. They are made perfect in Christ, who is now become a
vital principle in them, and they have in him the accomplishment of the
law through faith. Rom. 10:4.

2. Thence the name of a _Christian_ is a higher and more excellent name
than all the names in the world. It is a greater name than is to be found
in palaces and courts, a name above all posts of greatness, above the
whole world, with all that it contains. But, on the other hand, the name
of a Christian is also the lowest name of all the names in the world,
without exception. Thus, in the same degree, faith exalts a Christian
_above all_; love brings down a Christian _under all_. This thou wilt then
best understand, when thou seriously considerest the holy life of Christ;
which is the brightest mirror both of love, and of all other virtues. See
Phil. 2:5-8.

3. Behold how Christ made himself the servant of all! how humble was he in
heart! how meek in spirit! how kind and gracious in words! how benevolent
in his behavior! how merciful towards the poor! how compassionate towards
the distressed! how patient towards his slanderers! how calm in his
answers! how merciful towards sinners! Whom did he ever despise? whom did
he ever revile, being reviled? How condescending was he to the very
meanest! how ready to show acts of grace to all, without distinction! how
heartily did he seek the salvation of all men, praying for his very
enemies and murderers! Luke 23:34. How did he bear our sickness, sorrows,
reproaches, stripes, wounds, and punishments! And indeed, what else is the
life of Christ, but a most accomplished pattern of love, humility,
patience, and all other virtues whatsoever! This we ought to look into,
and to reflect upon it in our hearts; but especially when we are alone.
This is better than all the high boasts of knowledge, and all the art and
wisdom of the world. This life of Christ is like a seal (Cant. 8:6) to be
stamped upon our hearts, and leave there the impression of his image,
life, love, humility, patience, cross, reproach, and death. This would
prove a true celestial light to our hearts, and a powerful means both to
renew us in the inner man, and to transform us more and more into the
divine image. Now as Christ was _under all_ men, yea, under all creatures,
in his state of _humiliation_ in this world; but is now in his state of
_exaltation_, a Lord _over all_: so a Christian is, with reference to his
_faith_, a lord _over all_, nothing being excepted but God; but with
regard to his _life_ and conduct, a servant of servants, being _under all_
persons and things.




Chapter XII.


 Showing That Christ Is The Only Way And End Of True Godliness; And That
         Man Goes Astray, When God Does Not Guide And Direct Him.


    Teach me thy way, O Lord: I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart
    to fear thy name.--PS. 86:11.


This way is Christ. He says, "I am the way." John 14:6. But thou wilt here
ask, How am I to come to him? The answer is: By _faith_. For _faith_
unites us with Christ; _love_ binds us fast; and _hope_ upholds and
sustains us while we walk in this way; that is, in the life of Christ. Yet
at the same time, faith, hope, and love, all proceed from Christ himself,
and are his work in us. All these graces flow from him, and return to him.
This way goes out from him, and leads back to him again.

2. Faith apprehends the Person of Christ, and his office; Love follows
Christ in his life and conversation; Hope seizes on the glory that is
hereafter to be revealed in Christ. _Faith_ must have no other Christ, no
other Redeemer, no other Saviour, no other Mediator and Way to life, but
JESUS CHRIST only. _Love_ sets before itself the one only life of Christ,
as the most perfect and shining pattern to which to conform itself. _Hope_
looks up steadfastly to Christ, as the glorious Captain of our salvation,
keeping its eye fixed upon his everlasting kingdom above. This, _this_ is
the right _way_; this is the unerring truth, wherein we are to walk; and
this is what is meant by _having the heart united, to fear the Lord's
name_.

3. These three chief virtues are allied again to three other virtues. The
alliance of faith, is with humility; of love, with patience; and of hope,
with prayer. For he that believeth, humbleth himself; he that loveth, is
patient; and he that hopeth, learns to pray, and boldly to approach the
throne of grace. O how goodly and beautiful is this way! This is the way
of God, the way of salvation, the path to glory, even our great Master's
way! And may He himself teach us this way of truth, and inspire us with
courage to walk in it! Where this frame of mind is, there the soul is
firmly united to the fear of the Lord; and this is that _one thing_ which
David desired. Ps. 27:4. Such a one is resolved heartily to follow Christ
in his humility and love, meekness and patience, expelling, through the
lowliness of Christ, the venom of pride that lurks within. Consider how
Christ thy Lord was made for thee a despicable worm (Ps. 22:6), and
trampled upon by the basest of men! and by looking to him, learn to
restrain thy haughty temper. In a word, let his humility slay thy _pride_;
and do thou suppress the assaults of _covetousness_, by meditating on the
poverty of Christ. Behold, he had not so much as even where to lay his
head (Matt. 8:20), and how eager art thou to grasp in possession whatever
thy unbounded desires fix themselves upon! Let the spirit of _envy_ die,
by the consideration of the overflowing love of Christ. He hath given thee
life itself, and thou grudgest thy neighbor even a morsel of bread. Let
the thirst for _revenge_ be overcome in thy breast by the meekness of
Christ. Behold! he prayed for his enemies (Luke 23:34); and thou dost not
even pray for thy friends. His face being buffeted and spit upon by
sinners, he quietly endured it; and thou canst hardly endure a severe
look, or an unkind word from thy neighbor! Let the enticements to _lust_
and voluptuousness be beaten down, by the agony and pains which thy Lord
suffered in his holy body. Behold, and see, whether the sorrows of any man
were ever like unto his sorrows! Lam. 1:12. This consideration will prove
a check to the wanton lusts of thy flesh, and a curb to thy thirst after
worldly pleasure. He wore a crown of thorns; and wouldest thou wear one of
gold? He wept for the sins of others; and refusest thou to weep for thine
own? He was a man of sorrows; and shouldest thou wish to be a man of
pleasure?



