
                           Testimony of sense

252:18  I am wholly dishonest, and no man knoweth it. I can
        cheat, lie, commit adultery, rob, murder, and I elude
        detection by smooth-tongued villainy. Ani-
252:21  mal in propensity, deceitful in sentiment,
        fraudulent in purpose, I mean to make my short span
        of life one gala day. What a nice thing is sin! How
252:24  sin succeeds, where the good purpose waits! The world
        is my kingdom. I am enthroned in the gorgeousness
        of matter. But a touch, an accident, the law of God,
252:27  may at any moment annihilate my peace, for all my
        fancied joys are fatal. Like bursting lava, I expand but
        to my own despair, and shine with the resplendency of
252:30  consuming fire.

                           Testimony of Soul

        Spirit, bearing opposite testimony, saith:

        I am Spirit. Man, whose senses are spiritual, is my
253:1   likeness. He reflects the infinite understanding, for I am
        Infinity. The beauty of holiness, the perfection of being,
253:3   imperishable glory, - all are Mine, for I am
        God. I give immortality to man, for I am
        Truth. I include and impart all bliss, for I am Love.
253:6   I give life, without beginning and without end, for I am
        Life. I am supreme and give all, for I am Mind. I am
        the substance of all, because I AM THAT I AM.

                       Heaven-bestowed prerogative

253:9   I hope, dear reader, I am leading you into the under-
        standing of your divine rights, your heaven-bestowed har-
        mony, - that, as you read, you see there is no
253:12  cause (outside of erring, mortal, material sense
        which is not power) able to make you sick or
        sinful; and I hope that you are conquering this false sense.
253:15  Knowing the falsity of so-called material sense, you can
        assert your prerogative to overcome the belief in sin, dis-
        ease, or death.

                         Right endeavor possible

253:18  If you believe in and practise wrong knowingly, you
        can at once change your course and do right. Matter can
        make no opposition to right endeavors against
253:21  sin or sickness, for matter is inert, mindless.
        Also, if you believe yourself diseased, you can
        alter this wrong belief and action without hindrance from
253:24  the body.

        Do not believe in any supposed necessity for sin, dis-
        ease, or death, knowing (as you ought to know) that God
253:27  never requires obedience to a so-called material law, for
        no such law exists. The belief in sin and death is de-
        stroyed by the law of God, which is the law of Life in-
253:30  stead of death, of harmony instead of discord, of Spirit
        instead of the flesh.

                      Patience and final perfection

        The divine demand, "Be ye therefore perfect," is sci-
254:1   entific, and the human footsteps leading to perfection are
        indispensable. Individuals are consistent who, watching
254:3   and praying, can "run, and not be weary; . . .
        walk, and not faint," who gain good rapidly
        and hold their position, or attain slowly and
254:6   yield not to discouragement. God requires perfection,
        but not until the battle between Spirit and flesh is fought
        and the victory won. To stop eating, drinking, or being
254:9   clothed materially before the spiritual facts of existence
        are gained step by step, is not legitimate. When we wait
        patiently on God and seek Truth righteously, He directs
254:12  our path. Imperfect mortals grasp the ultimate of spir-
        itual perfection slowly; but to /begin/ aright and to con-
        tinue the strife of demonstrating the great problem of
254:15  being, is doing much.

        During the sensual ages, absolute Christian Science
        may not be achieved prior to the change called death,
254:18  for we have not the power to demonstrate what we do
        not understand. But the human self must be evangel-
        ized. This task God demands us to accept lovingly
254:21  to-day, and to abandon so fast as practical the material,
        and to work out the spiritual which determines the out-
        ward and actual.

254:24  If you venture upon the quiet surface of error and are
        in sympathy with error, what is there to disturb the waters?
        What is there to strip off error's disguise?

                           The cross and crown

254:27  If you launch your bark upon the ever-agitated but
        healthful waters of truth, you will encounter storms.
        Your good will be evil spoken of. This is the
254:30  cross. Take it up and bear it, for through it
        you win and wear the crown. Pilgrim on earth, thy home
        is heaven; stranger, thou art the guest of God.




        CHAPTER IX - CREATION

        Thy throne is established of old
        Thou art from everlasting. - PSALMS.

        For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth
        in pain together until now. And not only they, but ourselves
        also, which have the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we
        ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption,
        to wit, the redemption of our body. - PAUL.

                     Inadequate theories of creation

255:1   ETERNAL Truth is changing the universe. As mor-
        tals drop off their mental swaddling-clothes, thought
255:3   expands into expression. "Let there be light,"
        is the perpetual demand of Truth and Love,
        changing chaos into order and discord into the
255:6   music of the spheres. The mythical human theories of
        creation, anciently classified as the higher criticism, sprang
        from cultured scholars in Rome and in Greece, but they
255:9   afforded no foundation for accurate views of creation by
        the divine Mind.

                          Finite views of Deity

        Mortal man has made a covenant with his eyes to be-
255:12  little Deity with human conceptions. In league
        with material sense, mortals take limited views
        of all things. That God is corporeal or material, no man
255:15  should affirm.

        The human form, or physical finiteness, cannot be
        made the basis of any true idea of the infinite Godhead.
255:18  Eye hath not seen Spirit, nor hath ear heard His voice.

                          No material creation

256:1   Progress takes off human shackles. The finite must
        yield to the infinite. Advancing to a higher plane of ac-
256:3   tion, thought rises from the material sense to
        the spiritual, from the scholastic to the in-
        spirational, and from the mortal to the immortal. All
256:6   things are created spiritually. Mind, not matter, is the
        creator. Love, the divine Principle, is the Father and
        Mother of the universe, including man.

                          Tritheism impossible

256:9   The theory of three persons in one God (that is, a per-
        sonal Trinity or Tri-unity) suggests polythe-
        ism, rather than the one ever-present I AM.
256:12  "Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord."

                         No divine corporeality

        The everlasting I AM is not bounded nor compressed
        within the narrow limits of physical humanity, nor can
256:15  He be understood aright through mortal con-
        cepts. The precise form of God must be of
        small importance in comparison with the sublime ques-
256:18  tion, What is infinite Mind or divine Love?

        Who is it that demands our obedience? He who, in
        the language of Scripture, "doeth according to His will
256:21  in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the
        earth; and none can stay His hand, or say unto Him,
        What doest Thou?"

256:24  No form nor physical combination is adequate to rep-
        resent infinite Love. A finite and material sense of God
        leads to formalism and narrowness; it chills the spirit of
256:27  Christianity.

                             Limitless Mind

        A limitless Mind cannot proceed from physical limita-
        tions. Finiteness cannot present the idea or the vast-
256:30  ness of infinity. A mind originating from a
        finite or material source must be limited and
        finite. Infinite Mind is the creator, and creation is the
257:1   infinite image or idea emanating from this Mind. If
        Mind is within and without all things, then all is Mind;
257:3   and this definition is scientific.

                         Matter is not substance

        If matter, so-called, is substance, then Spirit, matter's
        unlikeness, must be shadow; and shadow cannot produce
257:6   substance. The theory that Spirit is not the
        only substance and creator is pantheistic het-
        erodoxy, which ultimates in sickness, sin, and death; it is
257:9   the belief in a bodily soul and a material mind, a soul
        governed by the body and a mind in matter. This be-
        lief is shallow pantheism.

257:12  Mind creates His own likeness in ideas, and the sub-
        stance of an idea is very far from being the supposed sub-
        stance of non-intelligent matter. Hence the Father Mind
257:15  is not the father of matter. The material senses and
        human conceptions would translate spiritual ideas into
        material beliefs, and would say that an anthropomorphic
257:18  God, instead of infinite Principle, - in other words, divine
        Love, - is the father of the rain, "who hath begotten the
        drops of dew," who bringeth "forth Mazzaroth in his sea-
257:21  son," and guideth "Arcturus with his sons."

                        Inexhaustible divine Love

        Finite mind manifests all sorts of errors, and thus
        proves the material theory of mind in matter to be the
257:24  antipode of Mind. Who hath found finite life
        or love sufficient to meet the demands of human
        want and woe, - to still the desires, to satisfy the aspira-
257:27  tions? Infinite Mind cannot be limited to a finite form,
        or Mind would lose its infinite character as inexhaustible
        Love, eternal Life, omnipotent Truth.

                      Infinite physique impossible

257:30  It would require an infinite form to contain infinite
        Mind. Indeed, the phrase /infinite form/ involves a con-
        tradiction of terms. Finite man cannot be the image and
258:1   likeness of the infinite God. A mortal, corporeal, or
        finite conception of God cannot embrace the glories of
258:3   limitless, incorporeal Life and Love. Hence
        the unsatisfied human craving for something
        better, higher, holier, than is afforded by a
258:6   material belief in a physical God and man. The insuffi-
        ciency of this belief to supply the true idea proves the
        falsity of material belief.

                          Infinity's reflection

258:9   Man is more than a material form with a mind inside,
        which must escape from its environments in
        order to be immortal. Man reflects infinity,
258:12  and this reflection is the true idea of God.

        God expresses in man the infinite idea forever develop-
        ing itself, broadening and rising higher and higher from
258:15  a boundless basis. Mind manifests all that exists in
        the infinitude of Truth. We know no more of man as
        the true divine image and likeness, than we know of
258:18  God.

        The infinite Principle is reflected by the infinite idea
        and spiritual individuality, but the material so-called senses
258:21  have no cognizance of either Principle or its idea. The
        human capacities are enlarged and perfected in propor-
        tion as humanity gains the true conception of man and
258:24  God.

                          Individual permanency

        Mortals have a very imperfect sense of the spiritual
        man and of the infinite range of his thought. To him
258:27  belongs eternal Life. Never born and
        never dying, it were impossible for man, under
        the government of God in eternal Science, to fall from his
258:30  high estate.

                           God's man discerned

        Through spiritual sense you can discern the heart of
        divinity, and thus begin to comprehend in Science the
259:1   generic term /man. /Man is not absorbed in Deity, and
        man cannot lose his individuality, for he re-
259:3   flects eternal Life; nor is he an isolated, soli-
        tary idea, for he represents infinite Mind, the sum of all
        substance.

259:6   In divine Science, man is the true image of God. The
        divine nature was best expressed in Christ Jesus, who
        threw upon mortals the truer reflection of God and lifted
259:9   their lives higher than their poor thought-models would
        allow, - thoughts which presented man as fallen, sick,
        sinning, and dying. The Christlike understanding of
259:12  scientific being and divine healing includes a perfect Prin-
        ciple and idea, - perfect God and perfect man, - as the
        basis of thought and demonstration.

                        The divine image not lost

259:15  If man was once perfect but has now lost his perfection,
        then mortals have never beheld in man the reflex image
        of God. The /lost/ image is no image. The
259:18  true likeness cannot be lost in divine reflection.
        Understanding this, Jesus said: "Be ye there-
        fore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
259:21  perfect."

                             Immortal models

        Mortal thought transmits its own images, and forms
        its offspring after human illusions. God, Spirit, works
259:24  spiritually, not materially. Brain or matter
        never formed a human concept. Vibration is
        not intelligence; hence it is not a creator. Immortal
259:27  ideas, pure, perfect, and enduring, are transmitted by
        the divine Mind through divine Science, which corrects
        error with truth and demands spiritual thoughts, divine
259:30  concepts, to the end that they may produce harmonious
        results.

        Deducing one's conclusions as to man from imperfec-
260:1   tion instead of perfection, one can no more arrive at the
        true conception or understanding of man, and make him-
260:3   self like it, than the sculptor can perfect his outlines from
        an imperfect model, or the painter can depict the form
        and face of Jesus, while holding in thought the character
260:6   of Judas.

                           Spiritual discovery

        The conceptions of mortal, erring thought must give
        way to the ideal of all that is perfect and eternal. Through
260:9   many generations human beliefs will be attain-
        ing diviner conceptions, and the immortal and
        perfect model of God's creation will finally be seen as
260:12  the only true conception of being.

        Science reveals the possibility of achieving all good,
        and sets mortals at work to discover what God has already
260:15  done; but distrust of one's ability to gain the goodness
        desired and to bring out better and higher results, often
        hampers the trial of one's wings and ensures failure at the
260:18  outset.

                     Requisite change of our ideals

        Mortals must change their ideals in order to improve
        their models. A sick body is evolved from
260:21  sick thoughts. Sickness, disease, and death
        proceed from fear. Sensualism evolves bad
        physical and moral conditions.

260:24  Selfishness and sensualism are educated in mortal
        mind by the thoughts ever recurring to one's self, by
        conversation about the body, and by the expectation of
260:27  perpetual pleasure or pain from it; and this education
        is at the expense of spiritual growth. If we array
        thought in mortal vestures, it must lose its immortal
260:30  nature.

                           Thoughts are things

        If we look to the body for pleasure, we find pain; for
        Life, we find death; for Truth, we find error; for Spirit,
261:1   we find its opposite, matter. Now reverse this action.
        Look away from the body into Truth and Love,
261:3   the Principle of all happiness, harmony, and
        immortality. Hold thought steadfastly to the endur-
        ing, the good, and the true, and you will bring these
261:6   into your experience proportionably to their occupancy
        of your thoughts.

                            Unreality of pain

        The effect of mortal mind on health and happiness is
261:9   seen in this: If one turns away from the body with such
        absorbed interest as to forget it, the body
        experiences no pain. Under the strong im-
261:12  pulse of a desire to perform his part, a noted actor was
        accustomed night after night to go upon the stage and
        sustain his appointed task, walking about as actively
261:15  as the youngest member of the company. This old man
        was so lame that he hobbled every day to the theatre, and
        sat aching in his chair till his cue was spoken, - a signal
261:18  which made him as oblivious of physical infirmity as if
        he had inhaled chloroform, though he was in the full pos-
        session of his so-called senses.

                        Immutable identity of man

261:21  Detach sense from the body, or matter, which is only
        a form of human belief, and you may learn the meaning
        of God, or good, and the nature of the immu-
261:24  table and immortal. Breaking away from the
        mutations of time and sense, you will neither
        lose the solid objects and ends of life nor your own iden-
261:27  tity. Fixing your gaze on the realities supernal, you will
        rise to the spiritual consciousness of being, even as the bird
        which has burst from the egg and preens its wings for a
261:30  skyward flight.

                          Forgetfulness of self

        We should forget our bodies in remembering good and
        the human race. Good demands of man every hour, in
262:1   which to work out the problem of being. Consecration
        to good does not lessen man's dependence on God, but
262:3   heightens it. Neither does consecration di-
        minish man's obligations to God, but shows
        the paramount necessity of meeting them. Christian
262:6   Science takes naught from the perfection of God, but it
        ascribes to Him the entire glory. By putting "off the old
        man with his deeds," mortals "put on immortality."

262:9   We cannot fathom the nature and quality of God's
        creation by diving into the shallows of mortal belief. We
        must reverse our feeble flutterings - our efforts to find
262:12  life and truth in matter - and rise above the testimony
        of the material senses, above the mortal to the immortal
        idea of God. These clearer, higher views inspire the God-
262:15  like man to reach the absolute centre and circumference
        of his being.

                             The true sense

        Job said: "I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the
262:18  ear: but now mine eye seeth Thee." Mortals will echo
        Job's thought, when the supposed pain and
        pleasure of matter cease to predominate. They
262:21  will then drop the false estimate of life and happiness, of
        joy and sorrow, and attain the bliss of loving unselfishly,
        working patiently, and conquering all that is unlike God.
262:24  Starting from a higher standpoint, one rises spontane-
        ously, even as light emits light without effort; for "where
        your treasure is, there will your heart be also."

                           Mind only the cause

262:27  The foundation of mortal discord is a false sense of
        man's origin. To begin rightly is to end rightly. Every
        concept which seems to begin with the brain
262:30  begins falsely. Divine Mind is the only cause
        or Principle of existence. Cause does not exist in matter,
        in mortal mind, or in physical forms.

                              Human egotism

263:1   Mortals are egotists. They believe themselves to be
        independent workers, personal authors, and even privi-
263:3   leged originators of something which Deity
        would not or could not create. The creations
        of mortal mind are material. Immortal spiritual man
263:6   alone represents the truth of creation.

                        Mortal man a mis-creator

        When mortal man blends his thoughts of existence
        with the spiritual and works only as God works,
263:9   he will no longer grope in the dark and cling
        to earth because he has not tasted heaven.
        Carnal beliefs defraud us. They make man an involun-
263:12  tary hypocrite, - producing evil when he would create
        good, forming deformity when he would outline grace
        and beauty, injuring those whom he would bless. He
263:15  becomes a general mis-creator, who believes he is a
        semi-god. His "touch turns hope to dust, the dust we
        all have trod." He might say in Bible language: "The
263:18  good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would
        not, /that I do./"

                             No new creation

        There can be but one creator, who has created all.
263:21  Whatever seems to be a new creation, is but the discovery
        of some distant idea of Truth; else it is a
        new multiplication or self-division of mor-
263:24  tal thought, as when some finite sense peers from its
        cloister with amazement and attempts to pattern the
        infinite.

263:27  The multiplication of a human and mortal sense of per-
        sons and things is not creation. A sensual thought, like
        an atom of dust thrown into the face of spiritual im-
263:30  mensity, is dense blindness instead of a scientific eternal
        consciousness of creation.

                           Mind's true camera

        The fading forms of matter, the mortal body and ma-
264:1   terial earth, are the fleeting concepts of the human mind.
        They have their day before the permanent facts and their
264:3   perfection in Spirit appear. The crude crea-
        tions of mortal thought must finally give place
        to the glorious forms which we sometimes behold in the
264:6   camera of divine Mind, when the mental picture is spir-
        itual and eternal. Mortals must look beyond fading,
        finite forms, if they would gain the true sense of things.
264:9   Where shall the gaze rest but in the unsearchable realm
        of Mind? We must look where we would walk, and we
        must act as possessing all power from Him in whom we
264:12  have our being.

                            Self-completeness

        As mortals gain more correct views of God and man,
        multitudinous objects of creation, which before were
264:15  invisible, will become visible. When we
        realize that Life is Spirit, never in nor of
        matter, this understanding will expand into self-com-
264:18  pleteness, finding all in God, good, and needing no other
        consciousness.

                      Spiritual proofs of existence

        Spirit and its formations are the only realities of being.
264:21  Matter disappears under the microscope of Spirit. Sin
        is unsustained by Truth, and sickness and
        death were overcome by Jesus, who proved
264:24  them to be forms of error. Spiritual living
        and blessedness are the only evidences, by which we can
        recognize true existence and feel the unspeakable peace
264:27  which comes from an all-absorbing spiritual love.

        When we learn the way in Christian Science and rec-
        ognize man's spiritual being, we shall behold and under-
264:30  stand God's creation, - all the glories of earth and heaven
        and man.

                           Godward gravitation

        The universe of Spirit is peopled with spiritual beings,
265:1   and its government is divine Science. Man is the off-
        spring, not of the lowest, but of the highest qualities of
265:3   Mind. Man understands spiritual existence
        in proportion as his treasures of Truth and
        Love are enlarged. Mortals must gravitate Godward,
265:6   their affections and aims grow spiritual, - they must near
        the broader interpretations of being, and gain some proper
        sense of the infinite, - in order that sin and mortality
265:9   may be put off.

        This scientific sense of being, forsaking matter for
        Spirit, by no means suggests man's absorption into Deity
265:12  and the loss of his identity, but confers upon man en-
        larged individuality, a wider sphere of thought and action,
        a more expansive love, a higher and more permanent
265:15  peace.

                         Mortal birth and death

        The senses represent birth as untimely and death as
        irresistible, as if man were a weed growing apace or a
265:18  flower withered by the sun and nipped by
        untimely frosts; but this is true only of a
        mortal, not of a man in God's image and likeness. The
265:21  truth of being is perennial, and the error is unreal and
        obsolete.

                           Blessings from pain

        Who that has felt the loss of human peace has not gained
265:24  stronger desires for spiritual joy? The aspiration after
        heavenly good comes even before we discover
        what belongs to wisdom and Love. The loss
265:27  of earthly hopes and pleasures brightens the ascending
        path of many a heart. The pains of sense quickly inform
        us that the pleasures of sense are mortal and that joy is
265:30  spiritual.

                          Decapitation of error

        The pains of sense are salutary, if they wrench away
        false pleasurable beliefs and transplant the affections
266:1   from sense to Soul, where the creations of God are good,
        "rejoicing the heart." Such is the sword of
266:3   Science, with which Truth decapitates error,
        materiality giving place to man's higher individuality and
        destiny.

                            Uses of adversity

266:6   Would existence without personal friends be to you
        a blank? Then the time will come when you will be
        solitary, left without sympathy; but this
266:9   seeming vacuum is already filled with divine
        Love. When this hour of development comes, even if
        you cling to a sense of personal joys, spiritual Love will
266:12  force you to accept what best promotes your growth.
        Friends will betray and enemies will slander, until the
        lesson is sufficient to exalt you; for "man's extremity
266:15  is God's opportunity." The author has experienced the
        foregoing prophecy and its blessings. Thus He teaches
        mortals to lay down their fleshliness and gain spirituality.
266:18  This is done through self-abnegation. Universal Love
        is the divine way in Christian Science.

        The sinner makes his own hell by doing evil, and the
266:21  saint his own heaven by doing right. The opposite per-
        secutions of material sense, aiding evil with evil, would
        deceive the very elect.

                            Beatific presence

266:24  Mortals must follow Jesus' sayings and his demonstra-
        tions, which dominate the flesh. Perfect and infinite
        Mind enthroned is heaven. The evil beliefs
266:27  which originate in mortals are hell. Man is the
        idea of Spirit; he reflects the beatific presence, illuming
        the universe with light. Man is deathless, spiritual. He
266:30  is above sin or frailty. He does not cross the barriers
        of time into the vast forever of Life, but he coexists with
        God and the universe.

                          The infinitude of God

267:1   Every object in material thought will be destroyed, but
        the spiritual idea, whose substance is in Mind, is eternal.
267:3   The offspring of God start not from matter
        or ephemeral dust. They are in and of Spirit,
        divine Mind, and so forever continue. God is one. The
267:6   allness of Deity is His oneness. Generically man is one,
        and specifically man means all men.

        It is generally conceded that God is Father, eternal, self-
267:9   created, infinite. If this is so, the forever Father must
        have had children prior to Adam. The great I AM made
        all "that was made." Hence man and the spiritual uni-
267:12  verse coexist with God.

        Christian Scientists understand that, in a religious
        sense, they have the same authority for the appellative
267:15  mother, as for that of brother and sister. Jesus said:
        "For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which
        is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and
267:18  mother."

                        Waymarks to eternal Truth

        When examined in the light of divine Science, mortals
        present more than is detected upon the surface, since
267:21  inverted thoughts and erroneous beliefs must
        be counterfeits of Truth. Thought is bor-
        rowed from a higher source than matter, and
267:24  by reversal, errors serve as waymarks to the one Mind,
        in which all error disappears in celestial Truth. The
        robes of Spirit are "white and glistering," like the raiment
267:27  of Christ. Even in this world, therefore, "let thy gar-
        ments be always white." "Blessed is the man that en-
        dureth [overcometh] temptation: for when he is tried,
267:30  [proved faithful], he shall receive the crown of life,
        which the Lord hath promised to them that love him."
        (James i. 12.)




        CHAPTER X - SCIENCE OF BEING

        That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
        which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon,
        and our hands have handled, of the Word of life, . . .
        That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you,
        that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our
        fellowship is with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ.
        - JOHN, First Epistle.

        Here I stand. I can do no otherwise; so help me God! Amen!
        - MARTIN LUTHER.

                         Materialistic challenge

268:1   In the material world, thought has brought to light
        with great rapidity many useful wonders. With
268:3   like activity have thought's swift pinions been rising
        towards the realm of the real, to the spiritual
        cause of those lower things which give im-
268:6   pulse to inquiry. Belief in a material basis, from
        which may be deduced all rationality, is slowly yielding
        to the idea of a metaphysical basis, looking away from
268:9   matter to Mind as the cause of every effect. Material-
        istic hypotheses challenge metaphysics to meet in final
        combat. In this revolutionary period, like the shep-
268:12  herd-boy with his sling, woman goes forth to battle with
        Goliath.

                          Confusion confounded

        In this final struggle for supremacy, semi-metaphysi-
268:15  cal systems afford no substantial aid to scientific meta-
        physics, for their arguments are based on
        the false testimony of the material senses as
268:18  well as on the facts of Mind. These semi-metaphysical
269:1   systems are one and all pantheistic, and savor of Pan-
        demonium, a house divided against itself.

269:3   From first to last the supposed coexistence of Mind
        and matter and the mingling of good and evil have re-
        sulted from the philosophy of the serpent. Jesus' demon-
269:6   strations sift the chaff from the wheat, and unfold the
        unity and the reality of good, the unreality, the nothing-
        ness, of evil.

                           Divine metaphysics

269:9   Human philosophy has made God manlike. Christian
        Science makes man Godlike. The first is error; the latter
        is truth. Metaphysics is above physics, and
269:12  matter does not enter into metaphysical prem-
        ises or conclusions. The categories of metaphysics rest
        on one basis, the divine Mind. Metaphysics resolves
269:15  things into thoughts, and exchanges the objects of sense
        for the ideas of Soul.

        These ideas are perfectly real and tangible to spiritual
269:18  consciousness, and they have this, advantage over the ob-
        jects and thoughts of material sense, - they are good and
        eternal.

                          Biblical foundations

269:21  The testimony of the material senses is neither abso-
        lute nor divine. I therefore plant myself unreservedly
        on the teachings of Jesus, of his apostles, of
269:24  the prophets, and on the testimony of the
        Science of Mind. Other foundations there are none.
        All other systems - systems based wholly or partly on
269:27  knowledge gained through the material senses - are reeds
        shaken by the wind, not houses built on the rock.

                            Rejected theories

        The theories I combat are these: (1) that all is matter;
269:30  (2) that matter originates in Mind, and is as
        real as Mind, possessing intelligence and life.
        The first theory, that matter is everything, is quite as
270:1   reasonable as the second, that Mind and matter coexist
        and cooperate. One only of the following statements can
270:3   be true: (1) that everything is matter; (2) that every-
        thing is Mind. Which one is it?

        Matter and Mind are opposites. One is contrary to
270:6   the other in its very nature and essence; hence both can-
        not be real. If one is real, the other must be unreal. Only
        by understanding that there is but one power, - not two
270:9   powers, matter and Mind, - are scientific and logical
        conclusions reached. Few deny the hypothesis that in-
        telligence, apart from man and matter, governs the uni-
270:12  verse; and it is generally admitted that this intelligence
        is the eternal Mind or divine principle, Love.

                           Prophetic ignorance

        The prophets of old looked for something higher than
270:15  the systems of their times; hence their fore-
        sight of the new dispensation of Truth. But
        they knew not what would be the precise nature of the
270:18  teaching and demonstration of God, divine Mind, in His
        more infinite meanings, - the demonstration which was
        to destroy sin, sickness, and death, establish the definition
270:21  of omnipotence, and maintain the Science of Spirit.

        The pride of priesthood is the prince of this world. It
        has nothing in Christ. Meekness and charity have divine
270:24  authority. Mortals think wickedly; consequently they
        are wicked. They think sickly thoughts, and so become
        sick. If sin makes sinners, Truth and Love alone can
270:27  unmake them. If a sense of disease produces suffering
        and a sense of ease antidotes suffering, disease is mental,
        not material. Hence the fact that the human mind alone
270:30  suffers, is sick, and that the divine Mind alone heals.

        The life of Christ Jesus was not miraculous, but it was
        indigenous to his spirituality, - the good soil wherein the
271:1   seed of Truth springs up and bears much fruit. Christ's
        Christianity is the chain of scientific being reappearing
271:3   in all ages, maintaining its obvious correspondence with
        the Scriptures and uniting all periods in the design of
        God. Neither emasculation, illusion, nor insubordination
271:6   exists in divine Science.

        Jesus instructed his disciples whereby to heal the sick
        through Mind instead of matter. He knew that the phi-
271:9   losophy, Science, and proof of Christianity were in Truth,
        casting out all inharmony.

                           Studious disciples

        In Latin the word rendered /disciple/ signifies student;
271:12  and the word indicates that the power of healing was not
        a supernatural gift to those learners, but the
        result of their cultivated spiritual understand-
271:15  ing of the divine Science, which their Master demonstrated
        by healing the sick and sinning. Hence the universal ap-
        plication of his saying: "Neither pray I for these alone,
271:18  but for them also which shall believe on me [understand
        me] through their word."

                           New Testament basis

        Our Master said, "But the Comforter . . . shall
271:21  teach you all things." When the Science of Christianity
        appears, it will lead you into all truth. The
        Sermon on the Mount is the essence of this
271:24  Science, and the eternal life, not the death of Jesus, is
        its outcome.

                             Modern evangel

        Those, who are willing to leave their nets or to cast
271:27  them on the right side for Truth, have the opportunity
        now, as aforetime, to learn and to practise
        Christian healing. The Scriptures contain it.
271:30  The spiritual import of the Word imparts this power.
        But, as Paul says, "How shall they hear without a
        preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be
272:1   sent?" If sent, how shall they preach, convert, and heal
        multitudes, except the people hear?

                        Spirituality of Scripture

272:3   The spiritual sense of truth must be gained before
        Truth can be understood. This sense is assimilated only
        as we are honest, unselfish, loving, and meek.
272:6   In the soil of an "honest and good heart" the
        seed must be sown; else it beareth not much fruit, for the
        swinish element in human nature uproots it. Jesus said:
272:9   "Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures." The spiritual
        sense of the Scriptures brings out the scientific sense, and
        is the new tongue referred to in the last chapter of Mark's
272:12  Gospel.

        Jesus' parable of "the sower" shows the care our
        Master took not to impart to dull ears and gross hearts
272:15  the spiritual teachings which dulness and grossness could
        not accept. Reading the thoughts of the people, he said:
        "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast
272:18  ye your pearls before swine."

                          Unspiritual contrasts

        It is the spiritualization of thought and Christianization
        of daily life, in contrast with the results of the ghastly farce
272:21  of material existence; it is chastity and purity,
        in contrast with the downward tendencies
        and earthward gravitation of sensualism and impurity,
272:24  which really attest the divine origin and operation of Chris-
        tian Science. The triumphs of Christian Science are re-
        corded in the destruction of error and evil, from which are
272:27  propagated the dismal beliefs of sin, sickness, and death.

                        God the Principle of all

        The divine Principle of the universe must interpret the
        universe. God is the divine Principle of all that repre-
272:30  sents Him and of all that really exists. Chris-
        tian Science, as demonstrated by Jesus, alone
        reveals the natural, divine Principle of Science.

273:1   Matter and its claims of sin, sickness, and death are
        contrary to God, and cannot emanate from Him. There
273:3   is no /material/ truth. The physical senses can take no
        cognizance of God and spiritual Truth. Human belief
        has sought out many inventions, but not one of them
273:6   can solve the problem of being without the divine Prin-
        ciple of divine Science. Deductions from material hy-
        potheses are not scientific. They differ from real Science
273:9   because they are not based on the divine law.

                         Science /versus/ sense

        Divine Science reverses the false testimony of the ma-
        terial senses, and thus tears away the foun-
273:12  dations of error. Hence the enmity between
        Science and the senses, and the impossibility
        of attaining perfect understanding till the errors of sense
273:15  are eliminated.

        The so-called laws of matter and of medical science have
        never made mortals whole, harmonious, and immortal.
273:18  Man is harmonious when governed by Soul. Hence the
        importance of understanding the truth of being, which
        reveals the laws of spiritual existence.

                       Spiritual law the only law

273:21  God never ordained a material law to annul the spiritual
        law. If there were such a material law, it would oppose
        the supremacy of Spirit, God, and impugn the
273:24  wisdom of the creator. Jesus walked on the
        waves, fed the multitude, healed the sick, and raised the
        dead in direct opposition to material laws. His acts were
273:27  the demonstration of Science, overcoming the false claims
        of material sense or law.

                       Material knowledge illusive

        Science shows that material, conflicting mortal opin-
273:30  ions and beliefs emit the effects of error at all times, but
        this atmosphere of mortal mind cannot be destructive to
        morals and health when it is opposed promptly and per-
274:1   sistently by Christian Science. Truth and Love antidote
        this mental miasma, and thus invigorate and sustain ex-
274:3   istence. Unnecessary knowledge gained from
        the five senses is only temporal, - the concep-
        tion of mortal mind, the offspring of sense, not
274:6   of Soul, Spirit, - and symbolizes all that is evil and
        perishable. /Natural science/, as it is commonly called, is
        not really natural nor scientific, because it is deduced from
274:9   the evidence of the material senses. Ideas, on the con-
        trary, are born of Spirit, and are not mere inferences
        drawn from material premises.

                          Five senses deceptive

274:12  The senses of Spirit abide in Love, and they demon-
        strate Truth and Life. Hence Christianity and the Sci-
        ence which expounds it are based on spiritual
274:15  understanding, and they supersede the so-
        called laws of matter. Jesus demonstrated this great
        verity. When what we erroneously term the five physical
