suggests that small-statured races like Lapps and Eskimos (though not
necessarily true pygmy races, of whose existence in Europe there is no
proof available) did once inhabit lands where there are Celts, and that
a Celtic folk-memory of these could conceivably have originated a belief
in certain kinds of fairies, and thus have been a shaping influence in
the animistic traditions about other fairies. The animistic argument
shows that pygmies described in Celtic literature and in Celtic and
non-Celtic mythologies are nearly always to be thought of as non-human
spirits; and that there is now and was in past ages a world-wide belief
that the human soul is in stature a pygmy. The philosophical argument of
alchemists and mystics, in a way, draws to itself the animistic
argument, and sets up the hypothesis that the smallness of elves and
fairies is due to their own nature, because they actually exist as
invisible tribes of non-human beings of pygmy size and form.


THE CHANGELING BELIEF

The smallness of fairies, which has just been considered, and the belief
in changelings are the two most prominent characteristics of the
Fairy-Faith, according to our evidence in chapter ii; and we are now to
consider the second. The prevalent and apparently the only important
theories which are current to explain this belief in changelings may be
designated as the Kidnap Theory and the Human-Sacrifice Theory. These we
shall proceed to estimate, after which there will be introduced newer
and seemingly more adequate theories.

_Kidnap Theory_

Some writers have argued that the changeling belief merely reflects a
time when the aboriginal pre-Celtic peoples held in subjection by the
Celts, and forced to live in mountain caverns and in secret retreats
underground, occasionally kidnapped the children of their conquerors,
and that such kidnapped children sometimes escaped and told to their
Celtic kinsmen highly romantic tales about having been in an underground
fairy-world with fairies. Frequently this argument has taken a slightly
different form: that instead of unfriendly pre-Celtic peoples it was
magic-working Druids who--either through their own choice or else,
having been driven to bay by the spread of Christianity, through force
of circumstances--dwelt in secret in chambered mounds or souterrains, or
in dense forests, and then stole young people for recruits, sometimes
permitting them, years afterwards, when too old to be of further use, to
return home under an inviolable vow of secrecy.[150] And Mr. David
MacRitchie in supporting his own Pygmy Theory has made interesting
modern elaborations of these two slightly different theories concerning
changelings.[151]

As already pointed out, there are definite ethnological elements blended
in the other parts of the complex Fairy-Faith; and so in this part of
it, the changeling belief, there are conceivably more of such elements
which lend some support to the Kidnap Theory. In itself, however, as we
hope to show conclusively, the Theory, failing to grasp the essential
and underlying character of this belief, does not adequately explain it.

_Human-Sacrifice Theory_

Alfred Nutt advanced a theory, which anticipated one part of our own,
that 'the changeling story is found to be connected with the antique
conception of life and sacrifice'. And he wrote:--'It is at least
possible that the sickly and ailing would be rejected when the time came
for each family to supply its quota of victims, and this might easily
translate itself in the folk-memory into the statement that the fairies
had carried off the healthy' (alone acceptable as sacrifice) 'and left
in exchange the sickly.'[152] Though our evidence will not permit us to
accept the theory (why it will not will be clear as we proceed) that
some such sacrificial customs among the ancient Celts entirely account
for the changeling story, yet we consider it highly probable that the
theory helps to explain particular aspects of the complex tradition, and
that the underlying philosophy of sacrifice extended in an animistic
way, as we shall try to extend it, probably offers more complete
explanation.

Thus, the Mexicans believed that the souls of all sacrificed children
went to live with the god Tlaloc in his heaven-world.[153] Among the
Greeks, a sacrificed victim appears to have been sent as a messenger,
bearing a message repeated to him before death to some god.[154] On the
funeral pile of Patroclus were laid Trojan captives, together with
horses and hounds, a practice corresponding to that of American Red Men;
the idea being that the sacrificed Trojans and the horses and hounds as
well, were thus sent to serve the slain warriors in the otherworld.
Among ourselves in Europe and in America it is not uncommon to read in
the daily newspaper about a suicide as resulting from the belief that
death alone can bring union with a deceased sweetheart or loved one.
These examples, and very many parallel ones to be found the world over,
seem to furnish the key to the theory of sacrifice: namely, that by
extinguishing life in this world it is transmitted to the world of the
gods, spirits, and the dead.

Both Sir John Rhys and D'Arbois de Jubainville have shown that the
Irish were wont to sacrifice the first-born of children and of
flocks.[155] O'Curry points out a clear case of human sacrifice at an
ancient Irish funeral[156]:--'Fiachra then brought fifty hostages with
him from Munster'; and, when he died, 'the hostages which he brought
from the south were buried alive around the _Fert_ (burial mound) of
Fiachra.' More commonly the ancient Celts seem to have made sacrifices
to appease place-spirits before the erection of a new building, by
sending to them through death the soul of a youth (see p. 436).

It is in such animistic beliefs as these, which underlie sacrifice, that
we find a partial solution of the problem of changeling belief. But the
sacrifice theory is also inadequate; for, though changelings may in some
cases in ancient times have conceivably been the sickly children
discarded by priests as unfit for sending to the gods or fairies, how
can we explain actual changelings to be met with to-day in all Celtic
lands? Some other hypothesis is evidently necessary.

_Soul-Wandering Theory_

Comparative study shows that non-Celtic changeling beliefs parallel to
those of the Celts exist almost everywhere, that they centre round the
primitive idea that the human soul can be abstracted from the body by
disembodied spirits and by magicians, and that they do not depend upon
the sacrifice theory, though animistically closely related to it. For
example, according to the Lepers' Islanders, ghosts steal men--as
fairies do--'to add them to their company; and if a man has left
children when he died, one of whom sickens afterwards, it is said that
the dead father takes it.'[157] In Banks Island, Polynesia, the ghost of
a woman who has died in childbirth is greatly dreaded: as long as her
child is on earth she cannot proceed to Panoi, the otherworld; and the
relatives take her child to another house, 'because they know that the
mother will come back to take its soul.'[158] When a Motlav child
sneezes, the mother will cry, 'Let him come back into the world! let him
remain.' Under similar circumstances in Mota, the cry is, 'Live; roll
back to us!' 'The notion is that a ghost is drawing a child's soul
away.' If the child falls ill the attempt has succeeded, and a wizard
throws himself into a trance and goes to the ghost-world to bring the
child's soul back.[159] In the islands of Kei and Kisar a belief
prevails that the spirits of the dead can take to themselves the souls
of the living who go near the graves.[160] Sometimes a Polynesian mother
insists on being buried with her dead child; or a surviving wife with
her dead husband, so that there will be no separation.[161] These last
practices help to illustrate the Celtic theory behind the belief that
fairies can abduct adults.

Throughout Melanesia sickness is generally attributed to the soul's
absence from the body, and this state of disembodiment is believed to be
due to some ghost's or spirit's interference,[162] just as among Celts
sickness is often thought to be due to fairies having taken the soul to
Fairyland. An old Irish piper who came up to Lady Gregory's home at
Coole Park told us that a certain relative of his, a woman, had lain in
a semi-conscious state of illness for months, and that when she
recovered full consciousness she declared she had been with the 'good
people'.

Folk-beliefs like all the above, which more adequately explain the
changeling idea than the Human-Sacrifice Theory, are world-wide, being
at once Celtic and non-Celtic.[163]

_Demon-Possession Theory_

There has been among many peoples, primitive and civilized, a
complementary belief to the one that evil spirits or ghosts may steal a
soul and so cause in the vacated body illness if the abduction is
temporary, and death if it is permanent: namely, a belief that demons,
who sometimes may be souls of the dead, can possess a human body while
the soul is out of it during sleep, or else can expel the soul and
occupy its place.[164] When complete possession of this character takes
place there is--as in 'mediumship'--a change of personality, and the
manner, thoughts, actions, language, and the whole nature of the
possessed person are radically changed. Sometimes a foreign tongue, of
which the subject is ignorant, is fluently spoken. When the possession
is an evil one, as Dr. Nevius has observed in China, where the phenomena
are common, the change of character is in the direction of immorality,
frequently in strong contrast with the character of the subject under
normal conditions, and is often accompanied by paroxysms and contortions
of the body, as I have often been solemnly assured by Celts is the case
in a changeling. (See M. Le Scour's account on page 198, of three
changelings that he saw in one family in Finistere; and compare what is
said about fairy changelings in Ireland, Scotland, Isle of Man, Wales,
and Cornwall.)

A conception like that among the Chinese, of how an evil spirit may
dispossess the soul inhabiting a child's or adult's body, seems to be
the basis and original conception behind the fairy-changeling belief in
all Celtic and other countries. When a child has been changed by
fairies, and an old fairy left in its place, the child has been,
according to this theory, dispossessed of its body by an evil fairy,
which a Chinaman calls a demon, while the leaving behind of the old
fairy accounts for the changed personality and changed facial expression
of the demon-possessed infant. The Chinese demon enters into and takes
complete possession of the child's body while the child's soul is out of
it during sleep--and all fairies make changelings when a babe is asleep
in its cradle at night, or during the day when it is left alone for a
short time. The Chinese child-soul is then unable to return into its
body until some kind of magical ceremony or exorcism expels the
possessing demon; and through precisely similar methods, often aided by
Christian priests, Celts cure changelings made by fairies, pixies, and
_corrigans_. In the following account, therefore, apparently lies the
root explanation of the puzzling beliefs concerning fairy changelings so
commonly met with in the Celtic Fairy-Faith:--'To avert the calamity of
nursing a demon, dried banana-skin is burnt to ashes, which are then
mixed with water. Into this the mother dips her finger and paints a
cross upon the sleeping babe's forehead. In a short time the demon soul
returns--for the soul wanders from the body during sleep and is
free--but, failing to recognize the body thus disguised, flies off. The
true soul, which has been waiting for an opportunity, now approaches the
dormant body, and, if the mark has been washed off in time, takes
possession of it; but if not, it, like the demon, failing to recognize
the body, departs, and the child dies in its sleep.'[165]

In relation to this Demon-Possession Theory, the writer has had the
opportunity of observing carefully some living changelings among the
Celts, and is convinced that in many such cases there is an undoubted
belief expressed by the parents and friends that fairy-possession has
taken place. This belief often translates itself naturally into the
folk-theory that the body of the child has also been changed, when
examination proves only a change of personality as recognized by
psychologists; or, in a distinct type of changelings, those who exhibit
great precocity in childhood combined with an old and wizened
countenance, there is neither a changed personality nor
demon-possession, but simply some abnormal physical or mental condition,
in the nature of cretinism, atrophy, marasmus, or arrested development.
One of the most striking examples of a changeling exists at
Plouharnel-Carnac, Brittany, where there is now living a dwarf Breton
whom I have photographed and talked with, and who may possibly combine
in himself both the abnormal psychical and the abnormal pathological
conditions. He is no taller than a normal child ten years old, but being
over thirty years old he is thick-set, though not deformed. All the
peasants who know him call him 'the Little _Corrigan_', and his own
mother declares that he is not the child she gave birth to. He once said
to me with a kind of pathetic protest, 'Did M. ---- tell you that I am a
demon?'

_Conclusion_

The Kidnap Theory, resting entirely upon the ethnological and social or
psychological elements which we have elsewhere pointed out as existing
in the superficial aspects of the essentially animistic Fairy-Faith as a
whole, is accordingly limited in its explanation of this specialized
part of the Fairy-Faith, the changeling belief, to these same elements
which may exist in the changeling belief. And, on the showing of
anthropology, the other theories undoubtedly offer a more adequate
explanation.

By means of sacrifice, according to its underlying philosophy, man is
able to transmit souls from this world to the world where dwell the gods
and fairy-folk both good and evil. Thus, had Abraham sacrificed Isaac,
the soul of Isaac would have been taken to heaven by Jehovah as fairies
take souls to Fairyland through death. But the difference is that in
human sacrifice men do voluntarily and for specific religious ends what
various kinds of fairies or spirits would do without human intervention
and often maliciously, as our review of ancient and modern theories of
sacrifice has shown. Gods and fairies are spiritual beings; hence only
the spiritual part of man can be delivered over to them.

Melanesians and other peoples whose changeling beliefs have now been
examined, regard all illness and death as the result of spirit
interference; while Celts regard strange maladies in children and in
adults as the result of fairy interference. And to no Celt is death in
early life a natural thing: if it comes to a child or to a beautiful
youth in any way whatsoever, the fairies have taken what they coveted.
In all mythologies gods have always enjoyed the companionship of
beautiful maidens, and goddesses the love of heroic youths; and they
have often taken them to their world as the Tuatha De Danann took the
great heroes of the ancient Celts to the Otherworld or Avalon, and as
they still in the character of modern fairies abduct brides and young
mothers, and bridegrooms or other attractive young men whom they wish to
have with them in Fairyland (see our chapters iv-vi).

Where sacrifice or death has not brought about such complete transfer or
abduction of the soul to the fairy world, there is only a temporary
absence from human society; and, meanwhile, the vacated body is under a
fairy spell and lies ill, or unconscious if there is a trance state. If
the body is an infant's, a fairy may possess it, as in the Chinese
theory of demon-possession. In such cases the Celts often think that the
living body is that of another child once _taken_ but since grown too
old for Fairyland; though the rational explanation frequently is purely
pathological. Looked at philosophically, a fairy exchange of this kind
is fair and evenly balanced, and there has been no true robbery. And in
this aspect of the changeling creed--an aspect of it purely
Celtic--there seems to be still another influence apart from human
sacrifice, soul-abductions, demon or fairy-possession, and disease;
namely, a greatly corrupted folk-memory of an ancient re-birth doctrine:
the living are taken to the dead or the fairies and then sent back
again, after the manner of Socrates' argument that the living come from
the dead and the dead from the living (cf. our chapter vii). In all such
exchanges, the economy of Nature demands that the balance between the
two worlds be maintained: hence there arose the theories of human
sacrifice, of soul abduction, of demon or fairy-possession; and in all
these collectively is to be found the complete psychological explanation
of the fairy-changeling and fairy-abduction beliefs among ancient and
modern Celts as these show themselves in the Fairy-Faith. All remaining
classes of changelings, which fall outside the scope of this clearly
defined psychological theory, are to be explained pathologically.


MAGIC AND WITCHCRAFT

The evidence from each Celtic country shows very clearly that magic and
witchcraft are inseparably blended in the Fairy-Faith, and that human
beings, i. e. 'charmers,' _dynion hysbys_, and other magicians, and
sorceresses, are often enabled through the aid of fairies to perform the
same magical acts as fairies; or, again, like Christian priests who use
exorcisms, they are able, acting independently, to counteract fairy
power, thereby preventing changelings or curing them, saving churnings,
healing man or beast of 'fairy-strokes', and, in short, nullifying all
undesirable influences emanating from the fairy world. A correct
interpretation of these magical elements so prominent in the Fairy-Faith
is of fundamental importance, because if made it will set us on one of
the main psychical highways which traverse the vast territory of our
anthropological inquiry. Let us, then, undertake such an interpretation,
first setting up, as we must, some sort of working hypothesis as to what
magic is, witchcraft being assumed to be a part of magic.

_Theories of Modern Anthropologists_

We may define magic, as understood by ancients and moderns, civilized or
non-civilized, apart from conjuring, which is mere jugglery and
deception of the senses, as the art of controlling for particular ends
various kinds of invisible forces, often, and, as we hold, generally
thought of as intelligent spirits. This is somewhat opposed to Mr.
Marett's point of view, which emphasizes 'pre-animistic influences',
i. e. 'powers to which the animistic form is very vaguely attributed if
at all.' And, in dealing with the anthropological aspects of
spell-casting in magical operations, Mr. Marett conceives such a magical
act to be in relation to the magician 'generically, a projection of
imperative will, and specifically one that moves on a supernormal
plane', and the victim's position towards this invisible projected force
to be 'a position compatible with _rapport_'.[166] He also thinks it
probable that the essence of the magician's supernormal power lies in
what Melanesians call _mana_.[166] In our opinion _mana_ may be equated
with what William James, writing of his attitude toward psychical
phenomena, called a universally diffused 'soul-stuff' leaking through,
so to speak, and expressing itself in the human individual.[167] On this
view, Mr. Marett's theory would amount to saying that magicians are able
to produce magical effects because they are able to control this
'soul-stuff'; and our evidence would regard all spirits and fairies as
portions of such universally diffused _mana_, 'soul-stuff', or, as
Fechner might call it, the 'Soul of the World'. Moreover, in essence,
such an idea of magic coincides, when carefully examined, with what
ancient thinkers like Plato, Iamblichus, the Neo-Platonists generally,
and mediaeval magicians like Paracelsus and Eliphas Levi, called magic;
and agrees with ancient Celtic magic--judging from what Roman historians
have recorded concerning it, and from Celtic manuscripts themselves.

Other modern anthropologists have set up far less satisfactory
definitions of magic. According to Dr. Frazer, for example, magic
assumes, as natural science does, that 'one event follows another
necessarily and invariably without the intervention of any spiritual or
personal agency'.[168] Such a theory is not supported by the facts of
anthropology; and does not even apply to those specialized and often
superficial kinds of magic classed under it by Dr. Frazer as
'sympathetic and imitative magic', i. e. that through which like produces
like, or part produces whole. To our mind, sympathetic and imitative
magic (to leave out of account many fallacious and irrational
ritualistic practices, which Dr. Frazer includes under these loose
terms), _when genuine_, in their varied aspects are directly dependent
upon hypnotic states, upon telepathy, mind-reading, mental suggestion,
association of ideas, and similar processes; in short, are due to the
operation of mind on mind and will on will, and, moreover, are
recognized by primitive races to have this fundamental character. Or,
according to the Fairy-Faith, they are caused by a fairy or disembodied
spirit acting upon an embodied one, a man or woman; and not, as Dr.
Frazer holds, through 'mistaken applications of one or other of two
great fundamental laws of thought, namely, the association of ideas by
similarity and the association of ideas by contiguity in space or
time'.[169]

The mechanical causation theory of magic, as thus set forth in _The
Golden Bough_, does not imply _mana_ or will-power, as Mr. Marett's more
adequate theory does in part: Dr. Frazer wishes us to regard animistic
religious practices as distinct from magic.[170] Nevertheless, in direct
opposition to Dr. Frazer's view, the weight of the evidence from the
past and from the present, which we are about to offer, is decidedly
favourable to our regarding magic and religion as complementary to one
another and, for all ordinary purposes of the anthropologist, as in
principle the same. The testimony touching magicians in all ages, Celtic
magic and witchcraft as well, besides that resulting from modern
psychical research, tends to establish an almost exclusively animistic
hypothesis to account for fairy magical phenomena and like phenomena
among human beings; and with these phenomena we are solely concerned.

_Among the Ancients_[171]

Among the more cultured Greeks and Romans--and the same can be said of
most great nations of antiquity--it was an unquestioned belief that
innumerable gods, placed in hierarchies, form part of an unbroken
spiritual chain at the lowest end of which stands man, and at the
highest the incomprehensible Supreme Deity. These gods, having their
abodes throughout the Universe, act as the agents of the Unknown God,
directing the operation of His cosmic laws and animating every star and
planet. Inferior to these gods, and to man also, the ancients believed
there to be innumerable hosts of invisible beings, called by them
daemons, who, acting as the servants of the gods, control, and thus in a
secondary sense create, all the minor phenomena of inanimate and animate
nature, such as tempests, atmospheric disturbances generally, the
failure of crops or their abundance, maladies and their cure, good and
evil passions in men, wars and peace, and all the blessings and curses
which affect the purely human life.

Man, being of the god-race and thus superior to these lower, servile
entities, could, like the gods, control them if adept in the magical
sciences; for ancient Magic, about which so much has been written and
about which so little has been understood by most people in ancient,
mediaeval, and modern times, is according to the wisest ancients nothing
more than the controlling of daemons, shades, and all sorts of secondary
spirits or elementals by men specially trained for that purpose.
Sufficient records are extant to make it evident that the fundamental
training of Egyptian, Indian, Assyrian, Greek, Roman, and Druid priests
was in the magical or occult sciences. Pliny, in his _Natural History_,
says:--'And to-day Britain practises the art [of magic] with religious
awe and with so many ceremonies that it might seem to have made the art
known to the Persians.'[172] Herein, then, is direct evidence that the
Celtic Fairy-Faith, considered in its true psychic nature, has been
immediately shaped by the ancient Celtic religion; and, as our witness
from the Isle of Skye so clearly set forth, that it originated among a
cultured class of the Celts more than among the peasants. And, in
accordance with this evidence, Professor Georges Dottin, who has made a
special study of the historical records concerning Druidism,
writes:--'The Druids of Ireland appear to us above all as magicians and
prophets. They foretell the future, they interpret the secret will of
the _fees_ (fairies), they cast lots.'[173] Thus, in spite of the
popular and Christian reshaping which the belief in fairies has had to
endure, its origin is easily enough discerned even in its modern form,
covered over though this is with accretions foreign to its primal
character.

Magic was the supreme science because it raised its adepts out of the
ordinary levels of humanity to a close relationship with the gods and
creative powers. Nor was it a science to be had for the asking, 'for
many were the wand-bearers and few the chosen.' Roman writers tell us
that neophytes for the druidic priesthood often spent twenty years in
severe study and training before being deemed fit to be called Druids.
We need not, however, in this study enter into an exposition of the
ordeals and trials of candidates seeking magical training, or else
initiation into the Mysteries. There were always two schools to which
they could apply, directly opposed in their government and policy--the
school of white magic and the school of black magic; the former being a
school in which magical powers were used in religious rites and always
for good ends, the latter a school in which all magical powers were used
for wholly selfish and evil ends. In both schools the preliminary
training was the same; that is to say, the first thing taught to the
neophyte was self-control. When he proved himself absolutely his own
master, when his teachers were certain that he could not be dominated by
another will or by any outside or psychic influence, then for the first
time he was permitted to exercise his own iron will in controlling
daemons, ghosts, and all the elemental hosts of the air--either as a
white magician or as a black magician.[174]

The magical sciences taught (an idea which still holds its ground, as
one can discover in modern India) that by formulas of invocation, by
chants, by magic sounds, by music, these invisible beings can be made to
obey the will of the magician even as they obey the will of the gods.
The calling up of the dead and talking with them is called necromancy;
the foretelling through spiritual agency and otherwise of coming events
or things hidden, like the outcome of a battle, is called divination;
the employment of charms against children so as to prevent their growing
is known as fascination; to cause any ill fortune or death to fall upon
another person by magic is sorcery; to excite the sexual passions of man
or woman, magical mixtures called philtres are used. Almost all these
definitions apply to the practices of black magic. But the great schools
known as the Mysteries were of white magic, in so far as they practised
the art; and such men as Pythagoras, Plato, and Aeschylus, who are
supposed to have been initiated into them, always held them in the
highest reverence, though prohibited from directly communicating
anything of their esoteric teachings concerning the origin and destiny
of man, the nature of the gods, and the constitution of the universe and
its laws.

In Plato's _Banquet_ the power or function of the daemonic element in
nature is explained. Socrates asks of the prophetess Diotima what is the
power of the daemonic element (personified as Love for the purposes of
the argument), and she replies:--'He interprets between gods and men,
conveying and taking across to the gods the prayers and sacrifices of
men, and to men the commands and replies of the gods; he is the mediator
who spans the chasm which divides them, and therefore in him all is
bound together, and through him the arts of the prophets and priests,
their sacrifices and mysteries and charms, and all prophecy and
incantation find their way. For God mingles not with man; but through
the daemonic element (or Love) all the intercourse and converse of God
with man, whether awake or asleep, is carried on. The wisdom which
understands this is spiritual.'[175]

_Among the Ancient Celts_

If we turn now directly to Celtic magic in ancient times, we discover
that the testimony of Pliny is curiously confirmed by Celtic
manuscripts, chiefly Irish ones, and that then, as now, witchcraft and
fairy powers over men and women are indistinguishable in their general
character. Thus, in the _Echtra Condla_, 'the Adventures of Connla,' the
fairy woman says of Druidism and magic:--'Druidism is not loved, little
has it progressed to honour on the Great Strand. When his law shall come
it will scatter the charms of Druids _from journeying on the lips of
black, lying demons_'--so characterized by the Christian
transcribers.[176] In _How Fionn Found his Missing Men_, an ancient tale
preserved by oral tradition until recorded by Campbell, it is said that
'Fionn then went out with Bran (his fairy dog). There were millions of
people (apparitions) out before him, called up by some sleight of
hand'.[177] In the _Leabhar na h-Uidre_, or 'Book of the Dun Cow' (p. 43
a), compiled from older manuscripts about A. D. 1100, there is a clear
example of Irish fetishism based on belief in the power of demons:--'...
for their swords used to turn against them (the Ulstermen) when they made
a false trophy. Reasonable [was] this; for demons used to speak to them
from their arms, so that hence their arms were safeguards.'[178]

Shape-shifting quite after the fairy fashion is very frequently met
with in old Celtic literature. Thus, in the Rennes _Dinnshenchas_ there
is this passage showing that spirits or fairies were regarded as
necessary for the employment of magic:--'Folks were envious of them
(Faifne the poet and his sister Aige): so they loosed elves at them who
transformed Aige into a fawn' (the form assumed by the fairy mother of
Oisin, see p. 299 n.), 'and sent her on a circuit all round Ireland, and
the fians of Meilge son of Cobthach, king of Ireland, killed her.'[179]
A fact which ought to be noted in this connexion is that kings or great
heroes, rather than ordinary men and women, are very commonly described
as being able to shift their own shape, or that of other people; e. g.
'Mongan took on himself the shape of Tibraide, and gave Mac an Daimh the
shape of the cleric, with a large tonsure on his head.'[180] And when
this fact is coupled with another, namely the ancient belief that such
kings and great heroes were incarnations and reincarnations of the
Tuatha De Danann, who form the supreme fairy hierarchy, we realize that,
having such an origin, they were simply exercising in human bodies
powers which their divine race exercise over men from the fairy world
(see our chapter iv).

In Brythonic literature and mythology, magic and witchcraft with the
same animistic character play as great or even a greater role than in
Gaelic literature and mythology. This is especially true with respect to
the Arthurian Legend, and to the _Mabinogion_, some of which tales are
regarded by scholars as versions of Irish ones. Sir John Rhys and
Professor J. Loth, who have been the chief translators of the
_Mabinogion_, consider their chief literary machinery to be magic (see
our chapter v).

So far it ought to be clear that Celtic magic contains much animism in
its composition, and that these few illustrations of it, selected from
numerous illustrations in the ancient Fairy-Faith, confirm Pliny's
independent testimony that in his age the Britons seemed capable of
instructing even the Persians themselves in the magical arts.

_European and American Witchcraft_

In a general way, the history of witchcraft in Europe and in the
American colonies is supplementary to what has already been said, seeing
that it is an offshoot of mediaeval magic, which in turn is an offshoot
of ancient magic. Witchcraft in the West, in probably a majority of
cases, is a mere fabric of absurd superstitions and practices--as it is
shown to be by the evidence brought out in so many of the horrible legal
and ecclesiastical processes conducted against helpless and eccentric
old people, and other men and women, including the young, often for the
sake of private revenge, and generally on no better foundation than
hearsay and false accusations. In the remaining instances it undoubtedly
arose, as ancient witchcraft (black magic) seems to have arisen, through
the infiltration of occult knowledge into uneducated and often
criminally inclined minds, so that what had formerly been secretly
guarded among the learned, and generally used for legitimate ends,
degenerated in the hands of the unfit into black magic. In our own age,
a parallel development, which adequately illustrates our subject of
inquiry, has taken place in the United States: fragments of magical lore
bequeathed by Mesmer and his immediate predecessors, the alchemists,
were practically and honestly applied to the practice of magnetic
healing and healing through mental suggestion by a small group of
practitioners in Massachusetts, and then with much ingenuity and real
genius were applied by Mary Baker Eddy to the interpretation of
miraculous healing by Jesus Christ. Hence arose a new religion called
Christian Science. But this religious movement did not stop at mental
healing: according to published reports, during the years 1908-9 the
leader of the New York First Church of Christ, Scientist, was deposed,
and, with certain of her close associates, was charged with having
projected daily against the late Mrs. Eddy's adjutant a current of
'malicious animal magnetism' from New York to Boston, in order to bring
about his death. The process is said to have been for the deposed
leader and her friends to sit together in a darkened room with their
eyes closed. 'Then one of them would say: "You all know Mr. ----. You
all know that his place is in the darkness whence he came. If his place
is six feet under ground, that is where he should be." Then all present
would concentrate their minds on the one thought--Mr. ---- and six feet
under ground.' And this practice is supposed to have been kept up for
days. Mrs. ----, who gives this testimony, is a friend of the victim,
and she asserts that these evil thought-waves slowly but surely began
his effacement, and that had the black magicians down in New York not
been discovered in time, Mr. ---- could not have withstood the
forces.[181] Perhaps so enlightened a country as the United States may
in time see history repeat itself, and add a new chapter to witchcraft;
for the true witches were not the kind who are popularly supposed to
ride on broomsticks and to keep a house full of black cats, and the
sooner this is recognized the better.

According to this aspect of Christian Science, 'malicious animal
magnetism' (or black magic), an embodied spirit, i. e. a man or woman,
possesses and can employ the same magical powers as a disembodied
spirit--or, as the Celts would say, the same magical powers as a
fairy--casting spells, and producing disease and death in the victim.
And this view coincides with ordinary witchcraft theories; for witches
have been variously defined as embodied spirits who have ability to act
in conjunction with disembodied spirits through the employment of
various occult forces, e. g. forces comparable to Mesmer's odic forces,
to the Melanesian _mana_, or to the 'soul-stuff' postulated by William
James, or, as Celts think, to forces focused in fairies themselves. So,
also, according to Mr. Marett's view, there is a state of _rapport_
between the victim and the magician or witch; and where such a state of
_rapport_ exists there is some _mana_-like force passing between the two
poles of the magical circuit, whether it be only unconscious mental or
electrical force emanating from the operator, or an extraneous force
brought under control and concentrated in some such conscious unit as we
designate by the term 'spirit', 'devil', or 'fairy'.

In conformity with this psychical or animistic view of witchcraft, in
the Capital Code of Connecticut (A. D. 1642) a witch is defined as one
who 'hath or consorteth with a familiar spirit'.[182] European codes, as
illustrated by the sixth chapter of Lord Coke's _Third Institute_, have
parallels to this definition:--'A witch is a person which hath
conference with the devil; to consult with him to do some act.'[182] And
upon these theories, not upon the broomstick and black-cat conception,
were based the trials for witchcraft during the seventeenth century.

The Bible, then so frequently the last court of appeal in such matters,
was found to sustain such theories about witches in the classical
example of the Witch of Endor and Saul; and the idea of witchcraft in
Europe and America came to be based--as it probably always had been in
pagan times--on the theory that living persons could control or be
controlled by disembodied spirits for evil ends. Hence all black
magicians, and what are now known as 'spirit mediums', were made liable
by law to the death penalty.[183]

In mediaeval Europe the great difficulty always was, as is shown in the
trials of Jeanne d'Arc, to decide whether the invisible agent in magical
processes, such as was imputed to the accused, was an angel or a demon.
If an angel, then the accused was a saint, and might become a candidate
for canonization; but if a demon, the accused was a witch, and liable to
a death-sentence. The wisest old doctors of the University of Paris, who
sat in judgement (or were consulted) in one of Jeanne's trials, could
not fully decide this knotty problem, nor, apparently, the learned
churchmen who also tried her; but evidently they all agreed that it was
better to waive the question. And, finally, an innocent peasant girl who
had heard Divine Voices, and who had thereby miraculously saved her king
and her country, was burned at the stake, under the joint direction of
English civil and ecclesiastical authorities, and, if not technically,
at least practically, with the full approval of the corresponding French
authorities, at Rouen, France, May 30, A. D. 1431.[184] In April, A. D.
1909, almost five centuries afterwards, it has been decided with tardy
justice that Jeanne's Voices were those of angels and not of demons, and
she has been made a saint.

How the case of Jeanne d'Arc bears directly upon the Fairy-Faith is
self-evident: One of the first questions asked by Jeanne's inquisitors
was 'if she had any knowledge of those who went to the Sabbath with the
fairies? or if she had not assisted at the assemblies held at the
fountain of the fairies, near Domremy, around which dance malignant
spirits?' And another question exactly as recorded was this:--'_Interroguee
s'elle croiet point au devant de aujourduy, que les fees feussent maulvais
esperis: respond qu'elle n'en scavoit rien._'[185]

_Conclusion_

Finally, we may say that what medicine-men are to American Indians, to
Polynesians, Australians, Africans, Eskimos, and many other contemporary
races, or what the mightier magicians of modern India are to their
people, the 'fairy-doctors' and 'charmers' of Ireland, Scotland, and Man
are to the Gaels, and the '_Dynion Hysbys_' or 'Wise Men' of Wales, the
witches of Cornwall, and the seers, sorceresses, and exorcists of
Brittany are to the Brythons. These Gaelic and Brythonic magicians and
witches, and 'fairy mediums', almost invariably claim to derive their
power from their ability to see and to communicate with fairies,
spirits, and the dead; and they generally say that they are enabled
through such spiritual agencies to reveal the past, to foretell the
future, to locate lost property, to cast spells upon human beings and
upon animals, to remove such spells, to cure fairy strokes and
changelings, to perform exorcisms, and to bring people back from
Fairyland.

We arrive at the following conclusion:--If, as eminent psychical
researchers now postulate (and as many of them believe), there are
active and intelligent disembodied beings able to act psychically upon
embodied men in much the same way that embodied men are known ordinarily
to act psychically upon one another, then there is every logical and
common-sense reason for extending this psychical hypothesis so as to
include the ancient, mediaeval, and modern theory of magic and
witchcraft, namely, that what embodied men and women can do in magical
ways, as for example in hypnotism, disembodied men and women can do.
Further, if fairies, in accord with reliable testimony from educated and
critical percipients, hypothetically exist (whatever their nature may
be), they may be possessed of magical powers of the same sort, and so
can cast spells upon or possess living human beings as Celts believe and
assert. And this hypothesis coincides in most essentials with the one we
used as a basis for this discussion, that, in accordance with the
Melanesian doctrine of control of ghosts and spirits with their inherent
_mana_, magical acts are possible.[186] This in turn applied to the
Celts amounts to a hypothetical confirmation of the ancient druidical
doctrine that through control of fairies or demons (daemons) Druids or
magicians could control the weather and natural phenomena connected with
vegetable and animal processes, could cast spells, could divine the
future, could execute all magical acts.


EXORCISMS

According to the testimony of anthropology, exorcism as a religious
practice has always flourished wherever animistic beliefs have furnished
it with the necessary environment; and not only has exorcism been a
fundamental part of religious practices in past ages, but it is so at
the present day. Among Christians, Celtic and non-Celtic, among
followers of all the great historical religions, and especially among
East Indians, Chinese, American Red Men, Polynesians, and most Africans,
the expelling of demons from men and women, from animals, from inanimate
objects, and from places, is sanctioned by well-established rituals.
Exorcism as applied to the human race is thus defined in the
_Dictionnaire de Theologie_ (Roman Catholic) by L'Abbe
Bergier:--'_Exorcism_--conjuration, prayer to God, and command given to
the demon to depart from the body of persons possessed.' The same
authority thus logically defends its practice by the Church:--'Far from
condemning the opinion of the Jews, who attributed to the demon certain
maladies, that divine Master confirmed it.'[187] And whenever exorcism
of this character has been or is now generally practised, the
professional exorcist appears as a personage just as necessary to
society as the modern doctor, since nearly all diseases were and to some
extent are still, both among Christians and non-Christians, very often
thought to be the result of demon-possession.

When we come to the dawn of the Christian period in Ireland and in
Scotland, we see Patrick and Columba, the first and greatest of the
Gaelic missionaries, very extensively practising exorcism; and there is
every reason to believe (though the data available on this point are
somewhat unsatisfactory) that their wide practice of exorcism was quite
as much a Christian adaptation of pre-Christian Celtic exorcism, such as
the Druids practised, as it was a continuation of New Testament
tradition. We may now present certain of the data which tend to verify
this supposition, and by means of them we shall be led to realize how
fundamentally such an animistic practice as exorcism must have shaped
the Fairy-Faith of the Celts, both before and after the coming of
Christianity.

'Once upon a time,' so the tale runs about Patrick, 'his foster-mother
went to milk the cow. He also went with her to drink a draught of new
milk. Then the cow goes mad in the byre and killed five other kine: a
demon, namely, entered her. There was great sadness on his
foster-mother, and she told him to bring the kine back to life. Then he
brought the kine to life, so that they were whole, and he cured the mad
one. So God's name and Patrick's were magnified thereby.'[188] On
another occasion, when demons came to Ireland in the form of black
birds, quite after the manner of the Irish belief that fairies assume
the form of crows (see pp. 302-5), the Celtic ire of Patrick was so
aroused in trying to exorcize them out of the country that he threw his
bell at them with such violence that it was cracked, and then he
wept:--'Now at the end of those forty days and forty nights' [of
Patrick's long fast on the summit of Cruachan Aigle or Croagh Patrick,
Ireland's Holy Mountain] 'the mountain was filled with black birds, so
that he knew not heaven or earth. He sang maledictive psalms at them.
They left him not because of this. Then his anger grew against them. He
strikes his bell at them, so that the men of Ireland heard its voice,
and he flung it at them, so that a gap broke out of it, and that [bell]
is "Brigit's Gapling". Then Patrick weeps till his face and his chasuble
in front of him were wet. No demon came to the land of Erin after that
till the end of seven years and seven months and seven days and seven
nights. Then the angel went to console Patrick and cleansed the
chasuble, and brought white birds round the Rick, and they used to sing
sweet melodies for him.'[188] In Adamnan's _Life of S. Columba_ it is
said that 'according to custom', which in all probability was
established in pagan times by the Druids and then maintained by their
Christian descendants, it was usual to exorcize even a milk vessel
before milking, and the milk in it afterwards.[189] Thus Adamnan tells
us that one day a youth, Columban by name, when he had finished milking,
went to the door of St. Columba's cell carrying the pail full of new
milk that, _according to custom_, the saint might exorcize it. When the
holy man had made the sign of the cross in the air, the air 'was greatly
agitated, and the bar of the lid, driven through its two holes, was shot
away to some distance; the lid fell to the ground, and most of the milk
was spilled on the soil.' Then the saint chided the youth,
saying:--'Thou hast done carelessly in thy work to-day; for thou hast
