town, and David was the youngest of all his sons.

There were seven big brothers at home, and it was no wonder Jesse was
proud of his sons. They were tall, splendid young men, all of them doing
men's work now, and taking very little notice of the youngest, who was
still only a small boy, chiefly useful in looking after the sheep.

But though David was but little thought of, no one could say that he did
not do his work well. There was not a more careful or watchful shepherd
on all the hills around Bethlehem. He knew each one of his sheep, and
never allowed one to stray. He always led them to the best pasture, and
found the coolest and freshest water for them to drink. Then, too, he
was as brave as a lion, and if any wild beast came lurking round hoping
to snatch a lamb away, David was up at once and would attack the
fiercest beast single-handed. Nothing could ever do any harm to his
flock.

Now it happened that one day while David was, as usual, out in the
fields that a sudden stir of excitement awoke in the little town of
Bethlehem. Men gathered round the city gate, and with anxious, fearful
eyes looked down the long white road that led up from the plain below.
And yet there seemed nothing there to make them look so terrified and
anxious. Only an old feeble man was slowly climbing up towards the town.
He was driving a heifer before him, and carrying what looked like a horn
in his hand.

[Illustration: An old feeble man was slowly climbing up towards the
town.]

But the people whispered together that the old man was none other than
Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, who carried God's messages. He must be
bringing a message to them, and who knew if it was good or evil. They
tried with uneasy minds to remember if they had been doing anything
wrong of late as they watched the old man drawing nearer and nearer.
Then at last the chief men of the town went out to meet him.

"Comest thou peaceably?" they asked anxiously.

The old man lifted his head and looked at them kindly as he echoed their
words.

"Peaceably," he answered at once; "I am come to sacrifice unto the
Lord."

A great sigh of relief went up from the people. The visit was a mark of
God's favour and not of His displeasure.

It was true, indeed, that Samuel had come to offer sacrifice, but he had
come also on a secret errand about which no man knew but himself. God
had bidden him take his horn of oil and anoint one of the sons of Jesse
to be king over His people instead of Saul, the present king, who had
displeased Him. But it was to be done secretly. Saul must not hear of
it, or his vengeance would be swift.

It was in Jesse's house that the feast of the sacrifice was prepared,
and Samuel ordered that all the sons of the house should pass before him
as they went to attend the sacrifice.

The first to come was Eliab, Jesse's eldest son, and when Samuel saw him
he felt sure that this was the man who was to be anointed king. He was a
splendid young man, tall and strong and handsome, looking almost as
kingly as Saul himself.

"Surely this is he," murmured Samuel to himself. But God's answer came
quickly. No, this was not the man. Samuel saw only the outward signs of
strength and beauty, but God saw deeper into the heart.

So the eldest son passed on, and one by one the six brothers followed,
all sons that a father might well be proud of. But God sent no sign to
show that any of them was the chosen king.

[Illustration: "Surely this is he," murmured Samuel to himself.]

Samuel was puzzled. What could it mean? Then he turned again to Jesse.

"Are here all thy children?" he asked.

Surprised at the question, Jesse suddenly remembered the little lad,
his youngest son, who was out in the fields tending the sheep. Was it
possible that Samuel had any use for him?

"Send and fetch him," ordered Samuel instantly, "for we will not sit
down till he comes hither."

So a messenger was sent in haste to bring David; and presently he came
hurrying in, and as soon as Samuel saw him he knew his search was ended.
