those who profess to be the children of the Light, back into a
dependence upon forms, out of which their forefathers in the Truth
were brought by that remarkable outpouring of grace and spiritual
power which marked the rise of Friends as a distinct people.

The fundamental doctrine declared by our Saviour, when He said, "It is
the Spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing," was steadily
kept in view by George Fox and his fellow laborers. They clearly saw
that Christ had ended the Jewish law, with its outward and ceremonial
observances, and had introduced a spiritual dispensation, under which
He, by his heavenly and eternal Light or Spirit, was to be the Leader,
Guide and Helper of his people; that all was now to be done in and by
Him; and that this was especially true of religious worship, which
depends upon the enlightening, quickening power of his Holy Spirit.

All confidence in the flesh,--in the natural abilities of man,--was
removed; and they were taught to distinguish between that which is of
man and that which is of God,--between that stirring up of the natural
feelings which can be produced by the skilful use of outward means,
such as music, pictorial representations and architectural grace and
grandeur; and that solemn covering of the heart which is a fruit and
an evidence of the extension of Divine help and power.

Hence these divinely enlightened men and women laid aside the forms in
which they had been educated, and which many of them had sincerely and
zealously practised, and, in their private retirements before the
Lord, and when they assembled for the performance of public worship,
they sat in silence before Him, seeking to draw near in spirit, in
living exercise of mind, that they might feel the arising of his
power, and be enabled to offer acceptable worship.

As that power arose in any, and under its influence, they were led to
utter words of prayer or praise to the Almighty, or exhortation to
their fellow believers; they were comforted or edified in proportion
as they could feel the Spirit bearing witness to the life that
accompanied the vocal expressions. Thus their dependence was not
placed on man, but on the Spirit that quickeneth.

There was no desire to limit the operation of the Spirit, or to lay
down any rule which would prohibit in times of worship any act which
truly proceeded from its motions; but there was a jealous care that
none of these outward things should be done as formal matters; that
people should not look upon them as essential to the holding of
meetings for worship, and that they should not in any manner be led
away from their dependence on the fresh extension of Divine life and
light to their souls, as the very foundation of true worship. The
writings of the early members of our Society abound in evidences of
their watchful care in this respect.

Among them, one of the most earnest and effective laborers for the
spread of the Gospel, was Edward Burrough, whose efforts in London
were blessed to a large number. Over the converts in that city he
watched with anxious love; and, when absent in the service of his
Master in other parts, frequently visited them by epistles, in which
he gave much sound and practical advice. From these epistles are taken
the following passages, referring to the manner in which these
meetings for worship were to be held.

    "We charge and command you in the presence of the Lord, whose power
    is dreadful, that you meet together in silence, and wait, and none
    to speak a word but what he is moved to speak, a word from the
    Lord."--_E. Burrough's Works, Ed. 1672, p. 70._

    "We charge by the Lord that none speak without eternal [Divine]
    motion; for if you do, the false prophet speaks, and his words eat
    as a canker, and darken and vail them that hearken to it."--_Id.,
    p. 71._

The nature of this spiritual worship is clearly portrayed by Robert
Barclay; see the 11th Proposition of his Apology, particularly in
Sections 6 and 7, to which we desire the reader to refer.

                   *       *       *       *       *

We have viewed with much concern the gradual creeping into the
meetings of Friends, in some parts of the country, of latter years, of
reading the Scriptures, and of singing, practices which, until within
a few years, were almost unknown amongst us.

We believe that these changes are an evidence of a departure from that
dependence on the Lord for ability to worship Him aright, which was
so conspicuous a testimony of this Society; and that they are
connected with a shrinking from patient waiting upon the Lord, and
