we will let Him guide us.

Or if ever the work be seen clearly enough, but our poor hands cannot
take aim for very trembling, or shoot for fear of striking something
very dear to us, He will steady our nerves and make our aim sure and
true. We have often, in our fight with ourselves, and in our struggle
to get God's will done in the world, to face as cruel a perplexity as
the father who had to split the apple on his son's head. The evil
against which we have to contend is often so closely connected with
things very precious to us, that it is hard to smite the one when there
is such danger of grazing the other. Many a time our tastes, our
likings, our prejudices, our hopes, our loves, make our sight dim, and
our pulses too tumultuous to allow of a good, long, steady gaze and a
certain aim. It is hard to keep the arrow's point firm when the heart
throbs and the hand shakes. But in all such difficult times He is ready
to help us. 'Behold, we know not what to do, but our eyes are upon
Thee,' is a prayer never offered in vain.

The word that is here rendered 'made strong,' might be translated 'made
pliable,' or 'flexible' conveying the notion of deftness and dexterity
rather than that of simple strength. It is practised strength that He
will give, the educated hand and arm, masters of the manipulation of
the weapon. The stiffness and clumsiness of our handling, the obstinate
rigidity as well as the throbbing feebleness of our arms, the dimness
of our sight, may all be overcome. At His touch the raw recruit is as
the disciplined veteran; the prophet who cannot speak because he is a
child, gifted with a mouth and wisdom which all the adversaries shall
not be able to gainsay nor to resist. Do not be disheartened by your
inexperience, or by your ignorance; but as the prophet said to the
young king, Take the bow and shoot. God's strong hand will hold yours,
and the arrow will fly true.

That strong hand is laid on ours, and lends its weight to our feeble
pull. The bow is often too heavy for us to bend, but we do not need to
strain our strength in the vain attempt to do it alone. Tasks seem too
much for us. The pressure of our daily work overwhelms us. The burden
of our daily anxieties and sorrows is too much. Some huge obstacle
starts up in our path. Some great sacrifice for truth, honour, duty,
which we feel we cannot make, is demanded of us. Some daring defiance
of some evil, which has caught us in its toils, or which it is
unfashionable to fight against, seems laid upon us. We cannot rise to
the height of the occasion, or bring ourselves to the wrench that is
required. Or the wearing recurrence of monotonous duties seems to take
ail freshness out of our lives, and all spring out of ourselves; and we
are ready to give over struggling any more, and let ourselves drift.
Can we not feel that large hand laid on ours; and does not power, more
and other than our own, creep into our numb and relaxed fingers? Yes,
if we will let Him. His strength is made perfect in our weakness; and
every man and woman who will make life a noble struggle against evil,
vanity, or sin, may be very sure that God will direct and strengthen
their hands to war, and their fingers to fight.

But the remarkable metaphor of the text not only gives the fact of
divine strength being bestowed, but also the _manner_ of the gift. What
a boldness of reverent familiarity there is in that symbol of the hands
of God laid on the hands of the man! How strongly it puts the contact
between us and Him as the condition of our reception of power from Him!
A true touch, as of hand to hand, conveys the grace. It is as when the
prophet laid himself down with his warm lip on the dead boy's cold
mouth, and his heart beating against the still heart of the corpse,
till the life passed into the clay, and the lad lived. So, if we may
say it, our Quickener bends Himself over all our deadness, and by His
own warmth reanimates us.

Perhaps this same thought is one of the lessons which we are meant to
learn from the frequency with which our Lord wrought His miracles of
healing by the touch of His hand. 'Come and lay Thy hand on him, and he
shall live.' 'And He put forth His hand and touched him, and said, I
will, be thou clean.' 'Many said, He is dead; but Jesus took him by the
hand and lifted him up, and he arose.' The touch of His hand is healing
and life. The touch of our hands is faith. In the mystery of His
incarnation, in the flow of His sympathy, in the forth-putting of His
power, He lays hold not on angels, but He lays hold on the seed of
Abraham. By our lowly trust, by the forth-putting of our desires, we
stretch 'lame hands of faith,' and, blessed be God! we do not 'grope,'
but we grasp His strong hand and are held up.

The contact of our spirits with His Spirit is a contact far more real
than the touch of earthly hands that grasp each other closest. There is
ever some film of atmosphere between the palms. But 'he that is joined
to the Lord is one spirit,' and he that clasps Christ's outstretched
hand of help with his outstretched hand of weakness, holds Him with a
closeness to which all unions of earth are gaping gulfs of separation.
You remember how Mary cast herself at Christ's feet on the resurrection
morning, and would have flung her arms round them in the passion of her
joy. The calm word which checked her has a wonderful promise in it.
'Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father'; plainly leading
to the inference, 'When I am ascended, then you may touch Me.' And that
touch will be more reverent, more close, more blessed, than any
clasping of His feet, even with such loving hands, and is possible for
us all for evermore.

Nothing but such contact will give us strength for conflict and for
conquest. And the plain lesson therefore is--see to it, that the
contact is not broken by you. Put away the metaphor, and the simple
English of the advice is just this:--First, live in the desire and the
confidence of His help in all your need, of His strength as all your
power. As a part of that confidence--its reverse and under side, so to
speak--cherish the profound sense of your own weakness.

  'In our own strength we nothing can;
   Full soon were we down-ridden'--

as Luther has taught us to sing. Let there be a constant renewal, in
the midst of your duties and trials, of that conscious dependence and
feeling of insufficiency. Stretch out the empty hands to Him in that
desire and hope, which, spoken or silent, is prayer. Keep the
communications open, by which His strength flows into your souls. Let
them not be choked with self-confidence, with vanities, with the
rubbish of your own nature, or of the world. Do not twitch away your
hands from under the strong hands that are laid so gently upon them.
But let Him cover, direct, cherish, and strengthen your poor fingers
till they are strong and nimble for all your work and warfare. If you
go into the fight trusting to your own wit and wisdom, to the vigour of
your own arm, or the courage of your own heart, that very foolhardy
confidence is itself defeat, for it is sin as well as folly, and
nothing can come of it but utter collapse and disaster. But if you will
only go to your daily fight with yourself and the world, with your hand
grasping God's hand, you will be able to 'withstand in the evil day,
and having done all, to stand.' The enemies may compass you about like
bees, but in the name of the Lord you can destroy them. Their arrows
may fly thick enough to darken the sun, but, as the proud old boast has
it, 'then we can fight in the shade'; and when their harmless points
have buried themselves in the ground, you will stand unhurt, your
unshivered bow ready for the next assault, and your hands made strong
by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. 'In all these things we are
more than conquerors, through Him that loved us.'




THE SHEPHERD, THE STONE OF ISRAEL


    '... The mighty God of Jacob. From thence is the Shepherd,
    the stone of Israel.'--GENESIS xlix. 24.

A slight alteration in the rendering will probably bring out the
meaning of these words more correctly. The last two clauses should
perhaps not be read as a separate sentence. Striking out the supplement
'is,' and letting the previous sentence run on to the end of the verse,
we get a series of names of God, in apposition with each other, as the
sources of the strength promised to the arms of the hands of the
warlike sons of Joseph. From the hands of the mighty God of Jacob--from
thence, from the Shepherd, the stone of Israel--the power will come for
conflict and for conquest. This exuberant heaping together of names of
God is the mark of the flash of rapturous confidence which lit up the
dying man's thoughts when they turned to God. When he begins to think
of Him he cannot stay his tongue. So many aspects of His character, so
many remembrances of His deeds, come crowding into his mind; so
familiar and so dear are they, that he must linger over the words, and
strive by this triple repetition to express the manifold preciousness
of Him whom no name, nor crowd of names, can rightly praise. So earthly
love ever does with its earthly objects, inventing and reiterating
epithets which are caresses. Such repetitions are not tautologies, for
each utters some new aspect of the one subject, and comes from a new
gush of heart's love towards it. And something of the same rapture and
unwearied recurrence to the Name that is above every name should mark
the communion of devout souls with their heavenly Love. What a
wonderful burst of such praise flowed out from David's thankful heart,
in his day of deliverance, like some strong current, with its sevenfold
wave, each crested with the Name--'The Lord is my rock, and my
fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust;
my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.'

Those three names which we find here are striking and beautiful in
themselves; in their juxtaposition; in their use on Jacob's lips. They
seem to have been all coined by him, for, if we accept this song as a
true prophecy uttered by him, we have here the earliest instance of
their occurrence. They all have a history, and appear again expanded
and deepened in the subsequent revelation. Let us look at them as they
stand.

1. _The Mighty God of Jacob_.--The meaning of such a name is clear
enough. It is He who has shown Himself mighty and mine by His deeds for
me all through my life. The dying man's thoughts are busy with all that
past from the day when he went forth from the tent of Isaac, and took
of the stones of the field for his pillow when the sun went down. A
perplexed history it had been, with many a bitter sorrow, and many a
yet bitterer sin. Passionate grief and despairing murmurs he had felt
and flung out, while it slowly unfolded itself. When the Pharaoh had
asked, 'How old art thou?' he had answered in words which owe their
sombreness partly to obsequious assumption of insignificance in such a
presence, but have a strong tinge of genuine sadness in them too: 'Few
and evil have the days of the years of my life been.' But lying dying
there, with it all well behind him, he has become wiser; and now it all
looks to him as one long showing forth of the might of his God, who had
been with him all his life long, and had redeemed him from all evil. He
has got far enough away to see the lie of the land, as he could not do
while he was toiling along the road. The barren rocks and white snow
glow with purple as the setting sun touches them. The struggles with
Laban; the fear of Esau; the weary work of toilsome years; the sad day
when Rachel died, and left to him the 'son of her sorrow'; the heart
sickness of the long years of Joseph's loss--all have faded away, or
been changed into thankful wonder at God's guidance. The one thought
which the dying man carries out of life with him is: God has shown
Himself mighty, and He has shown Himself mine.

For each of us, our own experience should be a revelation of God. The
things about Him which we read in the Bible are never living and real
to us till we have verified them in the facts of our own history. Many
a word lies on the page, or in our memories, fully believed and utterly
shadowy, until in some soul's conflict we have had to grasp it, and
found it true. Only so much of our creed as we have proved in life is
really ours. If we will only open our eyes and reflect upon our history
as it passes before us, we shall find every corner of it filled with
the manifestations to our hearts and to our minds of a present God. But
our folly, our stupidity, our impatience, our absorption with the mere
outsides of things, our self-will, blind us to the Angel with the drawn
sword who resists us, as well as to the Angel with the lily who would
lead us. So we waste our days; are deaf to His voice speaking through
all the clatter of tongues, and blind to His bright presence shining
through all the dimness of earth; and, for far too many of us, we never
can see God in the present, but only discern Him when He has passed by,
like Moses from his cleft. Like this same Jacob, we have to say:
'Surely God was in this place, and I knew it not.' Hence we miss the
educational worth of our lives, are tortured with needless cares, are
beaten by the poorest adversaries, and grope amidst what seems to us a
chaos of pathless perplexities, when we might be marching on assured
and strong, with God for our guide, and the hands of the Mighty One of
Jacob for our defence.

Notice, too, how distinctly the thought comes out in this name--that
the very vital centre of a man's religion is his conviction that God is
his. Jacob will not be content with thinking of God as the God of his
fathers; he will not even be content with associating himself with them
in the common possession; but he must feel the full force of the
intensely personal bond that knits him to God, and God to him. Of
course such a feeling does not ignore the blessed fellowship and family
who also are held in this bond. The God of Jacob is to the patriarch
also the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob. But that comes
second, and this comes first. Each man for himself must put forth the
hand of his own faith, and grasp that great hand for his own guide.
'_My_ Lord and _my_ God' is the true form of the confession. 'He loved
_me_ and gave Himself for _me_,' is the shape in which the Gospel of
Christ melts the soul. God is mine because His love individualises me,
and I have a distinct place in His heart, His purposes, and His deeds.
God is mine, because by my own individual act--the most personal which
I can perform--I cast myself on Him, by my faith appropriate the common
salvation, and open my being to the inflow of His power. God is mine,
and I am His, in that wonderful mutual possession, with perpetual
interchange of giving and receiving not only gifts but selves, which
makes the very life of love, whether it be love on earth or love in
heaven.

Remember, too, the profound use which our Lord made of this name,
wherein Jacob claims to possess God. Because Moses at the bush called
God, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, they cannot have
ceased to be. The personal relations, which subsist between God and the
soul that clasps Him for its own, demand an immortal life for their
adequate expression, and make it impossible that Death's skeleton
fingers should have power to untie such a bond. Anything is
conceivable, rather than that the soul which can say 'God is mine'
should perish. And that continued existence demands, too, a state of
being which shall correspond to itself, in which its powers shall all
be exercised, its desires fulfilled, its possibilities made facts.
Therefore there must be the resurrection. 'God is not ashamed to be
called their God, for He hath prepared for them a city.'

The dying patriarch left to his descendants the legacy of this great
name, and often, in later times, it was used to quicken faith by the
remembrance of the great deeds of God in the past. One instance may
serve as a sample of the whole. 'The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God
of Jacob is our refuge.' The first of these two names lays the
foundation of our confidence in the thought of the boundless power of
Him whom all the forces of the universe, personal and impersonal,
angels and stars, in their marshalled order, obey and serve. The second
bids later generations claim as theirs all that the old history reveals
as having belonged to the 'world's grey fathers.' They had no special
prerogative of nearness or of possession. The arm that guided them is
unwearied, and all the past is true still, and will for evermore be
true for all who love God. So the venerable name is full of promise and
of hope for us: 'The God of Jacob is our refuge.'

2. _The Shepherd_.--How that name sums up the lessons that Jacob had
learned from the work of himself and of his sons! 'Thy servants are
shepherds' they said to Pharaoh; 'both we, and also our sons.' For
fourteen long, weary years he had toiled at that task. 'In the day the
drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from
mine eyes,' and his own sleepless vigilance and patient endurance seem
to him to be but shadows of the loving care, the watchful protection,
the strong defence, which 'the God, who has been my Shepherd all my
life long,' had extended to him and his. Long before the shepherd king,
who had been taken from the sheepcotes to rule over Israel, sang his
immortal psalm, the same occupation had suggested the same thought to
the shepherd patriarch. Happy they whose daily work may picture for
them some aspect of God's care--or rather, happy they whose eyes are
open to see the dim likeness of God's care which every man's earthly
relations, and some part of his work, most certainly present.

There can be no need to draw out at length the thoughts which that
sweet and familiar emblem has conveyed to so many generations. Loving
care, wise guidance, fitting food, are promised by it; and docile
submission, close following at the Shepherd's heels, patience,
innocence, meekness, trust, are required. But I may put emphasis for a
moment on the connection between the thought of 'the mighty God of
Jacob' and that of 'the Shepherd.' The occupation, as we see it, does
not call for a strong arm, or much courage, except now and then to wade
through snowdrifts, and dig out the buried and half-dead creatures. But
the shepherds whom Jacob knew, had to be hardy, bold fighters. There
were marauders lurking ready to sweep away a weakly guarded flock.
There were wild beasts in the gorges of the hills. There was danger in
the sun by day on these burning plains, and in the night the wolves
prowled round the flock. We remember how David's earliest exploits were
against the lion and the bear, and how he felt that even his duel with
the Philistine bully was not more formidable than these had been. If we
will read into our English notions of a shepherd this element of danger
and of daring, we shall feel that these two clauses are not to be taken
as giving the contrasted ideas of strength and gentleness, but the
connected ones of strength, and therefore protection and security. We
have the same connection in later echoes of this name. 'Behold, the
Lord God shall come with _strong_ hand; He shall feed His flock like a
shepherd.' And our Lord's use of the figure brings into all but
exclusive prominence the good shepherd's conflict with the ravening
wolves--a conflict in which he must not hesitate even 'to lay down his
life for the sheep.' As long as the flock are here, amidst dangers and
foes, and wild weather, the arm that guides must be an arm that can
guard; and none less mighty than the Mighty One of Jacob can be the
Shepherd of men. But a higher fulfilment yet awaits this venerable
emblem, when in other pastures, where no lion nor any ravening beast
shall come, the 'Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne,' and is
Shepherd as well as Lamb, 'shall feed them, and lead them by living
fountains of waters.'

3. _The Stone of Israel_.--Here, again, we have a name, that after-ages
have caught up and cherished, used for the first time. I suppose the
Stone of Israel means much the same thing as the Rock. If so, that
symbol, too, which is full of such large meanings, was coined by Jacob.
It is, perhaps, not fanciful to suppose that it owes its origin to the
scenery of Palestine. The wild cliffs of the eastern region where
Peniel lay, or the savage fastnesses in the southern wilderness, a
day's march from Hebron, where he lived so long, came back to his
memory amid the flat, clay land of Egypt; and their towering height,
their immovable firmness, their cool shade, their safe shelter, spoke
to him of the unalterable might and impregnable defence which he had
found in God. So there is in this name the same devout, reflective
laying-hold upon experience which we have observed in the preceding.

There is also the same individualising grasp of God as his very own;
for 'Israel' here is, of course, to be taken not as the name of the
nation but as his own name, and the intention of the phrase is
evidently to express what God had been to him personally.

The general idea of this symbol is perhaps firmness, solidity. And that
general idea may be followed out in various details. God is a rock for
a foundation. Build your lives, your thoughts, your efforts, your hopes
there. The house founded on the rock will stand though wind and rain
from above smite it, and floods from beneath beat on it like battering
rams. God is a rock for a fortress. Flee to Him to hide, and your
defence shall be the 'munitions of rocks,' which shall laugh to scorn
all assault, and never be stormed by any foe. God is a rock for shade
and refreshment. Come close to Him from out of the scorching heat, and
you will find coolness and verdure and moisture in the clefts, when all
outside that grateful shadow is parched and dry.

The word of the dying Jacob was caught up by the great law-giver in his
dying song. 'Ascribe ye greatness to our God. He is the Rock.' It
reappears in the last words of the shepherd king, whose grand prophetic
picture of the true King is heralded by 'The Book of Israel spake to
me.' It is heard once more from the lips of the greatest of the
prophets in his glowing prophecy of the song of the final days: 'Trust
ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is the Rock of Ages,'
as well as in his solemn prophecy of the Stone which God would lay in
Zion. We hear it again from the lips that cannot lie: 'Did ye never
read in the Scriptures, The Stone which the builders rejected, the same
is become the headstone of the corner?' And for the last time the
venerable metaphor which has cheered so many ages appears in the words
of that Apostle who was 'surnamed Cephas, which is by interpretation a
stone': 'To whom coming as unto a living Stone, yea also as living
stones are built up.' As on some rocky site in Palestine, where a
hundred generations in succession have made their fortresses, one may
see stones with the bevel that tells of early Jewish masonry, and above
them Roman work, and higher still masonry of crusading times, and above
it the building of to-day; so we, each age in our turn, build on this
great rock foundation, dwell safe there for our little lives, and are
laid to peaceful rest in a sepulchre in the rock. On Christ we may
build. In Him we may dwell and rest secure. We may die in Jesus, and be
gathered to our own people, who, having died, live in Him. And though
so many generations have reared their dwellings on that great rock,
there is ample room for us too to build. We have not to content
ourselves with an uncertain foundation among the shifting rubbish of
perished dwellings, but can get down to the firm virgin rock for
ourselves. None that ever builded there have been confounded. We clasp
hands with all who have gone before us. At one end of the long chain
this dim figure of the dying Jacob, amid the strange vanished life of
Egypt, stretches out his withered hands to God the Stone of Israel; at
the other end, we lift up ours to Jesus, and cry:--

  'Rock of Ages! cleft for me,
   Let me hide myself in Thee.'

The faith is one. One will be the answer and the reward. May it be
yours and mine!




A CALM EVENING, PROMISING A BRIGHT MORNING


    'And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren,
    and all that went up with him to bury his father, after
    he had buried his father. And when Joseph's brethren
    saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will
    peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all
    the evil which we did unto him. And they sent a messenger
    unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he
    died, saying, So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I
    pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their
    sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee,
    forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy
    father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him. And
    his brethren also went and fell down before his face;
    and they said, Behold, we be thy servants. And Joseph
    said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God?
    But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God
    meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day,
    to save much people alive Now therefore fear ye not: I
    will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted
    them, and spake kindly unto them. And Joseph dwelt in
    Egypt, he, and his father's house: and Joseph lived an
    hundred and ten years. And Joseph saw Ephraim's children
    of the third generation: the children also of Machir the
    son of Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph's knees. And
    Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely
    visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land
    which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. And
    Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying,
    God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones
    from hence. So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten
    years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a
    coffin in Egypt.'--GENESIS l. 14-26.

Joseph's brothers were right in thinking that he loved Jacob better
than he did them; and they knew only too well that he had reasons for
doing so. But their fear that Jacob's death would be followed by an
outbreak of long-smothered revenge betrayed but too clearly their own
base natures. They thought him like themselves, and they knew
themselves capable of nursing wrath to keep it warm through long years
of apparent kindliness. They had no room in their hearts for frank,
full forgiveness. So they had lived on through numberless signs of
their brother's love and care, and still kept the old dread, and,
probably, not a little of the old envy. How much happiness they had
lost by their slowness to believe in Joseph's love!

Is there nothing like this in our thoughts of God? Do men not live for
years on His bounty, and all the while cherish suspicions of His heart?
'Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself.' It is
hard to believe in a love which has no faintest trace of desire for
vengeance for all past slights. It is hard for hearts conscious of
their own slowness to pardon, to realise undoubtingly God's infinite
placability.

The brothers' procedure is marked by unwarrantable lack of trust in
Joseph. Why did they not go to him at once, and appeal to his brotherly
affection? Their roundabout way of going to work by sending a messenger
was an insult to their brother, though it may have been meant as honour
to the viceroy. The craft which was their father's by nature seems to
have been amply transmitted. The story of Jacob's dying wish looks very
apocryphal. If he had been afraid of Joseph's behaviour when he was
gone, he was much more likely to have spoken to Joseph about it before
he went, than to have left the gun loaded and bid them fire it after
his death. Jacob knew his son better, and trusted him more than his
brothers did.

We note, too, the ingenious way of slipping in motives for forgiving,
first in putting the mention of their relationship into Jacob's mouth,
and then claiming to be worshippers of 'thy (not our) father's God.'
They had proved how truly they were both, when they sold him to the
Midianites!

Joseph's tears were a good answer. No doubt they were partly drawn out
by the shock of finding that he had been so misunderstood, but they
were omens of his pardon. So, when they were reported to the brothers,
they came themselves, and fulfilled the old dream by falling down
before him in abjectness. They do not call themselves his brethren, but
his slaves, as if grovelling was the way to win love or to show it. A
little affection would have gone farther than much submission. If their
attitude truly expressed their feelings, their hearts were as untouched
by Joseph's years of magnanimous kindness as a rock by falling rain. If
it was a theatrical display of feigned subjection, it was still worse.
Our Brother, against whom we have sinned, wants love, not cowering; and
if we believe in His forgiveness, we shall give Him the hearts which He
desires, and after that shall render the unconditional submission which
only trust and love can yield.

Joseph's answer is but the reiteration of his words at his first making
himself known. He soothes unworthy fears, says not a word of reproach
for their misunderstanding of him, waives all pretension to deal out
that retribution which God alone sends, and shows that he has lost all
bitterness in thinking of the past, since he sees in it, not the
working of their malice, but of God's providence, and is ready to
thank, if not them, at any rate Him, for having, by even so painful a
way, made him the instrument of widespread good. A man who sees God's
hand in his past, and thinks lightly of his sorrows and nobly of the
opportunities of service which they have brought him, will waste no
feeling on the men who were God's tools. If we want to live high above
low hatreds and revenges, let us cultivate the habit of looking behind
men to God. So we shall be saved from many fruitless pangs over
irrevocable losses and from many disturbing feelings about other people.

The sweet little picture of the great minister's last days is very
tenderly touched. Surrounded by his kindred, probably finding in a
younger generation the reverence and affection which the elder had
failed to give, he wears away the calm evening of the life which had
opened so stormily. It 'came in like a lion, it goes out like a lamb.'
The strong domestic instincts so characteristic of the Hebrew race had
full gratification. Honours and power at court and kingdom probably
continued, but these did not make the genial warmth which cheered the
closing years. It was that he saw his children's children's children,
and that they gathered round his knees in confidence, and received from
him his benediction.

But it is in his death that the flame shoots up most brightly at the
last. 'By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of
the children of Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones.' He
had been an Egyptian to all appearance all his life from the day of his
captivity, filling his place at court, marrying an Egyptian woman, and
bearing an Egyptian name, but his dying words show how he had been a
stranger in the midst of it all. As truly as his fathers who dwelt in
tents, he too felt that he here had no continuing city. He lived by
faith in God's promises, and therefore his heart was in the unseen
future far more than in the present.

He died with the ancestral assurance on his lips. Jacob, dying, had
said to him, 'Behold, I die; but God shall be with you, and bring you
again unto the land of your fathers' (Gen. xlviii. 21). Joseph hands on
the hope to his descendants. It is a grand instance of indomitable
confidence in God's word, not nonplussed, bewildered, or weakened,
though the man who cherishes it dies without seeing even a beginning of
fulfilment. Such a faith bridges the gulf of death as a very small
matter. In the strength of it we may drop our unfinished tasks, and,
needful as we may seem to wider or narrower circles, may be sure that
God and His word live, though we die. No man is necessary. Israel was
safe in Egypt, and sure to come out of it, though Joseph's powerful
protection was withdrawn.

His career may teach another lesson; namely, that true faith does not
detach us from strenuous interest and toil in the present. Though the
great hope burned in his heart, he did all his work as prime minister
all the better because of it. It should always be so. Life here is not
worth living if there is not another. The distance dignifies the
foreground. The highest importance and nobleness of the life that now
is, lie in its being preparation or apprenticeship for the greater
future. The Egyptian vizier, with Canaan written on his heart, and
Egypt administered by his hands, is a type of what every Christian
should be.

Possibly Joseph's 'commandment concerning his bones may have been
somewhat influenced by the Egyptian belief which underlies their
practice of embalming the body. He, too, may have thought that, in some
mysterious way, he would share in the possession of the land in which
his bones were to be laid. Or he may simply have been yielding to
natural sentiment. It is noteworthy that Jacob desired to be laid
beside his ancestors, and Joseph to be kept in Egypt for a time. Both
had the same assurance as to future possession of Canaan, but it led to
different wishes as to burial. Perhaps Joseph felt that his position in
Egypt required that his embalmed body should for a while remain there.
Perhaps he wished to leave with his people a silent witness of his own
hope, and a preacher, eloquent in its dumbness, of the duty of their
keeping alive that hope, whatever might come upon them.

'In a coffin in Egypt'--so the book ends. It might seem that that
mummy-case proclaimed rather the futility of the hope of restoration to
the land, and, as centuries rolled away, and the bondage became
heavier, no doubt many a wondering and doubting look was turned to it.
But there it lay, perhaps neglected, for more than three hundred years,
the visible embodiment of a hope which smiled at death and counted
centuries as nothing. At last the day came which vindicated the
long-deferred confidence; and, as the fugitives in their haste
shouldered the heavy sarcophagus, and set out with it for the Land of
Promise, surely some thrill of trust would pass through their ranks,
and in some hearts would sound the exhortation, 'If the vision tarry,
wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.'

We have not a dead Joseph to bid us wait with patience and never lose
our firm grip of God's promises, but we have a living Jesus. Our march
to the land of rest is headed, not by the bones of a departed leader,
but by the Forerunner, 'who is for us entered' whither He will bring
all who trust in Him. Therefore we should live, as Joseph lived, with
desires and trust reaching out beyond things seen to the land assured
to us by God's promise, doing our day's task all the more vigorously
because we do not belong to the order of things in the midst of which
we live; and then, when we lie down at the end of our life's work, we
shall not be saddened by disappointed hopes, nor reluctantly close our
eyes on good to come, when we shall not be there to share it, but be
sure that we shall 'see the good of Thy chosen,' and 'rejoice in the
gladness of Thy nation.'




JOSEPH'S FAITH


    'Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying,
    God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones
    from hence.'--GENESIS l. 25.

This is the one act of Joseph's life which the author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews selects as the sign that he too lived by faith. 'By faith
Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of the children of
Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones.'

It was at once a proof of how entirely he believed God's promise, and
of how earnestly he longed for its fulfilment. It was a sign too of how
little he felt himself at home in Egypt, though to outward appearance
he had become completely one of its people. The ancestral spirit was in
him true and strong though he was 'separate from his brethren.' He bore
an Egyptian name, a swelling title, he married an Egyptian woman, he
had an Egyptian priest for father-in-law, but he was an Israelite in
heart; and in the midst of official cares and a surfeit of honours, his
desires turned away from them all towards the land promised by God to
his fathers.

And when he lay dying, he could not bear to think that his bones should
moulder in the country where his life had been spent. 'I know that this
is not our land after all; swear to me that when the promise that has
tarried so long comes at last, you will take me, all that is left of
me, and carry it up, and lay it in some corner of the blessed soil,
that I too may somehow share in the inheritance of His people. God
shall surely visit you. Carry my bones up hence.'

Perhaps there is in this wish a trace of something besides faith in
God's promises. Of course, there is a natural sentiment which no
clearness of knowledge of a future state wholly dispels. We all feel as
if somehow our bodies remain a part of ourselves even after death, and
we have wishes where they shall lie. But perhaps Joseph had a more
definite belief on the matter than that. What theory of another life
does an Egyptian mummy express? Why all that sedulous care to preserve
the poor relics? Was it not a consequence of the belief that somehow or
other there could be no life without a body, and that in some
mysterious way the preservation of that contributed to the continuance
of this? And so Joseph, who was himself going to be embalmed and put
into a mummy-case, may have caught something of the tone of thought
prevalent around him, and have believed that to carry his bones to the
land of promise was, in some obscure manner, to carry _him_ thither. Be
that as it may, whether the wish came from a mistake about the relation
of flesh and spirit, or only from the natural desire which we too
possess, that our graves may not be among strangers, but beside our
father's and our mother's--that is not the main thing in this fact. The
main thing is that this dying man believed God's promise, and claimed
his share in it.

And on this the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews, whoever he was,
fastens. Neglecting the differences in knowledge between Joseph and the
Christians whom he addresses, and pointing back to the strong
confidence in God and longing for participation in the promises which
brightened the glazing eye and gave _him_ 'hope in his death,' he
declares that the principle of action which guided this man in the dim
twilight of early revelation, is that same faith which ought to guide
us who live in the full light of the unsetting sun.

Taking, then, this incident, with the New Testament commentary upon it,
it leads us to a truth which we often lose sight of, but which is
indispensable if we would understand the relations of the earlier and
later days.

1. _Faith is always the same, though knowledge varies._--There is a
vast difference between a man's creed and a man's faith. The one may
vary, does vary within very wide limits; the other remains the same.
The things believed have been growing from the beginning--the attitude
of mind and will by which they have been grasped has been the same from
the beginning, and will be the same to the end. And not only so, but it
will be substantially the same in heaven as it is on earth. For there
is but one bond which unites men to God; and that emotion of loving
trust is one and the same in the dim twilight of the world's morning,
and amid the blaze of the noonday of heaven. The contents of faith,
that on which it relies, the treasure it grasps, changes; the essence
of faith, the act of reliance, the grasp which holds the treasure, does
not change.

It is difficult to decide how much Joseph's gospel contained. From our
point of view it was very imperfect. The spiritual life was nourished
in him and in the rest of 'the world's grey fathers' on what looks to
us but like seven basketsful of fragments. They had promises, indeed,
in which we, looking at them with the light of fulfilment blazing upon
them, can see the broad outlines of the latest revelation, and can
trace the future flower all folded together and pale in the swelling
bud. But we shall err greatly if we suppose, as we are apt to do, that
those promises were to them anything like what they are to us. It
requires a very vigorous exercise of very rare gifts to throw ourselves
back to their position, and to gain any vivid and approximately
accurate notion of the theology of these ancient lovers of God.

This, at any rate, we may, perhaps, say: they had a sure and clear
knowledge of the living God, who had talked with them as with a friend;
they knew His inspiring, guiding presence; they knew the forgiveness of
sins; they knew, though they very dimly understood, the promise, 'In
thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.' How far they
looked across the gulf of death and beheld anything--even cloudland--on
the other side, is a question very hard to answer, and about which
confident dogmatism, either affirmative or negative, is unwarranted.
But it is to be remembered that, whether they had any notion of a
future state or no, they had a promise which fulfilled for them
substantially the same office as that does for us. The promise of the
land of Canaan gleaming before them through the mists, bare and
'earthly' as it seems to us when compared with our hope of an
inheritance incorruptible in the heavens, is, by the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, identified with that hope of ours, for he
expressly says that, whilst they were looking for an earthly Canaan,
they were 'desiring a better country, that is an heavenly.' So that,
whether they definitely expected a life after death or not, the
anticipation of the land promised to them and to their fathers held the
same place in their creed, and as a moral agent in their lives, which
the rest that remains for the people of God ought to do in ours.

And it is to be taken into account also that fellowship with God has in
it the germ of the assurance of immortality. It seems almost impossible
to suppose a state of mind in which a man living in actual communion
with God shall believe that death is to end it all. Christ's proof that
immortal life was revealed in the Pentateuch, was the fact that God
there called Himself the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob; by
which our Lord meant us to learn that men who are brought into personal
relations with God can never die, that it is impossible that a soul
which has looked up to the face of the unseen Father with filial love
should be left in the grave, or that those who are separated to be His,
as He is theirs, should see corruption. The relation once established
is eternal, and some more or less definite expectation of that eternity
seems inseparable from the consciousness of the relation.

But be that as it may, and even taking the widest possible view of the
contents of the patriarchal creed, what a rude outline it looks beside
ours! Can there be anything in common between us? Can they be in any
way a pattern for us? Yes; as I said, faith is one thing, creed is
another. Joseph and his ancestors were joined to God by the very same
bond which unites us to Him. There has never been but one path of life:
'They _trusted_ God and were lightened, and their faces were not
ashamed.' In that Old Covenant the one thing needful was trust in the
living Jehovah. In the New, the one thing needful is the very same
emotion, directed to the very same Lord, manifested now and incarnate
in the divine Son, our Saviour. In this exercise of loving confidence,
in which reason and will and affection blend in the highest energy and
holiest action, Joseph and we are one. Across the gulf of centuries we
clasp hands; and in despite of all superficial differences of culture
and civilisation, and all deeper differences in knowledge of God and
His loving will, Pharaoh's prime minister, and the English workman, and
the Hindoo ryot, may be alike in what is deepest--the faith which
grasps God. How all that mysterious Egyptian life fades away as we
think of the fundamental identity of religious emotion then and now! It
disguises our brother from us, as it did from the wandering Arabs who
came to buy corn, and could not recognise in the swarthy, imperious
Egyptian, with strange head-dress and unknown emblems hanging by chains
of gold about his neck, the fair boy whom they had sold to the
merchants. But beneath it all is the brother's heart, fed by the same
life-blood which feeds ours. He trusts in God, he expects a future
because God has promised it, and, therefore, he is separated from those
among whom he dwells, and knit to us in this far-off island of the sea,
who so many centuries after are partakers of like precious faith.

And incomplete as his creed was, Joseph may have been a better
Christian than some of us, and was so, if what he knew nourished his
