esteem still?"'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Devayani then, hearing those words of hers, exclaimed,
O king, thus, "Thou hast wronged me, O monarch! I shall not live here any
longer." And saying this, she quickly rose, with tearful eyes, to go to
her father. And the king was grieved to see her thus, and alarmed greatly,
followed in her foot-steps, endeavouring to appease her wrath. But
Devayani, with eyes red with anger, would not desist. Speaking not a word
to the king, with eyes bathed in tears, she soon reached the side of her
father Usanas, the son of Kavi. And beholding her father, she stood before
him, after due salutations. And Yayati also, immediately after, saluted
and worshipped Bhargava.

"'And Devayani said, "O father, virtue hath been vanquished by vice. The
low have risen, and the high have fallen. I have been offended again by
Sarmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparvan. Three sons have been begotten
upon her by this king Yayati. But, O father, being luckless I have got
only two sons! O son of Bhrigu, this king is renowned for his knowledge of
the precepts of religion. But, O Kavya, I tell thee that he hath deviated
from the path of rectitude."

"'Sukra, hearing all this, said, "O monarch, since thou hast made vice thy
beloved pursuit, though fully acquainted with the precepts of religion,
invincible decrepitude shall paralyse thee!" Yayati answered, "Adorable
one, I was solicited by the daughter of the Danava king to fructify her
season. I did it from a sense of virtue and not from other motives. That
male person, who being solicited by a woman in her season doth not grant
her wishes, is called, O Brahmana, by those conversant with the Vedas, a
slayer of the embryo. He who, solicited in secret by a woman full of
desire and in season, goeth not in unto her, loseth virtue and is called
by the learned a killer of the embryo. O son of Bhrigu, for these reasons,
and anxious to avoid sin, I went into Sarmishtha." Sukra then replied,
"Thou art dependent on me. Thou shouldst have awaited my command. Having
acted falsely in the matter of thy duty, O son of Nahusha, thou hast been
guilty of the sin of theft."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Yayati, the son of Nahusha, thus cursed by the
angry Usanas, was then divested of his youth and immediately overcome by
decrepitude. And Yayati said, "O son of Bhrigu, I have not yet been
satiated with youth or with Devayani. Therefore, O Brahmana, be graceful
unto me so that decrepitude might not touch me." Sukra then answered, "I
never speak an untruth. Even now, O king, art thou attacked by decrepitude.
But if thou likest, thou art competent to transfer this thy decrepitude to
another." Yayati said, "O Brahmana, let it be commanded by thee that that
son of mine who giveth me his youth shall enjoy my kingdom, and shall
achieve both virtue and fame." Sukra replied, "O son of Nahusha, thinking
of me thou mayst transfer this thy decrepitude to whomsoever thou likest.
That son who shall give thee his youth shall become thy successor to the
throne. He shall also have long life, wide fame, and numerous progeny!"'"


SECTION LXXXIV

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Yayati, then, overcome with decrepitude, returned to
his capital and summoning his eldest son Yadu who was also the most
accomplished, addressed him thus, "Dear child, from the curse of Kavya
called also Usanas, decrepitude and wrinkles and whiteness of hair have
come over me. But I have not been gratified yet with the enjoyment of
youth. Do thou, O Yadu, take this my weakness along with my decrepitude. I
shall enjoy with thy youth. And when a full thousand years will have
elapsed, returning to thee thy youth, I shall take back my weakness with
this decrepitude!"

"'Yadu replied, "There are innumerable inconveniences in decrepitude, in
respect of drinking and eating. Therefore, O king, I shall not take thy
decrepitude. This is, indeed, my determination. White hair on the head,
cheerlessness and relaxation of the nerves, wrinkles all over the body,
deformities, weakness of the limbs, emaciation, incapacity to work, defeat
at the hands of friends and companions--these are the consequences of
decrepitude. Therefore, O king, I desire not to take it. O king, thou hast
many sons some of whom are dearer to thee. Thou art acquainted with the
precepts of virtue. Ask some other son of thine to take thy decrepitude."

"'Yayati replied, "Thou art sprung from my heart, O son, but thou givest me
not thy youth. Therefore, thy children shall never be kings." And he
continued, addressing another son of his, "O Turvasu, take thou this
weakness of mine along with my decrepitude. With thy youth, O son, I like
to enjoy the pleasure of life. After the lapse of a full thousand years I
shall give back to thee thy youth, and take back from thee my weakness and
decrepitude."

"'Turvasu replied, "I do not like decrepitude, O father, it takes away all
appetites and enjoyments, strength and beauty of person, intellect, and
even life." Yayati said to him, "Thou art sprung from my heart, O son! But
thou givest me not thy youth! Therefore, O Turvasu, thy race shall be
extinct. Wretch, thou shall be the king of those whose practices and
precepts are impure, amongst whom men of inferior blood procreate children
upon women of blue blood, who live on meat, who are mean, who hesitate not
to appropriate the wives of their superiors, whose practices are those of
birds and beasts, who are sinful, and non-Aryan."'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Yayati, having thus cursed his son Turvasu, then,
addressed Sarmishtha's son Drahyu thus, "O Drahyu, take thou for a
thousand years my decrepitude destructive of complexion and personal
beauty and give me thy youth. When a thousand years have passed away, I
shall return thee thy youth and take back my own weakness and
decrepitude." To this Drahyu replied, "O king, one that is decrepit can
never enjoy elephants and cars and horses and women. Even his voice
becometh hoarse. Therefore, I do not desire (to take) thy decrepitude."
Yayati said to him, "Thou art sprung from my heart, O son! But thou
refusest to give me thy youth. Therefore, thy most cherished desires
shall never be fulfilled. Thou shalt be king only in name, of that
region where there are no roads for (the passage of) horses and cars
and elephants, and good vehicles, and asses, and goats and bullocks,
and palanquins; where there is swimming only by rafts and floats."
Yayati next addressed Anu and said, "O Anu, take my weakness and
decrepitude. I shall with thy youth enjoy the pleasures of life for a
thousand years." To this Anu replied, "Those that are decrepit always
eat like children and are always impure. They cannot pour libations
upon fire in proper times. Therefore, I do not like to take thy
decrepitude." Yayati said to him, "Thou art sprung from my heart, thou
givest not thy youth. Thou findest so many faults in decrepitude.
Therefore, decrepitude shall overcome thee! And, O Anu, thy progeny also
as soon as they attain to youth, shall die. And thou shalt also not be
able to perform sacrifices before fire."

"'Yayati at last turned to his youngest child, Puru, and addressing him
said, "Thou art, O Puru, my youngest son! But thou shall be the first of
all! Decrepitude, wrinkles, and whiteness of hair have come over me in
consequence of the curse of Kavya called also Usanas. I have not yet
however, been satiated with my youth. O Puru, take thou this my weakness
and decrepitude! With thy youth I shall enjoy for some years the pleasures
of life. And when a thousand years have passed away, I shall give back to
thee thy youth and take back my own decrepitude."'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by the king, Puru answered with
humility, "I shall do, O monarch, as thou bidest me. I shall take, O king,
thy weakness and decrepitude. Take thou my youth and enjoy as thou listest
the pleasures of life. Covered with thy decrepitude and becoming old, I
shall, as thou commandest, continue to live, giving thee my youth." Yayati
then said, "O Puru, I have been gratified with thee. And being gratified,
I tell thee that the people in thy kingdom shall have all their desires
fulfilled."

"'And having said this, the great ascetic Yayati, then thinking of Kavya,
transferred his decrepitude unto the body of the high-souled Puru.'"


SECTION LXXXV

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'The excellent monarch Yayati, the son of Nahusha,
having received Puru's youth, became exceedingly gratified. And with it he
once more began to indulge in his favourite pursuits to the full extent of
his desires and to the limit of his powers, according to seasons, so as to
derive the greatest pleasure therefrom. And, O king, in nothing that he
did, he acted against the precepts of his religion as behoved him well. He
gratified the gods by his sacrifices; the pitris, by Sraddhas; the poor,
by his charities; all excellent Brahmanas, by fulfilling their desires;
all persons entitled to the rites of hospitality, with food and drink; the
Vaisyas, by protection; and the Sudras, by kindness. And the king
repressed all criminals by proper punishments. And Yayati, gratifying all
sections of his subjects, protected them virtuously like another Indra.
And the monarch possessed of the prowess of a lion, with youth and every
object of enjoyment under control, enjoyed unlimited happiness without
transgressing the precepts of religion. And the king became very happy in
thus being able to enjoy all the excellent objects of his desires. And he
was only sorry when he thought that those thousand years would come to an
end. And having obtained youth for a thousand years, the king acquainted
with the mysteries of time, and watching proper Kalas and Kashthas sported
with (the celestial damsel) Viswachi, sometimes in the beautiful garden of
Indra, sometimes in Alaka (the city of Kuvera), and sometimes on the
summit of the mountain Meru on the north. And when the virtuous monarch
saw that the thousand years were full, he summoned his son, Puru, and
addressed him thus, "O oppressor of foes, with thy youth, O son, I have
enjoyed the pleasures of life, each according to its season to the full
extent of my desires, to the limit of my powers. Our desires, however, are
never gratified by indulgence. On the other hand, with indulgence, they
only flame up like fire with libations of sacrificial butter. If a single
person were owner of everything on Earth--all her yields of paddy and
barley, her silver, gold, and gems, her animals and women, he would not
still be content. Thirst of enjoyment, therefore, should be given up.
Indeed, true happiness belongeth to them that have cast off their thirst
for worldly objects--a thirst which is difficult to be thrown off by the
wicked and the sinful, which faileth not with the failing life, and which
is truly the fatal disease of man. My heart hath for a full thousand years
been fixed upon the objects of desires. My thirst for these, however,
increaseth day by day without abating. Therefore, I shall cast it off, and
fixing my mind on Brahma I shall pass the rest of my days with the
innocent deer in the forest peacefully and with no heart for any worldly
objects. And O Puru, I have been exceedingly gratified with thee!
Prosperity be thine! Receive back this thy youth! Receive thou also my
kingdom. Thou art, indeed, that son of mine who has done me the greatest
services."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Yayati, the son of Nahusha, received back
his decrepitude. And his son Puru received back his own youth. And Yayati
was desirous of installing Puru, his youngest son, on the throne. But the
four orders, with the Brahmanas at their head, then addressed the monarch
thus, "O king, how shall thou bestow thy kingdom on Puru, passing over thy
eldest son Yadu born of Devayani, and, therefore, the grandson of the
great Sukra? Indeed, Yadu is thy eldest son; after him hath been born
Turvasu; and of Sarmishtha's sons, the first is Drahyu, then Anu and then
Puru. How doth the youngest deserve the throne, passing all his elder
brothers over? This we represent to thee! O, conform to virtuous
practice."

"'Yayati then said, "Ye four orders with Brahmanas at their head, hear my
words as to why my kingdom should not be given to my eldest son. My
commands have been disobeyed by my eldest son, Yadu. The wise say that he
is no son who disobeyeth his father. That son, however, who doth the
bidding of his parents, who seeketh their good, who is agreeable to them,
is indeed, the best of sons. I have been disregarded by Yadu and by
Turvasu, too. Much I have been disregarded by Drahyu and by Anu also. By
Puru alone hath my word been obeyed. By him have I been much regarded.
Therefore, the youngest shall be my heir. He took my decrepitude. Indeed,
Puru is my friend. He did what was so agreeable to me. It hath also been
commanded by Sukra himself, the son of Kavi, that, that son of mine who
should obey me will become king after me and bring the whole Earth under
his sway. I, therefore, beseech thee, let Puru be installed on the
throne."

"'The people then said, "True it is, O king, that, that son who is
accomplished and who seeketh the good of his parents, deserveth prosperity
even if he be the youngest. Therefore, doth Puru, who hath done thee good,
deserve the crown. And as Sukra himself hath commanded it, we have nothing
to say to it."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The son of Nahusha, thus addressed by the
contented people, then installed his son, Puru, on the throne. And having
bestowed his kingdom on Puru, the monarch performed the initiatory
ceremonies for retiring into the woods. And soon after he left his capital,
followed by Brahmanas and ascetics.

"'The sons of Yadu are known by the name of the Yadavas: while those of
Turvasu have come to be called the Yavanas. And the sons of Drahyu are the
Bhojas, while those of Anu, the Mlechchhas. The progeny of Puru, however,
are the Pauravas, amongst whom, O monarch, thou art born, in order to rule
for a thousand years with thy passions under complete control.'"


SECTION LXXXVI

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'King Yayati, the son of Nahusha, having thus
installed his dear son on the throne, became exceedingly happy, and
entered into the woods to lead the life of a hermit. And having lived for
some time into forest in the company of Brahmanas, observing many rigid
vows, eating fruits and roots, patiently bearing privations of all sorts,
the monarch at last ascended to heaven. And having ascended to heaven he
lived there in bliss. But soon, however, he was hurled down by Indra. And
it hath been heard by me, O king, that, though hurled from heaven, Yayati,
without reaching the surface of the Earth, stayed in the firmament. I have
heard that some time after he again entered the region of the celestials
in company with Vasuman, Ashtaka, Pratarddana, and Sivi.'

"Janamejaya said, 'I desire to hear from thee in detail why Yayati, having
first obtained admission into heaven, was hurled therefrom, and why also
he gained re-admittance. Let all this, O Brahmana, be narrated by thee in
the presence of these regenerate sages. Yayati, lord of Earth, was, indeed,
like the chief of the celestials. The progenitor of the extensive race of
the Kurus, he was of the splendour of the Sun. I desire to hear in full
the story of his life both in heaven and on Earth, as he was illustrious,
and of world-wide celebrity and of wonderful achievements.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Indeed, I shall recite to thee the excellent story of
Yayati's adventures on Earth and in heaven. That story is sacred and
destroyeth the sins of those that hear it.

"'King Yayati, the son of Nahusha, having installed his youngest son, Puru,
on the throne after casting his sons with Yadu for their eldest amongst
the Mlechchhas, entered the forest to lead the life of a hermit. And the
king eating fruits and roots lived for some time in the forest. Having his
mind and passions under complete control, the king gratified by sacrifices
the Pitris and the gods. And he poured libations of clarified butter upon
the fire according to the rites prescribed for those leading the
Vanaprastha mode of life. And the illustrious one entertained guests and
strangers with the fruit of the forest and clarified butter, while he
himself supported life by gleaning scattered corn seeds. And the king led
this sort of life for a full thousand years. And observing the vow of
silence and with mind under complete control he passed one full year,
living upon air alone and without sleep. And he passed another year
practising the severest austerities in the midst of four fires around and
the Sun overhead. And, living upon air alone, he stood erect upon one leg
for six months. And the king of sacred deeds ascended to heaven, covering
heaven as well as the Earth (with the fame of his achievements).'"


SECTION LXXXVII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'While that king of kings dwelt in heaven--the home of
the celestials, he was reverenced by the gods, the Sadhyas, the Maruts,
and the Vasus. Of sacred deeds, and mind under complete control, the
monarch used to repair now and then from the abode of the celestials unto
the region of Brahman. And it hath been heard by me that he dwelt for a
long time in heaven.

"'One day that best of kings, Yayati, went to Indra and there in course of
conversation the lord of Earth was asked by Indra as follows:

"'"What didst thou say, O king, when thy son Puru took thy decrepitude on
Earth and when thou gavest him thy kingdom?"

"'Yayati answered, "I told him that the whole country between the rivers
Ganga and Yamuna was his. That is, indeed, the central region of the Earth,
while the out-lying regions are to be the dominions of thy brothers. I
also told him that those without anger were ever superior to those under
its sway, those disposed to forgive were ever superior to the unforgiving.
Man is superior to the lower animals. Among men again the learned are
superior to the un-learned. If wronged, thou shouldst not wrong in return.
One's wrath, if disregarded, burneth one's own self; but he that regardeth
it not taketh away all the virtues of him that exhibiteh it. Never
shouldst thou pain others by cruel speeches. Never subdue thy foes by
despicable means; and never utter such scorching and sinful words as may
torture others. He that pricketh as if with thorns men by means of hard
and cruel words, thou must know, ever carrieth in his mouth the Rakshasas.
Prosperity and luck fly away at his very sight. Thou shouldst ever keep
the virtuous before thee as thy models; thou shouldst ever with
retrospective eye compare thy acts with those of the virtuous; thou
shouldst ever disregard the hard words of the wicked. Thou shouldst ever
make the conduct of the wise the model upon which thou art to act thyself.
The man hurt by the arrows of cruel speech hurled from one's lips, weepeth
day and night. Indeed, these strike at the core of the body. Therefore the
wise never fling these arrows at others. There is nothing in the three
worlds by which thou canst worship and adore the deities better than by
kindness, friendship, charity and sweet speeches unto all. Therefore,
shouldst thou always utter words that soothe, and not those that scorch.
And thou shouldst regard those that deserve thy regards, and shouldst
always give but never beg!"'"


SECTION LXXXVIII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'After this Indra again asked Yayati, "Thou didst
retire into the woods, O king, after accomplishing all thy duties. O
Yayati, son of Nahusha, I would ask thee to whom thou art equal in ascetic
austerities." Yayati answered, "O Vasava, I do not, in the matter of
ascetic austerities, behold my equal among men, the celestials, the
Gandharvas, and the great Rishis." Indra then said, "O monarch, because
thou disregardest those that are thy superiors, thy equals, and even thy
inferiors, without, in fact, knowing their real merits, thy virtues have
suffered diminution and thou must fall from heaven." Yayati then said, "O
Sakra, if, indeed, my virtues have really sustained diminution and I must
on that account fall down from heaven, I desire, O chief of the celestials,
that I may at least fall among the virtuous and the honest." Indra replied,
"O king, thou shall fall among those that are virtuous and wise, and thou
shall acquire also much renown. And after this experience of thine, O
Yayati, never again disregard those that are thy superiors or even thy
equals."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Upon this, Yayati fell from the region of the
celestials. And as he was falling, he was beheld by that foremost of royal
sages, viz., Ashtaka, the protector of his own religion. Ashtaka beholding
him, enquired, "Who art thou, O youth of a beauty equal to that of Indra,
in splendour blazing as the fire, thus falling from on high? Art thou that
foremost of sky-ranging bodies--the sun--emerging from, dark masses of
clouds? Beholding thee falling from the solar course, possessed of
immeasurable energy and the splendour of fire or the sun, every one is
curious as to what it is that is so falling, and is, besides, deprived of
consciousness! Beholding thee in the path of the celestials, possessed of
energy like that of Sakra, or Surya, or Vishnu, we have approached thee to
ascertain the truth. If thou hadst first asked us who we were, we would
never have been guilty of the incivility of asking thee first. We now ask
thee who thou art and why thou approachest hither. Let thy fears be
dispelled; let thy woes and afflictions cease. Thou art now in the
presence of the virtuous and the wise. Even Sakra himself--the slayer of
Vala--cannot here do thee any injury. O thou of the prowess of the chief
of the celestials, the wise and the virtuous are the support of their
brethren in grief. Here there are none but the wise and virtuous like thee
assembled together. Therefore, stay thou here in peace. Fire alone hath
power to give heat. The Earth alone hath power to infuse life into the
seed. The sun alone hath power to illuminate everything. So the guest
alone hath power to command the virtuous and the wise."'"


SECTION LXXXIX

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'Yayati said, "I am Yayati, the son of Nahusha and the father of Puru.
Cast off from the region of the celestials and of Siddhas and Rishis for
having disregarded every creature, I am falling down, my righteousness
having sustained diminution. In years I am older than you; therefore, I
have not saluted you first. Indeed, the Brahmanas always reverence him who
is older in years or superior in learning or in ascetic merit."

"'Ashtaka then replied, "Thou sayest, O monarch, that he who is older in
years is worthy of regard. But it is said that he is truly worthy of
worship who is superior in learning and ascetic merit."

"'Yayati replied to this, "It is said that sin destroyeth the merits of
four virtuous acts. Vanity containeth the element of that which leadeth to
hell. The virtuous never follow in the footsteps of the vicious. They act
in such a way that their religious merit always increaseth. I myself had
great religious merit, but all that, however, is gone. I will scarcely be
able to regain it even by my best exertions. Beholding my fate, he that is
bent upon (achieving) his own good, will certainly suppress vanity. He who
having acquired great performeth meritorious sacrifices, who having
acquired all kinds of learning remaineth humble, and who having studied
the entire Vedas devoteth himself to asceticism with a heart withdrawn
from all mundane enjoyments, goeth to heaven. None should exult in having
acquired great wealth. None should be vain of having studied the entire
Vedas. In the world men are of different dispositions. Destiny is supreme.
Both power and exertion are all fruitless. Knowing Destiny to be all-
powerful, the wise, whatever their portions may be, should neither exult
nor boast. When creatures know that their weal and woe are dependent on
Destiny and not on their own exertion or power, they should neither grieve
nor exult, remembering that Destiny is all powerful. The wise should ever
live contented, neither grieving at woe nor exulting at weal. When Destiny
is supreme, both grief and exultation are one. O Ashtaka, I never suffer
myself to be overcome by fear, nor do I ever entertain grief, knowing for
certain that I shall be in the world what the great disposer of all hath
ordained. Insects and worms, all oviparous creatures, vegetable
existences, all crawling animals, vermin, the fish in the water, stones,
grass, wood--in fact, all created things, when they are freed from the
effects of their acts, are united with the Supreme Soul. Happiness and
misery are both transient. Therefore, O Ashtaka, why should I grieve? We
can never know how we are to act in order to avoid misery. Therefore,
none should grieve for misery."

"'Possessed of every virtue, king Yayati who was the maternal grandfather
of Ashtaka, while staying in the welkin, at the conclusion of his speech,
was again questioned by Ashtaka. The latter said, "O king of kings, tell
me, in detail, of all those regions that thou hast visited and enjoyed, as
well as the period for which thou hast enjoyed each. Thou speakest of the
precepts of religion even like the clever masters acquainted with the acts
and sayings of great beings!" Yayati replied, "I was a great king on Earth,
owning the whole world for my dominion. Leaving it, I acquired by dint of
religious merit many high regions. There I dwelt for a full thousand years,
and then I attained to a very high region the abode of Indra, of
extraordinary beauty having a thousand gates, and extending over a hundred
yojanas all round. There too, I dwelt a full thousand years and then
attained to a higher region still. That is the region of perfect beatitude,
where decay never exists, the region, viz., that of the Creator and the
Lord of Earth, so difficult of attainment. There also I dwelt for a full
thousand years, and then attained to another very high region viz., that
of the god of gods (Vishnu) where, too, I had lived in happiness. Indeed,
I dwelt in various regions, adored by all the celestials, and possessed of
prowess and splendour equal unto those of the celestials themselves.
Capable of assuming any form at will, I lived for a million years in the
gardens of Nandana sporting with the Apsaras and beholding numberless
beautiful trees clad in flowery vesture and sending forth delicious
perfume all round. And after many, many years had elapsed, while still
residing there in enjoyment of perfect beatitude, the celestial messenger
of grim visage, one day, in a loud and deep voice, thrice shouted to me--
Ruined! Ruined! Ruined!--O lion among kings, this much do I remember. I
was then fallen from Nandana, my religious merits gone! I heard in the
skies, O king, the voices of the celestials exclaiming in grief,--Alas!
What a misfortune! Yayati, with his religious merits destroyed, though
virtuous and of sacred deeds, is falling!--And as I was falling, I asked
them loudly, 'Where, ye celestials, are those wise ones amongst whom I am
to fall?' They pointed out to me this sacred sacrificial region belonging
to you. Beholding the curls of smoke blackening the atmosphere and
smelling the perfume of clarified butter poured incessantly upon fire, and
guided thereby, I am approaching this region of yours, glad at heart that
I come amongst you."'"


SECTION XC

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'Ashtaka said, "Capable of assuming any form at will, thou hast lived for
a million years in the gardens of Nandana. For what cause, O foremost of
those that flourished in the Krita age, hast thou been compelled to leave
that region and come hither?" Yayati answered, "As kinsmen, friends, and
relatives forsake, in this world, those whose wealth disappears so, in the
other world, the celestials with Indra as their chief, forsake him who
hath lost his righteousness." Ashtaka said, "I am extremely anxious to
know how in the other world men can lose virtue. Tell me also, O king,
what regions are attainable by what courses of action. Thou art acquainted,
I know, with the acts and sayings of great beings."

"'Yayati answered, "O pious one, they that speak of their own merits are
doomed to suffer the hell called Bhauma. Though really emaciated and lean,
they appear to grow on Earth (in the shape of their sons and grandsons)
only to become food for vultures, dogs, and jackals. Therefore, O king,
this highly censurable and wicked vice should be repressed. I have now, O
king, told thee all. Tell me what more I shall say."

"'Ashtaka said, "When life is destroyed with age, vultures, peacocks,
insects, and worms eat up the human body. Where doth man then reside? How
doth he also come back to life? I have never heard of any hell called
Bhauma on Earth!"

"'Yayati answered, "After the dissolution of the body, man, according to
his acts, re-entereth the womb of his mother and stayeth there in an
indistinct form, and soon after assuming a distinct and visible shape
reappeareth in the world and walketh on its surface. This is that Earth-
hell (Bhauma) where he falleth, for he beholdeth not the termination of
his existence and acteth not towards his emancipation. Some dwell for
sixty thousand years, some, for eighty thousand years in heaven, and then
they fall. And as they fall, they are attacked by certain Rakshasas in the
form of sons, grandsons, and other relatives, that withdraw their hearts
from acting for their own emancipation."

"'Ashtaka asked, "For what sin are beings, when they fall from heaven,
attacked by these fierce and sharp-toothed Rakshasas? Why are they not
reduced to annihilation? How do they again enter the womb, furnished with
senses?"

"'Yayati answered, "After falling from heaven, the being becometh a subtile
substance living in water. This water becometh the semen whence is the
seed of vitality. Thence entering the mother's womb in the womanly season,
it developeth into the embryo and next into visible life like the fruit
from the flower. Entering trees, plants, and other vegetable substances,
water, air, earth, and space, that same watery seed of life assumeth the
quadrupedal or bipedal form. This is the case with all creatures that you
see."

"'Ashtaka said, "O tell me, I ask thee because I have my doubts. Doth a
being that hath received a human form enter the womb in its own shape or
in some other? How doth it also acquire its distinct and visible shape,
eyes and ears and consciousness as well? Questioned by me, O, explain it
all! Thou art, O father, one acquainted with the acts and sayings of great
beings." Yayati answered, "According to the merits of one's acts, the
being that in a subtile form co-inheres in the seed that is dropped into
the womb is attracted by the atmospheric force for purposes of re-birth.
It then developeth there in course of time; first it becomes the embryo,
and is next provided with the visible physical organism. Coming out of the
womb in due course of time, it becometh conscious of its existence as man,
and with his ears becometh sensible of sound; with his eyes, of colour and
form; with his nose, of scent; with his tongue, of taste; by his whole
body, of touch; and by his mind, of ideas. It is thus, O Ashtaka, that the
gross and visible body developeth from the subtile essence."

"'Ashtaka asked, "After death, the body is burnt, or otherwise destroyed.
Reduced to nothing upon such dissolution, by what principle is one
revived?" Yayati said, "O lion among kings, the person that dies assumes a
subtil form; and retaining consciousness of all his acts as in a dream, he
enters some other form with a speed quicker than that of air itself. The
virtuous attain to a superior, and the vicious to an inferior form of
existence. The vicious become worms and insects. I have nothing more to
say, O thou of great and pure soul! I have told thee how beings are born,
after development of embryonic forms, as four-footed, six-footed creatures
and others with more feet. What more wilt thou ask me?"

"'Ashtaka said, "How, O father, do men attain to those superior regions
whence there is no return to earthly life? Is it by asceticism or by
knowledge? How also can one gradually attain to felicitous regions? Asked
by me, O answer it in full."

"'Yayati answered, "The wise say that for men there are seven gates through
which admission may be gained into Heaven. There are asceticism,
benevolence, tranquillity of mind, self-command, modesty, simplicity, and
kindness to all creatures. The wise also say that a person loseth all
these in consequence of vanity. That man who having acquired knowledge
regardeth himself as learned, and with his learning destroyed the
reputation of others, never attaineth to regions of indestructible
felicity. That knowledge also doth not make its possessor competent to
attain to Brahma. Study, taciturnity, worship before fire, and sacrifices,
these four remove all fear. When, however, these are mixed with vanity,
instead of removing it, they cause fear. The wise should never exult at
(receiving) honours nor should they grieve at insults. For it is the wise
alone that honour the wise; the wicked never act like the virtuous. I have
given away so much--I have performed so many sacrifices,--I have studied
so much,--I have observed these vows,--such vanity is the root of fear.
Therefore, thou must not indulge in such feelings. Those learned men who
accept as their support the unchangeable, inconceivable Brahma alone that
ever showereth blessings on persons virtuous like thee, enjoy perfect
peace here and hereafter."'"


SECTION XCI

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'Ashtaka said, "Those cognisant of the Vedas differ in opinion as to how
the followers of each of the four modes of life, viz., Grihasthas,
Bhikshus, Brahmacharins, and Vanaprashthas, should conduct themselves in
order to acquire religious merit."

"'Yayati answered, "These are what a Brahmacharin must do. While dwelling
in the abode of his preceptor, he must receive lessons only when his
preceptor summons him to do so; he must attend to the service of his
preceptor without waiting for the latter's command; he must rise from his
bed before his preceptor riseth, and go to bed after his preceptor hath
gone to bed. He must be humble, must have his passions under complete
control, must be patient, vigilant, and devoted to studies. It is then
only that he can achieve success. It hath been said in the oldest
Upanishad that a grihastha, acquiring wealth by honest means, should
perform sacrifices; he should always give something in charity, should
perform the rites of hospitality unto all arriving at his abode, and
should never use anything without giving a portion thereof to others. A
Muni, without search for woods, depending on his own vigour, should
abstain from all vicious acts, should give away something in charity,
should never inflict pain on any creature. It is then only that he can
achieve success. He, indeed, is a true Bhikshu who doth not support
himself by any manual arts, who possesseth numerous accomplishments, who
hath his passions under complete control, who is unconnected with worldly
concerns, who sleepeth not under the shelter of a householder's roof, who
is without wife, and who going a little way every day, travelleth over a
large extent of the country. A learned man should adopt the Vanaprastha
mode of life after performance of the necessary rites, when he hath been
able to control his appetites for enjoyment and desire of acquiring
valuable possessions. When one dieth in the woods while leading the
Vanaprastha mode of life, he maketh his ancestors and the successors,
numbering ten generations including himself, mix with the Divine essence."

"'Ashtaka asked, "How many kinds of Munis are there (observers of the vow
of the silence)?"

"'Yayati answered, "He is, indeed, a Muni who, though dwelling in the
woods, hath an inhabited place near, or who, though dwelling in an
inhabited place, hath the woods near."

"'Ashtaka enquired what is meant by Muni. Yayati replied, "A Muni
withdrawing himself from all worldly objects liveth in the woods. And
though he might never seek to surround himself with those objects that are
procurable in an inhabited place, he might yet obtain them all by virtue
of his ascetic power. He may truly be said to dwell in the woods having an
inhabited place near to himself. Again a wise man withdrawn from all
earthly objects, might live in a hamlet leading the life of a hermit. He
may never exhibit the pride of family, birth or learning. Clad in the
scantiest robes, he may yet regard himself as attired in the richest
vestments. He may rest content with food just enough for the support of
life. Such a person, though dwelling in an inhabited place, liveth yet in
the woods.

"'"The person again, who, with passions under complete control, adopteth
the vow of silence, refraining from action and entertaining no desire,
achieveth success. Why shouldst thou not, indeed, reverence the man who
liveth on clean food, who refraineth from ever injuring others, whose
heart is ever pure, who stands in the splendour of ascetic attributes, who
is free from the leaden weight of desire, who abstaineth from injury even
when sanctioned by religion? Emaciated by austerities and reduced in flesh,
marrow and blood, such a one conquereth not only this but the highest
world. And when the Muni sits in yoga meditation, becoming indifferent to
happiness and misery, honour and insult, he then leaveth the world and
enjoyeth communion with Brahma. When the Muni taketh food like wine and
other animals, i. e., without providing for it beforehand and without any
relish (like a sleeping infant feeding on the mother's lap), then like the
all-pervading spirit he becometh identified with the whole universe and
attaineth to salvation."'"


SECTION XCII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'Ashtaka asked, "Who amongst these, O king, both exerting constantly like
the Sun and the Moon, first attaineth to communion with Brahma, the
ascetic or the man of knowledge?"

"'Yayati answered, "The wise, with the help of the Vedas and of Knowledge,
having ascertained the visible universe to be illusory, instantly realises
the Supreme Spirit as the sole existent independent essence. While they
that devote themselves to Yoga meditation take time to acquire the same
knowledge, for it is by practice alone that these latter divest themselves
of the consciousness of quality. Hence the wise attain to salvation first.
Then again if the person devoted to Yoga find not sufficient time in one
life to attain success, being led astray by the attractions of the world,
in his next life he is benefited by the progress already achieved, for he
devoteth himself regretfully to the pursuit of success. But the man of
knowledge ever beholdeth the indestructible unity, and is, therefore,
though steeped in worldly enjoyments, never affected by them at heart.
Therefore, there is nothing to impede his salvation. He, however, who
faileth to attain to knowledge, should yet devote himself to piety as
dependent on action (sacrifices). But he that devoteth himself to such
piety, moved thereto by desire of salvation, can never achieve success.
His sacrifices bear no fruit and partake of the nature of cruelty. Piety
which is dependent on action that proceedeth not from the desire of fruit,
is, in case of such men Yoga itself."

"'Ashtaka said, "O king, thou lookest like a young man; thou art handsome
and decked with a celestial garland. Thy splendour is great! Whence dost
thou come and where dost thou go? Whose messenger art thou? Art thou going
down into the Earth?"

"'Yayati said, "Fallen from heaven upon the loss of all my religious
merits, I am doomed to enter the Earth-hell. Indeed, I shall go there after
I have finished my discourse with you. Even now the regents of the points
of the universe command me to hasten thither. And, O king, I have obtained
it as a boon from Indra that though fall I must upon the earth, yet I
should fall amidst the wise and the virtuous. Ye are all wise and virtuous
that are assembled here."

"'Ashtaka said, "Thou art acquainted with everything. I ask thee, O king,
are there any regions for myself to enjoy in heaven or in the firmament?
If there be, then, thou shalt not fall, though falling."

"'Yayati answered, "O king, there are as many regions for thee to enjoy in
heaven even as the number of kine and horses on Earth with the animals in
the wilderness and on the hills."

"'Ashtaka said, "If there are worlds for me to enjoy, as fruits of my
religious merits, in heaven, O king, I give them all unto thee. Therefore,
though falling, thou shalt not fall. O, take thou soon all those, wherever
they be, in heaven or in the firmament. Let thy sorrow cease."

"'Yayati answered, "O best of kings, a Brahma-knowing Brahmana alone can
take in gift, but not one like ourselves. And, O monarch, I myself have
given away to Brahmanas as one should. Let no man who is not a Brahmana
and let not the wife of a learned Brahmana ever live in infamy by
accepting gifts. While on earth, I ever desired to perform virtuous acts.
Having never done so before, how shall I now accept a gift?"

"'Pratardana who was amongst them asked, "O thou of the handsomest form, I
am Pratardana by name. I ask thee if there are any worlds for me to enjoy
as fruits of my religious merits, in heaven or the firmament? Answer me,
thou art acquainted with everything."

"'Yayati said, "O king, numberless worlds, full of felicity, effulgent like
the solar disc, and where woe can never dwell, await thee. If thou
dwellest in each but for seven days, they would not yet be exhausted."

"'Pratardana said, "These then I give unto thee. Therefore, though falling,
thou must not fall. Let the worlds that are mine be thine, whether they be
in the firmament or heaven. O, soon take them. Let thy woes cease."

"'Yayati answered, "O monarch, no king of equal energy should ever desire
to receive as gift the religious merits of another king acquired by Yoga
austerities. And no king who is afflicted with calamity through the fates
should, if wise, act in a censurable way. A king keeping his eye fixed for
ever on virtue should walk along the path of virtue like myself and,
knowing what his duties are, should not act so meanly as thou directest.
When others desirous of acquiring religious merits do not accept gifts,
how can I do what they themselves do not?" On the conclusion of this
speech, that best of kings, Yayati, was then addressed by Vasumat in the
following words.'"


SECTION XCIII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'Vasumat said, "I am Vasumat, the son of Oshadaswa. I would ask thee, O
king, whether there are any worlds for me to enjoy as fruits of my
religious merits, in heaven or the firmament. Thou art, O high-souled one,
acquainted with all holy regions."

"'Yayati answered, "There are as many regions for thee to enjoy in heaven
as the number of places in the firmament, the Earth and the ten points of
the universe illumined by the Sun."
