(2) The Greek language lived long and died slowly, and the Christian
hymn-writers wrote in its decadence. It was then an instrument that has
lost its fineness, and keenness, and polish--worn out and
ineffective,--not the language of the men whose thoughts still charm the
world, and who by its deft use gained for themselves and for their work
immortality. It has little of the subtilty of expression, the variety of
cadence, or the intellectual possibility, of the Greek of Homer, Plato,
and Aristophanes. It is a language, moreover, crippled by the
introduction of ecclesiastical and theological terms and phrases, which
stubbornly refuse to lend themselves to classical rhythm. Such a language
cannot be expected to have attraction for men to whom the ancient poets
are a delight.

(3) The hymns of the Greek Church are all in rhythmical prose--strangely
Oriental in appearance--with the exception of those by John of Damascus,
which are in iambics; and difficulties confront one on every page. What
lines will reward the work of rendering? Prayer, Gospel, psalm, hymn, and
exhortation follow each other, and are sometimes strangely interlaced.
Where does one begin and another end? Then, there is meaningless
repetition which must be passed over, and expressions demanding
modification. The symbolism is extravagant, and sometimes a single hymn
is crowded with figures the most grotesque. The Mariolatry is excessive,
and the hagiolatry offensive. Sifting and pruning are needed before a
cento can be formed which would commend itself to modern taste.

But when all that is said, there remains much that is both beautiful and
attractive. Some of the hymns and fragments are most chaste,--beautiful
and tender in their simple expression of Gospel truths, which are so
attractive to all true hearts, no matter by what creed dominated.

(4) The remarkable simplicity characterising those hymns constitutes,
strangely it may seem, no small difficulty for the translator. The mere
rendering of them into English prose is a comparatively easy task, and
can be of no value to any one but the specialist, but to take the
unmeasured lines and cut them to form stanzas, and in the process
sacrifice nothing of their spirit to the exigencies of rhyme and rhythm,
is a task by no means easy. But such drawbacks and difficulties are not
insurmountable; and with the growing interest in hymnology which
characterises our time, it will be strange if, in the years to come, the
Greek service-books are not made to yield their tribute to the praise of
the Christian Church in the West.

V. One prime characteristic of Greek hymnody should be referred to.
Unlike the English hymn, which is intensely subjective--in some cases
unhealthily so--the Greek hymn is in most cases objective. God in the
glory of His majesty, and clothed with His attributes, is held up to the
worship and adoration of His people. Christ, in His Person and Work, is
set before the mind in a most realistic manner. His birth and its
accompaniments; His life; the words He spoke, and the work He did; His
Passion, in all the agony of its detail; the denial of Peter; the remorse
of Judas; the Crucifixion; the darkness, the terror, the opened graves;
the penitent thief; the loud cry, the death--all are depicted in plain,
unmistakable language. So we have in the hymns of the Greek service-books
a pictorial representation of the history of Redemption, which by
engaging the mind appeals ultimately to the heart and its emotions. Our
self-regarding praise is perhaps inevitable, as being the product of the
meditative spirit which has its birth, and lives in the land of the
twilight; but the advantages of the objectiveness of Greek hymnody are so
patent, that its cultivation might be fostered by our hymn-writers, with
advantage to the devotional feeling of our people and to the worship of
the Church.

VI. The hymns as they appear in the original are distinguished by a
variety of terms, the meaning in certain cases being extremely vague, and
in others to be derived from the subject of the hymn, or from its form,
or the time, place, or manner in which it is sung. As we have no
corresponding terms in our language, it is necessary to retain the
original.

The following collection contains specimens of some of these. They are:--

_The Canon_ ({kanon}). This is the most elaborate form into which the
praise of the Greek Church is cast. A canon consists, nominally, of nine
odes or hymns, but the second ode is always omitted on account of the
denunciations of God against Israel which it contains. The canons of the
Great Fast are made up of those rejected odes.

_Hirmos_ ({heirmos}) is the first stanza of each ode. It may or may not
have a connection with the stanzas following, but its function is to give
them their rhythmical model.

_Troparion_ ({troparion}). The Troparia are the stanzas which follow the
Hirmos, and the term is doubtless derived from the verb {trepo}, to turn.
The Troparia _turn_ to the strophes of the Hirmos, as to a model.

_Contakion_ ({kontakion}) is a term of uncertain origin. Contakia occur
after the sixth ode of a canon. They are short hymns, and the term may be
derived from the Latin _Canticum_.

_Stichera_ ({stichera}) designates a series of verses which are often
taken from the Psalter.

_Idiomelon_ ({idiomelon}). Unlike Troparia, which follow the model set by
the Hirmos, Idiomela follow no model.

_Stichera Idiomela_ are a collection of irregular verses.

_Antiphon_ ({antiphonon}) is, as is well known, a hymn sung alternately
by the choir, which is divided for that purpose into two parts.

Other terms are found over hymns in the Greek service-books, but there is
no need to refer to them here, as no specimens of the particular hymns
find a place in this collection.

                                                      JOHN BROWNLIE.

Portpatrick, N.B.
_May_ 10_th_, 1900.




                         {tes patroas doxes sou}

                              ({kontakion})


                                    I

    Far from Thy heavenly care,
      Lord, I have gone astray;
    And all the wealth Thou gav'st to me,
        Have cast away.

                                   II

    Now from a broken heart,
      In penitence sincere,
    I lift my prayer to Thee, O Lord,
        In mercy hear.

                                   III

    And in Thy blest abode
      Give me a servant's place,
    That I, a son, may learn to own
        A Father's grace.




                      {basileu ouranie, paraklete}


                                    I

    O King enthroned on high,
      Thou Comforter Divine,
    Blest Spirit of all Truth, be nigh
        And make us Thine.

                                   II

    Yea, Thou art everywhere,
      All places far or near;
    O listen to our humble prayer,
        Be with us here!

                                   III

    Thou art the source of life,
      Thou art our treasure-store;
    Give us Thy peace, and end our strife
        For evermore.

                                   IV

    Descend, O Heavenly Dove
      Abide with us alway;
    And in the fulness of Thy love
        Cleanse us, we pray.




                 {ten achranton eikona sou proskynoumen}


                                    I

    To Thy blest Cross, O Christ, we come,
      And falling down adore Thee,
    And humbly make confession full
      Of all our sins before Thee.

                                   II

    For Thou Thyself art very God,
      And freely cam'st to save us;
    And in our flesh the fetters broke
      With which our sins enslave us.

                                   III

    Therefore we own with grateful hearts
      The joy the Saviour brought us,
    Who came to earth, and in our sins
      With love and pity sought us.




                     {Deute agalliasometha to kyrio}

                          ({Stichera Idiomela})


                                    I

    O come let us adore
      The Lord of all the earth,
    And in our songs of praise recount
      The mystery of His birth.

                                   II

    The middle wall is razed,
      An entrance now is free;
    For cherubim with sword of flame
      No longer guard the tree.

                                   III

    O Paradise restored!
      Now I shall enter in,
    And taste the bliss from which I fell
      Through Adam's mortal sin,--

                                   IV

    For Christ, the Father's Son,
      Who God's true image bore,
    Of Virgin born, in low estate
      Our human nature wore.

                                    V

    True God! True Man! to Thee
      Our earnest prayers ascend;
    O, of Thy loving-kindness hear,
      Who art the Sinners' Friend.




                           {Christos gennatai}

                         By St. Cosmas, 760 A.D.


                              {ho Heirmos}

                                    I

    Christ is born, go forth to meet Him,
      Christ by all the heaven adored;
    Singing songs of welcome, greet Him,
      For the earth receives her Lord.
    All ye nations shout and sing;
    For He comes, your glorious King.

                               {troparion}

                                   II

    Once His heavenly image bearing,
      Man has sunk to depths of sin;
    Now defiled, debased, despairing,
      Clad in rags and foul within;
    But our God, who beauty gave,
    Lifts the soul He comes to save.

                                   III

    From the height of heaven beholding,
      Pity filled the heart of grace,
