vain, and the seeking which is never vain; and the two 'cannots,' the
inability of His enemies for evermore to come where He is, and the
inability of His friends, for a little season, to come where He is.

I. The two seekings.

As I have observed, there is a very significant omission in one of the
forms of the words. The enemies are told that they will never find
Him, but no such dark words are spoken to the friends. So, then,
hostile seeking of the Christ is in vain, and loving seeking of Him by
His friends, though they understand Him but very poorly, and therefore
seek Him that they may know Him better, is always answered and
over-answered.

Let me deal just for a moment or two with each of these. In their
simplest use the words of my first text merely mean this: 'You cannot
touch Me, I am passing into a safe asylum where your hands can never
reach Me.'

We may generalise that for a moment, though it does not lie directly
in our path, and preach the old blessed truth that no man with hostile
intent seeking for Christ in His person, in His Gospel, or in His
followers and friends, can ever find Him. All the antagonism that has
stormed against Him and His cause and words, and His followers and
lovers, has been impotent and vain. The pursuers are like dogs chasing
a bird, sniffing along the ground after their prey, which all the
while sits out of their reach on a bough, and carols to the sky. As in
the days of His flesh, His foes could not touch His person till He
chose, and vainly sought Him when it pleased Him to hide from them, so
ever since, in regard to His cause, and in regard to all hearts that
love Him, no weapon that is formed against them shall prosper. They
shall be wrapped, when need be, in a cloud of protecting darkness, and
stand safe within its shelter. Take good cheer, all you that are
trying to do anything, however little, however secular it may appear
to be, for the good and well-being of your fellows! All such service
is a prolongation of Christ's work, and an effluence from His, if
there be any good in it at all; and it is immortal and safe, as is
His. 'Ye shall seek Me and shall not find Me.'

But then, besides that, there is another thought. It is not merely
hostile seeking of Him that is hopeless vain. When the dark days came
over Israel, under the growing pressure of the Roman yoke, and amidst
the agonies of that last siege, and the unutterable sufferings which
all but annihilated the nation, do you not think that there were many
of these people who said to themselves: 'Ah! if we had only that Jesus
of Nazareth back with us for a day or two; if we had only listened to
Him!' Do you not think that before Israel dissolved in blood there
were many of those who had stood hostile or alienated, who desired to
see 'one of the days of the Son of Man,' and did not see it? They
sought Him, not in anger any more; they sought Him, not in penitence,
or else they would have found Him; but they sought Him simply in
distress, and wishing that they could have back again what they had
cared so little for when they had it.

And are there no people listening to me now, to whom these words
apply?--

  'He that will not, when he may,
  When he will it shall be--Nay!'

Although it is (blessed be His name) always true that a seeking heart
finds Him, and whensoever there is the faintest trace of penitent
desire to get hold of Christ's hand it does grasp ours, it is also
true that things neglected once cannot be brought back; that the
sowing time allowed to pass can never return; and that they who have
turned, as some of you have turned, dear friends, all your lives, a
deaf ear to the Christ that asks you to love Him and trust Him, may
one day wish that it had been otherwise, and go to look for Him and
not find Him.

There is another kind of seeking that is vain, an intellectual seeking
without the preparation of the heart. There are, no doubt, some people
here to-day that would say, 'We have been seeking the truth about
religion all our lives, and we have not got to it yet.' Well, I do not
want to judge either your motives or your methods, but I know this,
that there is many a man who goes on the quest for religious
certainty, and looks _at_, if not _for_ Jesus Christ, and is not
really capable of discerning Him when he sees Him, because his eye is
not single, or because his heart is full of worldliness or
indifference, or because he begins with a foregone conclusion, and
looks for facts to establish that; or because he will not cast down
and put away evil things that rise up between him and his Master.

My brother! if you go to look for Jesus Christ with a heart full of
the world, if you go to look for Him while you wish to hold on by all
the habitudes and earthlinesses of your past, you will never find Him.
The sensualist seeks for Him, the covetous man seeks for Him, the
passionate, ill-tempered man seeks for Him; the woman plunged in
frivolities, or steeped to the eyebrows in domestic cares,--these may
in some feeble fashion go to look for Him and they will not find Him,
because they have sought for Him with hearts overcharged with other
things and filled with the affairs of this life, its trifles and its
sins.

I turn for a moment to the seeking that is not vain. 'Ye shall seek
Me' is not on Christ's lips to any heart that loves Him, however
imperfectly, a sentence of separation or an appointment of a sorrowful
lot, but it is a blessed law, the law of the Christian life.

That life is all one great seeking after Christ. Love seeks the absent
when removed from our sight. If we care anything about Him at all, our
hearts will turn to Him as naturally as, when the winter begins to
pinch, the migrating birds seek the sunny south, impelled by an
instinct that they do not themselves understand.

The same law which sends loving thoughts out across the globe to seek
for husband, child, or friend when absent, sets the really Christian
heart seeking for the Christ, whom, having not seen, it loves, as
surely as the ivy tendril feels out for a support. As surely as the
roots of a mountain-ash growing on the top of a boulder feel down the
side of the rock till they reach the soil; as surely as the stork
follows the warmth to the sunny Mediterranean, so surely, if your
heart loves Christ, will the very heart and motive of your action be
the search for Him.

And if you do _not_ seek Him, brother, as surely as He is parted from
our sense you will lose Him, and He will be parted from you wholly,
for there is no way by which a person who is not before our eyes may
be kept near us except only by diligent effort on our part to keep
thought and love and will all in contact with Him; thought meditating,
love going out towards Him, will submitting. Unless there be this
effort, you will lose your Master as surely as a little child in a
crowd will lose his nurse and his guide, if his hand slips from out
the protecting hand. The dark shadow of the earth on which you stand
will slowly steal over His silvery brightness, as when the moon is
eclipsed, and you will not know how you have lost Him, but only be
sadly aware that your heaven is darkened. 'Ye shall seek Me,' is the
condition of all happy communion between Christ and us.

And that seeking, dear brother, in the threefold form in which I have
spoken of it--effort to keep Him in our thoughts, in our love, and
over our will--is neither a seeking which starts from a sense that we
do not possess Him, nor one which ends in disappointment. But we seek
for Him because we already have Him in a measure, and we seek Him that
we may possess Him more abundantly, and anything is possible rather
than that such a search shall be vain. Men may go to created wells,
and find no water, and return ashamed, and with their vessels empty,
but every one who seeks for that Fountain of salvation shall draw from
it with joy. It is as impossible that a heart which desires Jesus
Christ shall not have Him, as it is that lungs dilated shall not fill
with air, or as it is that an empty vessel put out in a rainfall shall
not be replenished. He does not hide Himself, but He desires to be
found. May I say that as a mother will sometimes pretend to her child
to hide, that the child's delight may be the greater in searching and
in finding, so Christ has gone away from our sight in order, for one
reason, that He may stimulate our desires to feel after Him! If we
seek Him hid in God, we shall find Him for the joy of our hearts.

A great thinker once said that he would rather have the search after
truth than the possession of truth. It was a rash word, but it pointed
to the fact that there is a search which is only one shade less
blessed than the possession. And if that be so in regard to any pure
and high truth, it is still more so about Christ Himself. To seek for
Him is joy; to find Him is joy. What can be a happier life than the
life of constant pursuit after an infinitely precious object, which is
ever being sought and ever being found; sought with a profound
consciousness of its preciousness, found with a widening appreciation
and capacity for its enjoyment? 'Ye shall seek Me' is a word not of
evil but of good cheer; for buried in the depth of the commandment to
search is the promise that we shall find.

II, Secondly, let us look briefly at these two 'cannots.'

'Whither I go, ye cannot come,' says He to His enemies, with no
limitation, with no condition. The 'cannot' is absolute and permanent,
so long as they retain their enmity. To His friends, on the other
hand, He says, 'So now I say to you,' the law for to-day, the law for
this side the flood, but not the law for the beyond, as He explains
more fully in the subsequent words: 'Thou canst not follow Me now, but
thou shalt follow Me afterwards.'

So, then, Christ is somewhere. When He passed from life it was not
into a state only, but into a place; and He took with Him a material
body, howsoever changed. He is somewhere, and there friend and enemy
alike cannot enter, so long as they are compassed with 'the earthly
house of this tabernacle.' But the incapacity is deeper than that. No
sinful man can pass thither. Where has He gone? The preceding words
give us the answer. 'God shall glorify Him in Himself.' The prospect
of that assumption into the inmost glory of the divine nature directly
led our Lord to think of the change it would bring about in the
relation of His humble friends to Him. While for Himself He triumphs
in the prospect, He cannot but turn a thought to their lonesomeness,
and hence come the words of our text. He has passed into the bosom and
blaze of divinity. Can I walk there, can I pass into that tremendous
fiery furnace? 'Who shall dwell with the everlasting burnings?' 'Ye
cannot follow Me now.' No man can go thither except Christ goes
thither.

There are deep mysteries lying in that word of our Lords,--'I go to
prepare a place for you.' We know not what manner of activity on His
part that definitely means. It seems as if somehow or other the
presence in Heaven of our Brother in His glorified humanity was
necessary in order that the golden pavement should be trodden by our
feet, and that our poor, feeble manhood should live and not be
shrivelled up in the blaze of that central brightness.

We know not how He prepares the place, but heaven, whatever it be, is
no place for a man unless the Man, Christ Jesus, be there. He is the
Revealer of God, not only for earth, but for heaven; not only for
time, but for eternity. 'No man cometh unto the Father but by Me,' is
true everywhere and always, there as here. So I suppose that, but for
His presence, heaven itself would be dark, and its King invisible, and
if a man could enter there he would either be blasted with unbearable
flashes of brightness or grope at its noonday as the blind, because
his eye was not adapted to such beams. Be that as it may, 'the
Forerunner is for us entered.' He has gone before, because He knows
the great City, 'His own calm home, His habitation from eternity.' He
has gone before to make ready a lodging for us, in whose land He has
dwelt so long, and He will meet us, who would else be bewildered like
some dweller in a desert if brought to the capital, when we reach the
gates, and guide our unaccustomed steps to the mansion prepared for
us.

But the power to enter there, even when He is there, depends on our
union with Christ by faith. When we are joined to Him, the absolute
'cannot,' based upon flesh, and still more upon sin, which is a
radical and permanent impossibility, is changed into a relative and
temporary incapacity. If we have faith in Christ, and are thereby
drawing a kindred life from Him, our nature will be in process of
being changed into that which is capable of bearing the brilliance of
the felicities of heaven. But just as these friends of Christ, though
they loved Him very truly, and understood Him a little, were a long
way from being ready to follow Him, and needed the schooling of the
Cross, and Olivet, and Pentecost, as well as the discipline of life
and toil, before they were fully ripe for the harvest, so we, for the
most part, have to pass through analogous training before we are
prepared for the place which Christ has prepared for us. Certainly, so
soon as a heart has trusted Christ, it is capable of entering where He
is, and the real reason why the disciples could not come where He went
was that they did not yet clearly know Him as the divine Sacrifice for
theirs and the world's sins, and, however much they believed in Him as
Messiah, had not yet, nor could have, the knowledge on which they
could found their trust in Him as their Saviour.

But, while that is true, it is also true that each advance in the
grace and knowledge of our Lord and Saviour will bring with it
capacity to advance further into the heart of the far-off land, and to
see more of the King in His beauty. So, as long as His friends were
wrapped in such dark clouds of misconception and error, as long as
their Christian characters were so imperfect and incomplete as they
were at the time of my text being spoken, they could not go thither
and follow Him. But it was a diminishing impossibility, and day by day
they approximated more and more to His likeness, because they
understood Him more, and trusted Him more, and loved Him more, and
grew towards Him, and, therefore, day by day became more and more able
to enter into that Kingdom.

Are you growing in power so to do? Is the only thing which unfits you
for heaven the fact that you have a mortal body? In other respects are
you fit to go into that heaven, and walk in its brightness and not be
consumed? The answer to the question is found in another one--Are you
joined to Jesus Christ by simple faith? The incapacity is absolute and
eternal if the enmity is eternal.

State and place are determined yonder by character, and character is
determined by faith. Take a bottle of some solution in which
heterogeneous substances have all been melted up together, and let it
stand on a shelf and gradually settle down, and its contents will
settle in regular layers, the heaviest at the bottom and the lightest
at the top, and stratify themselves according to gravity. And that is
how the other world is arranged--stratified. When all the confusions
of this present are at an end, and all the moisture is driven off, men
and women will be left in layers, like drawing to like. As Peter said
about Judas with equal wisdom and reticence, 'He went to his own
place.' That is where we shall all go, to the place we are fit for.

God does not slam the door of heaven in anybody's face; it stands wide
open. But there is a mystic barrier, unseen, but most real, more
repellent than cherub and flaming sword, which makes it impossible for
any foot to cross that threshold except the foot of the man whose
heart and nature have been made Christlike, and fitted for heaven by
simple faith in Him.

Love Him and trust Him, and then your life on earth will be a blessed
seeking and a blessed finding of Him whom to seek is joyous effort,
whom to find is an Elysium of rest. You will walk here not parted from
Him, but with your thoughts and your love, which are your truest self,
going up where He is, until you drop 'the muddy vesture of decay'
which unfits you whilst you wear it for the presence-chamber of the
King, and so you will enter in and be 'for ever with the Lord.'




THE ROCK AND THE WATER

'In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink. 38. He
that believeth on Me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water.'--JOHN vii. 37,38.

The occasion and date of this great saying are carefully given by the
Evangelist, because they throw much light on its significance and
importance. It was 'on the last day, that great day of the Feast,'
that 'Jesus stood and cried.' The Feast was that of Tabernacles, which
was instituted in order to keep in mind the incidents of the desert
wandering. On the anniversary of this day the Jews still do as they
used to, and in many a foul ghetto and frowsy back street of European
cities, you will find them sitting beneath the booths of green
branches, commemorating the Exodus and its wonders. Part of that
ceremonial was that on each morning of the seven, and possibly on the
eighth, 'the last day of the Feast,' a procession of white-robed
priests wound down the rocky footpath from the Temple to Siloam, and
there in a golden vase drew water from the spring, chanting, as they
ascended and re-entered the Temple gates where they poured out the
water as a libation, the words of the prophet, 'with joy shall ye draw
water out of the wells of salvation.'

Picture the scene to yourselves--the white-robed priests toiling up
the pathway, the crowd in the court, the sparkling water poured out
with choral song. And then, as the priests stood with their empty
vases, there was a little stir in the crowd, and a Man who had been
standing watching, lifted up a loud voice and cried, 'If any man
thirst, let him come unto _Me_, and drink.' Strange words to say,
anywhere and anywhen, daring words to say there in the Temple court!
For there and then they could mean nothing less than Christ's laying
His hand on that old miracle, which was pointed to by the rite, when
the rock yielded the water, and asserting that all which it did and
typified was repeated, fulfilled, and transcended in Himself, and that
not for a handful of nomads in the wilderness, but for all the world,
in all its generations.

So here is one more instance to add to those to which I have directed
your attention on former occasions, in which, in this Gospel, we find
Christ claiming to be the fulfilment of incidents and events in that
ancient covenant, Jacob's ladder, the brazen serpent, the manna, and
now the rock that yielded the water. He says of them all that they are
the shadow, and the substance is in Him.

I. So then, we have to look, first, at Christ's view of humanity as
set forth here.

You remember the story of how the people in the wilderness, distressed
by that most imperative of all physical cravings, thirst, turned upon
Moses and Aaron and said, 'Why have ye brought us here to die in the
wilderness, where there are neither vines nor pomegranates,' but a
land of thirst and death? Just as Christ, in the former instances to
which we have already referred, selected and pointed to the poisoned
and serpent-stricken camp as an emblem of humanity, and just as He
pointed to the hunger of the men that were starving there, as an
emblem, go here He says: 'That is the world--a congregation of thirsty
men raging in their pangs, and not knowing where to find solace or
slaking for their thirst.' I do not need to go over all the dominant
desires that surge up in men's souls, the mind craving for knowledge,
the heart calling out for love, the whole nature feeling blindly and
often desperately after something external to itself, which it can
grasp, and in which it can feel satisfied. You know them; we all know
them. Like some plant growing in a cellar, and with feeble and
blanched tendrils feeling towards the light which is so far away,
every man carries about within himself a whole host of longing
desires, which need to find something round which they may twine, and
in which they can be at rest.

'The misery of man is great upon him,' because, having these desires,
he misreads so many of them, and stifles, ignores, atrophies to so
large an extent the noblest of them. I know of no sadder tragedy than
the way in which we misinterpret the meaning of these inarticulate
cries that rise from the depths of our hearts, and misunderstand what
it is that we are groping after, when we put out empty, and, alas! too
often unclean, hands, to lay hold on our true good.

Brethren, you do not know what you want, many of you, and there is
something pathetic in the endless effort to fill up the heart by a
multitude of diverse and small things, when all the while the deepest
meaning of aspirations, yearnings, longings, unrest, discontent is,
'My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God.' Nothing less than
infinitude will satisfy the smallest heart of the humblest and least
developed man. Nothing less than to have all our treasures in one
accessible, changeless Infinity will ever give rest to a human soul.
You have tried a multiplicity of trifles. It takes a great many bags
of coppers to make up L. 1000, and they are cumbrous to carry. Would
it not be better to part with a multitude of goodly pearls, if need
be, in order to have all your wealth, and the satisfaction of all your
desires, in the 'One Pearl of great price'? It is God for whom men are
thirsting, and, alas! so many of us know it not. As the old prophet
says, in words that never lose their pathetic power, 'they have hewn
out for themselves cisterns'--one is not enough--they need many. They
are only cisterns, which hold what is put into them, and they are
'broken cisterns,' which cannot hold it. Yet we turn to these with a
strange infatuation, which even the experience that teaches fools does
not teach us to be folly. We turn _to_ these; and we turn _from_ the
Fountain; the one, the springing, the sufficient, the unfailing, the
exuberant Fountain of living waters. Some of you have cisterns on the
tops of your houses, with a coating of green scum and soot on them,
and do you like that foul draught better than the bright blessing that
comes out of the heart of the rock, flashing and pure?

But not only are these desires misread, but the noblest of them are
stifled. I have said that the condition of humanity is that of thirst.
Christ speaks in my text as if that thirst was by no means universal,
and, alas! it is not, '_If_ any man thirst'; there are some of us that
do not, for we are all so constituted that, unless by continual
self-discipline, and self-suppression, and self-evolution, the lower
desires will overgrow the loftier ones, and kill them, as weeds will
some precious crop. And some of you are so much taken up with
gratifying the lowest necessities and longings of your nature, that
you leave the highest all uncared for, and the effect of that is that
the unsatisfied longing avenges itself, for your neglect of it, by
infusing unrest and dissatisfaction into what else would satisfy the
lowest. 'He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor
he that loveth abundance with increase,' but he that loves God will be
satisfied with less than silver, and will continue satisfied when
decrease comes. If you would suck the last drop of sweetness out of
the luscious purple grapes that grow on earth, you must have the
appetite after the best things, recognised, and ministered to, and
satisfied. And when we are satisfied with God, we shall 'have learnt
in whatsoever state we are, therewith to be self-sufficing.' But, as I
say, the highest desires are neglected, and the lowest are cockered
and pampered, and so the taste is depraved. Many of you have no wish
for God, and no desire after high and noble things, and are perfectly
contented to browse on the low levels, or to feed on 'the husks that
the swine do eat,' whilst all the while the loftiest of your powers is
starving within. Brethren, before we can come to the Rock that yields
the water, there must be the sense of need. Do you know what it is
that you want? Have you any desire after righteousness and purity and
nobleness, and the vision of God flaming in upon the pettinesses and
commonplaces of this life which is 'sound and fury, signifying
nothing,' and is trivial in all its pretended greatness, unless you
have learned that you need God most of all, and will never be at rest
till you have Him?

II. Secondly, note here Christ's consciousness of Himself.

Is there anything in human utterances more majestic and wonderful than
this saying of my text, 'If any man thirst, let him come to Me'? There
He claims to be separate altogether from those whose thirst He would
satisfy. There He claims to be able to meet every aspiration, every
spiritual want, every true desire in this complex nature of ours.
There He claims to be able to do this for one, and therefore for all.
There He claims to be able to do it for all the generations of
mankind, right away down to the end. Who is He who thus plants Himself
in the front of the race, knows their deep thirsts, takes account of
the impotence of anything created to satisfy them, assumes the divine
prerogative, and says, 'I come to satisfy every desire in every soul,
to the end of time'? Yes, and from that day when He stood in the
Temple and cried these words, down to this day, there have been, and
there are, millions who can say, 'We have drawn water from this
fountain of salvation, and it has never failed us.' Christ's audacious
presentation of Himself to the world as adequate to fill all its
needs, and slake all its thirst, has been verified by nineteen
centuries of experience, and there are many men and women all over the
world to-day who would be ready to set to their seals that Christ is
true, and that He, indeed, is all-sufficient for the soul.

Brethren, I do not wish to dwell upon this aspect of our Lord's
character in more than a sentence, but I beseech you to ask yourselves
what is the impression that is left of the character of a man who says
such things, unless He was something more than one of our race? Jesus
Christ, it is as clear as day, in these words makes a claim which only
divinity can warrant Him in making, or can fulfil when it is made. And
I would urge you to consider what the alternative is, if you do not
believe that Jesus Christ here sets Himself forth as the Incarnate
Word of God, sufficient for all humanity. 'I am meek and lowly in
heart'--and His lowliness of heart is proved in a strange fashion, if
He stands up before the race and says, 'If any man thirst, let him
come unto Me and drink.'

III. Note, further, Christ's invitation.

'Let him come ... and drink'--two expressions for one thing. That
invitation sounds all through Scripture, and, perhaps, there was
lingering in our Lord's mind, besides the reference to the rock that
yielded the water, some echo of the words of the second Isaiah: 'Ho!
every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters.' 'Nay!' said Christ,
'not to the waters, but to Me.' And then we hear from His own lips the
same invitation addressed to the woman of Samaria, with the difference
that to her, an alien, He pointed only to the natural water in the
well that had been Jacob's, whereas, to these people, the descendants
of the chosen race, He pointed to the miracle in the desert, and
claimed to fulfil that. And on the very last page of Scripture, as it
is now arranged, there stands the echo again of this saying of my
text, 'Let him that is athirst come'--there must be the sense of need,
as I was saying, before there is the coming--'and whosoever will, let
him take of the water of life freely.'

Now, dear friends, beneath these two metaphorical expressions there
lies one simple condition. I put it into three words, which, for the
sake of being easily remembered, I cast into an alliterative form:
approach Christ, appropriate Christ, adhere to Christ.

Approach Christ. You come by faith, you come by love, you come by
communion. And you can come if you will, though He is now on the
throne.

Appropriate Christ. It is vain that the water should be gushing from
the rock there, unless you make it your own by drinking. It must pass
your lips. It must become your personal possession. You must enclose a
piece of the common, and make it your very own. 'He loved _us_, and
gave Himself for _us_'; well and good, but strike out the 'us' and put
in 'me.' 'He loved _me_ and gave Himself for _me_.' The river may be
flowing right past your door, yet your lips may be cracked with
thirst, even whilst you hear the tinkle of its music amongst the
sedges and the pebbles. Appropriate Christ. 'Come ... and drink.'

Adhere to Christ. You were thirsty yesterday: you drank. That will not
slake to-day's thirst, nor prevent its recurrence. And you must keep
on drinking if you are to keep from perishing of thirst. Day by day,
drop by drop, draught by draught, you must drink. According to the
ancient Jewish legend, which Paul in one of his letters refers to,
about this very miracle, you must have the Rock following you all
through your desert pilgrimage, and you must drink daily and hourly,
by continual faith, love, and communion.

IV. We have here not only these points, but a fourth. Christ's
promise.

'He that believeth on Me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water.' That is one case of the universal law that a man who trusts
Christ becomes like the Christ whom he trusts. Derivatively and by
impartation, no doubt, but still the man who has gone to that Rock, to
the springing fountain as it pushes forth, receives into himself an
inward life by the communication of Christ's divine Spirit, so that he
has in him a fountain 'springing up into life everlasting.' The Book
of Proverbs says, 'The good man shall be satisfied from himself,' but
the good man is only satisfied from himself when he can say, 'I live,
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me,' and from that better self he will
be satisfied.

So we may have a well in the courtyard, and may be able to bear in
ourselves the fountain of water, and where the divine life of Christ
by His Spirit has through faith been implanted within us, it will come
out from us. There is a question for you Christian people--do any
rivers of living water flow out of you? If they do not, it is to be
doubted whether you have drunk of the fountain. There are many
professing Christians who are like the foul little rivers that pass
under the pavements in Manchester, all impure, and covered over so
that nobody sees them. 'Out of him shall flow rivers of living
water'--that is Christ's way of communicating the blessing of eternal
life to the world--by the medium of those who have already received
it. Christian men and women, if your faith has brought the life into
you, see to it that approaching Christ, and appropriating Christ, and
adhering to Christ, you are becoming assimilated to Christ, and in
your daily life, God's grace fructifying through you to all, are
'become as rivers of water in a dry place, and the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land.'




THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD

'... I am the light of the world: he that followeth Me shall not walk
in darkness, but shall have the light of life.'--JOHN viii. 12.

Jesus Christ was His own great theme. Whatever be the explanation of
the fact, there stands the fact that, if we know anything at all about
His habitual tone of teaching, we know that it was full of Himself. We
know, too, that what He said about Himself was very unlike the
language becoming a wise and humble religious teacher. Both the
prominence given to His own personality, and the tremendous claims He
advances for Himself, are hard to reconcile with any conception of His
nature and work except one,--that there we see God manifest in the
flesh. Are such words as these fit to be spoken by any man conscious
of his own limitations and imperfections of life and knowledge? Would
they not be fatal to any one's pretensions to be a teacher of religion
or morality? They assert that the Speaker is the Source of
illumination for the world; the only Source; the Source for all. They
assert that 'following' Him, whether in belief or in deed, is the sure
deliverance from all darkness, either of error or of sin; and implants
in every follower a light which is life. And the world, instead of
turning away from such monstrous assumptions, and drowning them in
scornful laughter, or rebelling against them, has listened, and
largely believed, and has not felt them to mar the beauty of meekness,
which, by a strange anomaly, this Man says that He has.

Words parallel to these are frequent on our Lord's lips. In each
instance they have some special appropriateness of application, as is
probably the case here. The suggestion has been reasonably made, that
there is an allusion in them to part of the ceremonial connected with
the Feast of Tabernacles, at which we find our Lord present in the
previous chapter. Commentators tell us that on the first evening of
the Feast, two huge golden lamps, which stood one on each side of the
altar of burnt offering in the Temple court, were lighted as the night
began to fall, and poured out a brilliant flood over Temple and city
and deep gorge; while far into the midnight, troops of rejoicing
worshippers clustered about them with dance and song. The possibility
of this reference is strengthened by the note of place which our
Evangelist gives. 'These things spake Jesus in the treasury, as He
taught in the Temple,' for the 'treasury' stood in the same court, and
doubtless the golden lamps were full in sight of the listening groups.
It is also strengthened by the unmistakable allusion in the previous
chapter to another portion of the ceremonial of the Feast, where our
Lord puts forth another of His great self-revelations and demands, in
singular parallelism with that of our text, in the words, 'If any man
thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.' That refers to the custom
during the Feast of drawing water from the fountain of Siloam, which
was poured out on the altar, while the gathered multitude chanted the
old strain of Isaiah's prophecy: 'With joy shall ye draw water out of
the wells of salvation.' It is to be remembered, too, in estimating
the probability of our text belonging to these Temple-sayings at the
Feast, that the section which separates it from them, and contains the
story about the woman taken in adultery, is judged by the best critics
to be out of place here, and is not found in the most valuable
manuscripts. If, then, we suppose this allusion to be fairly probable,
I think it gives a special direction and meaning to these grand words,
which it may be worth while to think of briefly.

The first thing to notice is--the intention of the ceremonial to which
our Lord here points as a symbol of Himself. What was the meaning of
these great lights that went flashing through the warm autumn nights
of the festival? All the parts of that Feast were intended to recall
some feature of the forty years' wanderings in the wilderness; the
lights by the altar were memorials of the pillar of cloud by day and
of fire by night. When, then, Jesus says, 'I am the Light of the
world,' He would declare Himself as being in reality, and to every
soul of man to the end of time, what that cloud with its heart of fire
was in outward seeming to one generation of desert wanderers.

Now, the main thing which _it_ was to these, was the visible vehicle
of the divine presence. 'The Lord went before them in a pillar of a
cloud.' 'The Lord looked through the pillar.' 'The Lord came down in
the cloud and spake with him.' The 'cloud covered the Tabernacle, and
the glory of the Lord appeared.' Such is the way in which it is ever
spoken of, as being the manifestation to Israel in sensible form of
the presence among them of God their King. 'The glory of the Lord' has
a very specific meaning in the Old Testament. It usually signifies
that brightness, the flaming heart of the cloudy pillar, which for the
most part, as it would appear, veiled by the cloud, gathered radiance
as the world grew darker at set of sun, and sometimes, at great crises
in the history, as at the Red Sea, or on Sinai, or in loving communion
with the law-giver, or in swift judgment against the rebels, rent the
veil and flamed on men's eyes. I need not remind you how this same
pillar of cloud and fire, which at once manifested and hid God, was
thereby no unworthy symbol of Him who remains, after all revelation,
unrevealed. Whatsoever sets forth, must also shroud, the infinite
glory. Concerning all by which He makes Himself known to eye, or mind,
or heart, it must be said, 'And there was the hiding of His power.'
The fire is ever folded in the cloud. Nay, at bottom, the light which
is full of glory is therefore inaccessible, and the thick darkness in
which He dwells is but the 'glorious privacy' of perfect light.

That guiding pillar, which moved before the moving people--a cloud to
shelter from the scorching heat, a fire to cheer in the blackness of
night--spread itself above the sanctuary of the wilderness; and 'the
glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle.' When the moving Tabernacle
gave place to the fixed Temple, again '_the_ cloud filled the house of
the Lord'; and there--dwelling between the cherubim, the types of the
whole order of creatural life, and above the mercy-seat, that spoke of
pardon, and the ark that held the law, and behind the veil, in the
thick darkness of the holy of holies, where no feet trod, save once a
year one white-robed priest, in the garb of a penitent, and bearing
the blood that made atonement--shone the light of the glory of God,
the visible majesty of the present Deity.

But long centuries had passed since that light had departed. 'The
glory' had ceased from the house that now stood on Zion, and the light
from between the cherubim. Shall we not, then, see a deep meaning and
reference to that awful blank, when Jesus standing there in the courts
of that Temple, whose inmost shrine was, in a most sad sense, empty,
pointed to the quenched lamps that commemorated a departed Shechinah,
and said, 'I am the Light of the world'?

He is the Light of the world, because in Him is the glory of God. His
words are madness, and something very like blasphemy, unless they are
vindicated by the visible indwelling in Him of the present God. The
cloud of the humanity, 'the veil, that is to say, His flesh,' enfolds
and tempers; and through its transparent folds reveals, even while it
swathes, the Godhead. Like some fleecy vapour flitting across the sun,
and irradiated by its light, it enables our weak eyes to see light,
and not darkness, in the else intolerable blaze. Yes! Thou art the
Light of the world, because in Thee dwelleth 'the fulness of the
Godhead bodily.' Thy servant hath taught us the meaning of Thy words,
when he said: 'The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us; and we
beheld His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,
full of grace and truth.'

Then, subordinate to this principal thought, is the other on which I
may touch for a moment--that Christ, like that pillar of cloud and
fire, _guides_ us in our pilgrimage. You may remember how emphatically
the Book of Numbers (chap. ix.) dwells upon the absolute control of
all the marches and halts by the movements of the cloud. When it was
taken up, they journeyed; when it settled down, they encamped. As long
as it lay spread above the Tabernacle, there they stayed. Impatient
eyes might look, and impatient spirits chafe--no matter. The camp
might be pitched in a desolate place, away from wells and palm-trees,
away from shade, among fiery serpents, and open to fierce foes--no
matter. As long as the pillar was motionless, no man stirred. Weary
slow days might pass in this compulsory inactivity; but 'whether it
were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the
Tabernacle, the children of Israel journeyed not.' And whenever It
lifted itself up,--no matter how short had been the halt, how weary
and footsore the people, how pleasant the resting-place--up with the
tent-pegs immediately, and away. If the signal were given at midnight,
when all but the watchers slept, or at midday, it was all the same.
There was the true Commander of their march. It was not Moses, nor
Jethro, with his quick Arab eye and knowledge of the ground, that
guided them; but that stately, solemn pillar, that floated before
them. How they must have watched for the gathering up of its folds as
they lay softly stretched along the Tabernacle roof; and for its
sinking down, and spreading itself out, like a misty hand of blessing,
as it sailed in the van!

'I am the Light of the world.' We have in Him a better guide through
worse perplexities than theirs. By His Spirit within us, by that
all-sufficient and perfect example of His life, by the word of His
Gospel, and by the manifold indications of His providence, Jesus
Christ is our Guide. If ever we go astray, it is not His fault, but
ours. How gentle and loving that guidance is, none who have not
yielded to it can tell. How wise and sure, none but those who have
followed it know. He does not say 'Go,' but 'Come.' When He puts forth
His sheep, He goes before them. In all rough places His quick hand is
put out to save us. In danger He lashes us to Himself, as Alpine
guides do when there is perilous ice to get across. As one of the
psalms puts it, with wonderful beauty: 'I will guide thee with Mine
eye'--a glance, not a blow--a look of directing love, that at once
heartens to duty and tells duty. We must be very near Him to catch
that look, and very much in sympathy with Him to understand it; and
when we do, we must be swift to obey. Our eyes must be ever toward the
Lord, or we shall often be marching on, unwitting that the pillar has
spread itself for rest, or idly dawdling in our tents long after the
cloud has gathered itself up for the march. Do not let impatience lead
you to hasty interpretation of His plans before they are fairly
evolved. Many men by self-will, by rashness, by precipitate hurry in
drawing conclusions about what they ought to do, have ruined their
lives. Take care, in the old-fashioned phrase, of 'running before you
are sent.' There should always be a good clear space between the
guiding ark and you, 'about two thousand cubits by measure,' that
there may be no mistakes about the road. It is neither reverent nor
wise to be treading on the heels of our Guide in our eager confidence
that we know where He wants us to go.

Do not let the warmth by the camp-fire, or the pleasantness of the
shady place where your tent is pitched, keep you there when the cloud
lifts. Be ready for change, be ready for continuance, because you are
in fellowship with your Leader and Commander; and let Him say, Go, and
you go; Do this, and you gladly do it, until the hour when He will
whisper, Come; and, as you come, the river will part, and the journey
will be over, and 'the fiery, cloudy pillar,' that 'guided you all
your journey through,' will spread itself out an abiding glory, in
that higher home where 'the Lamb is the light thereof.'

All true following of Christ begins with faith, or we might almost say
that following _is_ faith, for we find our Lord substituting the
former expression for the latter in another passage of this Gospel
parallel with the present. 'I am come a Light into the world, that
whosoever believeth on Me should not walk in darkness.' The two ideas
are not equivalent, but faith is the condition of following; and
following is the outcome and test, because it is the operation, of
faith. None but they who trust Him will follow Him. He who does not
follow, does not trust. To follow Christ, means to long and strive
after His companionship; as the Psalmist says, 'My soul followeth hard
after Thee.' It means the submission of the will, the effort of the
whole nature, the daily conflict to reproduce His example, the
resolute adoption of His command as my law, His providence as my will,
His fellowship as my joy. And the root and beginning of all such
following is in coming to Him, conscious of mine own darkness, and
trustful in His great light. We must rely on a Guide before we accept
His directions; and it is absurd to pretend that we trust Him, if we
do not go as He bids us. So 'Follow thou Me' is, in a very real sense,
the sum of all Christian duty.

That thought opens out very wide fields, into which we must not even
glance now; but I cannot help pausing here to repeat the remark
