the epithet "stagnant" has always been incorporated as a first-rate
misdemeanour of the Orthodox Church of the East. The assumption in the
epithet is that the Greek Church is not missionary and aggressive, and
the implication is that it has been so from earliest times. Until men
acquaint themselves with the history of this Church, and open their eyes
to facts which are readily accessible, it is useless to attempt to lift
them out of their prejudices.

How much did the Church of the East suffer by the great Roman schism of
1054! After, in the words of Dr. A. van Millingen, in his _Byzantine
Constantinople_, having in "the empire of which New Rome was the capital,
defended the higher life of mankind against the attacks of formidable
antagonists, and rendered eminent service to the cause of human welfare;"
after having elaborated the Christian doctrines and formed the creed of
Christendom for the world, she was shorn of much of her strength by the
departure of the West. The spring, and energy, and enterprise were
largely taken from her. No fault of hers that she was left with the
meditative souls who could ponder the mysteries of God, but could not
trade in the merchandise of the Kingdom. So she was left in possession of
her splendid attainment, without the aptitude to fit herself to
aggressive enterprise, while Rome, with all the qualifications which have
fitted her for an aggressive task, has made for herself a place and a
name which have eclipsed the glory of the old home. And so we forget the
Church of the Apostles, to which we owe so much.

But worse. How much did the Church of the East suffer, and how much does
she still suffer, by the overthrow of the empire by the Turks in 1453--by
the overthrow of the empire, and the domination of a powerful,
unscrupulous, and fanatical race, down through the 600 years succeeding!
How would the Church in these islands have stood such fiery trials? Would
we have continued an enterprising missionary Church through it all? It
might be good for us to try to understand that, when a despotic Sultan
stands over you, allowing you to breathe on condition of no
proselytising, the conditions are not favourable to well advertised
missionary effort. All that can be done in such circumstances, and under
such conditions, is to hold fast to the faith, and let the light shine,
which the Greek Church actually does.

Since the tenth century, Russia stands to the credit of Greek
missionaries. Not that Russia can be considered much credit in the
meantime by the West; but the ground for hope in Russia is the Christian
element that has entered into her national life. And our Protestantism
has not yet succeeded on the same national scale in missionary effort, a
fact which ought to incline us to think less of the stagnation of the
Greek Church. But why refer specially to Russia as a product of Greek
missionary effort? Would Rome, or the Church of the Reformation in the
West, be what they are to-day, but for the zeal and devotion of that
Church in bye-gone days?

It is an easy matter for us in these days, with our national liberty and
recognition of the Christian faith; with the noble souls around us who
are the products of centuries of grace; with wealth, and all that
Christian work calls for to its aid, to look disparagingly upon the
Church of the East, the mother of us all, as she lies in sore straits
despoiled of her splendour, and trampled under the heel of the Turk. Well
we know the theory of cross-bearing, but, in comparison with the Church
of the East from the very earliest down to the present day, we know but
little of its practice. Our laurels are not too firmly knit upon our
brows: let us take heed, and let us exercise the grace of charity and a
spirit of sympathy.

But our prejudices, which are, as usual, due to imperfect knowledge,
culpable or otherwise, charge this Church, which claims to be Orthodox,
with being heretical in doctrine and worship. To put the common view,
this Church, which is the repository of Apostolic doctrine, and from
which we, in common with others, have derived, has, along with the truth,
a large admixture of error, which renders her dangerous and to be
avoided.

We, who plume ourselves on the orthodoxy of our doctrines and purity of
worship, have a remarkable facility for detecting and magnifying the
errors of others: of creating them where they do not exist, and of
exaggerating them where they do. This facility has this advantage, that
it keeps our eyes away from ourselves and from the errors which are
nearer home. Like the beams of the winter sun which have little warmth in
them, the line of our vision is somewhat oblique.

This is a subject much too large to occupy our attention to any extent
here. It may be enough to remark in regard to the major charges, that
nowhere does the Eastern Church address worship, either to the Mother of
our Lord, or to the saints and angels. They are venerated and invoked,
but worshipped, never. Worship, as we understand it, is addressed to the
Triune God, and to Him alone. This is a rather dangerous subject to
touch, and this is not the place to safely approach it; but it may
suffice to say that we might be a great deal the better, and none the
worse, and it might be comforting and strengthening in times of
affliction and trial, to realise more than we do, that our Lord wore our
flesh when He sojourned with us on the earth, and that He derived His
humanity from Mary. We might thus even be induced to use Her name with
greater veneration and affection than have yet characterised our
references to Her, when these have had to be made, and so aid the
fulfilment of Her own prophecy, "Behold, from henceforth, all generations
shall call me blessed." And might it not be good for us to remember that
there _are_ saints and angels, and that we are "compassed about with so
great a cloud of witnesses?" Who doubts the fact? Do not they who tacitly
ignore the existence of the Blessed Dead?

If any of the hymns contained in this volume should touch the heart of
anyone who reads them, or, better still, at any future time, sings them,
may he, as he remembers the source from which they have come, think
reverently and sympathetically of the struggling Church of the East.




                           HYMNS FROM THE EAST




                                 MORNING




                                    I

    Now, God of Light, the morn appears,
      And life revives, and beauty glows;
    The night has gone with all its fears,
      And lo! the light in brightness grows.

                                   II

    Thine be the glory, God of Light,
      For all the joy from morn that springs;
    O may a morn dispel each night,
      And bless our lives with beauteous things.

                                   III

    Give us this day the light that dwells
      In every heart Thy presence fills;
    That night with all its fears dispels,
      And life, and hope, and joy instils.

                                   IV

    Then shall our nights no darkness bring,
      But morn, bright morn, for ever shine;
    And when night spreads her dusky wings,
      More bright shall be the light divine.

                                    V

    All praise to Thee, the God of Light;
      All praise to Christ, the glorious Son;
    And to the Spirit, Lord of might,
      Now, and while endless ages run.




                                    I

    Up, up, my soul! with gladness rise,
    And greet the ever-brightening skies.
    The morn hath come, sweet morn, awake!
    And from thy pinions slumber shake.

                                   II

    Pure as the morn God's presence shines;
    Love like its beams, thy life entwines;
    Richer the gifts thy God bestows
    Than morning beauty can disclose.

                                   III

    Sweet as the breath that fans the bowers,
    And stirs the leaves and opening flowers,
    Comes with the morn, the breath divine
    To stir thee, slumbering soul of mine.

                                   IV

    O Thou, the Morn, the Light, the Sun,
    With Thee be every day begun;
    Brightness shall clothe my life always,
    And fill my soul with grateful praise.

                                    V

    Glory to Thee, O Christ! my Lord,
    Light of my soul, Incarnate Word!
    Come with the morn, abide alway,
    And cheer my course to endless day.




                                    I

    The saffron tints appear,
    The morning comes--'tis here.
    Wipe slumber from thine eyes,
    Behold the sun arise!

                                   II

    Clad in his garb of gold,
    Bright as he shone of old;
    Beams o'er the heavens extend,
    Shafts from his orb descend.

                                   III

    Sun, that in morning light
    Rises, nor sinks in night,
    Shine in my soul alway,
    Make there an endless day.

                                   IV

    Life for my deadness give;
    Shine, that my soul may live;
    Joy to my sorrow bring;
    Light on Thy glowing wing.

                                    V

    If 'neath the cloud I lie,
    Darkness obscure my sky;
    Yet, may my faith behold
    Glints of the hidden gold.

                                   VI

    Father, to Thee, always,
    And Holy Ghost, be praise;
    Glory, while ages run,
    To Thee, O Christ! our Sun.




                                    I

    Now glows the morn in beauty rare,
    O haste my soul to fervent prayer,
    And let the wings of morning raise
    To God the tribute of thy praise.

                                   II

    The night is gone; now disappear
    The clouds that hung in threatening near;
    Day comes apace, and terrors flee,
    For light illumes the earth and sea.

                                   III

    O soul dismayed! when darkness fills
    The dismal days with darkling ills,
    Rest in the calm the promise gives,
    That Christ, thy Light and Glory, lives.

                                   IV

    Morn shall appear and scatter night;
    Light shall appear in noonday might.
    Strong in the joy the daylight brings,
    Soul, thou shalt rise on glowing wings.

                                    V

    Morn of my soul, O Christ, Thou art;
    Light of my life; my drooping heart
    Sings, when Thy countenance benign
    Shines as the joys of noonday shine.




                                 EVENING




                                    I

    When night her sable curtain spreads,
      And darkness falls on sea and land,
    In silent beauty, o'er our heads,
          The stars shine grand.

                                   II

    The orb of day his race hath run,
      But see what glory comes to view,
    As, full of radiance, one by one,
          The stars shine true.
