Lysimachus with the consent of Menelaus, and the fruit thereof
was spread abroad, the multitude gathered themselves together
against Lysimachus, many vessels of gold being already carried
away.

2 Mac 4:40
Whereupon the common people rising, and being filled with
rage, Lysimachus armed about three thousand men, and began first
to offer violence; one Auranus being the leader, a man far gone
in years, and no less in folly.

2 Mac 4:41
They then seeing the attempt of Lysimachus, some of them
caught stones, some clubs, others taking handfuls of dust, that
was next at hand, cast them all together upon Lysimachus, and
those that set upon them.

2 Mac 4:42
Thus many of them they wounded, and some they struck to the
ground, and all of them they forced to flee: but as for the
churchrobber himself, him they killed beside the treasury.

2 Mac 4:43
Of these matters therefore there was an accusation laid
against Menelaus.

2 Mac 4:44
Now when the king came to Tyrus, three men that were sent
from the senate pleaded the cause before him:

2 Mac 4:45
But Menelaus, being now convicted, promised Ptolemee the son
of Dorymenes to give him much money, if he would pacify the king
toward him.

2 Mac 4:46
Whereupon Ptolemee taking the king aside into a certain
gallery, as it were to take the air, brought him to be of
another mind:

2 Mac 4:47
Insomuch that he discharged Menelaus from the accusations,
who notwithstanding was cause of all the mischief: and those
poor men, who, if they had told their cause, yea, before the
Scythians, should have been judged innocent, them he condemned
to death.

2 Mac 4:48
Thus they that followed the matter for the city, and for the
people, and for the holy vessels, did soon suffer unjust
punishment.

2 Mac 4:49
Wherefore even they of Tyrus, moved with hatred of that
wicked deed, caused them to be honourably buried.

2 Mac 4:50
And so through the covetousness of them that were of power
Menelaus remained still in authority, increasing in malice, and
being a great traitor to the citizens.

2 Mac 5:1
About the same time Antiochus prepared his second voyage into
Egypt:

2 Mac 5:2
And then it happened, that through all the city, for the
space almost of forty days, there were seen horsemen running in
the air, in cloth of gold, and armed with lances, like a band of
soldiers,

2 Mac 5:3
And troops of horsemen in array, encountering and running one
against another, with shaking of shields, and multitude of
pikes, and drawing of swords, and casting of darts, and
glittering of golden ornaments, and harness of all sorts.

2 Mac 5:4
Wherefore every man prayed that that apparition might turn to
good.

2 Mac 5:5
Now when there was gone forth a false rumour, as though
Antiochus had been dead, Jason took at the least a thousand men,
and suddenly made an assault upon the city; and they that were
upon the walls being put back, and the city at length taken,
Menelaus fled into the castle:

2 Mac 5:6
But Jason slew his own citizens without mercy, not
considering that to get the day of them of his own nation would
be a most unhappy day for him; but thinking they had been his
enemies, and not his countrymen, whom he conquered.

2 Mac 5:7
Howbeit for all this he obtained not the principality, but at
the last received shame for the reward of his treason, and fled
again into the country of the Ammonites.

2 Mac 5:8
In the end therefore he had an unhappy return, being accused
before Aretas the king of the Arabians, fleeing from city to
city, pursued of all men, hated as a forsaker of the laws, and
being had in abomination as an open enemy of his country and
countrymen, he was cast out into Egypt.

2 Mac 5:9
Thus he that had driven many out of their country perished in
a strange land, retiring to the Lacedemonians, and thinking
there to find succour by reason of his kindred:

2 Mac 5:10
And he that had cast out many unburied had none to mourn for
him, nor any solemn funerals at all, nor sepulchre with his
fathers.

2 Mac 5:11
Now when this that was done came to the king's car, he
thought that Judea had revolted: whereupon removing out of Egypt
in a furious mind, he took the city by force of arms,

2 Mac 5:12
And commanded his men of war not to spare such as they met,
and to slay such as went up upon the houses.

2 Mac 5:13
Thus there was killing of young and old, making away of men,
women, and children, slaying of virgins and infants.

2 Mac 5:14
And there were destroyed within the space of three whole days
fourscore thousand, whereof forty thousand were slain in the
conflict; and no fewer sold than slain.

2 Mac 5:15
Yet was he not content with this, but presumed to go into
the most holy temple of all the world; Menelaus, that traitor to
the laws, and to his own country, being his guide:

2 Mac 5:16
And taking the holy vessels with polluted hands, and with
profane hands pulling down the things that were dedicated by
other kings to the augmentation and glory and honour of the
place, he gave them away.

2 Mac 5:17
And so haughty was Antiochus in mind, that he considered not
that the Lord was angry for a while for the sins of them that
dwelt in the city, and therefore his eye was not upon the place.

2 Mac 5:18
For had they not been formerly wrapped in many sins, this
man, as soon as he had come, had forthwith been scourged, and
put back from his presumption, as Heliodorus was, whom Seleucus
the king sent to view the treasury.

2 Mac 5:19
Nevertheless God did not choose the people for the place's
sake, but the place far the people's sake.

2 Mac 5:20
And therefore the place itself, that was partaker with them
of the adversity that happened to the nation, did afterward
communicate in the benefits sent from the Lord: and as it was
forsaken in the wrath of the Almighty, so again, the great Lord
being reconciled, it was set up with all glory.

2 Mac 5:21
So when Antiochus had carried out of the temple a thousand
and eight hundred talents, he departed in all haste unto
Antiochia, weening in his pride to make the land navigable, and
the sea passable by foot: such was the haughtiness of his mind.

2 Mac 5:22
And he left governors to vex the nation: at Jerusalem,
Philip, for his country a Phrygian, and for manners more
barbarous than he that set him there;

2 Mac 5:23
And at Garizim, Andronicus; and besides, Menelaus, who worse
than all the rest bare an heavy hand over the citizens, having a
malicious mind against his countrymen the Jews.

2 Mac 5:24
He sent also that detestable ringleader Apollonius with an
army of two and twenty thousand, commanding him to slay all
those that were in their best age, and to sell the women and the
younger sort:

2 Mac 5:25
Who coming to Jerusalem, and pretending peace, did forbear
till the holy day of the sabbath, when taking the Jews keeping
holy day, he commanded his men to arm themselves.

2 Mac 5:26
And so he slew all them that were gone to the celebrating of
the sabbath, and running through the city with weapons slew
great multitudes.

2 Mac 5:27
But Judas Maccabeus with nine others, or thereabout, withdrew
himself into the wilderness, and lived in the mountains after
the manner of beasts, with his company, who fed on herbs
continually, lest they should be partakers of the pollution.

2 Mac 6:1
Not long after this the king sent an old man of Athens to
compel the Jews to depart from the laws of their fathers, and
not to live after the laws of God:

2 Mac 6:2
And to pollute also the temple in Jerusalem, and to call it
the temple of Jupiter Olympius; and that in Garizim, of Jupiter
the Defender of strangers, as they did desire that dwelt in the
place.

2 Mac 6:3
The coming in of this mischief was sore and grievous to the
people:

2 Mac 6:4
For the temple was filled with riot and revelling by the
Gentiles, who dallied with harlots, and had to do with women
within the circuit of the holy places, and besides that brought
in things that were not lawful.

2 Mac 6:5
The altar also was filled with profane things, which the law
forbiddeth.

2 Mac 6:6
Neither was it lawful for a man to keep sabbath days or
ancient fasts, or to profess himself at all to be a Jew.

2 Mac 6:7
And in the day of the king's birth every month they were
brought by bitter constraint to eat of the sacrifices; and when
the fast of Bacchus was kept, the Jews were compelled to go in
procession to Bacchus, carrying ivy.

2 Mac 6:8
Moreover there went out a decree to the neighbour cities of
the heathen, by the suggestion of Ptolemee, against the Jews,
that they should observe the same fashions, and be partakers of
their sacrifices:

2 Mac 6:9
And whoso would not conform themselves to the manners of the
Gentiles should be put to death. Then might a man have seen the
present misery.

2 Mac 6:10
For there were two women brought, who had circumcised their
children; whom when they had openly led round about the city,
the babes handing at their breasts, they cast them down headlong
from the wall.

2 Mac 6:11
And others, that had run together into caves near by, to keep
the sabbath day secretly, being discovered by Philip, were all
burnt together, because they made a conscience to help
themselves for the honour of the most sacred day.

2 Mac 6:12
Now I beseech those that read this book, that they be not
discouraged for these calamities, but that they judge those
punishments not to be for destruction, but for a chastening of
our nation.

2 Mac 6:13
For it is a token of his great goodness, when wicked doers
are not suffered any long time, but forthwith punished.

2 Mac 6:14
For not as with other nations, whom the Lord patiently
forbeareth to punish, till they be come to the fulness of their
sins, so dealeth he with us,

2 Mac 6:15
Lest that, being come to the height of sin, afterwards he
should take vengeance of us.

2 Mac 6:16
And therefore he never withdraweth his mercy from us: and
though he punish with adversity, yet doth he never forsake his
people.

2 Mac 6:17
But let this that we at spoken be for a warning unto us. And
now will we come to the declaring of the matter in a few words.

2 Mac 6:18
Eleazar, one of the principal scribes, an aged man, and of a
well favoured countenance, was constrained to open his mouth,
and to eat swine's flesh.

2 Mac 6:19
But he, choosing rather to die gloriously, than to live
stained with such an abomination, spit it forth, and came of his
own accord to the torment,

2 Mac 6:20
As it behoved them to come, that are resolute to stand out
against such things, as are not lawful for love of life to be
tasted.

2 Mac 6:21
But they that had the charge of that wicked feast, for the
old acquaintance they had with the man, taking him aside,
besought him to bring flesh of his own provision, such as was
lawful for him to use, and make as if he did eat of the flesh
taken from the sacrifice commanded by the king;

2 Mac 6:22
That in so doing he might be delivered from death, and for
the old friendship with them find favour.

2 Mac 6:23
But he began to consider discreetly, and as became his age,
and the excellency of his ancient years, and the honour of his
gray head, whereon was come, and his most honest education from
a child, or rather the holy law made and given by God: therefore
he answered accordingly, and willed them straightways to send
him to the grave.

2 Mac 6:24
For it becometh not our age, said he, in any wise to
dissemble, whereby many young persons might think that Eleazar,
being fourscore years old and ten, were now gone to a strange
religion;

2 Mac 6:25
And so they through mine hypocrisy, and desire to live a
little time and a moment longer, should be deceived by me, and I
get a stain to mine old age, and make it abominable.

2 Mac 6:26
For though for the present time I should be delivered from
the punishment of men: yet should I not escape the hand of the
Almighty, neither alive, nor dead.

2 Mac 6:27
Wherefore now, manfully changing this life, I will shew
myself such an one as mine age requireth,

2 Mac 6:28
And leave a notable example to such as be young to die
willingly and courageously for the honourable and holy laws. And
when he had said these words, immediately he went to the
torment:

2 Mac 6:29
They that led him changing the good will they bare him a
little before into hatred, because the foresaid speeches
proceeded, as they thought, from a desperate mind.

2 Mac 6:30
But when he was ready to die with stripes, he groaned, and
said, It is manifest unto the Lord, that hath the holy
knowledge, that whereas I might have been delivered from death,
I now endure sore pains in body by being beaten: but in soul am
well content to suffer these things, because I fear him.

2 Mac 6:31
And thus this man died, leaving his death for an example of a
noble courage, and a memorial of virtue, not only unto young
men, but unto all his nation.

2 Mac 7:1
It came to pass also, that seven brethren with their mother
were taken, and compelled by the king against the law to taste
swine's flesh, and were tormented with scourges and whips.

2 Mac 7:2
But one of them that spake first said thus, What wouldest
thou ask or learn of us? we are ready to die, rather than to
transgress the laws of our fathers.

2 Mac 7:3
Then the king, being in a rage, commanded pans and caldrons
to be made hot:

2 Mac 7:4
Which forthwith being heated, he commanded to cut out the
tongue of him that spake first, and to cut off the utmost parts
of his body, the rest of his brethren and his mother looking on.

2 Mac 7:5
Now when he was thus maimed in all his members, he commanded
him being yet alive to be brought to the fire, and to be fried
in the pan: and as the vapour of the pan was for a good space
dispersed, they exhorted one another with the mother to die
manfully, saying thus,

2 Mac 7:6
The Lord God looketh upon us, and in truth hath comfort in
us, as Moses in his song, which witnessed to their faces,
declared, saying, And he shall be comforted in his servants.

2 Mac 7:7
So when the first was dead after this number, they brought
the second to make him a mocking stock: and when they had pulled
off the skin of his head with the hair, they asked him, Wilt
thou eat, before thou be punished throughout every member of thy
body?

2 Mac 7:8
But he answered in his own language, and said, No. Wherefore
he also received the next torment in order, as the former did.

2 Mac 7:9
And when he was at the last gasp, he said, Thou like a fury
takest us out of this present life, but the King of the world
shall raise us up, who have died for his laws, unto everlasting
life.

2 Mac 7:10
After him was the third made a mocking stock: and when he was
required, he put out his tongue, and that right soon, holding
forth his hands manfully.

2 Mac 7:11
And said courageously, These I had from heaven; and for his
laws I despise them; and from him I hope to receive them again.

2 Mac 7:12
Insomuch that the king, and they that were with him,
marvelled at the young man's courage, for that he nothing
regarded the pains.

2 Mac 7:13
Now when this man was dead also, they tormented and mangled
the fourth in like manner.

2 Mac 7:14
So when he was ready to die he said thus, It is good, being
put to death by men, to look for hope from God to be raised up
again by him: as for thee, thou shalt have no resurrection to
life.

2 Mac 7:15
Afterward they brought the fifth also, and mangled him.

2 Mac 7:16
Then looked he unto the king, and said, Thou hast power over
men, thou art corruptible, thou doest what thou wilt; yet think
not that our nation is forsaken of God;

2 Mac 7:17
But abide a while, and behold his great power, how he will
torment thee and thy seed.

2 Mac 7:18
After him also they brought the sixth, who being ready to die
said, Be not deceived without cause: for we suffer these things
for ourselves, having sinned against our God: therefore
marvellous things are done unto us.

2 Mac 7:19
But think not thou, that takest in hand to strive against
God, that thou shalt escape unpunished.

2 Mac 7:20
But the mother was marvellous above all, and worthy of
honourable memory: for when she saw her seven sons slain within
the space of one day, she bare it with a good courage, because
of the hope that she had in the Lord.

2 Mac 7:21
Yea, she exhorted every one of them in her own language,
filled with courageous spirits; and stirring up her womanish
thoughts with a manly stomach, she said unto them,

2 Mac 7:22
I cannot tell how ye came into my womb: for I neither gave
you breath nor life, neither was it I that formed the members of
every one of you;

2 Mac 7:23
But doubtless the Creator of the world, who formed the
generation of man, and found out the beginning of all things,
will also of his own mercy give you breath and life again, as ye
now regard not your own selves for his laws' sake.

2 Mac 7:24
Now Antiochus, thinking himself despised, and suspecting it
to be a reproachful speech, whilst the youngest was yet alive,
did not only exhort him by words, but also assured him with
oaths, that he would make him both a rich and a happy man, if he
would turn from the laws of his fathers; and that also he would
take him for his friend, and trust him with affairs.

2 Mac 7:25
But when the young man would in no case hearken unto him, the
king called his mother, and exhorted her that she would counsel
the young man to save his life.

2 Mac 7:26
And when he had exhorted her with many words, she promised
him that she would counsel her son.

2 Mac 7:27
But she bowing herself toward him, laughing the cruel tyrant
to scorn, spake in her country language on this manner; O my
son, have pity upon me that bare thee nine months in my womb,
and gave thee such three years, and nourished thee, and brought
thee up unto this age, and endured the troubles of education.

2 Mac 7:28
I beseech thee, my son, look upon the heaven and the earth,
and all that is therein, and consider that God made them of
things that were not; and so was mankind made likewise.

2 Mac 7:29
Fear not this tormentor, but, being worthy of thy brethren,
take thy death that I may receive thee again in mercy with thy
brethren.

2 Mac 7:30
Whiles she was yet speaking these words, the young man said,
Whom wait ye for? I will not obey the king's commandment: but I
will obey the commandment of the law that was given unto our
fathers by Moses.

2 Mac 7:31
And thou, that hast been the author of all mischief against
the Hebrews, shalt not escape the hands of God.

2 Mac 7:32
For we suffer because of our sins.

2 Mac 7:33
And though the living Lord be angry with us a little while
for our chastening and correction, yet shall he be at one again
with his servants.

2 Mac 7:34
But thou, O godless man, and of all other most wicked, be not
lifted up without a cause, nor puffed up with uncertain hopes,
lifting up thy hand against the servants of God:

2 Mac 7:35
For thou hast not yet escaped the judgment of Almighty God,
who seeth all things.

2 Mac 7:36
For our brethren, who now have suffered a short pain, are
dead under God's covenant of everlasting life: but thou, through
the judgment of God, shalt receive just punishment for thy
pride.

2 Mac 7:37
But I, as my brethren, offer up my body and life for the laws
of our fathers, beseeching God that he would speedily be
merciful unto our nation; and that thou by torments and plagues
mayest confess, that he alone is God;

2 Mac 7:38
And that in me and my brethren the wrath of the Almighty,
which is justly brought upon our nation, may cease.

2 Mac 7:39
Than the king' being in a rage, handed him worse than all the
rest, and took it grievously that he was mocked.

2 Mac 7:40
So this man died undefiled, and put his whole trust in the
Lord.

2 Mac 7:41
Last of all after the sons the mother died.

2 Mac 7:42
Let this be enough now to have spoken concerning the
idolatrous feasts, and the extreme tortures.

2 Mac 8:1
Then Judas Maccabeus, and they that were with him, went
privily into the towns, and called their kinsfolks together, and
took unto them all such as continued in the Jews' religion, and
assembled about six thousand men.

2 Mac 8:2
And they called upon the Lord, that he would look upon the
people that was trodden down of all; and also pity the temple
profaned of ungodly men;

2 Mac 8:3
And that he would have compassion upon the city, sore
defaced, and ready to be made even with the ground; and hear the
blood that cried unto him,

2 Mac 8:4
And remember the wicked slaughter of harmless infants, and
the blasphemies committed against his name; and that he would
shew his hatred against the wicked.

2 Mac 8:5
Now when Maccabeus had his company about him, he could not be
withstood by the heathen: for the wrath of the Lord was turned
into mercy.

2 Mac 8:6
Therefore he came at unawares, and burnt up towns and cities,
and got into his hands the most commodious places, and overcame
and put to flight no small number of his enemies.

2 Mac 8:7
But specially took he advantage of the night for such privy
attempts, insomuch that the fruit of his holiness was spread
every where.

2 Mac 8:8
So when Philip saw that this man increased by little and
little, and that things prospered with him still more and more,
he wrote unto Ptolemeus, the governor of Celosyria and Phenice,
to yield more aid to the king's affairs.

2 Mac 8:9
Then forthwith choosing Nicanor the son of Patroclus, one of
his special friends, he sent him with no fewer than twenty
thousand of all nations under him, to root out the whole
generation of the Jews; and with him he joined also Gorgias a
captain, who in matters of war had great experience.

2 Mac 8:10
So Nicanor undertook to make so much money of the captive
Jews, as should defray the tribute of two thousand talents,
which the king was to pay to the Romans.

2 Mac 8:11
Wherefore immediately he sent to the cities upon the sea
coast, proclaiming a sale of the captive Jews, and promising
that they should have fourscore and ten bodies for one talent,
not expecting the vengeance that was to follow upon him from the
Almighty God.

2 Mac 8:12
Now when word was brought unto Judas of Nicanor's coming, and
he had imparted unto those that were with him that the army was
at hand,

2 Mac 8:13
They that were fearful, and distrusted the justice of God,
fled, and conveyed themselves away.

2 Mac 8:14
Others sold all that they had left, and withal besought the
Lord to deliver them, sold by the wicked Nicanor before they met
together:

2 Mac 8:15
And if not for their own sakes, yet for the covenants he had
made with their fathers, and for his holy and glorious name's
sake, by which they were called.

2 Mac 8:16
So Maccabeus called his men together unto the number of six
thousand, and exhorted them not to be stricken with terror of
the enemy, nor to fear the great multitude of the heathen, who
came wrongly against them; but to fight manfully,

2 Mac 8:17
And to set before their eyes the injury that they had
unjustly done to the holy place, and the cruel handling of the
city, whereof they made a mockery, and also the taking away of
the government of their forefathers:

2 Mac 8:18
For they, said he, trust in their weapons and boldness; but
our confidence is in the Almighty who at a beck can cast down
both them that come against us, and also all the world.

2 Mac 8:19
Moreover, he recounted unto them what helps their forefathers
had found, and how they were delivered, when under Sennacherib
an hundred fourscore and five thousand perished.

2 Mac 8:20
And he told them of the battle that they had in Babylon with
the Galatians, how they came but eight thousand in all to the
business, with four thousand Macedonians, and that the
Macedonians being perplexed, the eight thousand destroyed an
hundred and twenty thousand because of the help that they had
from heaven, and so received a great booty.

2 Mac 8:21
Thus when he had made them bold with these words, and ready
to die for the law and the country, he divided his army into
four parts;

2 Mac 8:22
And joined with himself his own brethren, leaders of each
band, to wit Simon, and Joseph, and Jonathan, giving each one
fifteen hundred men.

2 Mac 8:23
Also he appointed Eleazar to read the holy book: and when he
had given them this watchword, The help of God; himself leading
the first band,

2 Mac 8:24
And by the help of the Almighty they slew above nine thousand
of their enemies, and wounded and maimed the most part of
Nicanor's host, and so put all to flight;

2 Mac 8:25
And took their money that came to buy them, and pursued them
far: but lacking time they returned:

2 Mac 8:26
For it was the day before the sabbath, and therefore they
would no longer pursue them.

2 Mac 8:27
So when they had gathered their armour together, and spoiled
their enemies, they occupied themselves about the sabbath,
yielding exceeding praise and thanks to the Lord, who had
preserved them unto that day, which was the beginning of mercy
distilling upon them.

2 Mac 8:28
And after the sabbath, when they had given part of the spoils
to the maimed, and the widows, and orphans, the residue they
divided among themselves and their servants.

2 Mac 8:29
When this was done, and they had made a common supplication,
they besought the merciful Lord to be reconciled with his
servants for ever.

2 Mac 8:30
Moreover of those that were with Timotheus and Bacchides, who
fought against them, they slew above twenty thousand, and very
easily got high and strong holds, and divided among themselves
many spoils more, and made the maimed, orphans, widows, yea, and
the aged also, equal in spoils with themselves.

2 Mac 8:31
And when they had gathered their armour together, they laid
them up all carefully in convenient places, and the remnant of
the spoils they brought to Jerusalem.

2 Mac 8:32
They slew also Philarches, that wicked person, who was with
Timotheus, and had annoyed the Jews many ways.

2 Mac 8:33
Furthermore at such time as they kept the feast for the
victory in their country they burnt Callisthenes, that had set
fire upon the holy gates, who had fled into a little house; and
so he received a reward meet for his wickedness.

2 Mac 8:34
As for that most ungracious Nicanor, who had brought a
thousand merchants to buy the Jews,

2 Mac 8:35
He was through the help of the Lord brought down by them, of
whom he made least account; and putting off his glorious
apparel, and discharging his company, he came like a fugitive
servant through the midland unto Antioch having very great
dishonour, for that his host was destroyed.

2 Mac 8:36
Thus he, that took upon him to make good to the Romans their
tribute by means of captives in Jerusalem, told abroad, that the
Jews had God to fight for them, and therefore they could not be
hurt, because they followed the laws that he gave them.

2 Mac 9:1
About that time came Antiochus with dishonour out of the
country of Persia

2 Mac 9:2
For he had entered the city called Persepolis, and went about
to rob the temple, and to hold the city; whereupon the multitude
running to defend themselves with their weapons put them to
flight; and so it happened, that Antiochus being put to flight
of the inhabitants returned with shame.

2 Mac 9:3
Now when he came to Ecbatane, news was brought him what had
happened unto Nicanor and Timotheus.

2 Mac 9:4
Then swelling with anger, he thought to avenge upon the Jews
the disgrace done unto him by those that made him flee.
Therefore commanded he his chariotman to drive without ceasing,
and to dispatch the journey, the judgment of GOd now following
him. For he had spoken proudly in this sort, That he would come
to Jerusalem and make it a common burying place of the Jews.

2 Mac 9:5
But the Lord Almighty, the God of Isreal, smote him with an
incurable and invisible plague: or as soon as he had spoken
these words, a pain of the bowels that was remediless came upon
him, and sore torments of the inner parts;

2 Mac 9:6
And that most justly: for he had tormented other men's bowels
with many and strange torments.

2 Mac 9:7
Howbeit he nothing at all ceased from his bragging, but still
was filled with pride, breathing out fire in his rage against
the Jews, and commanding to haste the journey: but it came to
pass that he fell down from his chariot, carried violently; so
that having a sore fall, all the members of his body were much
pained.

2 Mac 9:8
And thus he that a little afore thought he might command the
waves of the sea, (so proud was he beyond the condition of man)
and weigh the high mountains in a balance, was now cast on the
ground, and carried in an horselitter, shewing forth unto all
the manifest power of God.

2 Mac 9:9
So that the worms rose up out of the body of this wicked man,
and whiles he lived in sorrow and pain, his flesh fell away, and
the filthiness of his smell was noisome to all his army.

2 Mac 9:10
And the man, that thought a little afore he could reach to
the stars of heaven, no man could endure to carry for his
intolerable stink.

2 Mac 9:11
Here therefore, being plagued, he began to leave off his
great pride, and to come to the knowledge of himself by the
scourge of God, his pain increasing every moment.

2 Mac 9:12
And when he himself could not abide his own smell, he said
these words, It is meet to be subject unto God, and that a man
that is mortal should not proudly think of himself if he were
God.

2 Mac 9:13
This wicked person vowed also unto the Lord, who now no more
would have mercy upon him, saying thus,

2 Mac 9:14
That the holy city (to the which he was going in haste to lay
it even with the ground, and to make it a common buryingplace,)
he would set at liberty:

2 Mac 9:15
And as touching the Jews, whom he had judged not worthy so
much as to be buried, but to be cast out with their children to
be devoured of the fowls and wild beasts, he would make them all
equals to the citizens of Athens:

2 Mac 9:16
And the holy temple, which before he had spoiled, he would
garnish with goodly gifts, and restore all the holy vessels with
many more, and out of his own revenue defray the charges
belonging to the sacrifices:

2 Mac 9:17
Yea, and that also he would become a Jew himself, and go
through all the world that was inhabited, and declare the power
of God.

2 Mac 9:18
But for all this his pains would not cease: for the just
judgment of God was come upon him: therefore despairing of his
health, he wrote unto the Jews the letter underwritten,
containing the form of a supplication, after this manner:

2 Mac 9:19
Antiochus, king and governor, to the good Jews his citizens
wisheth much joy, health, and prosperity:

2 Mac 9:20
If ye and your children fare well, and your affairs be to
your contentment, I give very great thanks to God, having my
hope in heaven.

2 Mac 9:21
As for me, I was weak, or else I would have remembered kindly
your honour and good will returning out of Persia, and being
taken with a grievous disease, I thought it necessary to care
for the common safety of all:

2 Mac 9:22
Not distrusting mine health, but having great hope to escape
this sickness.

2 Mac 9:23
But considering that even my father, at what time he led an
army into the high countries, appointed a successor,

2 Mac 9:24
To the end that, if any thing fell out contrary to
expectation, or if any tidings were brought that were grievous,
they of the land, knowing to whom the state was left, might not
be troubled:
