
And the same faith brings joy and peace because it sets right our
relations with other people, and with all externals. If I am living
in an atmosphere of trust, then sorrow will never be absolute, nor
have exclusive monopoly and possession of my spirit. But there will
be the paradox, and the blessedness, of Christian experience, 'as
sorrowful yet always rejoicing.' For the joy of the Christian life
has its source far away beyond the swamps from which the sour drops
of sorrow may trickle, and it is possible that, like the fabled fire
that burned under water, the joy of the Lord may be bright in my
heart, even when it is drenched in floods of calamity and distress.

And so, brethren, the joy and peace that come from faith will fill
the heart which trusts. Only remember how emphatically the Apostle
here puts these two things together, 'joy and peace in believing.' As
long as, and not a moment longer than, you are exercising the
Christian act of trust, will you be experiencing the Christian
blessedness of 'joy and peace.' Unscrew the pipe, and in an instant
the water ceases to flow. Touch the button and switch off, and out
goes the light. Some Christian people fancy they can live upon past
faith. You will get no present joy and peace out of past faith. The
rain of this day twelve months will not moisten the parched ground of
to-day. Yesterday's religion was all used up yesterday. And if you
would have a continuous flow of joy and peace through your lives,
keep up a uniform habit and attitude of trust in God. You will get it
then; you will get it in no other way.

III. Lastly, note the hope which springs from this experience of joy
and peace.

'The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that
ye may abound in hope.' Here, again, the Apostle does not trouble
himself to define the object of the hope. In this, as in the former
clause, his attention is fixed upon the emotion, not upon that
towards which it goes out. And just as there was no need to say in
whom it was that the Christian man was to believe, so there is no
room to define what it is that the Christian man has a right to hope
for. For his hope is intended to cover all the future, the next
moment, or to-morrow, or the dimmest distance where time has ceased
to be, and eternity stands unmoved. The attitude of the Christian
mind ought to be a cheery optimism, an unconquerable hope. 'The best
has yet to be' is the true Christian thought in contemplating the
future for myself, for my dear ones, for God's Church, and for God's
universe.

And the truest basis on which that hope can rest is the experience
granted to us, on condition of our faith, of a present, abundant
possession of the joy and peace which God gives. The gladder you are
to-day, if the gladness comes from the right source, the surer you
may be that that gladness will never end. That is not what befalls
men who live by earthly joys. For the more poignant, precious, and,
as we faithlessly think, indispensable some of these are to us, the
more into their sweetest sweetness creeps the dread thought: 'This is
too good to last; this must pass.' We never need to think that about
the peace and joy that come to us through believing. For they, in
their sweetness, prophesy perpetuity. I need not dwell upon the
thought that the firmest, most personally precious convictions of an
eternity of future blessedness, rise and fall in a Christian
consciousness with the purity and the depth of its own experience of
the peace and joy of the Gospel. The more you have of Jesus Christ in
your lives and hearts to-day, the surer you will be that whatever
death may do, it cannot touch that, and the more ludicrously
impossible it will seem that anything that befalls this poor body can
touch the bond that knits us to Jesus Christ. Death can separate us
from a great deal. Its sharp scythe cuts through all other bonds, but
its edge is turned when it is tried against the golden chain that
binds the believing soul to the Christ in whom he has believed.

So, brethren, there is the ladder--begin at the bottom step, with
faith in Jesus Christ. That will bring God's direct action into your
spirit, through His Holy Spirit, and that one gift will break up into
an endless multiplicity of blessings, just as a beam of light spilt
upon the surface of the ocean breaks into diamonds in every wave, and
that 'joy and peace' will kindle in your hearts a hope fed by the
great words of the Lord: 'Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you,' 'My joy shall remain in you, and your joy shall be full,'
'He that liveth and believeth in Me shall never die.'




PHOEBE

   'I commend unto you Phoebe our sister, who is a servant
   of the Church that is at Cenchrea: 2. That ye receive her
   in the Lord, worthily of the Saints, and that ye assist
   her in whatsover matter she may have need of you: for she
   herself hath been a succourer of many, and of mine own
   self.'--ROMANS xvi. 1, 2 (R.V.).


This is an outline picture of an else wholly unknown person. She,
like most of the other names mentioned in the salutations in this
chapter, has had a singular fate. Every name, shadowy and unreal as
it is to us, belonged to a human life filled with hopes and fears,
plunged sometimes in the depths of sorrows, struggling with anxieties
and difficulties; and all the agitations have sunk into forgetfulness
and calm. There is left to the world an immortal remembrance, and
scarcely a single fact associated with the undying names.

Note the person here disclosed.

A little rent is made in the dark curtain through which we see as
with an incandescent light concentrated for a moment upon her, one of
the many good women who helped Paul, as their sisters had helped
Paul's Master, and who thereby have won, little as either Paul or she
thought it, an eternal commemoration. Her name is a purely idolatrous
one, and stamps her as a Greek, and by birth probably a worshipper of
Apollo. Her Christian associations were with the Church at Cenchrea,
the port of Corinth, of which little Christian community nothing
further is known. But if we take into account the hideous
immoralities of Corinth, we shall deem it probable that the port,
with its shifting maritime population, was, like most seaports, a
soil in which goodness was hard put to it to grow, and a church had
much against which to struggle. To be a Christian at Cenchrea can
have been no light task. Travellers in Egypt are told that Port Said
is the wickedest place on the face of the earth; and in Phoebe's home
there would be a like drift of disreputables of both sexes and of all
nationalities. It was fitting that one good woman should be recorded
as redeeming womanhood there. We learn of her that she was a
'servant,' or, as the margin preferably reads, a 'deaconess of the
Church which is at Cenchrea'; and in that capacity, by gentle
ministrations and the exhibition of purity and patient love, as well
as by the gracious administration of material help, had been a
'succourer of many.' There is a whole world of unmentioned kindnesses
and a life of self-devotion hidden away under these few words.
Possibly the succour which she administered was her own gift. She may
have been rich and influential, or perhaps she but distributed the
Church's bounty; but in any case the gift was sweetened by the
giver's hand, and the succour was the impartation of a woman's
sympathy more than the bestowment of a donor's gift. Sometime or
other, and somehow or other, she had had the honour and joy of
helping Paul, and no doubt that opportunity would be to her a crown
of service. She was now on the point of taking the long journey to
Rome on her own business, and the Apostle bespeaks for her help from
the Roman Church 'in whatsoever matter she may have need of you,' as
if she had some difficult affair on hand, and had no other friends in
the city. Possibly then she was a widow, and perhaps had had some
lawsuit or business with government authorities, with whom a word
from some of her brethren in Rome might stand her in good stead.
Apparently she was the bearer of this epistle, which would give her a
standing at once in the Roman Church, and she came among them with a
halo round her from the whole-hearted commendation of the Apostle.

Mark the lessons from this little picture.

We note first the remarkable illustration here given of the power of
the new bond of a common faith. The world was then broken up into
sections, which were sometimes bitterly antagonistic and at others
merely rigidly exclusive. The only bond of union was the iron fetter
of Rome, which crushed the people, but did not knit them together.
But here are Paul the Jew, Phoebe the Greek, and the Roman readers of
the epistle, all fused together by the power of the divine love that
melted their hearts, and the common faith that unified their lives.
The list of names in this chapter, comprising as it does men and
women of many nationalities, and some slaves as well as freemen, is
itself a wonderful testimony of the truth of Paul's triumphant
exclamation in another epistle, that in Christ there is 'neither Jew
nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor female.'

The clefts have closed, and the very line of demarcation is
obliterated; and these clefts were deeper than any of which we
moderns have had experience. It remains something like a miracle that
the members of Paul's churches could ever be brought together, and
that their consciousness of oneness could ever overpower the
tremendous divisive forces. We sometimes wonder at their bickerings;
we ought rather to wonder at their unity, and be ashamed of the
importance which we attach to our infinitely slighter mutual
disagreements. The bond that was sufficient to make the early
Christians all one in Christ Jesus seems to have lost its binding
power to-day, and, like an used-up elastic band, to have no clasping
grip left in it.

Another thought which we may connect with the name of Phoebe is the
characteristic place of women in Christianity.

The place of woman amongst the Jews was indeed free and honourable as
compared with her position either in Greece or Rome, but in none of
them was she placed on the level of man, nor regarded mainly in the
aspect of an equal possessor of the same life of the Spirit. But a
religion which admits her to precisely the same position of a
supernatural life as is granted to man, necessarily relegates to a
subordinate position all differences of sex as it does all other
natural distinctions. The women who ministered to Jesus of their
substance, the two sisters of Bethany, the mourners at Calvary, the
three who went through the morning twilight to the tomb, were but the
foremost conspicuous figures in a great company through all the ages
who have owed to Jesus their redemption, not only from the slavery of
sin, but from the stigma of inferiority as man's drudge or toy. To
the world in which Paul lived it was a strange, new thought that
women could share with man in his loftiest emotions. Historically the
emancipation of one half of the human race is the direct result of
the Christian principle that all are one in Christ Jesus. In modern
life the emancipation has been too often divorced from its one sure
basis, and we have become familiar with the sight of the 'advanced'
women who have advanced so far as to have lost sight of the Christ to
whom they owe their freedom. The picture of Phoebe in our text might
well be commended to all such as setting forth the most womanlike
ideal. She was 'a succourer of many.' Her ministry was a ministry of
help; and surely such gentle ministry is that which most befits the
woman's heart and comes most graciously to the woman's fingers.

Phoebe then may well represent to us the ministry of succour in this
world of woe and need. There is ever a cry, even in apparently
successful lives, for help and a helper. Man's clumsy hand is but too
apt to hurt where it strives to soothe, and nature itself seems to
devolve on the swifter sympathies and more delicate perceptions of
woman the joy of binding up wounded spirits. In the verses
immediately following our text we read of another woman to whom was
entrusted a more conspicuous and direct form of service. Priscilla
'taught Apollos the way of God more perfectly,' and is traditionally
represented as being united with her husband in evangelistic work.
But it is not merely prejudice which takes Phoebe rather than
Priscilla as the characteristic type of woman's special ministry. We
must remember our Lord's teaching, that the giver of 'a cup of cold
water in the name of a prophet' in some measure shares in the
prophet's work, and will surely share in the prophet's reward. She
who helped Paul must have entered into the spirit of Paul's labours;
and He to whom all service that is done from the same motive is one
in essence, makes no difference between him whose thirsty lips drink
and her whose loving hand presents the cup of cold water. 'Small
service is true service while it lasts.' Paul and Phoebe were one in
ministry and one in its recompense.

We may further see in her a foreshadowing of the reward of lowly
service, though it be only the service of help. Little did Phoebe
dream that her name would have an eternal commemoration of her
unnoticed deeds of kindness and aid, standing forth to later
generations and peoples of whom she knew nothing, as worthy of
eternal remembrance. For those of us who have to serve unnoticed and
unknown, here is an instance and a prophecy which may stimulate and
encourage. 'Surely I will never forget any of their works' is a
gracious promise which the most obscure and humble of us may take to
heart, and sustained by which, we may patiently pursue a way on which
there are 'none to praise and very few to love.' It matters little
whether our work be noticed or recorded by men, so long as we know
that it is written in the Lamb's book of life and that He will one
day proclaim it 'before the Father in heaven and His angels.'




PRISCILLA AND AQUILA

   'Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus;
   4. (Who have for my life laid down their own necks:
   unto whom not only I give thanks, but so all the churches
   of the Gentiles:) 5. Likewise greet the church that is
   in their house.'--ROMANS xvi. 3-5.


It has struck me that this wedded couple present, even in the scanty
notices that we have of them, some interesting points which may be
worth while gathering together.

Now, to begin with, we are told that Aquila was a Jew. We are not
told whether Priscilla was a Jewess or no. So far as her name is
concerned, she may have been, and very probably was, a Roman, and, if
so, we have in their case a 'mixed marriage' such as was not uncommon
then, and of which Timothy's parents give another example. She is
sometimes called Prisca, which was her proper name, and sometimes
Priscilla, an affectionate diminutive. The two had been living in
Rome, and had been banished under the decree of the Emperor, just as
Jews have been banished from England and from every country in Europe
again and again. They came from Rome to Corinth, and were, perhaps,
intending to go back to Aquila's native place, Pontus, when Paul met
them in the latter city, and changed their whole lives. His
association with them began in a purely commercial partnership. But
as they abode together and worked at their trade, there would be many
earnest talks about the Christ, and these ended in both husband and
wife becoming disciples. The bond thus knit was too close to be
easily severed, and so, when Paul sailed across the AEgean for
Ephesus, his two new friends kept with him, which they would be the
more ready to do, as they had no settled home. They remained with him
during his somewhat lengthened stay in the great Asiatic city; for we
find in the first Epistle to the Corinthians which was written from
Ephesus about that time, that the Apostle sends greetings from
'Priscilla and Aquila and the Church which is in their house.' But
when Paul left Ephesus they seem to have stayed behind, and
afterwards to have gone their own way.

About a year after the first Epistle to the Corinthians was sent from
Ephesus, the Epistle to the Romans was written, and we find there the
salutation to Priscilla and Aquila which is my text. So this
wandering couple were back again in Rome by that time, and settled
down there for a while. They are then lost sight of for some time,
but probably they returned to Ephesus. Once more we catch a glimpse
of them in Paul's last letter, written some seven or eight years
after that to the Romans. The Apostle knows that death is near, and,
at that supreme moment, his heart goes out to these two faithful
companions, and he sends them a parting token of his undying love.
There are only two messages to friends in the second Epistle to
Timothy, and one of these is to Prisca and Aquila. At the mouth of
the valley of the shadow of death he remembered the old days in
Corinth, and the, to us, unknown instance of devotion which these two
had shown, when, for his life, they laid down their own necks.

Such is all that we know of Priscilla and Aquila. Can we gather any
lessons from these scattered notices thus thrown together?

I. Here is an object lesson as to the hallowing effect of
Christianity on domestic life and love.

Did you ever notice that in the majority of the places where these
two are named, if we adopt the better readings, Priscilla's name
comes first? She seems to have been 'the better man of the two'; and
Aquila drops comparatively into the background. Now, such a couple,
and a couple in which the wife took the foremost place, was an
absolute impossibility in heathenism. They are a specimen of what
Christianity did in the primitive age, all over the Empire, and is
doing to-day, everywhere--lifting woman to her proper place. These
two, yoked together in 'all exercise of noble end,' and helping one
another in Christian work, and bracketed together by the Apostle, who
puts the wife first, as his fellow-helpers in Christ Jesus, stands
before us as a living picture of what our sweet and sacred family
life and earthly loves may be glorified into, if the light from
heaven shines down upon them, and is thankfully received into them.

Such a house as the house of Prisca and Aquila is the product of
Christianity, and such ought to be the house of every professing
Christian. For we should all make our homes as 'tabernacles of the
righteous,' in which the voice of joy and rejoicing is ever heard.
Not only wedded love, but family love, and all earthly love, are then
most precious, when into them there flows the ennobling, the calming,
the transfiguring thought of Christ and His love to us.

Again, notice that, even in these scanty references to our two
friends, there twice occurs that remarkable expression 'the church
that is in their house.' Now, I suppose that that gives us a little
glimpse into the rudimentary condition of public worship in the
primitive church. It was centuries after the time of Priscilla and
Aquila before circumstances permitted Christians to have buildings
devoted exclusively to public worship. Up to a very much later period
than that which is covered by the New Testament, they gathered
together wherever was most convenient. And, I suppose, that both in
Rome and Ephesus, this husband and wife had some room--perhaps the
workshop where they made their tents, spacious enough for some of the
Christians of the city to meet together in. One would like people who
talk so much about 'the Church,' and refuse the name to individual
societies of Christians, and even to an aggregate of these, unless it
has 'bishops,' to explain how the little gathering of twenty or
thirty people in the workshop attached to Aquila's house, is called
by the Apostle without hesitation 'the church which is in their
house.' It was a part of the Holy Catholic Church, but it was also 'a
Church,' complete in itself, though small in numbers. We have here
not only a glimpse into the manner of public worship in early times,
but we may learn something of far more consequence for us, and find
here a suggestion of what our homes ought to be. 'The Church that is
in thy house'--fathers and mothers that are responsible for your
homes and their religious atmosphere, ask yourselves if any one would
say that about your houses, and if they could not, why not?

II. We may get here another object lesson as to the hallowing of
common life, trade, and travel.

It does not appear that, after their stay in Ephesus, Aquila and his
wife were closely attached to Paul's person, and certainly they did
not take any part as members of what we may call his evangelistic
staff. They seem to have gone their own way, and as far as the scanty
notices carry us, they did not meet Paul again, after the time when
they parted in Ephesus. Their gipsy life was probably occasioned by
Aquila's going about--as was the custom in old days when there were
no trades-unions or organised centres of a special industry--to look
for work where he could find it. When he had made tents in Ephesus
for a while, he would go on somewhere else, and take temporary
lodgings there. Thus he wandered about as a working man. Yet Paul
calls him his 'fellow worker in Christ Jesus'; and he had, as we saw,
a Church in his house. A roving life of that sort is not generally
supposed to be conducive to depth of spiritual life. But their
wandering course did not hurt these two. They took their religion
with them. It did not depend on locality, as does that of a great
many people who are very religious in the town where they live, and,
when they go away for a holiday, seem to leave their religion, along
with their silver plate, at home. But no matter whether they were in
Corinth or Ephesus or Rome, Aquila and Priscilla took their Lord and
Master with them, and while working at their camel's-hair tents, they
were serving God.

Dear brethren, what we want is not half so much preachers such as my
brethren and I, as Christian tradesmen and merchants and travellers,
like Aquila and Priscilla.

III. Again, we may see here a suggestion of the unexpected issues of
our lives.

Think of that complicated chain of circumstances, one end of which
was round Aquila and the other round the young Pharisee in Jerusalem.
It steadily drew them together until they met in that lodging at
Corinth. Claudius, in the fullness of his absolute power, said, 'Turn
all these wretched Jews out of my city. I will not have it polluted
with them any more. Get rid of them!' So these two were uprooted, and
drifted to Corinth. We do not know why they chose to go thither;
perhaps they themselves did not know why; but God knew. And while
they were coming thither from the west, Paul was coming thither from
the east and north. He was 'prevented by the Spirit from speaking in
Asia,' and driven across the sea against his intention to Neapolis,
and hounded out of Philippi and Thessalonica and Beraea; and turned
superciliously away from Athens; and so at last found himself in
Corinth, face to face with the tentmaker from Rome and his wife. Then
one of the two men said, 'Let us join partnership together, and set
up here as tent-makers for a time.' What came out of this unintended
and apparently chance meeting?

The first thing was the conversion of Aquila and his wife; and the
effects of that are being realised by them in heaven at this moment,
and will go on to all eternity.

So, in the infinite complexity of events, do not let us worry
ourselves by forecasting, but let us trust, and be sure that the Hand
which is pushing us is pushing us in the right direction, and that He
will bring us, by a right, though a roundabout way, to the City of
Habitation. It seems to me that we poor, blind creatures in this
world are somewhat like a man in a prison, groping with his hand in
the dark along the wall, and all unawares touching a spring which
moves a stone, disclosing an aperture that lets in a breath of purer
air, and opens the way to freedom. So we go on as if stumbling in the
dark, and presently, without our knowing what we do, by some trivial
act we originate a train of events which influences our whole future.

Again, when Aquila and Priscilla reached Ephesus they formed another
chance acquaintance in the person of a brilliant young Alexandrian,
whose name was Apollos. They found that he had good intentions and a
good heart, but a head very scantily furnished with the knowledge of
the Gospel. So they took him in hand, just as Paul had taken them. If
I may use such a phrase, they did not know how large a fish they had
caught. They had no idea what a mighty power for Christ was lying
dormant in that young man from Alexandria who knew so much less than
they did. They instructed Apollos, and Apollos became second only to
Paul in the power of preaching the Gospel. So the circle widens and
widens. God's grace fructifies from one man to another, spreading
onward and outward. And all Apollos' converts, and _their_
converts, and _theirs_ again, right away down the ages, we may
trace back to Priscilla and Aquila.

So do not let us be anxious about the further end of our deeds--viz.
their results; but be careful about the nearer end of them--viz.
their motives; and God will look after the other end. Seeing that
'thou knowest not which shall prosper, whether this or that,' or how
much any of them will prosper, let us grasp _all_ opportunities
to do His will and glorify His name.

IV. Further, here we have an instance of the heroic self-devotion
which love to Christ kindles.

'For my sake they laid down their own necks.' We do not know to what
Paul is referring: perhaps to that tumult in Ephesus, where he
certainly was in danger. But the language seems rather more emphatic
than such danger would warrant. Probably it was at some perilous
juncture of which we know nothing (for we know very little, after
all, of the details of the Apostle's life), in which Aquila and
Priscilla had said, 'Take us and let him go. He can do a great deal
more for God than we can do. We will put our heads on the block, if
he may still live.' That magnanimous self-surrender was a wonderful
token of the passionate admiration and love which the Apostle
inspired, but its deepest motive was love to Christ and not to Paul
only.

Faith in Christ and love to Him ought to turn cowards into heroes, to
destroy thoughts of self, and to make the utmost self-sacrifice
natural, blessed, and easy. We are not called upon to exercise
heroism like Priscilla's and Aquila's, but there is as much heroism
needed for persistently Christian life, in our prosaic daily
circumstances, as has carried many a martyr to the block, and many a
tremulous woman to the pyre. We can all be heroes; and if the love of
Christ is in us, as it should be, we shall all be ready to 'yield
ourselves living sacrifices, which is our reasonable service.'

Long years after, the Apostle, on the further edge of life, looked
back over it all; and, whilst much had become dim, and some trusted
friends had dropped away, like Demas, he saw these two, and waved
them his last greeting before he turned to the executioner--'Salute
Prisca and Aquila.' Paul's Master is not less mindful of His friends'
love, or less eloquent in the praise of their faithfulness, or less
sure to reward them with the crown of glory. 'Whoso confesseth Me
before men, him will I also confess before the angels in heaven.'




TWO HOUSEHOLDS

   '... Salute them which are of Aristobulus' household.
   11. ... Greet them that be of the household of Narcissus,
   which are in the Lord.'--ROMANS xvi. 10, 11.


There does not seem much to be got out of these two sets of
salutations to two households in Rome; but if we look at them with
eyes in our heads, and some sympathy in our hearts, I think we shall
get lessons worth the treasuring.

In the first place, here are two sets of people, members of two
different households, and that means mainly, if not exclusively,
slaves. In the next place, in each case there was but a section of
the household which was Christian. In the third place, in neither
household is the master included in the greeting. So in neither case
was _he_ a Christian.

We do not know anything about these two persons, men of position
evidently, who had large households. But the most learned of our
living English commentators of the New Testament has advanced a very
reasonable conjecture in regard to each of them. As to the first of
them, Aristobulus: that wicked old King Herod, in whose life Christ
was born, had a grandson of the name, who spent all his life in Rome,
and was in close relations with the Emperor of that day. He had died
some little time before the writing of this letter. As to the second
of them, there is a very notorious Narcissus, who plays a great part
in the history of Rome just a little while before Paul's period
there, and he, too, was dead. And it is more than probable that the
slaves and retainers of these two men were transferred in both cases
to the emperor's household and held together in it, being known as
Aristobulus' men and Narcissus' men. And so probably the Christians
among them are the brethren to whom these salutations are sent.

Be that as it may, I think that if we look at the two groups, we
shall get out of them some lessons.

I. The first of them is this: the penetrating power of Christian
truth. Think of the sort of man that the master of the first
household was, if the identification suggested be accepted. He is one
of that foul Herodian brood, in all of whom the bad Idumaean blood ran
corruptly. The grandson of the old Herod, the brother of Agrippa of
the Acts of the Apostles, the hanger-on of the Imperial Court, with
Roman vices veneered on his native wickedness, was not the man to
welcome the entrance of a revolutionary ferment into his household;
and yet through his barred doors had crept quietly, he knowing
nothing about it, that great message of a loving God, and a Master
whose service was freedom. And in thousands of like cases the Gospel
was finding its way underground, undreamed of by the great and wise,
but steadily pressing onwards, and undermining all the towering
grandeur that was so contemptuous of it. So Christ's truth spread at
first; and I believe that is the way it always spreads. Intellectual
revolutions begin at the top and filter down; religious revolutions
begin at the bottom and rise; and it is always the 'lower orders'
that are laid hold of first. 'Ye see your calling, brethren, how that
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble
are called,' but a handful of slaves in Aristobulus' household, with
this living truth lodged in their hearts, were the bearers and the
witnesses and the organs of the power which was going to shatter all
that towered above it and despised it. And so it always is.

Do not let us be ashamed of a Gospel that has not laid hold of the
upper and the educated classes, but let us feel sure of this, that
there is no greater sign of defective education and of superficial
culture and of inborn vulgarity than despising the day of small
things, and estimating truth by the position or the intellectual
attainments of the men that are its witnesses and its lovers. The
Gospel penetrated at first, and penetrates still, in the fashion that
is suggested here.

II. Secondly, these two households teach us very touchingly and
beautifully the uniting power of Christian sympathy.

A considerable proportion of the first of these two households would
probably be Jews--if Aristobulus were indeed Herod's grandson. The
probability that he was is increased by the greeting interposed
between those to the two households--'Salute Herodion.' The name
suggests some connection with Herod, and whether we suppose the
designation of 'my kinsman,' which Paul gives him, to mean 'blood
relation' or 'fellow countryman,' Herodion, at all events, was a Jew
by birth. As to the other members of these households, Paul may have
met some of them in his many travels, but he had never been in Rome,
and his greetings are more probably sent to them as conspicuous
sections, numerically, of the Roman Church, and as tokens of his
affection, though he had never seen them. The possession of a common
faith has bridged the gulf between him and them. Slaves in those days
were outside the pale of human sympathy, and almost outside the pale
of human rights. And here the foremost of Christian teachers, who was
a freeman born, separated from these poor people by a tremendous
chasm, stretches a brother's hand across it and grasps theirs. The
Gospel that came into the world to rend old associations and to split
up society, and to make a deep cleft between fathers and children and
husband and wife, came also to more than counterbalance its dividing
effects by its uniting power. And in that old world that was
separated into classes by gulfs deeper than any of which we have any
experience, it, and it alone, threw a bridge across the abysses and
bound men together. Think of what a revolution it must have been,
when a master and his slave could sit down together at the table of
the Lord and look each other in the face and say 'Brother' and for
the moment forget the difference of bond and free. Think of what a
revolution it must have been when Jew and Gentile could sit down
together at the table of the Lord, and forget circumcision and
uncircumcision, and feel that they were all one in Jesus Christ. And
as for the third of the great clefts--that, alas! which made so much
of the tragedy and the wickedness of ancient life--viz. the
separation between the sexes--think of what a revolution it was when
men and women, in all purity of the new bond of Christian affection,
could sit down together at the same table, and feel that they were
brethren and sisters in Jesus Christ.

The uniting power of the common faith and the common love to the one
Lord marked Christianity as altogether supernatural and new, unique
in the world's experience, and obviously requiring something more
than a human force to produce it. Will anybody say that the
Christianity of this day has preserved and exhibits that primitive
demonstration of its superhuman source? Is there anything obviously
beyond the power of earthly motives in the unselfish, expansive love
of modern Christians? Alas! alas! to ask the question is to answer
it, and everybody knows the answer, and nobody sorrows over it. Is
any duty more pressingly laid upon Christian churches of this
generation than that, forgetting their doctrinal janglings for a
while, and putting away their sectarianisms and narrowness, they
should show the world that their faith has still the power to do what
it did in the old times, bridge over the gulf that separates class
from class, and bring all men together in the unity of the faith and
of the love of Jesus Christ? Depend upon it, unless the modern
organisations of Christianity which call themselves 'churches' show
themselves, in the next twenty years, a great deal more alive to the
necessity, and a great deal more able to cope with the problem, of
uniting the classes of our modern complex civilisation, the term of
life of these churches is comparatively brief. And the form of
Christianity which another century will see will be one which
reproduces the old miracle of the early days, and reaches across the
deepest clefts that separate modern society, and makes all one in
Jesus Christ. It is all very well for us to glorify the ancient love
of the early Christians, but there is a vast deal of false
sentimentality about our eulogistic talk of it. It were better to
praise it less and imitate it more. Translate it into present life,
and you will find that to-day it requires what it nineteen hundred
years ago was recognised as manifesting, the presence of something
more than human motive, and something more than man discovers of
truth. The cement must be divine that binds men thus together.

Again, these two households suggest for us the tranquillising power
of Christian resignation.

They were mostly slaves, and they continued to be slaves when they
were Christians. Paul recognised their continuance in the servile
position, and did not say a word to them to induce them to break
their bonds. The Epistle to the Corinthians treats the whole subject
of slavery in a very remarkable fashion. It says to the slave: 'If
you were a slave when you became a Christian, stop where you are. If
you have an opportunity of being free, avail yourself of it; if you
have not, never mind.' And then it adds this great principle: 'He
that is called in the Lord, being a slave, is Christ's freeman.
Likewise he that is called, being free, is Christ's slave.' The
Apostle applies the very same principle, in the adjoining verses, to
the distinction between circumcision and uncircumcision. From all
which there comes just the same lesson that is taught us by these two
households of slaves left intact by Christianity--viz. that where a
man is conscious of a direct, individual relation to Jesus Christ,
that makes all outward circumstances infinitely insignificant. Let us
get up to the height, and they all become very small. Of course, the
principles of Christianity killed slavery, but it took eighteen
hundred years to do it. Of course, there is no blinking the fact that
slavery was an essentially immoral and unchristian institution. But
it is one thing to lay down principles and leave them to be worked in
and then to be worked out, and it is another thing to go blindly
charging at existing institutions and throwing them down by violence,
before men have grown up to feel that they are wicked. And so the New
Testament takes the wise course, and leaves the foolish one to
foolish people. It makes the tree good, and then its fruit will be
good.

But the main point that I want to insist upon is this: what was good
for these slaves in Rome is good for you and me. Let us get near to
Jesus Christ, and feel that we have got hold of His hand for our own
selves, and we shall not mind very much about the possible varieties
of human condition. Rich or poor, happy or sad, surrounded by
companions or treading a solitary path, failures or successes as the
world has it, strong or broken and weak and wearied--all these
varieties, important as they are, come to be very small when we can
say, 'We are the Lord's.' That amulet makes all things tolerable; and
the Christian submission which is the expression of our love to, and
confidence in, His infinite sweetness and unerring goodness, raises
us to a height from which the varieties of earthly condition seem to
blend and melt into one. When we are down amongst the low hills, it
seems a long way from the foot of one of them to the top of it; but
when we are on the top they all melt into one dead level, and you
cannot tell which is top and which is bottom. And so, if we only can
rise high enough up the hill, the possible diversities of our
condition will seem to be very small variations in the level.
III. Lastly, these two groups suggest to us the conquering power of
Christian faithfulness.

The household of Herod's grandson was not a very likely place to find
Christian people in, was it? Such flowers do not often grow, or at
least do not easily grow, on such dunghills. And in both these cases
it was only a handful of the people, a portion of each household,
that was Christian. So they had beside them, closely identified with
them--working, perhaps, at the same tasks, I might almost say,
chained with the same chains--men who had no share in their faith or
in their love. It would not be easy to pray and love and trust God
and do His will, and keep clear of complicity with idolatry and
immorality and sin, in such a pigsty as that; would it? But these men
did it. And nobody need ever say, 'I am in such circumstances that I
cannot live a Christian life.' There are no such circumstances, at
least none of God's appointing. There are often such that we bring
upon ourselves, and then the best thing is to get out of them as soon
as we can. But as far as He is concerned, He never puts anybody
anywhere where he cannot live a holy life.

There were no difficulties too great for these men to overcome; there
are no difficulties too great for us to overcome. And wherever you
and I may be, we cannot be in any place where it is so hard to live a
consistent life as these people were. Young men in warehouses, people
in business here in Manchester, some of us with unfortunate domestic
or relative associations, and so on--we may all feel as if it would
be so much easier for us if this, that, and the other thing were
changed. No, it would not be any easier; and perhaps the harder the
easier, because the more obviously the atmosphere is poisonous, the
more we shall put some cloth over our mouths to prevent it from
getting into our lungs. The dangerous place is the place where the
vapours that poison are scentless as well as invisible. But whatever
be the difficulties, there is strength waiting for us, and we may all
win the praise which the Apostle gives to another of these Roman
brethren, whom he salutes as 'Apelles, approved in Christ'--a man
that had been 'tried' and had stood his trial. So in our various
spheres of difficulty and of temptation we may feel that the greeting
from heaven, like Paul's message to the slaves in Rome, comes to us
with good cheer, and that the Master Himself sees us, sympathises
with us, salutes us, and stretches out His hand to help and to keep
us.




TRYPHENA AND TRYPHOSA

   'Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour
   in the Lord.'--ROMANS xvi. 12.


The number of salutations to members of the Roman Church is
remarkable when we take into account that Paul had never visited it.
The capital drew all sorts of people to it, and probably there had
been personal intercourse between most of the persons here mentioned
and the Apostle in some part of his wandering life. He not only
displays his intimate knowledge of the persons saluted, but his
beautiful delicacy and ingenuity in the varying epithets applied to
them shows how in his great heart and tenacious memory individuals
had a place. These shadowy saints live for ever by Paul's brief
characterisation of them, and stand out to us almost as clearly and
as sharply distinguished as they did to him.

These two, Tryphena and Tryphosa, were probably sisters. That is
rendered likely by their being coupled together here, as well as by
the similarity of their names. These names mean luxurious, or
delicate, and no doubt expressed the ideal for their daughters which
the parents had had, and possibly indicate the kind of life from
which these two women had come. We can scarcely fail to note the
contrast between the meaning of their names and the Christian lives
they had lived. Two dainty women, probably belonging to a class in
which a delicate withdrawal from effort and toil was thought to be
the woman's distinctive mark, had fled from luxury, which often
tended to be voluptuous, and was always self-indulgent, and had
chosen the better part of 'labour in the Lord.' They had become
untrue to their names, because they must be true to their Master and
themselves. We may well take the lesson that lies here, and is
eminently needful to-day amidst the senseless, and often sinful, tide
of luxury which runs so strongly as to threaten the great and eternal
Christian principle of self-denial.

The first thing that strikes us in looking at these salutations is
the illustration which it gives of the uniting power of a common
faith. Tryphena and Tryphosa were probably Roman ladies of some
social standing, and their names may indicate that they at least
inherited a tendency to exclusiveness; yet here they occur
immediately after the household of Narcissus and in close connection
with that of Aristobulus, both of which are groups of slaves.
Aristobulus was a grandson of Herod the Great, and Narcissus was a
well-known freedman, whose slaves at his death would probably become
the property of the Emperor. Other common slave names are those of
Ampliatus and Urbanus; and here in these lists they stand side by
side with persons of some distinction in the Roman world, and with
men and women of widely differing nationalities. The Church of Rome
would have seemed to any non-Christian observer a motley crowd in
which racial distinctions, sex, and social conditions had all been
swept away by the rising tide of a common fanaticism. In it was
exemplified in actual operation Paul's great principle that in Christ
Jesus 'there is neither Jew nor Greek, male nor female, bond nor
free, but in Him all are one.' Roman society in that day, as Juvenal
shows us, was familiar with the levelling and uniting power of common
vice and immorality, and the few sternly patriotic Romans who were
left lamented that 'the Orontes flowed into the Tiber'; but such
common wallowing in filth led to no real unity, whereas, in the
obscure corner of the great city where there were members of the
infant Church gathered together, there was the beginning of a common
life in the one Lord which lifted each participant of it out of the
dreary solitude of individuality, and imparted to each heart the
tingling consciousness of oneness with all who held the one faith in
the one Lord and had received the one baptism in the one Name. That
fair dawn has been shadowed by many clouds, and the churches of
to-day, however they may have developed doctrine, may look back with
reproach and shame to the example of Rome, where Tryphena and
Tryphosa, with all their inherited, fastidious delicacy, recognised
in the household of Aristobulus and the household of Narcissus
'brethren in the Lord,' and were as glad to welcome Jews, Asiatics,
Persians, and Greeks, as Romans of the bluest blood, into the family
of Christ. The Romish Church of our day has lost its early grace of
welcoming all who love the one Lord into its fellowship; and we of
the Protestant churches have been but too swift to learn the bad
lesson of forbidding all who follow not with us.

Another thought which may be suggested by Tryphena and Tryphosa is
the blessed hallowing of natural family relations by common faith.
They were probably sisters, or, at all events, as their names
indicate, near relatives, and to them that faith must have been
doubly precious because they shared it with each other. None of the
trials to which the early Christians were exposed was more severe
than the necessity which their Christianity so often imposed upon
them of breaking the sacred family ties. It saddened even Christ's
heart to think that He had come to rend families in sunder, and to
make 'a man's foes them of his own household'; and we can little
imagine how bitter the pang must have been when family love had to be
cast aside at the bidding of allegiance to Him.

But though the stress of that separation between those most nearly
related in blood by reason of unshared faith is alleviated in this
day, it still remains; and that is but a feeble Christian life which
