person who can do "them," i.e., love God with all his heart, soul, and
mind, and his neighbor as himself?

Paul has nothing against those who are justified by faith and therefore
are true doers of the Law. He opposes those who think they can fulfill
the Law when in reality they can only sin against the Law by trying to
obtain righteousness by the Law. The Law demands that we fear, love, and
worship God with a true faith. The law-workers fail to do this. Instead,
they invent new modes of worship and new kinds of works which God never
commanded. They provoke His anger according to the passage: "But in vain
they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men."
(Matthew 15:9.) Hence, the law-righteous workers are downright rebels
against God, and idolaters who constantly sin against the first
commandment. In short, they are no good at-all though outwardly they
seem to be extremely solicitous of the honor of God.

We who are justified by faith as the saints of old, may be under the
Law, but we are not under the curse of the Law because sin is not
imputed to us for Christ's sake. If the Law cannot be fulfilled by the
believers, if sin continues to cling to them despite their love for God,
what can you expect of people who are not yet justified by faith, who
are still enemies of God and His Word, like the unbelieving law-workers?
It goes to show how impossible it is for those who have not been
justified by faith to fulfill the Law.


  VERSE 13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being
  made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth
  on a tree.

Jerome and his present-day followers rack their miserable brains over
this comforting passage in an effort to save Christ from the fancied
insult of being called a curse. They say: "This quotation from Moses
does not apply to Christ. Paul is taking liberties with Moses by
generalizing the statements in Deuteronomy 21:23. Moses has 'he that is
hanged.' Paul puts it 'every one that hangeth.' On the other hand, Paul
omits the words 'of God' in his quotation from Moses: 'For he that is
hanged is accursed of God.' Moses speaks of a criminal who is worthy of
death." "How," our opponents ask, "can this passage be applied to the
holy Christ as if He were accursed of God and worthy to be hanged?" This
piece of exegesis may impress the naive as a zealous attempt to defend
the honor and glory of Christ. Let us see what Paul has in mind.

Paul does not say that Christ was made a curse for Himself. The accent
is on the two words "for us." Christ is personally innocent. Personally,
He did not deserve to be hanged for any crime of His own doing. But
because Christ took the place of others who were sinners, He was hanged
like any other transgressor. The Law of Moses leaves no loopholes. It
says that a transgressor should be hanged. Who are the other sinners?
We are. The sentence of death and everlasting damnation had long been
pronounced over us. But Christ took all our sins and died for them on
the Cross. "He was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin
of many, and made intercession for the transgressors." (Isaiah 53:12.)

All the prophets of old said that Christ should be the greatest
transgressor, murderer, adulterer, thief, blasphemer that ever was or
ever could be on earth. When He took the sins of the whole world upon
Himself, Christ was no longer an innocent person. He was a sinner
burdened with the sins of a Paul who was a blasphemer; burdened with the
sins of a Peter who denied Christ; burdened with the sins of a David who
committed adultery and murder, and gave the heathen occasion to laugh at
the Lord. In short, Christ was charged with the sins of all men, that
He should pay for them with His own blood. The curse struck Him. The Law
found Him among sinners. He was not only in the company of sinners.
He had gone so far as to invest Himself with the flesh and blood of
sinners. So the Law judged and hanged Him for a sinner.

In separating Christ from us sinners and holding Him up as a holy
exemplar, errorists rob us of our best comfort. They misrepresent Him
as a threatening tyrant who is ready to slaughter us at the slightest
provocation.

I am told that it is preposterous and wicked to call the Son of God a
cursed sinner. I answer: If you deny that He is a condemned sinner, you
are forced to deny that Christ died. It is not less preposterous to say,
the Son of God died, than to say, the Son of God was a sinner.

John the Baptist called Him "the lamb of God, which taketh away the sin
of the world." Being the unspotted Lamb of God, Christ was personally
innocent. But because He took the sins of the world His sinlessness was
defiled with the sinfulness of the world. Whatever sins I, you, all of
us have committed or shall commit, they are Christ's sins as if He had
committed them Himself. Our sins have to be Christ's sins or we shall
perish forever.

Isaiah declares of Christ: "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of
us all." We have no right to minimize the force of this declaration. God
does not amuse Himself with words. What a relief for a Christian to know
that Christ is covered all over with my sins, your sins, and the sins of
the whole world.

The papists invented their own doctrine of faith. They say charity
creates and adorns their faith. By stripping Christ of our sins, by
making Him sinless, they cast our sins back at us, and make Christ
absolutely worthless to us. What sort of charity is this? If that is a
sample of their vaunted charity we want none of it.

Our merciful Father in heaven saw how the Law oppressed us and how
impossible it was for us to get out from under the curse of the Law. He
therefore sent His only Son into the world and said to Him: "You are now
Peter, the liar; Paul, the persecutor; David, the adulterer; Adam, the
disobedient; the thief on the cross. You, My Son, must pay the world's
iniquity." The Law growls: "All right. If Your Son is taking the sin of
the world, I see no sins anywhere else but in Him. He shall die on the
Cross." And the Law kills Christ. But we go free.

The argument of the Apostle against the righteousness of the Law is
impregnable. If Christ bears our sins, we do not bear them. But if
Christ is innocent of our sins and does not bear them, we must bear
them, and we shall die in our sins. "But thanks be to God, which giveth
us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ."

Let us see how Christ was able to gain the victory over our enemies. The
sins of the whole world, past, present, and future, fastened themselves
upon Christ and condemned Him. But because Christ is God He had an
everlasting and unconquerable righteousness. These two, the sin of the
world and the righteousness of God, met in a death struggle. Furiously
the sin of the world assailed the righteousness of God. Righteousness is
immortal and invincible. On the other hand, sin is a mighty tyrant
who subdues all men. This tyrant pounces on Christ. But Christ's
righteousness is unconquerable. The result is inevitable. Sin is
defeated and righteousness triumphs and reigns forever.

In the same manner was death defeated. Death is emperor of the world.
He strikes down kings, princes, all men. He has an idea to destroy all
life. But Christ has immortal life, and life immortal gained the victory
over death. Through Christ death has lost her sting. Christ is the Death
of death.

The curse of God waged a similar battle with the eternal mercy of God in
Christ. The curse meant to condemn God's mercy. But it could not do it
because the mercy of God is everlasting. The curse had to give way. If
the mercy of God in Christ had lost out, God Himself would have lost
out, which, of course, is impossible.

"Christ," says Paul, "spoiled principalities and powers, He made a show
of them openly, triumphing over them in it." (Col. 2:15.) They cannot
harm those who hide in Christ. Sin, death, the wrath of God, hell, the
devil are mortified in Christ. Where Christ is near the powers of evil
must keep their distance. St. John says: "And this is the victory that
overcometh the world, even our faith." (I John 5:4.)

You may now perceive why it is imperative to believe and confess the
divinity of Christ. To overcome the sin of a whole world, and death,
and the wrath of God was no work for any creature. The power of sin and
death could be broken only by a greater power. God alone could abolish
sin, destroy death, and take away the curse of the Law. God alone could
bring righteousness, life, and mercy to light. In attributing these
achievements to Christ the Scriptures pronounce Christ to be God
forever. The article of justification is indeed fundamental. If we
remain sound in this one article, we remain sound in all the other
articles of the Christian faith. When we teach justification by faith in
Christ we confess at the same time that Christ is God.

I cannot get over the blindness of the Pope's theologians. To imagine
that the mighty forces of sin, death, and the curse can be vanquished
by the righteousness of man's paltry works, by fasting, pilgrimages,
masses, vows, and such gewgaws. These blind leaders of the blind turn
the poor people over to the mercy of sin, death, and the devil.
What chance has a defenseless human creature against these powers of
darkness? They train sinners who are ten times worse than any thief,
whore, murderer. The divine power of God alone can destroy sin and
death, and create righteousness and life.

When we hear that Christ was made a curse for us, let us believe it with
joy and assurance. By faith Christ changes places with us. He gets our
sins, we get His holiness.

By faith alone can we become righteous, for faith invests us with the
sinlessness of Christ. The more fully we believe this, the fuller will
be our joy. If you believe that sin, death, and the curse are void, why,
they are null, zero. Whenever sin and death make you nervous write it
down as an illusion of the devil. There is no sin now, no curse, no
death, no devil because Christ has done away with them. This fact is
sure. There is nothing wrong with the fact. The defect lies in our lack
of faith.

In the Apostolic Creed we confess: "I believe in the holy Christian
Church." That means, I believe that there is no sin, no curse, no evil
in the Church of God. Faith says: "I believe that." But if you want to
believe your eyes you will find many shortcomings and offenses in the
members of the holy Church. You see them succumb to temptation, you see
them weak in faith, you see them giving way to anger, envy, and other
evil dispositions. "How can the Church be holy?" you ask. It is with the
Christian Church as it is with the individual Christian. If I examine
myself I find enough unholiness to shock me. But when I look at Christ
in me I find that I am altogether holy. And so it is with the Church.

Holy Writ does not say that Christ was under the curse. It says directly
that Christ was made a curse. In II Corinthians 5:21 Paul writes: "For
he (God) hath made him (Christ) to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him." Although this and
similar passages may be properly explained by saying that Christ was
made a sacrifice for the curse and for sin, yet in my judgment it is
better to leave these passages stand as they read: Christ was made sin
itself; Christ was made the curse itself. When a sinner gets wise
to himself he does not only feel miserable, he feels like misery
personified; he does not only feel like a sinner, he feels like sin
itself.

To finish with this verse: All evils would have overwhelmed us, as they
shall overwhelm the unbelievers forever, if Christ had not become the
great transgressor and guilty bearer of all our sins. The sins of the
world got Him down for a moment. They came around Him like water. Of
Christ, the Old Testament Prophet complained: "Thy fierce wrath goeth
over me; thy terrors have cut me off." (Psalm 88 16.) By Christ's
salvation we have been delivered from the terrors of God to a life of
eternal felicity.


  VERSE 14. That the blessing of Abraham might come, on the Gentiles
  through Jesus Christ.

Paul always keeps this text before him: "In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed." The blessing promised unto Abraham
could come upon the Gentiles only by Christ, the seed of Abraham. To
become a blessing unto all nations Christ had to be made a curse to take
away the curse from the nations of the earth. The merit that we plead,
and the work that we proffer is Christ who was made a curse for us.

Let us become expert in the art of transferring our sins, our death,
and every evil from ourselves to Christ; and Christ's righteousness and
blessing from Christ to ourselves.


  VERSE 14. That we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.

"The promise of the Spirit" is Hebrew for "the promised Spirit." The
Spirit spells freedom from the Law, sin, death, the curse, hell, and the
judgment of God. No merits are mentioned in connection with this promise
of the Spirit and all the blessings that go with Him. This Spirit of
many blessings is received by faith alone. Faith alone builds on the
promises of God, as Paul says in this verse.

Long ago the prophets visualized the happy changes Christ would effect
in all things. Despite the fact that the Jews had the Law of God they
never ceased to look longingly for Christ. After Moses no prophet or
king added a single law to the Book. Any changes or additions were
deferred to the time of Christ's coming. Moses told the people: "The
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee,
of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken." (Deut.
18:15.)

God's people of old felt that the Law of Moses could not be improved
upon until the Messiah would bring better things than the Law, i.e.,
grace and remission of sins.


  VERSE 15. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; Though it be but
  a man's covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or
  addeth thereto.

After the preceding, well-taken argument, Paul offers another based on
the similarity between a man's testament and God's testament. A man's
testament seems too weak a premise for the Apostle to argue from in
confirmation of so important a matter as justification. We ought to
prove earthly things by heavenly things, and not heavenly things by
earthly things. But where the earthly thing is an ordinance of God
we may use it to prove divine matters. In Matthew 7:11 Christ Himself
argued from earthly to heavenly things when He said: "If ye then, being
evil, know how to give good gifts to your children; how much more shall
your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?"

To come to Paul's argument. Civil law, which is God's ordinance,
prohibits tampering with any testament of man. Any person's last will
and testament must be respected. Paul asks: "Why is it that man's last
will is scrupulously respected and not God's testament? You would not
think of breaking faith with a man's testament. Why do you not keep
faith with God's testament?"

The Apostle says that he is speaking after the manner of men. He means
to say: "I will give you an illustration from the customs of men. If
a man's last will is respected, and it is, how much more ought the
testament of God be honored: 'In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed.' When Christ died, this testament was sealed by His
blood. After His death the testament was opened, it was published to the
nations. No man ought to alter God's testament as the false apostles do
who substitute the Law and traditions of men for the testament of God."

As the false prophets tampered with God's testament in the days of Paul,
so many do in our day. They will observe human laws punctiliously, but
the laws of God they transgress without the flicker of an eyelid. But
the time will come when they will find out that it is no joke to pervert
the testament of God.


  VERSE 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He
  saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed,
  which is Christ.

The word testament is another name for the promise that God made unto
Abraham concerning Christ. A testament is not a law, but an inheritance.
Heirs do not look for laws and assessments when they open a last will;
they look for grants and favors. The testament which God made out to
Abraham did not contain laws. It contained promises of great spiritual
blessings.

The promises were made in view of Christ, in one seed, not in many
seeds. The Jews will not accept this interpretation. They insist
that the singular "seed" is put for the plural "seeds." We prefer the
interpretation of Paul, who makes a fine case for Christ and for us out
of the singular "seed," and is after all inspired to do so by the Holy
Ghost.


