founded by I-Hsuan,[810] who resided on the banks of a river[811] in
Chih-li and died in 867. It is not easy to discriminate the special
doctrines[812] of the Lin-Chi for it became the dominant form of the
school to such an extent that other variants are little more than
names. But it appears to have insisted on the transmission of
spiritual truths not only by oral instruction but by a species of
telepathy between teacher and pupil culminating in sudden
illumination. At the present day the majority of Chinese monasteries
profess to belong to the Ch'an-tsung and it has encroached on other
schools. Thus it is now accepted on the sacred island of P'uto which
originally followed the Lu-tsung.

Although the Ch'an school did not value the study of scripture as part
of the spiritual life, yet it by no means neglected letters and can
point to a goodly array of ecclesiastical authors, extending down
to modern times.[813] More than twenty of their treatises have been
admitted into the Tripitaka. Several of these are historical and
discuss the succession of Patriarchs and abbots, but the most
characteristic productions of the sect are collections of aphorisms,
usually compiled by the disciples of a teacher who himself committed
nothing to writing.[814]

In opposition to the Contemplative School or Tsung-men, all the others
are sometimes classed together as Chiao-men. This dichotomy perhaps
does no more than justice to the importance of Bodhidharma's school,
but is hardly scientific, for, whatever may be the numerical
proportion, the other schools differ from one another as much as they
differ from it. They all agree in recognizing the authority not only
of a founder but of a special sacred book. We may treat first of one
which, like the Tsung-men, belongs specially to the Buddhism of the
Far East and is both an offshoot of the Tsung-men and a protest
against it--there being nothing incompatible in this double
relationship. This is the T'ien-t'ai[815] school which takes its name
from a celebrated monastery in the province of Che-kiang. The founder
of this establishment and of the sect was called Chih-K'ai or
Chih-I[816] and followed originally Bodhidharma's teaching, but
ultimately rejected the view that contemplation is all-sufficient,
while still claiming to derive his doctrine from Nagarjuna. He had a
special veneration for the Lotus Sutra and paid attention to
ceremonial. He held that although the Buddha-mind is present in all
living beings, yet they do not of themselves come to the knowledge and
use of it, so that instruction is necessary to remove error and
establish true ideas. The phrase Chih-kuan[817] is almost the motto of
the school: it is a translation of the two words Samatha and
Vipassana, taken to mean calm and insight.

The T'ien-T'ai is distinguished by its many-sided and almost
encyclopaedic character. Chih-I did not like the exclusiveness of the
Contemplative School. He approved impartially of ecstasy, literature,
ceremonial and discipline: he wished to find a place for everything
and a point of view from which every doctrine might be admitted to
have some value. Thus he divided the teaching of the Buddha into five
periods, regarded as progressive not contradictory, and expounded
respectively in (_a_) the Hua-yen Sutra; (_b_) the Hinayana Sutras;
(_c_) the Leng-yen-ching; (_d_) the Prajna-paramita; (_e_) the Lotus
Sutra which is the crown, quintessence and plenitude of all Buddhism.
He also divided religion into eight parts,[818] sometimes counted as
four, the latter half of the list being the more important. The names
are collection, progress, distinction and completion. These terms
indicate different ways of looking at religion, all legitimate but not
equally comprehensive or just in perspective. By collection is meant
the Hinayana, the name being apparently due to the variously
catalogued phenomena which occupy the disciple in the early stages of
his progress: the scriptures, divisions of the universe, states of the
human minds and so on. Progress (T'ung, which might also be rendered
as transition or communication) is applicable to the Hina and Mahayana
alike and regards the religious life as a series of stages rising from
the state of an unconverted man to that of a Buddha. Pieh, or
distinction, is applicable only to the Mahayana and means the special
excellences of a Bodhisattva. Yuan, completeness or plenitude, is the
doctrine of the Lotus which embraces all aspects of religion. In a
similar spirit of synthesis and conciliation Chih-I uses Nagarjuna's
view that truth is not of one kind. From the stand-point of absolute
truth all phenomena are void or unreal; on the other hand they are
indubitably real for practical purposes. More just is the middle view
which builds up the religious character. It sees that all phenomena
both exist and do not exist and that thought cannot content itself
with the hypothesis either of their real existence or of the void.
Chih-I's teaching as to the nature of the Buddha is almost
theistic. It regards the fundamental (pen) Buddhahood as not merely
the highest reality but as constant activity exerting itself for the
good of all beings. Distinguished from this fundamental Buddhahood is
the derivative Buddhahood or trace (chi) left by the Buddha among men
to educate them. There has been considerable discussion in the school
as to the relative excellence of the _pen_ and the _chi_.[819]

The T'ien-T'ai school is important, not merely for its doctrines, but
as having produced a great monastic establishment and an illustrious
line of writers. In spite of the orders of the Emperor who wished to
retain him at Nanking, Chih-I retired to the highlands of Che-Kiang
and twelve monasteries still mark various spots where he is said to
have resided. He had some repute as an author, but more as a preacher.
His words were recorded by his disciple Kuan-Ting[820] and in this way
have been preserved two expositions of the Lotus and a treatise on his
favourite doctrine of Chih-Kuan which together are termed the
San-ta-pu, or Three Great Books. Similar spoken expositions of other
sutras are also preserved. Some smaller treatises on his chief
doctrines seem to be works of his own pen.[821] A century later
Chan-Jan,[822] who is reckoned the ninth Patriarch of the T'ien-t'ai
school, composed commentaries on the Three Great Books as well as some
short original works. During the troubled period of the Five
Dynasties, the T'ien-t'ai monasteries suffered severely and the sacred
books were almost lost. But the school had a branch in Korea and a
Korean priest called Ti-Kuan[823] re-established it in China. It
continued to contribute literature to the Tripitaka until 1270 but
after the tenth century its works, though numerous, lose their
distinctive character and are largely concerned with magical formulae
and the worship of Amida.

The latter is the special teaching of the Pure Land school, also
known as the Lotus school, or the Short Cut.[824] It is indeed a
short cut to salvation, striking unceremoniously across all systems,
for it teaches that simple faith in Amitabha (Amida) and invocation of
his name can take the place of moral and intellectual endeavour. Its
popularity is in proportion to its facility: its origin is ancient,
its influence universal, but perhaps for this very reason its
existence as a corporation is somewhat indistinct. It is also
remarkable that though the Chinese Tripitaka contains numerous works
dedicated to the honour of Amitabha, yet they are not described as
composed by members of the Pure Land school but appear to be due to
authors of all schools.[825]

The doctrine, if not the school, was known in China before 186, in
which year there died at Lo-yang, a monk of the Yueh-chih called
Lokakshi, who translated the longer Sukhavati-vyuha. So far as I know,
there is no reason for doubting these statements.[826] The date is
important for the history of doctrine, since it indicates that the
sutra existed in Sanskrit some time previously. Another translation by
the Parthian An Shih-Kao, whose activity falls between 148 and 170
A.D. may have been earlier and altogether twelve translations were
made before 1000 A.D. of which five are extant.[827] Several of the
earlier translators were natives of Central Asia, so it is permissible
to suppose that the sutra was esteemed there. The shorter
Sukhavati-vyuha was translated by Kumarajiva (_c._ 402) and later by
Hsuan Chuang. The Amitayurdhyanasutra was translated by Kalayasas
about 424. These three books[828] are the principal scriptures of the
school and copies of the greater Sukhavati may still be found in
almost every Chinese monastery, whatever principles it professes.

Hui Yuan[829] who lived from 333 to 416 is considered as the founder
of the school. He was in his youth an enthusiastic Taoist and
after he turned Buddhist is said to have used the writings of
Chuang-tzu to elucidate his new faith. He founded a brotherhood,
and near the monastery where he settled was a pond in which lotus
flowers grew, hence the brotherhood was known as the White Lotus
school.[830] For several centuries[831] it enjoyed general esteem.
Pan-chou, one of its Patriarchs, received the title of Kuo-shih about
770 A.D., and Shan-tao, who nourished about 650 and wrote
commentaries, was one of its principal literary men.[832] He
popularized the doctrine of the Pai-tao or White Way, that is, the
narrow bridge leading to Paradise across which Amitabha will guide the
souls of the faithful. But somehow the name of White Lotus became
connected with conspiracy and rebellion until it was dreaded as the
title of a formidable secret society, and ceased to be applied to the
school as a whole. The teaching and canonical literature of the Pure
Land school did not fall into disrepute but since it was admitted by
other sects to be, if not the most excellent way, at least a
permissible short cut to heaven, it appears in modern times less as a
separate school than as an aspect of most schools.[833] The simple and
emotional character of Amidism, the directness of its "Come unto me,"
appeal so strongly to the poor and uneducated, that no monastery or
temple could afford to neglect it.

Two important Indian schools were introduced into China in the sixth and
seventh centuries respectively and flourished until about 900 A.D. when
they began to decay. These are the Chu-she-tsung and Fa-hsiang-tsung.[834]
The first name is merely a Chinese transcription of the Sanskrit Ko'sa and
is due to the fact that the chief authority of the school is the
Abhidharmakosasastra of Vasubandhu.[835] This work expounds the doctrine
of the Sarvastivadins, but in a liberal spirit and without ignoring other
views. Though the Chu-she-tsung represented the best scholastic tradition
of India more adequately than any other Chinese sect, yet it was too
technical and arid to become popular and both in China and Japan (where it
is known as Kusha-shu) it was a system of scholastic philosophy rather than
a form of religion. In China it did not last many centuries.

The Fa-Hsiang school is similar inasmuch as it represented Indian
scholasticism and remained, though much esteemed, somewhat academic.
The name is a translation of Dharmalakshana and the school is also
known as Tz'u-en-tsung,[836] and also as Wei-shih-hsiang-chiao
because its principal text-book is the Ch'eng-wei-shih-lun.[837] This
name, equivalent to Vidyamatra, or Vijnanamatra, is the title of a
work by Hsuan Chuang which appears to be a digest of ten Sanskrit
commentaries on a little tract of thirty verses ascribed to
Vasubandhu. As ultimate authorities the school also recognizes the
revelations made to Asanga by Maitreya[838] and probably the
Mahayanasutralankara[839] expresses its views. It claims as its
founder Silabhadra the teacher of Hsuan Chuang, but the latter was
its real parent.

Closely allied to it but reckoned as distinct is the school called the
Hua-yen-tsung[840] because it was based on the Hua-yen-ching or
Avatamsakasutra. The doctrines of this work and of Nagarjuna may be
conveniently if not quite correctly contrasted as pantheistic and
nihilistic. The real founder and first patriarch was Tu-Fa-Shun who
died in 640 but the school sometimes bears the name of Hsien-Shou, the
posthumous title of its third Patriarch who contributed seven works to
the Tripitaka.[841] It began to wane in the tenth century but has
a distinguished literary record.

The Lu-tsung or Vinaya school[842] was founded by Tao Hsuan (595-667).
It differs from those already mentioned inasmuch as it emphasizes
discipline and asceticism as the essential part of the religious life.
Like the T'ien-t'ai this school arose in China. It bases itself on
Indian authorities, but it does not appear that in thus laying stress
on the Vinaya it imitated any Indian sect, although it caught the
spirit of the early Hinayana schools. The numerous works of the
founder indicate a practical temperament inclined not to mysticism or
doctrinal subtlety but to biography, literary history and church
government. Thus he continued the series called Memoirs of Eminent
Monks and wrote on the family and country of the Buddha. He compiled a
catalogue of the Tripitaka, as it was in his time, and collections of
extracts, as well as of documents relating to the controversies
between Buddhists and Taoists.[843] Although he took as his chief
authority the Dharmagupta Vinaya commonly known as the Code in Four
Sections, he held, like most Chinese Buddhists, that there is a
complete and perfect doctrine which includes and transcends all the
vehicles. But he insisted, probably as a protest against the laxity or
extravagance of many monasteries, that morality and discipline are the
indispensable foundation of the religious life. He was highly esteemed
by his contemporaries and long after his death the Emperor Mu-tsung
(821-5) wrote a poem in his honour. The school is still respected and
it is said that the monks of its principal monastery, Pao-hua-shan in
Kiangsu, are stricter and more learned than any other.

The school called Chen-yen (in Japanese Shin-gon), true word, or
Mi-chiao,[844] secret teaching, equivalent to the Sanskrit Mantrayana
or Tantrayana, is the latest among the recognized divisions of Chinese
Buddhism since it first made its appearance in the eighth century. The
date, like that of the translation of the Amida scriptures is
important, for the school was introduced from India and it follows
that its theories and practices were openly advocated at this period
and probably were not of repute much earlier. It is akin to the
Buddhism of Tibet and may be described in its higher aspects as an
elaborate and symbolic pantheism, which represents the one spirit
manifesting himself in a series of emanations and reflexes. In its
popular and unfortunately commoner aspect it is simply polytheism,
fetichism and magic. In many respects it resembles the Pure Land
school. Its principal deity (the word is not inaccurate) is Vairocana,
analogous to Amitabha, and probably like him a Persian sun god in
origin. It is also a short cut to salvation, for, without denying the
efficiency of more laborious and ascetic methods, it promises to its
followers a similar result by means of formulae and ceremonies. Like
the Pure Land school it has become in China not so much a separate
corporation as an aspect, and often the most obvious and popular
aspect, of all Buddhist schools.

It claims Vajrabodhi as its first Patriarch. He was a monk of the
Brahman caste who arrived in China from southern India[845] in 719 and
died in 730 after translating several Tantras and spells. His
companion and successor was Amoghavajra of whose career something has
already been said. The fourth Patriarch, Hui Kuo, was the instructor
of the celebrated Japanese monk Kobo Daishi who established the school
in Japan under the name of Shingon.[846]

The principal scripture of this sect is the Ta-jih-ching or sutra of
the Sun-Buddha.[847] A distinction is drawn between exoteric and
esoteric doctrine (the "true word") and the various phases of Buddhist
thought are arranged in ten classes. Of these the first nine are
merely preparatory, but in the last or esoteric phase, the adept
becomes a living Buddha and receives full intuitive knowledge. In this
respect the Tantric school resembles the teaching of Bodhidharma but
not in detail. It teaches that Vairocana is the whole world, which is
divided into Garbhadhatu (material) and Vajradhatu (indestructible),
the two together forming Dharmadhatu. The manifestations of
Vairocana's body to himself--that is Buddhas and Bodhisattvas--are
represented symbolically by diagrams of several circles.[848] But it
would be out of place to dwell further on the dogmatic theology of the
school, for I cannot discover that it was ever of importance in China
whatever may have been its influence in Japan. What appealed only too
powerfully to Chinese superstition was the use of spells, charms and
magical formulae and the doctrine that since the universe is merely
idea, thoughts and facts are equipollent. This doctrine (which need
not be the outcome of metaphysics, but underlies the magical practices
of many savage tribes) produced surprising results when applied to
funeral ceremonies, which in China have always formed the major part
of religion, for it was held that ceremonial can represent and control
the fortunes of the soul, that is to say that if a ceremony represents
figuratively the rescue of a soul from a pool of blood, then the soul
which is undergoing that punishment will be delivered. It was not
until the latter part of the eighth century that such theories and
ceremonies were accepted by Chinese Buddhism, but they now form a
large part of it.

Although in Japan Buddhism continued to produce new schools until the
thirteenth century, no movement in China attained this status after
about 730, and Lamaism, though its introduction produced considerable
changes in the north, is not usually reckoned as a Tsung. But numerous
societies and brotherhoods arose especially in connection with the
Pure Land school and are commonly spoken of as sects. They differ from
the schools mentioned above in having more or less the character of
secret societies, sometimes merely brotherhoods like the Freemasons
but sometimes political in their aims. Among those whose tenets are
known that which has most religion and least politics in its
composition appears to be the Wu-wei-chiao,[849] founded about 1620 by
one Lo-tsu[850] who claimed to have received a revelation contained in
five books. It is strictly vegetarian and antiritualistic,
objecting to the use of images, incense and candles in worship.

There are many other sects with a political tinge. The proclivity of the
Chinese to guilds, corporations and secret societies is well known and
many of these latter have a religious basis. All such bodies are under
the ban of the Government, for they have always been suspected with more
or less justice of favouring anti-social or anti-dynastic ideas. But,
mingled with such political aspirations, there is often present the
desire for co-operation in leading privately a religious life which, if
made public, would be hampered by official restrictions. The most
celebrated of these sects is the White Lotus. Under the Yuan dynasty it
was anti-Mongol, and prepared the way for the advent of the Ming. When
the Ming dynasty in its turn became decadent, we hear again of the White
Lotus coupled with rebellion, and similarly after the Manchus had passed
their meridian, its beautiful but ill-omened name frequently appears. It
seems clear that it is an ancient and persistent society with some idea
of creating a millennium, which becomes active when the central
government is weak and corrupt. Not unlike the White Lotus is the secret
society commonly known as the Triad but called by its members the Heaven
and Earth Association. The T'ai-p'ing sect, out of which the celebrated
rebellion arose, was similar but its inspiration seems to have come from
a perversion of Christianity. The Tsai-Li sect[851] is still prevalent in
Peking, Tientsin, and the province of Shantung. I should exceed the scope
of my task if I attempted to examine these sects in detail,[852] for
their relation to Buddhism is often doubtful. Most of them combine with
it Taoist and other beliefs and some of them expect a Messiah or King of
Righteousness who is usually identified with Maitreya. It is easy to see
how at this point hostility to the existing Government arises and
provokes not unnatural resentment.[853]

Recently several attempts have been made to infuse life and order
into Chinese Buddhism. Japanese influence can be traced in most of
them and though they can hardly be said to represent a new school,
they attempt to go back to Mahayanism as it was when first introduced
into China. The Hinayana is considered as a necessary preliminary to
the Mahayana and the latter is treated as existing in several schools,
among which are included the Pure Land school, though the
Contemplative and Tantric schools seem not to be regarded with favour.
They are probably mistrusted as leading to negligence and
superstition.[854]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 790: [Chinese: ] See especially Hackmann, "Die Schulen
des chinesischen Buddhismus" (in the _Mitth. Seminars fur
Orientalische Sprachen_, Berlin, 1911), which contains the text and
translation of an Essay by a modern Chinese Buddhist, Yang Wen Hui.
Such a review of Chinese sects from the contemporary Buddhist point of
view has great value, but it does not seem to me that Mr. Yang explains
clearly the dogmatic tenets of each sect, the obvious inference being
that such tenets are of little practical importance. Chinese
monasteries often seem to combine several schools. Thus the
Tz'u-Fu-Ssu monastery near Peking professes to belong both to
the Lin-Chi and Pure Land schools and its teachers expound the
Diamond-cutter, Lotus and Shou-Leng-Ching. So also in India. See Rhys
Davids in article Sects Buddhist, _E.R.E._ Hackmann gives a list of
authorities. Edkins, _Chinese Buddhism_ (chaps. VII and VIII), may
still be consulted, though the account is far from clear.]

[Footnote 791: [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 792: It based itself on the Satyasiddhisastra of
Harivarman, Nanjio, Cat. 1274.]

[Footnote 793: This meditation however is of a special sort. The six
Paramitas are, Dana, Sila, Kshanti, Virya, Dhyana and Prajna. The
meditation of Bodhidharma is not the Dhyana of this list, but
meditation on Prajna, the highest of the Paramitas. See Hackmann's
Chinese text, p. 249.]

[Footnote 794: Ta-mo-hsue-mai-lun, analyzed by Wieger in his _Histoire
des Croyances religieuses en Chine_, pp. 520 ff. I could wish for more
information about this work, but have not been able to find the
original.]

[Footnote 795: Also called Fa-shen or dharmakaya in the discourse.
Bodhidharma said that he preached the _seal of the heart_ (hsinyin).
This probably corresponds to some Sanskrit expression, but I have not
found the Indian equivalent.]

[Footnote 796: I-Ching, in his _Memoirs of Eminent Monks_, mentions
three pilgrims as having studied the works of Chuang-tzu and his
own style shows that he was well-read in this author.]

[Footnote 797: He is not mentioned by Taranatha.]

[Footnote 798: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 799: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 800: Acariyaparampara. There is a list of such teachers in
Mahavamsa, V. 95 ff., Dipavamsa, IV. 27 ff. and V. 69.]

[Footnote 801: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 802: The succession of Patriarchs is the subject of several works
comprised in the Chinese Tripitaka. Of these the Fu-fa-tsang-yin-yuan-ching
(Nanjio, 1340) is the most important, because it professes to be translated
(A.D. 472) from an Indian work, which, however, is not in the Tibetan Canon
and is not known in Sanskrit. The Chinese text, as we have it, is probably
not a translation from the Sanskrit, but a compilation made in the sixth
century which, however, acquired considerable authority. See Maspero in
_Melanges d'Indianisme_: Sylvain Levi, pp. 129-149, and _B.E.F.E.O._1911,
pp. 344-348. Other works are the Fo-tsu-t'ung-chi (Nanjio, 1661), of Chih
P'an (_c._ 1270), belonging to the T'ien-t'ai school, and the
Ching-te-ch'uan-teng-lu together with the Tsung-men-t'ung-yao-hsu-chi
(Nanjio, 1524, 1526) both belonging to the school of Bodhidharma. See also
Nanjio, 1528, 1529. The common list of Patriarchs is as follows: 1.
Mahakasyapa; 2. Ananda; 3. Sanavasa or Sanakavasa; 4. Upagupta; 5.
Dhritaka; 6. Micchaka. Here the name of Vasumitra is inserted by some but
omitted by others; 7. Buddhanandi; 8. Buddhamitra; 9. Parsva; 10.
Punyayasas; 11. Asvaghosha; 12. Kapimala; 13. Nagarjuna; 14. Deva
(Kanadeva); 15. Rahulata; 16. Sanghanandi; 17. Sanghayasas; 18. Kumarata;
19. Jayata; 20. Vasubandhu; 21. Manura; 22. Haklena or Padmaratna; 23.
Simha Bhikshu; 24. Basiasita; 25. Putnomita or Punyamitra; 26. Prajnatara;
27 (or 28, if Vasumitra is reckoned) Bodhidharma. Many of these names are
odd and are only conjectural restorations made from the Chinese
transcription, for which see Nanjio, 1340. Other lists of Patriarchs vary
from that given above, partly because they represent the traditions of
other schools. It is not strange, for instance, if the Sarvastivadins did
not recognize Nagarjuna as a Patriarch. Two of their lists have been
preserved by Seng-yu (Nanjio, 1476) who wrote about 520. Some notes on the
Patriarchs and reproductions of Chinese pictures representing them will be
found in Dore, pp. 244 ff. It is extremely curious that Asvaghosha is
represented as a woman.]

[Footnote 803: It is found, for instance, in the lists of the Jain
Tirthankaras and in some accounts of the Buddhas and of the Avataras
of Vishnu.]

[Footnote 804: See Watters, _Yuan Chwang_, p. 290. But the dates offer
some difficulty, for Mihirakula, the celebrated Hun chieftain, is
usually supposed to have reigned about 510-540 A.D. Taranatha
(Schiefner, p. 95) speaks of a martyr called Malikabuddhi. See, too,
_ib._ p. 306.]

[Footnote 805: It is clear that the school of Valabhi was to some
extent a rival of Nalanda.]

[Footnote 806: For a portrait of Hui-neng see Kokka, No. 297. The
names of Bodhidharma's successors are in Chinese characters [Chinese:
]]

[Footnote 807: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 808: [Chinese: ] Much biographical information respecting
this and other schools will be found in Dore, vols. VII and VIII. But
there is little to record in the way of events or literary and
doctrinal movements.]

[Footnote 809: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 810: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 811: Lin-Chi means coming to the ford. Is this an allusion
to the Pali expression Sotapanno? The name appears in Japanese as
Rinzai. Most educated Chinese monks when asked as to their doctrine
say they belong to the Lin-Chi.]

[Footnote 812: They are generally called the three mysteries (Hsuan)
and the three important points (Yao), but I have not been able to
obtain any clear explanation of what they mean. See Edkins, _Chinese
Buddhism_, p. 164, and Hackmann, _l.c._ p. 250.]

[Footnote 813: Wieger, _Bouddhisme Chinois_, p. 108, states that 230
works belonging to this sect were published under the Manchu dynasty.]

[Footnote 814: See _e.g._ Nanjio, Cat. 1527, 1532.]

[Footnote 815: [Chinese: ] Tendai in Japanese. It is also called in
China [Chinese: ] Fa-hua.]

[Footnote 816: [Chinese: ] Also often spoken of as Chih-che-ta-shih.
[Chinese: ] Officially he is often styled the fourth Patriarch of
the school. See Dore, p. 449.]

[Footnote 817: [Chinese: ] In Pali Buddhism also, especially in
later works, Samatha and Vipassana may be taken as a compendium of the
higher life as they are respectively the results of the two sets of
religious exercises called Adhicitta and Adhipanna. (See Ang. Nik. III
88.)]

[Footnote 818: In Chinese [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ],
[Chinese: ], [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ], [Chinese: ].
Tun, Chien, Pi-mi, Pu-ting, Tsang, T'ung, Pieh, Yuan. See Nanjio,
1568, and for very different explanations of these obscure words.
Edkins, _Chinese Buddhism_, p. 182, and Richard's _New Testament of
Higher Buddhism_, p. 41. Masson-Oursel in _J.A._ 1915, I. p. 305.]

[Footnote 819: [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 820: [Chinese: ] The books are Nanjio, Nos. 1534, 1536,
1538.]

[Footnote 821: Among them is the compendium for beginners called
Hsiao-chih-kuan, (Nanjio, 1540), partly translated in Beal's _Catena_,
pp. 251 ff.]

[Footnote 822: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 823: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 824: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 825: The list of Chinese authors in Nanjio's Catalogue, App.
III, describes many as belonging to the T'ien-t'ai, Avatamsaka or
Dhyana schools, but none as belonging to the Ching-T'u.]

[Footnote 826: For the authorities, see Nanjio, p. 381.]

[Footnote 827: Nanjio, p. 10, note.]

[Footnote 828: They are all translated in _S.B.E._ XLIX. The two
former exist in Sanskrit. The Amitayurdhyana is known only in the
Chinese translation. They are called in Chinese [Chinese: ],
[Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 829: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 830: [Chinese: ] The early history of the school is
related in a work called Lien-she-kao-hsien-ch'uan, said to date from
the Tsin dynasty. See for some account of the early worthies, Dore,
pp. 280 ff. and 457 ff. Their biographies contain many visions and
miracles.]

[Footnote 831: Apparently at least until 1042. See De Groot,
_Sectarianism_, p. 163. The dated inscriptions in the grottoes of
Lung-men indicate that the cult of Amitabha flourished especially from
647 to 715. See Chavannes, _Mission. Archeol._ Tome I, deuxieme
partie, p. 545.]

[Footnote 832: [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 833: See for instance the tract called Hsuan-Fo-P'u
[Chinese: ] and translated by Richard under the title of _A Guide to
Buddhahood_, pp. 97 ff.]

[Footnote 834: [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 835: See Watters, _On Yuan Chwang_, I. 210, and also
Takakusu, _Journal of the Pali Text Soc_. 1905, p. 132.]

[Footnote 836: [Chinese: ] The name refers not to the doctrines of
the school, but to Tz'u-en-tai-shih, a title given to Kuei-chi the
disciple of Hsuan Chuang who was one of its principal teachers and
taught at a monastery called Tz'u-en.]

[Footnote 837: [Chinese: ] See Nanjio, Cat. Nos. 1197 and 1215.]

[Footnote 838: See Watters, _On Yuan Chwang_, I. pp. 355 ff.]

[Footnote 839: Ed. and transl. by Sylvain Levi, 1911.]

[Footnote 840: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 841: His name when alive was Fa-tsang. See Nanjio, Cat. p.
462, and Dore, 450. The Empress Wu patronized him.]

[Footnote 842: [Chinese: ] Also called Nan Shan or Southern mountain
school from a locality in Shensi.]

[Footnote 843: [Chinese: ] Nanjio, Cat. 1493, 1469, 1470, 1120,
1481, 1483, 1484, 1471.]

[Footnote 844: [Chinese: ] or [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 845: From Mo-lai-ye, which seems to mean the extreme south
of India. Dore gives some Chinese legends about him, p. 299.]

[Footnote 846: For an appreciative criticism of the sect as known in
Japan, see Anesaki's _Buddhist Art_, chap. III.]

[Footnote 847: Nanjio, No. 530. Nos. 533, 534 and 1039 are also
important texts of this sect.]

[Footnote 848: In the T'ien-t'ai and Chen-yen schools, and indeed in
Chinese Buddhism generally, Dharma (_Fa_ in Chinese) is regarded as
cosmic law. Buddhas are the visible expression of Dharma. Hence they
are identified with it and the whole process of cosmic evolution is
regarded as the manifestation of Buddhahood.]

[Footnote 849: [Chinese: ] See the account by Edkins, _Chinese
Buddhism_, pp. 271 ff.]

[Footnote 850: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 851: [Chinese: ] See _China Mission Year Book_, 1896, p.
43.]

[Footnote 852: For some account of them, see Stanton, The Triad
Society, White Lotus Society, etc., 1900, reprinted from _China
Review_, vols. XXI, XXII, and De Groot, _Sectarianism and religious
persecution in China_, vol. I. pp. 149-259.]

[Footnote 853: The Republic of China has not changed much from the
ways of the Empire. The Peking newspapers of June 17, 1914, contain a
Presidential Edict stating that "the invention of heretical religions
by ill-disposed persons is strictly prohibited by law," and that
certain religious societies are to be suppressed.]

[Footnote 854: See, for an account of such a reformed sect, O.
Francke, "Ein Buddhistischer Reformversuch in China," _T'oung Pao_,
1909, p. 567.]




CHAPTER XLVI

CHINA _(continued)_

CHINESE BUDDHISM AT THE PRESENT DAY


The Buddhism treated of in this chapter does not include Lamaism,
which being identical with the religion of Tibet and Mongolia is more
conveniently described elsewhere. Ordinary Chinese Buddhism and
Lamaism are distinct, but are divided not so much by doctrine as by
the race, language and usages of the priests. Chinese Buddhism has
acquired some local colour, but it is still based on the teaching and
practice imported from India before the Yuan dynasty, whereas Lamaist
tradition is not direct: it represents Buddhism as received not from
India but from Tibet. Some holy places, such as P'uto and Wu-t'ai-shan
are frequented by both Lamas and Chinese monks, and Tibetan prayers
and images may sometimes be seen in Chinese temples, but as a rule the
two divisions do not coalesce.

Chinese Buddhism has a physiognomy and language of its own. The
Paraphrase of the Sacred Edict in a criticism, which, though
unfriendly, is not altogether inaccurate, says that Buddhists attend
only to the heart, claim that Buddha can be found in the heart, and
aim at becoming Buddhas. This sounds strange to those who are
acquainted only with the Buddhism of Ceylon and Burma, but is
intelligible as a popular statement of Bodhidharma's doctrine.
Heart[855] means the spiritual nature of man, essentially identical
with the Buddha nature and capable of purification and growth so that
all beings can become Buddhas. But in the Far East the doctrine became
less pantheistic and more ethical than the corresponding Indian ideas.
The Buddha in the heart is the internal light and monitor rather than
the universal spirit. Amida, Kuan-yin and Ti-tsang with other radiant
and benevolent spirits have risen from humanity and will help man to
rise as they have done. Chinese Buddhists do not regard Amida's vows
as an isolated achievement. All Boddhisattvas have done the same
and carried out their resolution in countless existences. Like the
Madonna these gracious figures appeal directly to the emotions and
artistic senses and their divinity offers no difficulty, for in China
Church and State alike have always recognized deification as a natural
process. One other characteristic of all Far Eastern Buddhism may be
noticed. The Buddha is supposed to have preached many creeds and codes
at different periods of his life and each school supposes its own to
be the last, best and all inclusive.

As indicated elsewhere, the essential part of the Buddhist Church is
the monkhood and it is often hard to say if a Chinese layman is a
Buddhist or not. It will therefore be best to describe briefly the
organization and life of a monastery, then the services performed
there and to some extent attended by the laity, and thirdly the rites
performed by monks on behalf of the laity, especially funeral
ceremonies.

The Chinese Tripitaka contains no less than five recensions of the
Vinaya, and the later pilgrims who visited India made it their special
object to obtain copies of the most correct and approved code. But
though the theoretical value of these codes is still admitted, they
have for practical purposes been supplemented by other manuals of
which the best known are the Fan-wang-ching or Net of Brahma[856] and
the Pai-chang-ts'ung-lin-ch'ing-kuei or Rules of Purity of the
Monasteries of Pai Chang.

The former is said to have been translated in A.D. 406 by Kumarajiva
and to be one chapter of a larger Sanskrit work. Some passages of it,
particularly the condemnation of legislation which forbids or imposes
conditions on the practice of Buddhism,[857] read as if they had been
composed in China rather than India, and its whole attitude towards
the Hinayanist Vinaya as something inadequate and superseded, can
hardly have been usual in India or China even in the time of I-Ching
(700 A.D.). Nothing is known of the Indian original, but it certainly
was not the Brahmajalasutta of the Pali Canon.[858] Though the
translation is ascribed to so early a date, there is no evidence
that the work carried weight as an authority before the eighth
century. Students of the Vinaya, like I-Ching, ignore it. But when the
scholarly endeavour to discover the most authentic edition of the
Vinaya began to flag, this manual superseded the older treatises.
Whatever external evidence there may be for attributing it to
Kumarajiva, its contents suggest a much later date and there is no
guarantee that a popular manual may not have received additions. The
rules are not numbered consecutively but as 1-10 and 1-48, and it may
be that the first class is older than the second. In many respects it
expounds a late and even degenerate form of Buddhism for it
contemplates not only a temple ritual (including the veneration of
images and sacred books), but also burning the head or limbs as a
religious practice. But it makes no allusion to salvation through
faith in Amitabha and says little about services to be celebrated for
the dead.[859]

Its ethical and disciplinary point of view is dogmatically Mahayanist
and similar to that of the Bodhicaryavatara. The Hinayana is several
times denounced[860] and called heretical, but, setting aside a little
intolerance and superstition, the teaching of this manual is truly
admirable and breathes a spirit of active charity--a desire not only
to do no harm but to help and rescue.

It contains a code of ten primary and forty-eight secondary
commandments, worded as prohibitions, but equivalent to positive
injunctions, inasmuch as they blame the neglect of various active
duties. The ten primary commandments are called Pratimoksha and he who
breaks them is Parajika,[861] that is to say, he _ipso facto_ leaves
the road leading to Buddhahood and is condemned to a long series of
inferior births. They prohibit taking life, theft, unchastity, lying,
trading in alcoholic liquors, evil speaking, boasting, avarice, hatred
and blasphemy. Though infraction of the secondary commandments has
less permanently serious consequence, their observance is
indispensable for all monks. Many of them are amplifications of the
ten major commandments and are directed against indirect and
potential sins, such as the possession of weapons. The Bhikshu may not
eat flesh, drink alcohol, set forests on fire or be connected with any
business injurious to others, such as the slave trade. He is warned
against gossip, sins of the eye, foolish practices such as divination
and even momentary forgetfulness of his high calling and duties. But
it is not sufficient that he should be self-concentrated and without
offence. He must labour for the welfare and salvation of others, and
it is a sin to neglect such duties as instructing the ignorant,
tending the sick, hospitality, saving men or animals from death or
slavery, praying[862] for all in danger, exhorting to repentance,
sympathy with all living things. A number of disciplinary rules
prescribe a similarly high standard for daily monastic life. The monk
must be strenuous and intelligent; he must yield obedience to his
superiors and set a good example to the laity: he must not teach for
money or be selfish in accepting food and gifts. As for creed he is
strictly bidden to follow and preach the Mahayana: it is a sin to
follow or preach the doctrine of the Sravakas[863] or read their books
or not aspire to ultimate Buddhahood. Very remarkable are the
injunctions to burn one's limbs in honour of Buddhas: to show great
respect to copies of the scriptures and to make vows. From another
point of view the first and forty-seventh secondary commandments are
equally remarkable: the first bids officials discharge their duties
with due respect to the Church and the other protests against improper
legislation.

The Fan-wang-ching is the most important and most authoritative
statement of the general principles regulating monastic life in China.
So far as my own observation goes, it is known and respected in all
monasteries. The Pai-chang-ch'ing-kuei[864] deals rather with the
details of organization and ritual and has not the same universal
currency. It received the approval of the Yuan dynasty[865] and is
still accepted as authoritative in many monasteries and gives a
correct account of their general practice. It was composed by a monk
of Kiang-si, who died in 814 A.D. He belonged to the Ch'an school, but
his rules are approved by others. I will not attempt to summarize
them, but they include most points of ritual and discipline mentioned
below. The author indicates the relations which should prevail between
Church and State by opening his work with an account of the ceremonies
to be performed on the Emperor's birthday, and similar occasions.

Large Buddhist temples almost always form part of a monastery, but
smaller shrines, especially in towns, are often served by a single
priest. The many-storeyed towers called pagodas which are a
characteristic beauty of Chinese landscapes, are in their origin
stupas erected over relics but at the present day can hardly be called
temples or religious buildings, for they are not places of worship and
generally owe their construction to the dictates of Feng-shui or
geomancy. Monasteries are usually built outside towns and by
preference on high ground, whence _shan_ or mountain has come to be
the common designation of a convent, whatever its position. The sites
of these establishments show the deep feeling of cultivated Chinese
for nature and their appreciation of the influence of scenery on
temper, an appreciation which connects them spiritually with the
psalms of the monks and nuns preserved in the Pali Canon. The
architecture is not self-assertive. Its aim is not to produce edifices
complete and satisfying in their own proportions but rather to
harmonize buildings with landscape, to adjust courts and pavilions to
the slope of the hillside and diversify the groves of fir and bamboo
with shrines and towers as fantastic and yet as natural as the
mountain boulders. The reader who wishes to know more of them should
consult Johnston's _Buddhist China_, a work which combines in a rare
degree sound knowledge and literary charm.

A monastery[866] is usually a quadrangle surrounded by a wall.
Before the great gate, which faces south, or in the first court is
a tank, spanned by a bridge, wherein grows the red lotus and tame fish
await doles of biscuit. The sides of the quadrangle contain dwelling
rooms, refectories, guest chambers, store houses, a library, printing
press and other premises suitable to a learned and pious foundation.
The interior space is divided into two or three courts, bordered by a
veranda. In each court is a hall of worship or temple, containing a
shelf or alcove on which are set the sacred images: in front of them
stands a table, usually of massive wood, bearing vases of flowers,
bowls for incense sticks and other vessels. The first temple is called
the Hall of the Four Great Kings and the figures in it represent
beings who are still in the world of transmigration and have not yet
attained Buddhahood. They include gigantic images of the Four Kings,
Maitreya, the Buddha designate of the future, and Wei-to,[867] a
military Bodhisattva sometimes identified with Indra. Kuan-ti, the
Chinese God of War, is often represented in this building. The chief
temple, called the Precious Hall of the Great Hero,[868] is in the
second court and contains the principal images. Very commonly there
are nine figures on either side representing eighteen disciples of the
Buddha and known as the Eighteen Lohan or Arhats.[869] Above the altar
are one or more large gilt images. When there is only one it is
usually Sakya-muni, but more often there are three. Such triads are
variously composed and the monks often speak of them vaguely as the
"three precious ones," without seeming to attach much importance to
their identity.[870] The triad is loosely connected with the idea of
the three bodies of Buddha but this explanation does not always apply
and the central figure is sometimes O-mi-to or Kuan-yin, who are the
principal recipients of the worship offered by the laity. The latter
deity has usually a special shrine at the back of the main altar and
facing the north door of the hall, in which her merciful activity as
the saviour of mankind is represented in a series of statuettes or
reliefs. Other Bodhisattvas such as Ta-shih-chi (Mahasthamaprapta) and
Ti-tsang also have separate shrines in or at the side of the great
hall.[871] The third hall contains as a rule only small images. It is
used for expounding the scriptures and for sermons, if the monastery
has a preacher, but is set apart for the religious exercises of the
monks rather than the devotions of the laity. In very large
monasteries there is a fourth hall for meditation.

Monasteries are of various sizes and the number of monks is not
constant, for the peripatetic habit of early Buddhism is not extinct:
at one time many inmates may be absent on their travels, at
another there may be an influx of strangers. There are also wandering
monks who have ceased to belong to a particular monastery and spend
their time in travelling. A large monastery usually contains from
thirty to fifty monks, but a very large one may have as many as three
hundred. The majority are dedicated by their parents as children, but
some embrace the career from conviction in their maturity and these,
if few, are the more interesting. Children who are brought up to be
monks receive a religious education in the monastery, wear monastic
clothes and have their heads shaved. At the age of about seventeen
they are formally admitted as members of the order and undergo three
ceremonies of ordination, which in their origin represented stages of
the religious life, but are now performed by accumulation in the
course of a few days. One reason for this is that only monasteries
possessing a licence from the Government[872] are allowed to hold
ordinations and that consequently postulants have to go some distance
to be received as full brethren and are anxious to complete the
reception expeditiously. At the first ordination the candidates are
accepted as novices: at the second, which follows a day or two
afterwards and corresponds to the upasampada, they accept the robes
and bowl and promise obedience to the rules of the Pratimoksha. But
these ceremonies are of no importance compared with the third, called
Shou Pu-sa-chieh[873] or acceptance of the Bodhisattva precepts, that
is to say the fifty-eight precepts enunciated in the Fan-wang-ching.
The essential part of this ordination is the burning of the
candidate's head in from three to eighteen places. The operation
involves considerable pain and is performed by lighting pieces of
charcoal set in a paste which is spread over the shaven skull.

Although the Fan-wang-ching does not mention this burning of the head
as part of ordination, yet it emphatically enjoins the practice of
burning the body or limbs, affirming that those who neglect it are not
true Bodhisattvas.[874] The prescription is founded on the
twenty-second chapter of the Lotus[875] which, though a later
addition, is found in the Chinese translation made between 265 and
316 A.D.[876] I-Ching discusses and reprobates such practices. Clearly
they were known in India when he visited it, but not esteemed by the
better Buddhists, and the fact that they form no part of the ordinary
Tibetan ritual indicates that they had no place in the decadent Indian
Buddhism which in various stages of degeneration was introduced into
Tibet.[877] In Korea and Japan branding is practised but on the breast
and arms rather than on the head.

It would appear then that burning and branding as part of initiation
were known in India in the early centuries of our era but not commonly
approved and that their general acceptance in China was subsequent to
the death of I-Ching in A.D. 713.[878] This author clearly approved of
nothing but the double ordination as novice and full monk. The third
ordination as Bodhisattva must be part of the later phase inaugurated
by Amogha about 750.[879]

This practice is defended as a trial of endurance, but the earlier and
better monks were right in rejecting it, for in itself it is an
unedifying spectacle and it points to the logical conclusion that, if
it is meritorious to cauterize the head, it is still more meritorious
to burn the whole body. Cases of suicide by burning appear to have
occurred in recent years, especially in the province of
Che-Kiang.[880] The true doctrine of the Mahayana is that everyone
should strive for the happiness and salvation of all beings, but this
beautiful truth may be sadly perverted if it is held that the
endurance of pain is in itself meritorious and that such acquired
merit can be transferred to others. Self-torture, seems not to be
unknown in the popular forms of Chinese Buddhism.[881]

The postulant, after receiving these three ordinations, becomes a full
monk or Ho-shang[882] and takes a new name. The inmates of every
monastery owe obedience to the abbot and some abbots have an official
position, being recognized by the Government as representing the
clergy of a prefecture, should there be any business to be transacted
with the secular authorities. But there is no real hierarchy outside
the monasteries, each of which is an isolated administrative unit.
Within each monastery due provision is made for discipline and
administration. The monks are divided into two classes, the Western
who are concerned with ritual and other purely religious duties and
the Eastern who are relatively secular and superintend the business of
the establishment.[883] This is often considerable for the income is
usually derived from estates, in managing which the monks are assisted
by a committee of laymen. Other laymen of humbler status[884] live
around the monastery and furnish the labour necessary for agriculture,
forestry and whatever industries the character of the property calls
into being. As a rule there is a considerable library. Even a
sympathetic stranger will often find that the monks deny its
existence, because many books have been destroyed in political
troubles, but most monasteries possess copies of the principal
scriptures and a complete Tripitaka, usually the edition of 1737, is
not rare. Whether the books are much read I do not know, but I have
observed that after the existence of the library has been
admitted, it often proves difficult to find the key. There is also
a printing press, where are prepared notices and prayers, as well as
copies of popular sutras.

The food of the monks is strictly vegetarian, but they do not go round
with the begging bowl nor, except in a few monasteries, is it
forbidden to eat after midday. As a rule there are three meals, the
last about 6 p.m., and all must be eaten in silence. The three
garments prescribed by Indian Buddhism are still worn, but beneath
them are trousers, stockings, and shoes which are necessary in the
Chinese climate. There is no idea that it is wrong to sleep on a bed,
to receive presents or own property.

Two or three services are performed daily in the principal temple,
early in the morning, about 4 p.m., and sometimes in the middle of the
day. A specimen of this ritual may be seen in the service called by
Beal the Liturgy of Kuan Yin.[885] It consists of versicles, responses
and canticles, and, though strangely reminiscent both in structure and
externals (such as the wearing of vestments) of the offices of the
Roman Church,[886] appears to be Indian in origin. I-Ching describes
the choral services which he attended in Nalanda and elsewhere--the
chanting, bowing, processions--and the Chinese ritual is, I think,
only the amplification of these ceremonies. It includes the
presentation of offerings, such as tea, rice and other vegetables. The
Chinese pilgrims testify that in India flowers, lights and incense
were offered to relics and images (as in Christian churches), and the
Bodhicaryavatara,[887] one of the most spiritual of later Mahayanist
works, mentions offerings of food and drink as part of worship. Many
things in Buddhism lent themselves to such a transformation or parody
of earlier teaching. Offerings of food to hungry ghosts were
countenanced, and it was easy to include among the recipients other
spirits. It was meritorious to present food, raiment and property to
living saints: oriental, and especially Chinese, symbolism found
it natural to express the same devotion by offerings made before
images.

In the course of most ceremonies, the monks make vows on behalf of all
beings and take oath to work for their salvation. They are also
expected to deliver and hear sermons and to engage in meditation. Some
of them superintend the education of novices which consists chiefly in
learning to read and repeat religious works. Quite recently elementary
schools for the instruction of the laity have been instituted in some
monasteries.[888]

The regularity of convent life is broken by many festivals. The year
is divided into two periods of wandering, two of meditation and one of
repose corresponding to the old Vassa. Though this division has become
somewhat theoretical, it is usual for monks to set out on excursions
in the spring and autumn. In each month there are six fasts, including
the two uposatha days. On these latter the 250 rules of the
Pratimoksha are recited in a refectory or side hall and subsequently
the fifty-eight rules of the Fan-wang-ching are recited with greater
ceremony in the main temple.

Another class of holy days includes the birthdays[889] not only of
Sakya-muni, but of other Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, the anniversaries
of events in Sakya-muni's life and the deaths of Bodhidharma and other
Saints, among whom the founder or patron of each monastery has a
prominent place. Another important and popular festival is called
Yu-lan-pen or All Souls' day, which is an adaptation of Buddhist
usages to Chinese ancestral worship. Of many other festivals it may be
said that they are purely Chinese but countenanced by Buddhism: such
are the days which mark the changes of the seasons, those sacred to
Kuan-ti and other native deities, and (before the revolution) imperial
birthdays.

The daily services are primarily for the monks, but the laity may
attend them, if they please. More frequently they pay their devotions
at other hours, light a few tapers and too often have recourse to some
form of divination before the images. Sometimes they defray the
cost of more elaborate ceremonies to expiate sins or ensure
prosperity. But the lay attendance in temples is specially large at
seasons of pilgrimage. For an account of this interesting side of
Chinese religious life I cannot do better than refer the reader to Mr.
Johnston's volume already cited.

Though the services of the priesthood may be invoked at every crisis
of life, they are most in requisition for funeral ceremonies. A
detailed description of these as practised at Amoy has been given by
De Groot[890] which is probably true in essentials for all parts of
China. These rites unite in incongruous confusion several orders of
ideas. Pre-Buddhist Chinese notions of the life after death seem not
to have included the idea of hell. The disembodied soul is honoured
and comforted but without any clear definition of its status. Some
representative--a person, figure, or tablet--is thought capable of
giving it a temporary residence and at funeral ceremonies offerings
are made to such a representative and plays performed before it.
Though Buddhist language may be introduced into this ritual, its
spirit is alien to even the most corrupt Buddhism.

Buddhism familiarized China with the idea that the average man stands
in danger of purgatory and this doctrine cannot be described as late
or Mahayanist.[891] Those epithets are, however, merited by the
subsidiary doctrine that such punishment can be abridged by vicarious
acts of worship which may take the form of simple prayer addressed to
benevolent beings who can release the tortured soul. More often the
idea underlying it is that the recitation of certain formulae acquires
merit for the reciter who can then divert this merit to any
purpose.[892] This is really a theological refinement of the ancient
and widespread notion that words have magic force. Equally ancient and
unBuddhist in origin is the theory of sympathetic magic. Just as by
sticking pins into a wax figure you may kill the person represented,
so by imitating physical operations of rescue, you may deliver a soul
from the furnaces and morasses of hell. Thus a paper model of
hades is made which is knocked to pieces and finally burnt: the spirit
is escorted with music and other precautions over a mock bridge, and,
most singular of all, the priests place over a receptacle of water a
special machine consisting of a cylinder containing a revolving
apparatus which might help a creature immersed in the fluid to climb
up. This strange mummery is supposed to release those souls who are
condemned to sojourn in a pool of blood.[893] This, too, is a
superstition countenanced only by Chinese Buddhism, for the punishment
is incurred not so much by sinners as by those dying of illnesses
which defile with blood. Many other rites are based on the notion that
objects--or their paper images--ceremonially burnt are transmitted to
the other world for the use of the dead. Thus representations in paper
of servants, clothes, furniture, money and all manner of things are
burned together with the effigy of the deceased and sometimes also
certificates and passports giving him a clean bill of health for the
Kingdom of Heaven.

As in funeral rites, so in matters of daily life, Buddhism gives its
countenance and help to popular superstition, to every kind of charm
for reading the future, securing happiness and driving away evil
spirits. In its praise may be said that this patronage, though far too
easy going, is not extended to cruel or immoral customs. But the
reader will ask, is there no brighter side? I believe that there is,
but it is not conspicuous and, as in India, public worship and temple
ritual display the lower aspects of religion. But in China a devout
Buddhist is generally a good man and the objects of Buddhist
