________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 57, Art. 3]

Whether the Intellectual Habit, Art, Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that art is not an intellectual virtue.
For Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii, 18, 19) that "no one makes bad
use of virtue." But one may make bad use of art: for a craftsman can
work badly according to the knowledge of his art. Therefore art is
not a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, there is no virtue of a virtue. But "there is a
virtue of art," according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 5).
Therefore art is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, the liberal arts excel the mechanical arts. But just
as the mechanical arts are practical, so the liberal arts are
speculative. Therefore, if art were an intellectual virtue, it would
have to be reckoned among the speculative virtues.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 3, 4) says that art is
a virtue; and yet he does not reckon it among the speculative
virtues, which, according to him, reside in the scientific part of
the soul.

_I answer that,_ Art is nothing else but "the right reason about
certain works to be made." And yet the good of these things depends,
not on man's appetitive faculty being affected in this or that way,
but on the goodness of the work done. For a craftsman, as such, is
commendable, not for the will with which he does a work, but for the
quality of the work. Art, therefore, properly speaking, is an
operative habit. And yet it has something in common with the
speculative habits: since the quality of the object considered by the
latter is a matter of concern to them also, but not how the human
appetite may be affected towards that object. For as long as the
geometrician demonstrates the truth, it matters not how his
appetitive faculty may be affected, whether he be joyful or angry:
even as neither does this matter in a craftsman, as we have observed.
And so art has the nature of a virtue in the same way as the
speculative habits, in so far, to wit, as neither art nor speculative
habit makes a good work as regards the use of the habit, which is the
property of a virtue that perfects the appetite, but only as regards
the aptness to work well.

Reply Obj. 1: When anyone endowed with an art produces bad
workmanship, this is not the work of that art, in fact it is contrary
to the art: even as when a man lies, while knowing the truth, his
words are not in accord with his knowledge, but contrary thereto.
Wherefore, just as science has always a relation to good, as stated
above (A. 2, ad 3), so it is with art: and it is for this reason that
it is called a virtue. And yet it falls short of being a perfect
virtue, because it does not make its possessor to use it well; for
which purpose something further is requisite: although there cannot
be a good use without the art.

Reply Obj. 2: In order that man may make good use of the art he has,
he needs a good will, which is perfected by moral virtue; and for
this reason the Philosopher says that there is a virtue of art;
namely, a moral virtue, in so far as the good use of art requires a
moral virtue. For it is evident that a craftsman is inclined by
justice, which rectifies his will, to do his work faithfully.

Reply Obj. 3: Even in speculative matters there is something by way
of work: e.g. the making of a syllogism or of a fitting speech, or
the work of counting or measuring. Hence whatever habits are ordained
to such like works of the speculative reason, are, by a kind of
comparison, called arts indeed, but "liberal" arts, in order to
distinguish them from those arts that are ordained to works done by
the body, which arts are, in a fashion, servile, inasmuch as the body
is in servile subjection to the soul, and man, as regards his soul,
is free (_liber_). On the other hand, those sciences which are not
ordained to any such like work, are called sciences simply, and not
arts. Nor, if the liberal arts be more excellent, does it follow that
the notion of art is more applicable to them.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 57, Art. 4]

Whether Prudence Is a Distinct Virtue from Art?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is not a distinct virtue
from art. For art is the right reason about certain works. But
diversity of works does not make a habit cease to be an art; since
there are various arts about works widely different. Since therefore
prudence is also right reason about works, it seems that it too
should be reckoned a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, prudence has more in common with art than the
speculative habits have; for they are both "about contingent matters
that may be otherwise than they are" (Ethic. vi, 4, 5). Now some
speculative habits are called arts. Much more, therefore, should
prudence be called an art.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs to prudence, "to be of good counsel"
(Ethic. vi, 5). But counselling takes place in certain arts also, as
stated in _Ethic._ iii, 3, e.g. in the arts of warfare, of
seamanship, and of medicine. Therefore prudence is not distinct from
art.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher distinguishes prudence from art
(Ethic. vi, 5).

_I answer that,_ Where the nature of virtue differs, there is a
different kind of virtue. Now it has been stated above (A. 1; Q. 56,
A. 3) that some habits have the nature of virtue, through merely
conferring aptness for a good work: while some habits are virtues,
not only through conferring aptness for a good work, but also through
conferring the use. But art confers the mere aptness for good work;
since it does not regard the appetite; whereas prudence confers not
only aptness for a good work, but also the use: for it regards the
appetite, since it presupposes the rectitude thereof.

The reason for this difference is that art is the "right reason of
things to be made"; whereas prudence is the "right reason of things
to be done." Now "making" and "doing" differ, as stated in _Metaph._
ix, text. 16, in that "making" is an action passing into outward
matter, e.g. "to build," "to saw," and so forth; whereas "doing" is
an action abiding in the agent, e.g. "to see," "to will," and the
like. Accordingly prudence stands in the same relation to such like
human actions, consisting in the use of powers and habits, as art
does to outward making: since each is the perfect reason about the
things with which it is concerned. But perfection and rectitude of
reason in speculative matters, depend on the principles from which
reason argues; just as we have said above (A. 2, ad 2) that science
depends on and presupposes understanding, which is the habit of
principles. Now in human acts the end is what the principles are in
speculative matters, as stated in _Ethic._ vii, 8. Consequently, it
is requisite for prudence, which is right reason about things to be
done, that man be well disposed with regard to the ends: and this
depends on the rectitude of his appetite. Wherefore, for prudence
there is need of a moral virtue, which rectifies the appetite. On the
other hand the good of things made by art is not the good of man's
appetite, but the good of those things themselves: wherefore art does
not presuppose rectitude of the appetite. The consequence is that
more praise is given to a craftsman who is at fault willingly, than
to one who is unwillingly; whereas it is more contrary to prudence to
sin willingly than unwillingly, since rectitude of the will is
essential to prudence, but not to art. Accordingly it is evident that
prudence is a virtue distinct from art.

Reply Obj. 1: The various kinds of things made by art are all
external to man: hence they do not cause a different kind of virtue.
But prudence is right reason about human acts themselves: hence it is
a distinct kind of virtue, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Prudence has more in common with art than a speculative
habit has, if we consider their subject and matter: for they are both
in the thinking part of the soul, and about things that may be
otherwise than they are. But if we consider them as virtues, then art
has more in common with the speculative habits, as is clear from what
has been said.

Reply Obj. 3: Prudence is of good counsel about matters regarding
man's entire life, and the end of human life. But in some arts there
is counsel about matters concerning the ends proper to those arts.
Hence some men, in so far as they are good counselors in matters of
warfare, or seamanship, are said to be prudent officers or pilots,
but not simply prudent: only those are simply prudent who give good
counsel about all the concerns of life.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 57, Art. 5]

Whether Prudence Is a Virtue Necessary to Man?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is not a virtue necessary to
lead a good life. For as art is to things that are made, of which it
is the right reason, so is prudence to things that are done, in
respect of which we judge of a man's life: for prudence is the right
reason about these things, as stated in _Ethic._ vi, 5. Now art is
not necessary in things that are made, save in order that they be
made, but not after they have been made. Neither, therefore is
prudence necessary to man in order to lead a good life, after he has
become virtuous; but perhaps only in order that he may become
virtuous.

Obj. 2: Further, "It is by prudence that we are of good counsel," as
stated in _Ethic._ vi, 5. But man can act not only from his own, but
also from another's good counsel. Therefore man does not need
prudence in order to lead a good life, but it is enough that he
follow the counsels of prudent men.

Obj. 3: Further, an intellectual virtue is one by which one always
tells the truth, and never a falsehood. But this does not seem to be
the case with prudence: for it is not human never to err in taking
counsel about what is to be done; since human actions are about
things that may be otherwise than they are. Hence it is written (Wis.
9:14): "The thoughts of mortal men are fearful, and our counsels
uncertain." Therefore it seems that prudence should not be reckoned
an intellectual virtue.

_On the contrary,_ It is reckoned with other virtues necessary for
human life, when it is written (Wis. 8:7) of Divine Wisdom: "She
teacheth temperance and prudence and justice and fortitude, which
are such things as men can have nothing more profitable in life."

_I answer that,_ Prudence is a virtue most necessary for human life.
For a good life consists in good deeds. Now in order to do good
deeds, it matters not only what a man does, but also how he does it;
to wit, that he do it from right choice and not merely from impulse
or passion. And, since choice is about things in reference to the
end, rectitude of choice requires two things: namely, the due end,
and something suitably ordained to that due end. Now man is suitably
directed to his due end by a virtue which perfects the soul in the
appetitive part, the object of which is the good and the end. And to
that which is suitably ordained to the due end man needs to be
rightly disposed by a habit in his reason, because counsel and
choice, which are about things ordained to the end, are acts of the
reason. Consequently an intellectual virtue is needed in the reason,
to perfect the reason, and make it suitably affected towards things
ordained to the end; and this virtue is prudence. Consequently
prudence is a virtue necessary to lead a good life.

Reply Obj. 1: The good of an art is to be found, not in the
craftsman, but in the product of the art, since art is right reason
about things to be made: for since the making of a thing passes into
external matter, it is a perfection not of the maker, but of the
thing made, even as movement is the act of the thing moved: and art
is concerned with the making of things. On the other hand, the good
of prudence is in the active principle, whose activity is its
perfection: for prudence is right reason about things to be done, as
stated above (A. 4). Consequently art does not require of the
craftsman that his act be a good act, but that his work be good.
Rather would it be necessary for the thing made to act well (e.g.
that a knife should carve well, or that a saw should cut well), if it
were proper to such things to act, rather than to be acted on,
because they have not dominion over their actions. Wherefore the
craftsman needs art, not that he may live well, but that he may
produce a good work of art, and have it in good keeping: whereas
prudence is necessary to man, that he may lead a good life, and not
merely that he may be a good man.

Reply Obj. 2: When a man does a good deed, not of his own counsel,
but moved by that of another, his deed is not yet quite perfect, as
regards his reason in directing him and his appetite in moving him.
Wherefore, if he do a good deed, he does not do well simply; and yet
this is required in order that he may lead a good life.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated in _Ethic._ vi, 2, truth is not the same for
the practical as for the speculative intellect. Because the truth of
the speculative intellect depends on conformity between the intellect
and the thing. And since the intellect cannot be infallibly in
conformity with things in contingent matters, but only in necessary
matters, therefore no speculative habit about contingent things is an
intellectual virtue, but only such as is about necessary things. On
the other hand, the truth of the practical intellect depends on
conformity with right appetite. This conformity has no place in
necessary matters, which are not affected by the human will; but only
in contingent matters which can be effected by us, whether they be
matters of interior action, or the products of external work. Hence
it is only about contingent matters that an intellectual virtue is
assigned to the practical intellect, viz. art, as regards things to
be made, and prudence, as regards things to be done.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 57, Art. 6]

Whether "Eubulia," "Synesis," and "Gnome" Are Virtues Annexed to
Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that "_eubulia, synesis_, and _gnome_" are
unfittingly assigned as virtues annexed to prudence. For _eubulia_ is
"a habit whereby we take good counsel" (Ethic. vi, 9). Now it
"belongs to prudence to take good counsel," as stated (Ethic. vi, 9).
Therefore _eubulia_ is not a virtue annexed to prudence, but rather
is prudence itself.

Obj. 2: Further, it belongs to the higher to judge the lower. The
highest virtue would therefore seem to be the one whose act is
judgment. Now _synesis_ enables us to judge well. Therefore _synesis_
is not a virtue annexed to prudence, but rather is a principal virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, just as there are various matters to pass judgment
on, so are there different points on which one has to take counsel.
But there is one virtue referring to all matters of counsel.
Therefore, in order to judge well of what has to be done, there is no
need, besides _synesis,_ of the virtue of _gnome_.

Obj. 4: Further, Cicero (De Invent. Rhet. iii) mentions three other
parts of prudence; viz. "memory of the past, understanding of the
present, and foresight of the future." Moreover, Macrobius (Super
Somn. Scip. 1) mentions yet others: viz. "caution, docility," and the
like. Therefore it seems that the above are not the only virtues
annexed to prudence.

_On the contrary,_ stands the authority of the Philosopher (Ethic.
vi, 9, 10, 11), who assigns these three virtues as being annexed to
prudence.

_I answer that,_ Wherever several powers are subordinate to one
another, that power is the highest which is ordained to the highest
act. Now there are three acts of reason in respect of anything done
by man: the first of these is counsel; the second, judgment; the
third, command. The first two correspond to those acts of the
speculative intellect, which are inquiry and judgment, for counsel is
a kind of inquiry: but the third is proper to the practical
intellect, in so far as this is ordained to operation; for reason
does not have to command in things that man cannot do. Now it is
evident that in things done by man, the chief act is that of command,
to which all the rest are subordinate. Consequently, that virtue
which perfects the command, viz. prudence, as obtaining the highest
place, has other secondary virtues annexed to it, viz. _eustochia_,
which perfects counsel; and _synesis_ and _gnome_, which are parts of
prudence in relation to judgment, and of whose distinction we shall
speak further on (ad 3).

Reply Obj. 1: Prudence makes us be of good counsel, not as though its
immediate act consisted in being of good counsel, but because it
perfects the latter act by means of a subordinate virtue, viz.
_euboulia_.

Reply Obj. 2: Judgment about what is to be done is directed to
something further: for it may happen in some matter of action that a
man's judgment is sound, while his execution is wrong. The matter
does not attain to its final complement until the reason has
commanded aright in the point of what has to be done.

Reply Obj. 3: Judgment of anything should be based on that thing's
proper principles. But inquiry does not reach to the proper
principles: because, if we were in possession of these, we should
need no more to inquire, the truth would be already discovered. Hence
only one virtue is directed to being of good counsel, wheres there
are two virtues for good judgment: because difference is based not on
common but on proper principles. Consequently, even in speculative
matters, there is one science of dialectics, which inquires about all
matters; whereas demonstrative sciences, which pronounce judgment,
differ according to their different objects. _Synesis_ and _gnome_
differ in respect of the different rules on which judgment is based:
for _synesis_ judges of actions according to the common law; while
_gnome_ bases its judgment on the natural law, in those cases where
the common law fails to apply, as we shall explain further on (II-II,
Q. 51, A. 4).

Reply Obj. 4: Memory, understanding and foresight, as also caution
and docility and the like, are not virtues distinct from prudence:
but are, as it were, integral parts thereof, in so far as they are
all requisite for perfect prudence. There are, moreover, subjective
parts or species of prudence, e.g. domestic and political economy,
and the like. But the three first names are, in a fashion, potential
parts of prudence; because they are subordinate thereto, as secondary
virtues to a principal virtue: and we shall speak of them later
(II-II, Q. 48, seqq.).
________________________

QUESTION 58

OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MORAL AND INTELLECTUAL VIRTUES
(In Five Articles)

We must now consider moral virtues. We shall speak (1) of the
difference between them and intellectual virtues; (2) of their
distinction, one from another, in respect of their proper matter;
(3) of the difference between the chief or cardinal virtues and
the others.

Under the first head there are five points of inquiry:

(1) Whether every virtue is a moral virtue?

(2) Whether moral virtue differs from intellectual virtue?

(3) Whether virtue is adequately divided into moral and intellectual
virtue?

(4) Whether there can be moral without intellectual virtue?

(5) Whether, on the other hand, there can be intellectual without
moral virtue?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 58, Art. 1]

Whether Every Virtue Is a Moral Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that every virtue is a moral virtue.
Because moral virtue is so called from the Latin _mos,_ i.e. custom.
Now, we can accustom ourselves to the acts of all the virtues.
Therefore every virtue is a moral virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6) that moral
virtue is "a habit of choosing the rational mean." But every virtue
is a habit of choosing: since the acts of any virtue can be done
from choice. And, moreover, every virtue consists in following the
rational mean in some way, as we shall explain further on (Q. 64,
AA. 1, 2, 3). Therefore every virtue is a moral virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, Cicero says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that "virtue is a
habit like a second nature, in accord with reason." But since every
human virtue is directed to man's good, it must be in accord with
reason: since man's good "consists in that which agrees with his
reason," as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). Therefore every virtue
is a moral virtue.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher [says] (Ethic. i, 13): "When we
speak of a man's morals, we do not say that he is wise or
intelligent, but that he is gentle or sober." Accordingly, then,
wisdom and understanding are not moral virtues: and yet they are
virtues, as stated above (Q. 57, A. 2). Therefore not every virtue
is a moral virtue.

_I answer that,_ In order to answer this question clearly, we must
consider the meaning of the Latin word _mos;_ for thus we shall be
able to discover what a _moral_ virtue is. Now _mos_ has a twofold
meaning. For sometimes it means custom, in which sense we read (Acts
15:1): "Except you be circumcised after the manner (_morem_) of
Moses, you cannot be saved." Sometimes it means a natural or
quasi-natural inclination to do some particular action, in which
sense the word is applied to dumb animals. Thus we read (2 Macc. 1:2)
that "rushing violently upon the enemy, like lions [*Leonum more,
i.e. as lions are in the habit of doing], they slew them": and the
word is used in the same sense in Ps. 67:7, where we read: "Who
maketh men of one manner (_moris_) to dwell in a house." For both
these significations there is but one word in Latin; but in the Greek
there is a distinct word for each, for the word _ethos_is written
sometimes with a long, and sometimes a short _e._

Now _moral_ virtue is so called from _mos_ in the sense of a natural
or quasi-natural inclination to do some particular action. And the
other meaning of _mos,_ i.e. _custom,_ is akin to this: because
custom becomes a second nature, and produces an inclination similar
to a natural one. But it is evident that inclination to an action
belongs properly to the appetitive power, whose function it is to
move all the powers to their acts, as explained above (Q. 9, A. 1).
Therefore not every virtue is a moral virtue, but only those that are
in the appetitive faculty.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument takes _mos_ in the sense of _custom._

Reply Obj. 2: Every act of virtue can be done from choice: but no
virtue makes us choose aright, save that which is in the appetitive
part of the soul: for it has been stated above that choice is an act
of the appetitive faculty (Q. 13, A. 1). Wherefore a habit of
choosing, i.e. a habit which is the principle whereby we choose, is
that habit alone which perfects the appetitive faculty: although the
acts of other habits also may be a matter of choice.

Reply Obj. 3: "Nature is the principle of movement" (Phys. ii, text.
3). Now to move the faculties to act is the proper function of the
appetitive power. Consequently to become as a second nature by
consenting to the reason, is proper to those virtues which are in the
appetitive faculty.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 58, Art. 2]

Whether Moral Virtue Differs from Intellectual Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtue does not differ from
intellectual virtue. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei iv, 21) "that
virtue is the art of right conduct." But art is an intellectual
virtue. Therefore moral and intellectual virtue do not differ.

Obj. 2: Further, some authors put science in the definition of
virtues: thus some define perseverance as a "science or habit
regarding those things to which we should hold or not hold"; and
holiness as "a science which makes man to be faithful and to do his
duty to God." Now science is an intellectual virtue. Therefore moral
virtue should not be distinguished from intellectual virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (Soliloq. i, 6) that "virtue is the
rectitude and perfection of reason." But this belongs to the
intellectual virtues, as stated in _Ethic._ vi, 13. Therefore moral
virtue does not differ from intellectual.

Obj. 4: Further, a thing does not differ from that which is included
in its definition. But intellectual virtue is included in the
definition of moral virtue: for the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6)
that "moral virtue is a habit of choosing the mean appointed by
reason as a prudent man would appoint it." Now this right reason that
fixes the mean of moral virtue, belongs to an intellectual virtue, as
stated in _Ethic._ vi, 13. Therefore moral virtue does not differ
from intellectual.

_On the contrary,_ It is stated in _Ethic._ i, 13 that "there are two
kinds of virtue: some we call intellectual; some moral."

_I answer that,_ Reason is the first principle of all human acts; and
whatever other principles of human acts may be found, they obey
reason somewhat, but in various ways. For some obey reason blindly
and without any contradiction whatever: such are the limbs of the
body, provided they be in a healthy condition, for as soon as reason
commands, the hand or the foot proceeds to action. Hence the
Philosopher says (Polit. i, 3) that "the soul rules the body like a
despot," i.e. as a master rules his slave, who has no right to rebel.
Accordingly some held that all the active principles in man are
subordinate to reason in this way. If this were true, for man to act
well it would suffice that his reason be perfect. Consequently, since
virtue is a habit perfecting man in view of his doing good actions,
it would follow that it is only in the reason, so that there would be
none but intellectual virtues. This was the opinion of Socrates, who
said "every virtue is a kind of prudence," as stated in _Ethic._ vi,
13. Hence he maintained that as long as man is in possession of
knowledge, he cannot sin; and that every one who sins, does so
through ignorance.

Now this is based on a false supposition. Because the appetitive
faculty obeys the reason, not blindly, but with a certain power of
opposition; wherefore the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 3) that "reason
commands the appetitive faculty by a politic power," whereby a man
rules over subjects that are free, having a certain right of
opposition. Hence Augustine says on Ps. 118 (Serm. 8) that "sometimes
we understand (what is right) while desire is slow, or follows not at
all," in so far as the habits or passions of the appetitive faculty
cause the use of reason to be impeded in some particular action. And
in this way, there is some truth in the saying of Socrates that so
long as a man is in possession of knowledge he does not sin:
provided, however, that this knowledge is made to include the use of
reason in this individual act of choice.

Accordingly for a man to do a good deed, it is requisite not only
that his reason be well disposed by means of a habit of intellectual
virtue; but also that his appetite be well disposed by means of a
habit of moral virtue. And so moral differs from intellectual virtue,
even as the appetite differs from the reason. Hence just as the
appetite is the principle of human acts, in so far as it partakes of
reason, so are moral habits to be considered virtues in so far as
they are in conformity with reason.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine usually applies the term "art" to any form of
right reason; in which sense art includes prudence which is the right
reason about things to be done, even as art is the right reason about
things to be made. Accordingly, when he says that "virtue is the art
of right conduct," this applies to prudence essentially; but to other
virtues, by participation, for as much as they are directed by
prudence.

Reply Obj. 2: All such definitions, by whomsoever given, were based
on the Socratic theory, and should be explained according to what we
have said about art (ad 1).

The same applies to the Third Objection.

Reply Obj. 4: Right reason which is in accord with prudence is
included in the definition of moral virtue, not as part of its
essence, but as something belonging by way of participation to all
the moral virtues, in so far as they are all under the direction of
prudence.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 58, Art. 3]

Whether Virtue Is Adequately Divided into Moral and Intellectual?

Objection 1: It would seem that virtue is not adequately divided into
moral and intellectual. For prudence seems to be a mean between moral
and intellectual virtue, since it is reckoned among the intellectual
virtues (Ethic. vi, 3, 5); and again is placed by all among the four
cardinal virtues, which are moral virtues, as we shall show further
on (Q. 61, A. 1). Therefore virtue is not adequately divided into
intellectual and moral, as though there were no mean between them.

Obj. 2: Further, continency, perseverance, and patience are not
reckoned to be intellectual virtues. Yet neither are they moral
virtues; since they do not reduce the passions to a mean, and are
consistent with an abundance of passion. Therefore virtue is not
adequately divided into intellectual and moral.

Obj. 3: Further, faith, hope, and charity are virtues. Yet they are
not intellectual virtues: for there are only five of these, viz.
science, wisdom, understanding, prudence, and art, as stated above
(Q. 57, AA. 2, 3, 5). Neither are they moral virtues; since they are
not about the passions, which are the chief concern of moral virtue.
Therefore virtue is not adequately divided into intellectual and
moral.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 1) that "virtue
is twofold, intellectual and moral."

_I answer that,_ Human virtue is a habit perfecting man in view of
his doing good deeds. Now, in man there are but two principles of
human actions, viz. the intellect or reason and the appetite: for
these are the two principles of movement in man as stated in _De
Anima_ iii, text. 48. Consequently every human virtue must needs be a
perfection of one of these principles. Accordingly if it perfects
man's speculative or practical intellect in order that his deed may
be good, it will be an intellectual virtue: whereas if it perfects
his appetite, it will be a moral virtue. It follows therefore that
every human virtue is either intellectual or moral.

Reply Obj. 1: Prudence is essentially an intellectual virtue. But
considered on the part of its matter, it has something in common with
the moral virtues: for it is right reason about things to be done, as
stated above (Q. 57, A. 4). It is in this sense that it is reckoned
with the moral virtues.

Reply Obj. 2: Continency and perseverance are not perfections of the
sensitive appetite. This is clear from the fact that passions abound
in the continent and persevering man, which would not be the case if
his sensitive appetite were perfected by a habit making it
conformable to reason. Continency and perseverance are, however,
perfections of the rational faculty, and withstand the passions lest
reason be led astray. But they fall short of being virtues: since
intellectual virtue, which makes reason to hold itself well in
respect of moral matters, presupposes a right appetite of the end, so
that it may hold itself aright in respect of principles, i.e. the
ends, on which it builds its argument: and this is wanting in the
continent and persevering man. Nor again can an action proceeding
from two principles be perfect, unless each principle be perfected by
the habit corresponding to that operation: thus, however perfect be
the principal agent employing an instrument, it will produce an
imperfect effect, if the instrument be not well disposed also. Hence
if the sensitive faculty, which is moved by the rational faculty, is
not perfect; however perfect the rational faculty may be, the
resulting action will be imperfect: and consequently the principle of
that action will not be a virtue. And for this reason, continency,
desisting from pleasures, and perseverance in the midst of pains, are
not virtues, but something less than a virtue, as the Philosopher
maintains (Ethic. vii, 1, 9).

Reply Obj. 3: Faith, hope, and charity are superhuman virtues: for
they are virtues of man as sharing in the grace of God.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 58, Art. 4]

Whether There Can Be Moral Without Intellectual Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral can be without intellectual
virtue. Because moral virtue, as Cicero says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) is
"a habit like a second nature in accord with reason." Now though
nature may be in accord with some sovereign reason that moves it,
there is no need for that reason to be united to nature in the same
subject, as is evident of natural things devoid of knowledge.
Therefore in a man there may be a moral virtue like a second nature,
inclining him to consent to his reason, without his reason being
perfected by an intellectual virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, by means of intellectual virtue man obtains perfect
use of reason. But it happens at times that men are virtuous and
acceptable to God, without being vigorous in the use of reason.
Therefore it seems that moral virtue can be without intellectual.

Obj. 3: Further moral virtue makes us inclined to do good works. But
some, without depending on the judgment of reason, have a natural
inclination to do good works. Therefore moral virtues can be without
intellectual virtues.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Moral. xxii) that "the other
virtues, unless we do prudently what we desire to do, cannot be real
virtues." But prudence is an intellectual virtue, as stated above (Q.
57, A. 5). Therefore moral virtues cannot be without intellectual
virtues.

_I answer that,_ Moral virtue can be without some of the intellectual
virtues, viz. wisdom, science, and art; but not without understanding
and prudence. Moral virtue cannot be without prudence, because it is
a habit of choosing, i.e. making us choose well. Now in order that a
choice be good, two things are required. First, that the intention be
directed to a due end; and this is done by moral virtue, which
inclines the appetitive faculty to the good that is in accord with
reason, which is a due end. Secondly, that man take rightly those
things which have reference to the end: and this he cannot do unless
his reason counsel, judge and command aright, which is the function
of prudence and the virtues annexed to it, as stated above (Q. 57,
AA. 5, 6). Wherefore there can be no moral virtue without prudence:
and consequently neither can there be without understanding. For it
is by the virtue of understanding that we know self-evident
principles both in speculative and in practical matters. Consequently
just as right reason in speculative matters, in so far as it proceeds
from naturally known principles, presupposes the understanding of
those principles, so also does prudence, which is the right reason
about things to be done.

Reply Obj. 1: The inclination of nature in things devoid of reason is
without choice: wherefore such an inclination does not of necessity
require reason. But the inclination of moral virtue is with choice:
and consequently in order that it may be perfect it requires that
reason be perfected by intellectual virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: A man may be virtuous without having full use of reason
as to everything, provided he have it with regard to those things
which have to be done virtuously. In this way all virtuous men have
full use of reason. Hence those who seem to be simple, through lack
of worldly cunning, may possibly be prudent, according to Matt.
10:16: "Be ye therefore prudent (Douay: 'wise') as serpents, and
simple as doves."

Reply Obj. 3: The natural inclination to a good of virtue is a kind
of beginning of virtue, but is not perfect virtue. For the stronger
this inclination is, the more perilous may it prove to be, unless it
be accompanied by right reason, which rectifies the choice of fitting
means towards the due end. Thus if a running horse be blind, the
faster it runs the more heavily will it fall, and the more grievously
will it be hurt. And consequently, although moral virtue be not right
reason, as Socrates held, yet not only is it "according to right
reason," in so far as it inclines man to that which is, according to
right reason, as the Platonists maintained [*Cf. Plato, Meno xli.];
but also it needs to be "joined with right reason," as Aristotle
declares (Ethic. vi, 13).
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 58, Art. 5]

Whether There Can Be Intellectual Without Moral Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that there can be intellectual without
moral virtue. Because perfection of what precedes does not depend on
the perfection of what follows. Now reason precedes and moves the
sensitive appetite. Therefore intellectual virtue, which is a
perfection of the reason, does not depend on moral virtue, which is a
perfection of the appetitive faculty; and can be without it.

Obj. 2: Further, morals are the matter of prudence, even as things
makeable are the matter of art. Now art can be without its proper
matter, as a smith without iron. Therefore prudence can be without
the moral virtues, although of all the intellectual virtues, it seems
most akin to the moral virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence is "a virtue whereby we are of good
counsel" (Ethic. vi, 9). Now many are of good counsel without having
the moral virtues. Therefore prudence can be without a moral virtue.

_On the contrary,_ To wish to do evil is directly opposed to moral
virtue; and yet it is not opposed to anything that can be without
moral virtue. Now it is contrary to prudence "to sin willingly"
(Ethic. vi, 5). Therefore prudence cannot be without moral virtue.

_I answer that,_ Other intellectual virtues can, but prudence cannot,
be without moral virtue. The reason for this is that prudence is the
right reason about things to be done (and this, not merely in
general, but also in particular); about which things actions are. Now
right reason demands principles from which reason proceeds to argue.
And when reason argues about particular cases, it needs not only
universal but also particular principles. As to universal principles
of action, man is rightly disposed by the natural understanding of
principles, whereby he understands that he should do no evil; or
again by some practical science. But this is not enough in order that
man may reason aright about particular cases. For it happens
sometimes that the aforesaid universal principle, known by means of
understanding or science, is destroyed in a particular case by a
passion: thus to one who is swayed by concupiscence, when he is
overcome thereby, the object of his desire seems good, although it is
opposed to the universal judgment of his reason. Consequently, as by
the habit of natural understanding or of science, man is made to be
rightly disposed in regard to the universal principles of action; so,
in order that he be rightly disposed with regard to the particular
principles of action, viz. the ends, he needs to be perfected by
certain habits, whereby it becomes connatural, as it were, to man to
judge aright to the end. This is done by moral virtue: for the
virtuous man judges aright of the end of virtue, because "such a man
is, such does the end seem to him" (Ethic. iii, 5). Consequently the
right reason about things to be done, viz. prudence, requires man to
have moral virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Reason, as apprehending the end, precedes the appetite
for the end: but appetite for the end precedes the reason, as arguing
about the choice of the means, which is the concern of prudence. Even
so, in speculative matters the understanding of principles is the
foundation on which the syllogism of the reason is based.

Reply Obj. 2: It does not depend on the disposition of our appetite
whether we judge well or ill of the principles of art, as it does,
when we judge of the end which is the principle in moral matters: in
the former case our judgment depends on reason alone. Hence art does
not require a virtue perfecting the appetite, as prudence does.

Reply Obj. 3: Prudence not only helps us to be of good counsel, but
also to judge and command well. This is not possible unless the
impediment of the passions, destroying the judgment and command of
prudence, be removed; and this is done by moral virtue.
________________________

QUESTION 59

OF MORAL VIRTUE IN RELATION TO THE PASSIONS
(In Five Articles)

We must now consider the difference of one moral virtue from another.
And since those moral virtues which are about the passions, differ
accordingly to the difference of passions, we must consider (1) the
relation of virtue to passion; (2) the different kinds of moral
virtue in relation to the passions. Under the first head there are
five points of inquiry:

(1) Whether moral virtue is a passion?

(2) Whether there can be moral virtue with passion?

(3) Whether sorrow is compatible with moral virtue?

(4) Whether every moral virtue is about a passion?

(5) Whether there can be moral virtue without passion?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 59, Art. 1]

Whether Moral Virtue Is a Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtue is a passion. Because
the mean is of the same genus as the extremes. But moral virtue is a
mean between two passions. Therefore moral virtue is a passion.

Obj. 2: Further, virtue and vice, being contrary to one another, are
in the same genus. But some passions are reckoned to be vices, such
as envy and anger. Therefore some passions are virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, pity is a passion, since it is sorrow for another's
ills, as stated above (Q. 35, A. 8). Now "Cicero the renowned orator
did not hesitate to call pity a virtue," as Augustine states in _De
Civ. Dei_ ix, 5. Therefore a passion may be a moral virtue.

_On the contrary,_ It is stated in _Ethic._ ii, 5 that "passions are
neither virtues nor vices."

_I answer that,_ Moral virtue cannot be a passion. This is clear for
three reasons. First, because a passion is a movement of the sensitive
appetite, as stated above (Q. 22, A. 3): whereas moral virtue is not
a movement, but rather a principle of the movement of the appetite,
being a kind of habit. Secondly, because passions are not in
themselves good or evil. For man's good or evil is something in
reference to reason: wherefore the passions, considered in
themselves, are referable both to good and evil, for as much as they
may accord or disaccord with reason. Now nothing of this sort can be
a virtue: since virtue is referable to good alone, as stated above
(Q. 55, A. 3). Thirdly, because, granted that some passions are, in
some way, referable to good only, or to evil only; even then the
movement of passion, as passion, begins in the appetite, and ends in
the reason, since the appetite tends to conformity with reason. On
the other hand, the movement of virtue is the reverse, for it begins
in the reason and ends in the appetite, inasmuch as the latter is
moved by reason. Hence the definition of moral virtue (Ethic. ii, 6)
states that it is "a habit of choosing the mean appointed by reason
as a prudent man would appoint it."

Reply Obj. 1: Virtue is a mean between passions, not by reason of its
essence, but on account of its effect; because, to wit, it
establishes the mean between passions.

Reply Obj. 2: If by vice we understand a habit of doing evil deeds,
it is evident that no passion is a vice. But if vice is taken to mean
sin which is a vicious act, nothing hinders a passion from being a
vice, or, on the other hand, from concurring in an act of virtue; in
so far as a passion is either opposed to reason or in accordance with
reason.

Reply Obj. 3: Pity is said to be a virtue, i.e. an act of virtue, in
so far as "that movement of the soul is obedient to reason"; viz.
"when pity is bestowed without violating right, as when the poor are
relieved, or the penitent forgiven," as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei
ix, 5). But if by pity we understand a habit perfecting man so that
he bestows pity reasonably, nothing hinders pity, in this sense, from
being a virtue. The same applies to similar passions.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 59, Art. 2]

Whether There Can Be Moral Virtue with Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtue cannot be with passion.
For the Philosopher says (Topic. iv) that "a gentle man is one who is
not passionate; but a patient man is one who is passionate but does
not give way." The same applies to all the moral virtues. Therefore
all moral virtues are without passion.

Obj. 2: Further, virtue is a right affection of the soul, as health
is to the body, as stated _Phys._ vii, text. 17: wherefore "virtue is
a kind of health of the soul," as Cicero says (Quaest. Tusc. iv). But
the soul's passions are "the soul's diseases," as he says in the same
book. Now health is incompatible with disease. Therefore neither is
passion compatible with virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, moral virtue requires perfect use of reason even in
particular matters. But the passions are an obstacle to this: for the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "pleasures destroy the judgment
of prudence": and Sallust says (Catilin.) that "when they," i.e. the
soul's passions, "interfere, it is not easy for the mind to grasp the
truth." Therefore passion is incompatible with moral virtue.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 6): "If the will
is perverse, these movements," viz. the passions, "are perverse also:
but if it is upright, they are not only blameless, but even
praiseworthy." But nothing praiseworthy is incompatible with moral
virtue. Therefore moral virtue does not exclude the passions, but is
consistent with them.

_I answer that,_ The Stoics and Peripatetics disagreed on this point,
as Augustine relates (De Civ. Dei ix, 4). For the Stoics held that
the soul's passions cannot be in a wise or virtuous man: whereas the
Peripatetics, who were founded by Aristotle, as Augustine says (De
Civ. Dei ix, 4), maintained that the passions are compatible with
moral virtue, if they be reduced to the mean.

This difference, as Augustine observes (De Civ. Dei ix, 4), was one
of words rather than of opinions. Because the Stoics, through not
discriminating between the intellective appetite, i.e. the will, and
the sensitive appetite, which is divided into irascible and
concupiscible, did not, as the Peripatetics did, distinguish the
passions from the other affections of the human soul, in the point of
their being movements of the sensitive appetite, whereas the other
emotions of the soul, which are not passions, are movements of the
intellective appetite or will; but only in the point of the passions
being, as they maintained, any emotions in disaccord with reason.
These emotions could not be in a wise or virtuous man if they arose
deliberately: while it would be possible for them to be in a wise
man, if they arose suddenly: because, in the words of Aulus Gellius
[*Noct. Attic. xix, 1], quoted by Augustine (De Civ. Dei ix, 4), "it
is not in our power to call up the visions of the soul, known as its
fancies; and when they arise from awesome things, they must needs
disturb the mind of a wise man, so that he is slightly startled by
fear, or depressed with sorrow," in so far as "these passions
forestall the use of reason without his approving of such things or
consenting thereto."

Accordingly, if the passions be taken for inordinate emotions, they
cannot be in a virtuous man, so that he consent to them deliberately;
as the Stoics maintained. But if the passions be taken for any
movements of the sensitive appetite, they can be in a virtuous man,
in so far as they are subordinate to reason. Hence Aristotle says
(Ethic. ii, 3) that "some describe virtue as being a kind of freedom
from passion and disturbance; this is incorrect, because the
assertion should be qualified": they should have said virtue is
freedom from those passions "that are not as they should be as to
manner and time."

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher quotes this, as well as many other
examples in his books on Logic, in order to illustrate, not his own
mind, but that of others. It was the opinion of the Stoics that the
passions of the soul were incompatible with virtue: and the
Philosopher rejects this opinion (Ethic. ii, 3), when he says that
virtue is not freedom from passion. It may be said, however, that
when he says "a gentle man is not passionate," we are to understand
this of inordinate passion.

Reply Obj. 2: This and all similar arguments which Tully brings
forward in _De Tusc. Quaest._ iv take the passions in the execution
of reason's command.

Reply Obj. 3: When a passion forestalls the judgment of reason, so as
to prevail on the mind to give its consent, it hinders counsel and
the judgment of reason. But when it follows that judgment, as through
being commanded by reason, it helps towards the execution of reason's
command.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 59, Art. 3]

Whether Sorrow Is Compatible with Moral Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that sorrow is incompatible with virtue.
Because the virtues are effects of wisdom, according to Wis. 8:7:
"She," i.e. Divine wisdom, "teacheth temperance, and prudence, and
justice, and fortitude." Now the "conversation" of wisdom "hath no
bitterness," as we read further on (verse 16). Therefore sorrow is
incompatible with virtue also.

Obj. 2: Further, sorrow is a hindrance to work, as the Philosopher
states (Ethic. vii, 13; x, 5). But a hindrance to good works is
incompatible with virtue. Therefore sorrow is incompatible with
virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, Tully calls sorrow a disease of the mind (De Tusc.
Quaest. iv). But disease of the mind is incompatible with virtue,
which is a good condition of the mind. Therefore sorrow is opposed to
virtue and is incompatible with it.

_On the contrary,_ Christ was perfect in virtue. But there was sorrow
in Him, for He said (Matt. 26:38): "My soul is sorrowful even unto
death." Therefore sorrow is compatible with virtue.

_I answer that,_ As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 8), the Stoics
held that in the mind of the wise man there are three _eupatheiai_,
i.e. "three good passions," in place of the three disturbances: viz.
instead of covetousness, "desire"; instead of mirth, "joy"; instead
of fear, "caution." But they denied that anything corresponding to
sorrow could be in the mind of a wise man, for two reasons.

First, because sorrow is for an evil that is already present. Now
they held that no evil can happen to a wise man: for they thought
that, just as man's only good is virtue, and bodily goods are no good
to man; so man's only evil is vice, which cannot be in a virtuous
man. But this is unreasonable. For, since man is composed of soul and
body, whatever conduces to preserve the life of the body, is some
good to man; yet not his supreme good, because he can abuse it.
Consequently the evil which is contrary to this good can be in a wise
man, and can cause him moderate sorrow. Again, although a virtuous
man can be without grave sin, yet no man is to be found to live
without committing slight sins, according to 1 John 1:8: "If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves." A third reason is because
a virtuous man, though not actually in a state of sin, may have been
so in the past. And he is to be commended if he sorrow for that sin,
according to 2 Cor. 7:10: "The sorrow that is according to God
worketh penance steadfast unto salvation." Fourthly, because he may
praiseworthily sorrow for another's sin. Therefore sorrow is
compatible with moral virtue in the same way as the other passions
are when moderated by reason.

Their second reason for holding this opinion was that sorrow is about
evil present, whereas fear is for evil to come: even as pleasure is
about a present good, while desire is for a future good. Now the
enjoyment of a good possessed, or the desire to have good that one
possesses not, may be consistent with virtue: but depression of the
mind resulting from sorrow for a present evil, is altogether contrary
to reason: wherefore it is incompatible with virtue. But this is
unreasonable. For there is an evil which can be present to the
virtuous man, as we have just stated; which evil is rejected by
reason. Wherefore the sensitive appetite follows reason's rejection
by sorrowing for that evil; yet moderately, according as reason
dictates. Now it pertains to virtue that the sensitive appetite be
conformed to reason, as stated above (A. 1, ad 2). Wherefore
moderated sorrow for an object which ought to make us sorrowful, is a
mark of virtue; as also the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6, 7).
Moreover, this proves useful for avoiding evil: since, just as good
is more readily sought for the sake of pleasure, so is evil more
undauntedly shunned on account of sorrow.

Accordingly we must allow that sorrow for things pertaining to virtue
is incompatible with virtue: since virtue rejoices in its own. On the
other hand, virtue sorrows moderately for all that thwarts virtue, no
matter how.

Reply Obj. 1: The passage quoted proves that the wise man is not made
sorrowful by wisdom. Yet he sorrows for anything that hinders wisdom.
Consequently there is no room for sorrow in the blessed, in whom
there can be no hindrance to wisdom.

Reply Obj. 2: Sorrow hinders the work that makes us sorrowful: but it
helps us to do more readily whatever banishes sorrow.

Reply Obj. 3: Immoderate sorrow is a disease of the mind: but
moderate sorrow is the mark of a well-conditioned mind, according to
the present state of life.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 59, Art. 4]

Whether All the Moral Virtues Are About the Passions?

Objection 1: It would seem that all the moral virtues are about the
passions. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3) that "moral virtue
is about objects of pleasure and sorrow." But pleasure and sorrow are
passions, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 4; Q. 31, A. 1; Q. 35, AA. 1,
2). Therefore all the moral virtues are about the passions.

Obj. 2: Further, the subject of the moral virtues is a faculty which
is rational by participation, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. i,
13). But the passions are in this part of the soul, as stated above
(Q. 22, A. 3). Therefore every moral virtue is about the passions.

Obj. 3: Further, some passion is to be found in every moral virtue:
and so either all are about the passions, or none are. But some are
about the passions, as fortitude and temperance, as stated in
_Ethic._ iii, 6, 10. Therefore all the moral virtues are about the
passions.

_On the contrary,_ Justice, which is a moral virtue, is not about the
passions; as stated in _Ethic._ v, 1, seqq.

_I answer that,_ Moral virtue perfects the appetitive part of the
soul by directing it to good as defined by reason. Now good as
defined by reason is that which is moderated or directed by reason.
Consequently there are moral virtues about all matters that are
subject to reason's direction and moderation. Now reason directs, not
only the passions of the sensitive appetite, but also the operations
of the intellective appetite, i.e. the will, which is not the subject
of a passion, as stated above (Q. 22, A. 3). Therefore not all the
moral virtues are about passions, but some are about passions, some
about operations.

Reply Obj. 1: The moral virtues are not all about pleasures and
sorrows, as being their proper matter; but as being something
resulting from their proper acts. For every virtuous man rejoices in
acts of virtue, and sorrows for the contrary. Hence the Philosopher,
after the words quoted, adds, "if virtues are about actions and
passions; now every action and passion is followed by pleasure or
sorrow, so that in this way virtue is about pleasures and sorrows,"
viz. as about something that results from virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: Not only the sensitive appetite which is the subject of
the passions, is rational by participation, but also the will, where
there are no passions, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Some virtues have passions as their proper matter, but
some virtues not. Hence the comparison does not hold for all cases.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 59, Art. 5]

Whether There Can Be Moral Virtue Without Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtue can be without passion.
For the more perfect moral virtue is, the more does it overcome the
passions. Therefore at its highest point of perfection it is
altogether without passion.

Obj. 2: Further, then is a thing perfect, when it is removed from its
contrary and from whatever inclines to its contrary. Now the passions
incline us to sin which is contrary to virtue: hence (Rom. 7:5) they
are called "passions of sins." Therefore perfect virtue is altogether
without passion.

Obj. 3: Further, it is by virtue that we are conformed to God, as
Augustine declares (De Moribus Eccl. vi, xi, xiii). But God does all
things without passion at all. Therefore the most perfect virtue is
without any passion.

_On the contrary,_ "No man is just who rejoices not in his deeds," as
stated in _Ethic._ i, 8. But joy is a passion. Therefore justice
cannot be without passion; and still less can the other virtues be.

_I answer that,_ If we take the passions as being inordinate
emotions, as the Stoics did, it is evident that in this sense perfect
virtue is without the passions. But if by passions we understand any
movement of the sensitive appetite, it is plain that moral virtues,
which are about the passions as about their proper matter, cannot be
without passions. The reason for this is that otherwise it would
follow that moral virtue makes the sensitive appetite altogether
idle: whereas it is not the function of virtue to deprive the powers
subordinate to reason of their proper activities, but to make them
execute the commands of reason, by exercising their proper acts.
Wherefore just as virtue directs the bodily limbs to their due
external acts, so does it direct the sensitive appetite to its proper
regulated movements.

Those moral virtues, however, which are not about the passions, but
about operations, can be without passions. Such a virtue is justice:
because it applies the will to its proper act, which is not a
passion. Nevertheless, joy results from the act of justice; at least
in the will, in which case it is not a passion. And if this joy be
increased through the perfection of justice, it will overflow into
the sensitive appetite; in so far as the lower powers follow the
movement of the higher, as stated above (Q. 17, A. 7; Q. 24, A. 3).
Wherefore by reason of this kind of overflow, the more perfect a
virtue is, the more does it cause passion.

Reply Obj. 1: Virtue overcomes inordinate passion; it produces
ordinate passion.

Reply Obj. 2: It is inordinate, not ordinate, passion that leads to
sin.

Reply Obj. 3: The good of anything depends on the condition of its
nature. Now there is no sensitive appetite in God and the angels, as
there is in man. Consequently good operation in God and the angels is
altogether without passion, as it is without a body: whereas the good
operation of man is with passion, even as it is produced with the
body's help.
________________________

QUESTION 60

HOW THE MORAL VIRTUES DIFFER FROM ONE ANOTHER (FIVE ARTICLES)

We must now consider how the moral virtues differ from one another:
under which head there are five points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there is only one moral virtue?

(2) Whether those moral virtues which are about operations, are
distinct from those which are about passions?

(3) Whether there is but one moral virtue about operations?

(4) Whether there are different moral virtues about different
passions?

(5) Whether the moral virtues differ in point of the various objects
of the passions?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 60, Art. 1]

Whether There Is Only One Moral Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is only one moral virtue.
Because just as the direction of moral actions belongs to reason
which is the subject of the intellectual virtues; so does their
inclination belong to the appetite which is the subject of moral
virtues. But there is only one intellectual virtue to direct all
moral acts, viz. prudence. Therefore there is also but one moral
virtue to give all moral acts their respective inclinations.

Obj. 2: Further, habits differ, not in respect of their material
objects, but according to the formal aspect of their objects. Now the
formal aspect of the good to which moral virtue is directed, is one
thing, viz. the mean defined by reason. Therefore, seemingly, there
is but one moral virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, things pertaining to morals are specified by their
end, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 3). Now there is but one common end of
all moral virtues, viz. happiness, while the proper and proximate
ends are infinite in number. But the moral virtues themselves are not
infinite in number. Therefore it seems that there is but one.

_On the contrary,_ One habit cannot be in several powers, as stated
above (Q. 56, A. 2). But the subject of the moral virtues is the
appetitive part of the soul, which is divided into several powers, as
stated in the First Part (Q. 80, A. 2; Q. 81, A. 2). Therefore there
cannot be only one moral virtue.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 58, AA. 1, 2, 3), the moral
virtues are habits of the appetitive faculty. Now habits differ
specifically according to the specific differences of their objects,
as stated above (Q. 54, A. 2). Again, the species of the object of
appetite, as of any thing, depends on its specific form which it
receives from the agent. But we must observe that the matter of the
passive subject bears a twofold relation to the agent. For sometimes
it receives the form of the agent, in the same kind specifically as
the agent has that form, as happens with all univocal agents, so that
if the agent be one specifically, the matter must of necessity
receive a form specifically one: thus the univocal effect of fire is
of necessity something in the species of fire. Sometimes, however,
the matter receives the form from the agent, but not in the same kind
specifically as the agent, as is the case with non-univocal causes of
generation: thus an animal is generated by the sun. In this case the
forms received into matter are not of one species, but vary according
to the adaptability of the matter to receive the influx of the agent:
for instance, we see that owing to the one action of the sun, animals
of various species are produced by putrefaction according to the
various adaptability of matter.

Now it is evident that in moral matters the reason holds the place of
commander and mover, while the appetitive power is commanded and
moved. But the appetite does not receive the direction of reason
univocally so to say; because it is rational, not essentially, but by
participation (Ethic. i, 13). Consequently objects made appetible by
the direction of reason belong to various species, according to their
various relations to reason: so that it follows that moral virtues
are of various species and are not one only.

Reply Obj. 1: The object of the reason is truth. Now in all moral
matters, which are contingent matters of action, there is but one
kind of truth. Consequently, there is but one virtue to direct all
such matters, viz. prudence. On the other hand, the object of the
appetitive power is the appetible good, which varies in kind
according to its various relations to reason, the directing power.

Reply Obj. 2: This formal element is one generically, on account of
the unity of the agent: but it varies in species, on account of the
various relations of the receiving matter, as explained above.

Reply Obj. 3: Moral matters do not receive their species from the
last end, but from their proximate ends: and these, although they be
infinite in number, are not infinite in species.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 60, Art. 2]

Whether Moral Virtues About Operations Are Different from Those That
Are About Passions?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtues are not divided into
those which are about operations and those which are about passions.
For the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3) that moral virtue is "an
operative habit whereby we do what is best in matters of pleasure or
sorrow." Now pleasure and sorrow are passions, as stated above (Q.
31, A. 1; Q. 35, A. 1). Therefore the same virtue which is about
passions is also about operations, since it is an operative habit.

Obj. 2: Further, the passions are principles of external action. If
therefore some virtues regulate the passions, they must, as a
consequence, regulate operations also. Therefore the same moral
virtues are about both passions and operations.

Obj. 3: Further, the sensitive appetite is moved well or ill towards
every external operation. Now movements of the sensitive appetite are
passions. Therefore the same virtues that are about operations are
also about passions.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher reckons justice to be about
operations; and temperance, fortitude and gentleness, about passions
(Ethic. ii, 3, 7; v, 1, seqq.).

_I answer that,_ Operation and passion stand in a twofold relation to
virtue. First, as its effects; and in this way every moral virtue has
some good operations as its product; and a certain pleasure or sorrow
which are passions, as stated above (Q. 59, A. 4, ad 1).

Secondly, operation may be compared to moral virtue as the matter
about which virtue is concerned: and in this sense those moral
virtues which are about operations must needs differ from those which
are about passions. The reason for this is that good and evil, in
certain operations, are taken from the very nature of those
operations, no matter how man may be affected towards them: viz. in
so far as good and evil in them depend on their being commensurate
with someone else. In operations of this kind there needs to be some
power to regulate the operations in themselves: such are buying and
selling, and all such operations in which there is an element of
something due or undue to another. For this reason justice and its
parts are properly about operations as their proper matter. On the
other hand, in some operations, good and evil depend only on
commensuration with the agent. Consequently good and evil in these
operations depend on the way in which man is affected to them. And
for this reason in such like operations virtue must needs be chiefly
about internal emotions which are called the passions of the soul, as
is evidently the case with temperance, fortitude and the like.

It happens, however, in operations which are directed to another,
that the good of virtue is overlooked by reason of some inordinate
passion of the soul. In such cases justice is destroyed in so far as
the due measure of the external act is destroyed: while some other
virtue is destroyed in so far as the internal passions exceed their
due measure. Thus when through anger, one man strikes another,
justice is destroyed in the undue blow; while gentleness is destroyed
by the immoderate anger. The same may be clearly applied to other
virtues.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections. For the first
considers operations as the effect of virtue, while the other two
consider operation and passion as concurring in the same effect. But
in some cases virtue is chiefly about operations, in others, about
passions, for the reason given above.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 60, Art. 3]

Whether There Is Only One Moral Virtue About Operations?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is but one moral virtue about
operations. Because the rectitude of all external operations seems to
belong to justice. Now justice is but one virtue. Therefore there is
but one virtue about operations.

Obj. 2: Further, those operations seem to differ most, which are
directed on the one side to the good of the individual, and on the
other to the good of the many. But this diversity does not cause
diversity among the moral virtues: for the Philosopher says (Ethic.
v, 1) that legal justice, which directs human acts to the common
good, does not differ, save logically, from the virtue which directs
a man's actions to one man only. Therefore diversity of operations
does not cause a diversity of moral virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, if there are various moral virtues about various
operations, diversity of moral virtues would needs follow diversity
of operations. But this is clearly untrue: for it is the function of
justice to establish rectitude in various kinds of commutations, and
again in distributions, as is set down in _Ethic._ v, 2. Therefore
there are not different virtues about different operations.

_On the contrary,_ Religion is a moral virtue distinct from piety,
both of which are about operations.

_I answer that,_ All the moral virtues that are about operations
agree in one general notion of justice, which is in respect of
something due to another: but they differ in respect of various
special notions. The reason for this is that in external operations,
the order of reason is established, as we have stated (A. 2), not
according as how man is affected towards such operations, but
according to the becomingness of the thing itself; from which
becomingness we derive the notion of something due which is the
formal aspect of justice: for, seemingly, it pertains to justice that
a man give another his due. Wherefore all such virtues as are about
operations, bear, in some way, the character of justice. But the
thing due is not of the same kind in all these virtues: for something
is due to an equal in one way, to a superior, in another way, to an
inferior, in yet another; and the nature of a debt differs according
as it arises from a contract, a promise, or a favor already
conferred. And corresponding to these various kinds of debt there are
various virtues: e.g. _Religion_ whereby we pay our debt to God;
_Piety,_ whereby we pay our debt to our parents or to our country;
_Gratitude,_ whereby we pay our debt to our benefactors, and so forth.

Reply Obj. 1: Justice properly so called is one special virtue, whose
object is the perfect due, which can be paid in the equivalent. But
the name of justice is extended also to all cases in which something
due is rendered: in this sense it is not as a special virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: That justice which seeks the common good is
another virtue from that which is directed to the private good of an
individual: wherefore common right differs from private right; and
Tully (De Inv. ii) reckons as a special virtue, piety which directs
man to the good of his country. But that justice which directs man to
the common good is a general virtue through its act of command: since
it directs all the acts of the virtues to its own end, viz. the common
good. And the virtues, in so far as they are commanded by that
justice, receive the name of justice: so that virtue does not differ,
save logically, from legal justice; just as there is only a logical
difference between a virtue that is active of itself, and a virtue
that is active through the command of another virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: There is the same kind of due in all the
operations belonging to special justice. Consequently, there is the
same virtue of justice, especially in regard to commutations. For it
may be that distributive justice is of another species from
commutative justice; but about this we shall inquire later on
(II-II, Q. 61, A. 1).
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 60, Art. 4]

Whether There Are Different Moral Virtues About Different Passions?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are not different moral virtues
about different passions. For there is but one habit about things
that concur in their source and end: as is evident especially in the
case of sciences. But the passions all concur in one source, viz.
love; and they all terminate in the same end, viz. joy or sorrow, as
we stated above (Q. 25, AA. 1, 2, 4; Q. 27, A. 4). Therefore there is
but one moral virtue about all the passions.

Obj. 2: Further, if there were different moral virtues about
different passions, it would follow that there are as many moral
virtues as passions. But this clearly is not the case: since there is
one moral virtue about contrary passions; namely, fortitude, about
fear and daring; temperance, about pleasure and sorrow. Therefore
there is no need for different moral virtues about different passions.

Obj. 3: Further, love, desire, and pleasure are passions of different
species, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 4). Now there is but one virtue
about all these three, viz. temperance. Therefore there are not
different moral virtues about different passions.

_On the contrary,_ Fortitude is about fear and daring; temperance
about desire; meekness about anger; as stated in _Ethic._ iii, 6, 10;
iv, 5.

_I answer that,_ It cannot be said that there is only one moral
virtue about all the passions: since some passions are not in the
same power as other passions; for some belong to the irascible,
others to the concupiscible faculty, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 1).

On the other hand, neither does every diversity of passions
necessarily suffice for a diversity of moral virtues. First, because
some passions are in contrary opposition to one another, such as joy
and sorrow, fear and daring, and so on. About such passions as are
thus in opposition to one another there must needs be one same
virtue. Because, since moral virtue consists in a kind of mean, the
mean in contrary passions stands in the same ratio to both, even as
in the natural order there is but one mean between contraries, e.g.
between black and white. Secondly, because there are different
passions contradicting reason in the same manner, e.g. by impelling
to that which is contrary to reason, or by withdrawing from that
which is in accord with reason. Wherefore the different passions of
the concupiscible faculty do not require different moral virtues,
because their movements follow one another in a certain order, as
being directed to the one same thing, viz. the attainment of some
good or the avoidance of some evil: thus from love proceeds desire,
and from desire we arrive at pleasure; and it is the same with the
opposite passions, for hatred leads to avoidance or dislike, and this
leads to sorrow. On the other hand, the irascible passions are not
all of one order, but are directed to different things: for daring
and fear are about some great danger; hope and despair are about some
difficult good; while anger seeks to overcome something contrary
which has wrought harm. Consequently there are different virtues
about such like passions: e.g. temperance, about the concupiscible
passions; fortitude, about fear and daring; magnanimity, about hope
and despair; meekness, about anger.

Reply Obj. 1: All the passions concur in one common principle and
end; but not in one proper principle or end: and so this does not
suffice for the unity of moral virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as in the natural order the same principle causes
movement from one extreme and movement towards the other; and as in
the intellectual order contraries have one common ratio; so too
between contrary passions there is but one moral virtue, which, like
a second nature, consents to reason's dictates.

Reply Obj. 3: Those three passions are directed to the same object in
a certain order, as stated above: and so they belong to the same
virtue.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 60, Art. 5]

Whether the Moral Virtues Differ in Point of the Various Objects of
the Passions?

Objection 1: It would seem that the moral virtues do not differ
according to the objects of the passions. For just as there are
objects of passions, so are there objects of operations. Now those
moral virtues that are about operations, do not differ according to
the objects of those operations: for the buying and selling either of
a house or of a horse belong to the one same virtue of justice.
Therefore neither do those moral virtues that are about passions
differ according to the objects of those passions.

Obj. 2: Further, the passions are acts or movements of the sensitive
appetite. Now it needs a greater difference to differentiate habits
than acts. Hence diverse objects which do not diversify the species
of passions, do not diversify the species of moral virtue: so that
there is but one moral virtue about all objects of pleasure, and the
same applies to the other passions.

Obj. 3: Further, more or less do not change a species. Now various
objects of pleasure differ only by reason of being more or less
pleasurable. Therefore all objects of pleasure belong to one species
of virtue: and for the same reason so do all fearful objects, and the
same applies to others. Therefore moral virtue is not diversified
according to the objects of the passions.

Obj. 4: Further, virtue hinders evil, even as it produces good. But
there are various virtues about the desires for good things: thus
temperance is about desires for the pleasure of touch, and
_eutrapelia_ about pleasures in games. Therefore there should be
different virtues about fears of evils.

_On the contrary,_ Chastity is about sexual pleasures, abstinence
about pleasures of the table, and _eutrapelia_ about pleasures in
games.

_I answer that,_ The perfection of a virtue depends on the reason;
whereas the perfection of a passion depends on the sensitive
appetite. Consequently virtues must needs be differentiated according
to their relation to reason, but the passions according to their
relation to the appetite. Hence the objects of the passions,
according as they are variously related to the sensitive appetite,
cause the different species of passions: while, according as they are
related to reason, they cause the different species of virtues. Now
the movement of reason is not the same as that of the sensitive
appetite. Wherefore nothing hinders a difference of objects from
causing diversity of passions, without causing diversity of virtues,
as when one virtue is about several passions, as stated above (A. 4);
and again, a difference of objects from causing different virtues,
without causing a difference of passions, since several virtues are
directed about one passion, e.g. pleasure.

And because diverse passions belonging to diverse powers, always
belong to diverse virtues, as stated above (A. 4); therefore a
difference of objects that corresponds to a difference of powers
always causes a specific difference of virtues--for instance the
difference between that which is good absolutely speaking, and that
which is good and difficult to obtain. Moreover since the reason
rules man's lower powers in a certain order, and even extends to
outward things; hence, one single object of the passions, according
as it is apprehended by sense, imagination, or reason, and again,
according as it belongs to the soul, body, or external things, has
various relations to reason, and consequently is of a nature to cause
a difference of virtues. Consequently man's good which is the object
of love, desire and pleasure, may be taken as referred either to a
bodily sense, or to the inner apprehension of the mind: and this same
good may be directed to man's good in himself, either in his body or
in his soul, or to man's good in relation to other men. And every
such difference, being differently related to reason, differentiates
virtues.

Accordingly, if we take a good, and it be something discerned by the
sense of touch, and something pertaining to the upkeep of human life
either in the individual or in the species, such as the pleasures of
the table or of sexual intercourse, it will belong to the virtue of
_temperance._ As regards the pleasures of the other senses, they are
not intense, and so do not present much difficulty to the reason:
hence there is no virtue corresponding to them; for virtue, "like
art, is about difficult things" (Ethic. ii, 3).

On the other hand, good discerned not by the senses, but by an inner
power, and belonging to man in himself, is like money and honor; the
former, by its very nature, being employable for the good of the
body, while the latter is based on the apprehension of the mind.
These goods again may be considered either absolutely, in which way
they concern the concupiscible faculty, or as being difficult to
obtain, in which way they belong to the irascible part: which
distinction, however, has no place in pleasurable objects of touch;
since such are of base condition, and are becoming to man in so far
as he has something in common with irrational animals. Accordingly in
reference to money considered as a good absolutely, as an object of
desire, pleasure, or love, there is _liberality_: but if we consider
this good as difficult to get, and as being the object of our hope,
there is _magnificence_ [*_megaloprepeia_]. With regard to that good
which we call honor, taken absolutely, as the object of love, we have
a virtue called _philotimia,_ i.e. _love of honor_: while if we
consider it as hard to attain, and as an object of hope, then we have
_magnanimity._ Wherefore liberality and _philotimia_ seem to be in
the concupiscible part, while magnificence and magnanimity are in the
irascible.

As regards man's good in relation to other men, it does not seem hard
to obtain, but is considered absolutely, as the object of the
concupiscible passions. This good may be pleasurable to a man in his
behavior towards another either in some serious matter, in actions,
to wit, that are directed by reason to a due end, or in playful
actions, viz. that are done for mere pleasure, and which do not stand
in the same relation to reason as the former. Now one man behaves
towards another in serious matters, in two ways. First, as being
pleasant in his regard, by becoming speech and deeds: and this
belongs to a virtue which Aristotle (Ethic. ii, 7) calls "friendship"
[*_philia_], and may be rendered "affability." Secondly, one man
behaves towards another by being frank with him, in words and deeds:
this belongs to another virtue which (Ethic. iv, 7) he calls
"truthfulness" [*_aletheia_]. For frankness is more akin to the
reason than pleasure, and serious matters than play. Hence there is
another virtue about the pleasures of games, which the Philosopher
calls _eutrapelia_ (Ethic. iv, 8).

It is therefore evident that, according to Aristotle, there are ten
moral virtues about the passions, viz. fortitude, temperance,
liberality, magnificence, magnanimity, _philotimia,_ gentleness,
friendship, truthfulness, and _eutrapelia,_ all of which differ in
respect of their diverse matter, passions, or objects: so that if we
add _justice,_ which is about operations, there will be eleven in all.

Reply Obj. 1: All objects of the same specific operation have the
same relation to reason: not so all the objects of the same specific
passion; because operations do not thwart reason as the passions do.

Reply Obj. 2: Passions are not differentiated by the same rule as
virtues are, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: More and less do not cause a difference of species,
unless they bear different relations to reason.

Reply Obj. 4: Good is a more potent mover than evil: because evil
does not cause movement save in virtue of good, as Dionysius states
(Div. Nom. iv). Hence an evil does not prove an obstacle to reason,
so as to require virtues unless that evil be great; there being,
seemingly, one such evil corresponding to each kind of passion. Hence
there is but one virtue, meekness, for every form of anger; and,
again, but one virtue, fortitude, for all forms of daring. On the
other hand, good involves difficulty, which requires virtue, even if
it be not a great good in that particular kind of passion.
Consequently there are various moral virtues about desires, as stated
above.
________________________

QUESTION 61

OF THE CARDINAL VIRTUES
(In Five Articles)

We must now consider the cardinal virtues: under which head there are
five points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the moral virtues should be called cardinal or principal
virtues?

(2) Of their number;

(3) Which are they?

(4) Whether they differ from one another?

(5) Whether they are fittingly divided into social, perfecting,
perfect, and exemplar virtues?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 61, Art. 1]

Whether the Moral Virtues Should Be Called Cardinal or Principal
Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtues should not be called
cardinal or principal virtues. For "the opposite members of a
division are by nature simultaneous" (Categor. x), so that one is not
principal rather than another. Now all the virtues are opposite
members of the division of the genus "virtue." Therefore none of them
should be called principal.

Obj. 2: Further, the end is principal as compared to the means. But
the theological virtues are about the end; while the moral virtues
are about the means. Therefore the theological virtues, rather than
the moral virtues, should be called principal or cardinal.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is essentially so is principal in
comparison with that which is so by participation. But the
intellectual virtues belong to that which is essentially rational:
whereas the moral virtues belong to that which is rational by
participation, as stated above (Q. 58, A. 3). Therefore the
intellectual virtues are principal, rather than the moral virtues.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose in explaining the words, "Blessed are the
poor in spirit" (Luke 6:20) says: "We know that there are four
cardinal virtues, viz. temperance, justice, prudence, and fortitude."
But these are moral virtues. Therefore the moral virtues are cardinal
virtues.

_I answer that,_ When we speak of virtue simply, we are understood to
speak of human virtue. Now human virtue, as stated above (Q. 56, A.
3), is one that answers to the perfect idea of virtue, which requires
rectitude of the appetite: for such like virtue not only confers the
faculty of doing well, but also causes the good deed done. On the
other hand, the name virtue is applied to one that answers
imperfectly to the idea of virtue, and does not require rectitude of
the appetite: because it merely confers the faculty of doing well
without causing the good deed to be done. Now it is evident that the
perfect is principal as compared to the imperfect: and so those
virtues which imply rectitude of the appetite are called principal
virtues. Such are the moral virtues, and prudence alone, of the
intellectual virtues, for it is also something of a moral virtue, as
was clearly shown above (Q. 57, A. 4). Consequently, those virtues
which are called principal or cardinal are fittingly placed among the
moral virtues.

Reply Obj. 1: When a univocal genus is divided into its species, the
members of the division are on a par in the point of the generic
idea; although considered in their nature as things, one species may
surpass another in rank and perfection, as man in respect of other
animals. But when we divide an analogous term, which is applied to
several things, but to one before it is applied to another, nothing
hinders one from ranking before another, even in the point of the
generic idea; as the notion of being is applied to substance
principally in relation to accident. Such is the division of virtue
into various kinds of virtue: since the good defined by reason is not
found in the same way in all things.

Reply Obj. 2: The theological virtues are above man, as stated above
(Q. 58, A. 3, ad 3). Hence they should properly be called not human,
but "super-human" or godlike virtues.

Reply Obj. 3: Although the intellectual virtues, except in prudence,
rank before the moral virtues, in the point of their subject, they do
not rank before them as virtues; for a virtue, as such, regards good,
which is the object of the appetite.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 61, Art. 5]

Whether There Are Four Cardinal Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are not four cardinal virtues.
For prudence is the directing principle of the other moral virtues,
as is clear from what has been said above (Q. 58, A. 4). But that
which directs other things ranks before them. Therefore prudence
alone is a principal virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, the principal virtues are, in a way, moral virtues.
Now we are directed to moral works both by the practical reason, and
by a right appetite, as stated in _Ethic._ vi, 2. Therefore there are
only two cardinal virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, even among the other virtues one ranks higher than
another. But in order that a virtue be principal, it needs not to
rank above all the others, but above some. Therefore it seems that
there are many more principal virtues.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Moral. ii): "The entire structure of
good works is built on four virtues."

_I answer that,_ Things may be numbered either in respect of their
formal principles, or according to the subjects in which they are:
and either way we find that there are four cardinal virtues.

For the formal principle of the virtue of which we speak now is good
as defined by reason; which good is considered in two ways. First, as
existing in the very act of reason: and thus we have one principal
virtue, called "Prudence." Secondly, according as the reason puts its
order into something else; either into operations, and then we have
"Justice"; or into passions, and then we need two virtues. For the
need of putting the order of reason into the passions is due to their
thwarting reason: and this occurs in two ways. First, by the passions
inciting to something against reason, and then the passions need a
curb, which we call "Temperance." Secondly, by the passions
withdrawing us from following the dictate of reason, e.g. through
fear of danger or toil: and then man needs to be strengthened for
that which reason dictates, lest he turn back; and to this end there
is "Fortitude."

In like manner, we find the same number if we consider the subjects
of virtue. For there are four subjects of the virtue we speak of now:
viz. the power which is rational in its essence, and this is
perfected by "Prudence"; and that which is rational by participation,
and is threefold, the will, subject of "Justice," the concupiscible
faculty, subject of "Temperance," and the irascible faculty, subject
of "Fortitude."

Reply Obj. 1: Prudence is the principal of all the virtues simply.
The others are principal, each in its own genus.

Reply Obj. 2: That part of the soul which is rational by
participation is threefold, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: All the other virtues among which one ranks before
another, are reducible to the above four, both as to the subject and
as to the formal principle.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 61, Art. 3]

Whether Any Other Virtues Should Be Called Principal Rather Than These?

Objection 1: It would seem that other virtues should be called
principal rather than these. For, seemingly, the greatest is the
principal in any genus. Now "magnanimity has a great influence on all
the virtues" (Ethic. iv, 3). Therefore magnanimity should more than
any be called a principal virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, that which strengthens the other virtues should
above all be called a principal virtue. But such is humility: for
Gregory says (Hom. iv in Ev.) that "he who gathers the other virtues
without humility is as one who carries straw against the wind."
Therefore humility seems above all to be a principal virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is most perfect seems to be principal.
But this applies to patience, according to James 1:4: "Patience hath
a perfect work." Therefore patience should be reckoned a principal
virtue.

_On the contrary,_ Cicero reduces all other virtues to these four (De
Invent. Rhet. ii).

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), these four are reckoned as
cardinal virtues, in respect of the four formal principles of virtue
as we understand it now. These principles are found chiefly in
certain acts and passions. Thus the good which exists in the act of
reason, is found chiefly in reason's command, but not in its counsel
or its judgment, as stated above (Q. 57, A. 6). Again, good as
defined by reason and put into our operations as something right and
due, is found chiefly in commutations and distributions in respect of
another person, and on a basis of equality. The good of curbing the
passions is found chiefly in those passions which are most difficult
to curb, viz. in the pleasures of touch. The good of being firm in
holding to the good defined by reason, against the impulse of
passion, is found chiefly in perils of death, which are most
difficult to withstand.

Accordingly the above four virtues may be considered in two ways.
First, in respect of their common formal principles. In this way they
are called principal, being general, as it were, in comparison with
all the virtues: so that, for instance, any virtue that causes good
in reason's act of consideration, may be called prudence; every
virtue that causes the good of right and due in operation, be called
justice; every virtue that curbs and represses the passions, be
called temperance; and every virtue that strengthens the mind against
any passions whatever, be called fortitude. Many, both holy doctors,
as also philosophers, speak about these virtues in this sense: and in
this way the other virtues are contained under them. Wherefore all
the objections fail.

Secondly, they may be considered in point of their being denominated,
each one from that which is foremost in its respective matter, and
thus they are specific virtues, condivided with the others. Yet they
are called principal in comparison with the other virtues, on account
of the importance of their matter: so that prudence is the virtue
which commands; justice, the virtue which is about due actions
between equals; temperance, the virtue which suppresses desires for
the pleasures of touch; and fortitude, the virtue which strengthens
against dangers of death. Thus again do the objections fail: because
the other virtues may be principal in some other way, but these are
called principal by reason of their matter, as stated above.
________________________

