    death forty years. Then God Most High will revive Israfil who will blow
    a second blast, at the sound of which all the dead will rise to
    life."[124]

This confession of faith makes no mention of Mika,il (Michael), the fourth
of the archangels. His special duty is to see that all created beings have
what is needful for them. He has charge of the rain-fall, plants, grain and
all that is required for the sustenance of men, beasts, fishes, &c.
Gabriel's special charge is the communication of God's will to prophets.
The words "one terrible in power" (Sura liii. 5) {140} are generally
applied to him. He is honoured with the privilege of nearness to God.
Tradition says that on the night of the Mi'raj, the Prophet saw that
Gabriel had six hundred wings, and that his body was so large that from one
shoulder to the other the distance was so great that a swift flying bird
would require five hundred years to pass over it.

Nine-tenths of all created beings are said to be angels who are formed of
light. Their rank is stationary, and each is content with the position he
occupies. Their one desire is to love and to know God. Whatever he commands
they do. "All beings in the heaven and on the earth are His: and they who
are in His presence disdain not His service, neither are they wearied: they
praise Him day and night." (Sura xxi. 19, 20.) They are free from all
sin.[125] It is true that they did not wish for the creation of Adam, and
this may seem like a want of confidence in God. It is said, however, that
their object was not to oppose God, but to relieve their minds of the
doubts they had in the matter. Thus "when the Lord said to the angels,
'Verily, I am about to place one in my stead on earth,' they said: 'Wilt
Thou place there one who will do ill therein, and shed blood when we
celebrate thy praise and extol thy holiness.' God said: 'Verily I know what
ye know not.'" It is true that Iblis was disobedient, but then he belonged
not to the angelic order but to that of the jinn. "When we said to the
angels, 'prostrate yourselves before Adam,' they all prostrated themselves
save Iblis, who was of the jinn, and revolted from his Lord's behest."
(Sura xviii. 48.) (See also Sura ii. 33.)

Angels appear in human form on special occasions, but usually they are
invisible. It is a common belief that animals can see angels and devils.
This accounts for the saying, "If you hear a cock crow, pray for mercy, for
it has seen an angel; but if you hear an ass bray, take refuge with God,
for it has seen a devil."

{141}

The angels intercede for man: "The angels celebrate the praise of their
Lord and ask forgiveness for the dwellers on earth." (Sura xlii. 3.) They
also act as guardian angels: "Each hath a succession of angels before him
and behind him who watch over him by God's behest." (Sura xiii. 12.) "Is it
not enough for you that your Lord aideth you with three thousand angels
sent down from on high?" (Sura iii. 120.) "Supreme over His servants He
sendeth forth guardians who watch over you, until when death overtaketh any
one of you our messengers take his soul and fail not." (Sura vi. 61.)

In the Traditions it is said that God has appointed for every man two
angels to watch over him by day, and two by night. The one stands on the
right hand side of the man, the other on his left. Some, however, say that
they reside in the teeth, and that the tongue of the man is the pen and the
saliva of the mouth the ink.[126] They protect the actions of men and
record them all whether good or bad. They are called the Mua'qqibat,
_i.e._, those who succeed one another. They also bear the name of
Kiram-ul-Katibin, "the exalted writers." They are referred to in the Quran.
"Think they that we hear not their secrets and their private talk? Yes, and
our angels who are at their sides write them down." (Sura xliii. 80).

There are eight angels who support the throne of God. "And the angels shall
be on its sides, and over them on that day eight shall bear up the throne
of thy Lord." (Sura lxix. 17). Nineteen have charge of hell. "Over it are
nineteen. None but angels have we made guardians of the fire." (Sura lxxiv.
30).

There is a special arrangement made by Providence to mitigate the evils of
Satanic interference. "Iblis," says Jabir Maghrabi, "though able to assume
all other forms is not permitted to appear in the semblance of the Deity,
or {142} any of His angels, or prophets. There would otherwise be much
danger to human salvation, as he might, under the appearance of one of the
prophets, or of some superior being, make use of this power to seduce men
to sin. To prevent this, whenever he attempts to assume such forms, fire
comes down from heaven and repulses him."

The story of Harut and Marut is of some interest from its connection with
the question of the impeccability of the angels. Speaking of those who
reject God's Apostle the Quran says: "And they followed what the Satans
read in the reign of Solomon; not that Solomon was unbelieving, but the
Satans were unbelieving. Sorcery did they teach to men, and what had been
revealed to the two angels Harut and Marut at Babel. Yet no man did these
two teach until they had said, 'We are only a temptation. Be not thou an
unbeliever.'" (Sura ii. 96). Here it is quite clear that two angels teach
sorcery, which is generally allowed to be an evil. Some explanation has to
be given. Commentators are by no means reticent on this subject. The story
goes that in the time of the prophet Enoch when the angels saw the bad
actions of men they said: "O Lord! Adam and his descendants whom Thou has
appointed as Thy vice-regents on earth act disobediently." To which the
Lord replied: "If I were to send you on earth, and to give you lustful and
angry dispositions, you too would sin." The angels thought otherwise; so
God told them to select two of their number who should undergo this ordeal.
They selected two, renowned for devotion and piety. God having implanted in
them the passions of lust and anger said: "All day go to and fro on the
earth, put an end to the quarrels of men, ascribe no equal to Me, do not
commit adultery, drink no wine, and every night repeat the Ism-ul-A'zam,
the exalted name (of God) and return to heaven." This they did for some
time, but at length a beautiful woman named Zuhra (Venus) led them astray.
One day she brought them a cup of wine. One said: {143} "God has forbidden
it;" the other, "God is merciful and forgiving." So they drank the wine,
killed the husband of Zuhra, to whom they revealed the "exalted name," and
fell into grievous sin. Immediately after, they found that the "name" had
gone from their memories and so they could not return to heaven as usual.
They were very much concerned at this and begged Enoch to intercede for
them. The prophet did so, and with such success that the angels were
allowed to choose between a present or a future punishment. They elected to
be punished here on earth. They were then suspended with their heads
downwards in a well at Babel. Some say that angels came and whipped them
with rods of fire, and that a fresh spring ever flowed just beyond the
reach of their parched lips. The woman was changed to a star. Some assert
that it was a shooting star which has now passed out of existence. Others
say that she is the star Venus.

It is only right to state that the Qazi 'Ayaz, Imam Fakhr-ud-din Razi
(544-606 A.H.), Qazi Nasir-ud-din Baidavi (620-691 A.H.) and most
scholastic divines deny the truth of this story. They say that angels are
immaculate, but it is plain that this does not meet the difficulty which
the Quran itself raises in connection with Harut and Marut. They want to
know how beings in such a state can teach, and whether it is likely that
men would have the courage to go near such a horrible scene. As to the
woman, they think the whole story absurd, not only because the star Venus
was created before the time of Adam, but also because it is inconceivable
that one who was so wicked should have the honour of shining in heaven for
ever. A solution, however, they are bound to give, and it is this. Magic is
a great art which God must allow mankind to know. The dignity of the order
of prophets is so great that they cannot teach men what is confessedly
hurtful. Two angels were therefore sent, and so men can now distinguish
between the miracles of prophets, the signs of {144} saints, the wonders of
magicians and others. Then Harut and Marut always discouraged men from
learning magic. They said to those who came to them: "We are only a
temptation. Be not thou an unbeliever." Others assert that it is a Jewish
allegory in which the two angels represent reason and benevolence, the
woman the evil appetites. The woman's ascent to heaven represents death.

To this solution of the difficulty, however, the great body of the
Traditionists do not agree. They declare that the story is a Hadis-i-Sahih,
and that the Isnad is sound and good. I name only a few of the great
divines who hold this view. They are Imam Ibn Hanbal, Ibn Ma'sud, Ibn 'Umr,
Ibn 'Abbas, Hafiz 'Asqallani[127] and others. Jelal-ud-din Syuti in his
commentary the Durr-i-Mashur, has given all the Traditions in order and,
though there is some variety in the details, the general purport accords
with the narrative as I have related it. The Traditionists answer the
objections of the Scholastics thus. They say that angels are immaculate
only so long as they remain in the angelic state; that, though confined,
Harut and Marut can teach magic, for a word or two is quite sufficient for
that purpose; that some men have no fear and, if they have, it is quite
conceivable that the two angels may teach through the instrumentality of
devils or jinn. With regard to the woman Zuhra they grant that to be
changed into a bright star is of the nature of a reward; but they say the
desire to learn the "exalted name" was so meritorious an act that the good
she desired outweighs the evil she did. With regard to the date of the
creation of the star Venus, it is said that all our astronomical knowledge
is based on observations made since the Flood, whereas this story relates
to the times of Enoch who lived before the days of Noah. So the dispute
goes on and men of great repute for learning and knowledge believe in the
story.

{145}

Munkir and Nakir are two fierce-looking black angels with blue eyes who
visit every man in his grave, and examine him with regard to his faith in
God and in Muhammad. The dead are supposed to dwell in 'Alam-i-barzakh, a
state of existence intervening between the present life and the life of
mankind after the resurrection.[128] This is the meaning of the word
"grave" when used in this connection. Unbelievers and wicked Muslims suffer
trouble in that state; true believers who can give a good answer to the
angels are happy. Some suppose that a body of angels are appointed for this
purpose and that some of them bear the name of Munkir, and some that of
Nakir and that, just as each man has two recording angels during his
lifetime, two from this class are appointed to examine him after death.
There is a difference of opinion with regard to children. The general
belief is that the children of believers will be questioned, but that the
angels will teach them to say: "Allah is my Lord, Islam my religion, and
Muhammad my Prophet." With regard to the children of unbelievers being
questioned, Imam Abu Hanifa hesitated to give an opinion. He also doubted
about their punishment. Some think they will be in A'raf, a place between
heaven and hell; others suppose that they will be servants to the true
believers in Paradise.

Distinct from the angels there is another order of beings made of fire
called jinn (genii.) It is said that they were created thousands of years
before Adam came into existence. "We created man of dried clay, of dark
loam moulded, and the jinn had been before created of subtle fire." (Sura
xv. 26, 27.) They eat, drink, propagate their species and are subject to
death, though they generally live many centuries. They dwell chiefly in the
Koh-i-Kaf, a chain of mountains supposed to encompass the world:[129] {146}
some are believers in Islam; some are infidels, and will be punished. "I
will wholly fill hell with jinn and men." (Sura xi. 120.) The Sura called
Surat-ul-Jinn (lxxii.) refers to their belief in Islam. The passage is too
long to quote. They try to hear[130] what is going on in heaven. "We guard
them (_i.e._, men) from every stoned Satan, save such as steal a hearing."
(Sura xv. 18.) They were under the power of Solomon and served him. (Sura
xxxviii. 36.) An 'Ifrit of the jinn said, "I will bring it thee (Solomon)
ere thou risest from thy place: I have power for this and am trusty." (Sura
xxvii. 39.) At the last day the jinn also will be questioned. Imam Hanifa
doubted whether the jinn who are Muslims will be rewarded. The unbelieving
jinn will assuredly be punished. Tradition classifies them in the following
order: (1) Jann, (2) Jinn, (3) Shaitan, (4) 'Ifrit, (5) Marid. Many fables
have been invented concerning these beings, and though intelligent Muslims
may doubt these wonderful accounts, yet a belief in the order of jinn is
imperative, at least, as long as there is belief in the Quran. Those who
wish to know more of this subject will find a very interesting chapter on
it in Lane's Modern Egyptians.

3. THE BOOKS.--Al Berkevi says:--

    "It is necessary to believe that the books of God have been sent
    through the instrumentality of Gabriel, to prophets upon the earth. The
    books are never sent except to prophets. The Quran was sent to Muhammad
    portion by portion during a space of 23 years. The Pentateuch came to
    Moses, the Injil to Jesus, the Zabur to David, and the other books to
    other prophets. The whole number of the Divine books is 104. The Quran,
    the last of all, is to be followed till the day of judgment. It can
    neither be abrogated nor changed. Some laws of the previous books have
    been abrogated by the Quran and ought not to be followed."

The one hundred and four books were sent from heaven in the following
order:--To Adam, ten; to Seth, fifty; to Enoch (Idris), thirty; to Abraham,
ten; to Moses, the {147} Taurat (Pentateuch); to David, the Zabur (Psalms);
to Jesus, the Injil; to Muhammad, the Quran. The one hundred to which no
distinctive name is given are known as the "Suhuf-ul-Anbiya,"--Books of the
Prophets. The Quran is also known as the Furqan, the distinguisher; the
Quran-i-Sharif, noble Quran; the Quran-i-Majid, glorious Quran; the Mushaf,
the Book. It is said to be the compendium of the Taurat, Zabur and
Injil[131]; so Muslims do not require to study these books.[132] The
orthodox belief is that they are entirely abrogated by the Quran,[133]
though Syed Ahmad denounces as ignorant and foolish those Musalmans who say
so.[134] Be that as it may, their inspiration is considered to be of a
lower order than that of the Quran. A large {148} portion of the Injil is
considered to be mere narrative. The actual words of Christ only are looked
upon as the revelation which descended from heaven. It is so in the case of
the Old Testament Prophets. "However, it was the rule to call a book by the
name of the prophet, whether the subject-matter was pure doctrine only, or
whether it was mixed up with narrative also." "It is to be observed that,
in the case of our own Prophet, the revelations made to him were intended
to impart a special miracle of eloquence and they were written down,
literally and exactly, in the form in which they were communicated without
any narrative being inserted in them."[135] The writings of the Apostles
are not considered to be inspired books. "We do not consider that the Acts
of the Apostles, or the various Epistles, although unquestionably very good
books, are to be taken as part and parcel of the New Testament itself;
nevertheless we look upon the writings of the Apostles in the same light as
we do the writings of the Companions of our own Prophet; that is to say, as
entitled to veneration and respect."[136] There are many verses in the
Quran which speak of previous revelations, thus: "We also caused Jesus, the
son of Mary, to follow the footsteps of the prophets, confirming the law
(Taurat) which was sent before him, and we gave him the Injil with its
guidance and light, confirmatory of the preceding law; a guidance and a
warning to those that fear God." (Sura v. 50). "We believe in God, and that
which hath been sent down to us, and that which hath been sent down to
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes, and that which hath been given
to Moses and to Jesus, and that which was given to the prophets from their
Lord. No difference do we make between any of them: and to God are we
resigned." (Sura ii. 130). "In truth hath He sent down to thee the Book,
which confirmeth those that precede it, for He had sent down the {149} Law
and the Injil aforetime, as man's guidance; and now hath He sent down the
Furqan." (Sura iii. 2).[137]

Practically, Musalmans reject the Old and New Testaments. To do so is
manifestly against the letter of the Quran, and, as some reason for this
neglect of previous Scriptures must be given, Muslim divines say that the
Jewish and Christian Scriptures have been corrupted. The technical
expression is "tahrif," a word signifying, to change, to turn aside
anything from the truth. Then tahrif may be of two kinds, tahrif-i-m'anavi,
a change in the meaning of words; tahrif-i-lafzi, an actual change of the
written words. Most Musalmans maintain that the latter kind of corruption
has taken place, and so they do not feel bound to read or study the
previous revelations so frequently referred to in the Quran. The charge
brought against the Jews of corrupting their Scriptures is based on the
following verse of the Quran: "Some truly are there among you who torture
the Scriptures with their tongues, in order that ye may suppose it to be
from the Scripture, yet it is not from the Scripture. And they say: 'this
is from God,' yet it is not from God; and they utter a lie against God, and
they know they do so." (Sura iii. 72.) All the ancient commentators assert
that this only proved tahrif-i-m'anavi; that is, that the Jews referred to
either misinterpreted what they read, or, whilst professing to read from
the Scripture, used expressions not found therein. It does not mean that
they altered the text of their Scriptures. This, however, does not excuse
Musalmans for their neglect of the previous Scriptures, and so the orthodox
divines of modern times maintain that the greater corruption--the
tahrif-i-lafzi, has taken place. The question is fully discussed, and the
opinion of the earlier commentators endorsed by Syed Ahmad in his
Commentary on the Bible.[138]

{150}

4. PROPHETS.--Muhammad Al Berkevi says:--

    "It is necessary to confess that God has sent prophets; that Adam is
    the first of the prophets and the father of all men; that Muhammad is
    the last of the prophets; that between Adam and Muhammad there were a
    great number of prophets; that Muhammad is the most excellent of all
    and that his people are the best of all peoples; that each of the
    preceding prophets was sent to a special people, some with books, some
    without, but that Muhammad was sent to all men and also to the genii;
    that his law will remain until the end of the world, that his miracles
    are many in number, that by his blessed finger he made waters flow,
    that he divided the moon into two parts, that animals, trees, and
    stones said to him: 'Thou art a true prophet.'

    We must also believe that one night he was transported from Mecca to
    Jerusalem, and from thence to heaven, where he saw both paradise and
    hell, conversed with the Most High and returned to Mecca before
    morning. After him no other prophet will come, for he is the seal of
    the prophets."

The number of prophets sent by God to make known His will varies according
to the Tradition which records it. About two hundred thousand is the usual
number stated. Twenty-five are mentioned by name in the Quran, of whom six
are distinguished by special titles. Adam, Sufi Ullah, the chosen of God;
Noah, Nabi Ullah, the prophet of God; Abraham, Khalil Ullah, the friend of
God; Moses, Kalim Ullah, the speaker with God; Jesus, Ruh Ullah, the spirit
of God; Muhammad, Rasul Ullah, the messenger of God. These are called the
Anbiya-ulul-'Azm (possessors of purpose) because they were the heads of
their respective dispensations, and because they will be permitted by God
to intercede in the day of judgment for their followers. They are the
greatest and most exalted of the prophets.[139]

There are degrees of rank amongst the prophets, for "Some of the Apostles
have We endowed more highly than others. Those to whom God hath spoken, He
hath raised to the loftiest grade, and to Jesus, the Son of Mary We gave
{151} manifest signs, and We strengthened him with the Holy Spirit." (Sura
ii. 254). The Anbiya-ulul-'Azm are ranked in the following order: Noah,
Jesus, Moses, Abraham and as the chief of all, Muhammad, of whom it is
said: "He is the Apostle of God and the seal of the prophets." (Sura
xxxiii. 40).

A Tradition, as usual, supports his position. "I am the chief of the sons
of men." "Adam and all beside him will be ranged under my flag in the
judgment day."[140] It is said that the law given by Moses was harsh and
severe; that by Christ was mild and gracious; but that the law given by
Muhammad is perfect, for it combines both the quality of strictness and
that of graciousness; according to the Tradition: "I always laugh and by
laughing kill."[141] Each prophet is said to have been sent to his own
tribe, but Muhammad was sent for all men. A Tradition is adduced to support
this statement: "I was raised up for all men whether white or black, other
prophets were not except for their own tribe." The Quran also states: "We
have sent thee (Muhammad) for all men."
