274:18  senses are misdirected, they are simply the manifested
        beliefs of mortal mind, which affirm that life, substance,
        and intelligence are material, instead of spiritual. These
274:21  false beliefs and their products constitute the flesh, and
        the flesh wars against Spirit.

                         Impossible partnership

        Divine Science is absolute, and permits no half-way
274:24  position in learning its Principle and rule - establishing
        it by demonstration. The conventional firm,
        called matter and mind, God never formed.
274:27  Science and understanding, governed by the unerring and
        eternal Mind, destroy the imaginary copartnership, matter
        and mind, formed only to be destroyed in a manner and
274:30  at a period as yet unknown. This suppositional partner-
        ship is already obsolete, for matter, examined in the light
        of divine metaphysics, disappears.

                        Spirit the starting-point

275:1   Matter has no life to lose, and Spirit never dies. A
        partnership of mind with matter would ignore omnipres-
275:3   ent and omnipotent Mind. This shows that
        matter did not originate in God, Spirit, and is
        not eternal. Therefore matter is neither substantial, living,
275:6   nor intelligent. The starting-point of divine Science is
        that God, Spirit, is All-in-all, and that there is no other
        might nor Mind, - that God is Love, and therefore He
275:9   is divine Principle.

                             Divine synonyms

        To grasp the reality and order of being in its Science,
        you must begin by reckoning God as the divine Principle
275:12  of all that really is. Spirit, Life, Truth, Love,
        combine as one, - and are the Scriptural names
        for God. All substance, intelligence, wisdom, being, im-
275:15  mortality, cause, and effect belong to God. These are
        His attributes, the eternal manifestations of the infinite
        divine Principle, Love. No wisdom is wise but His
275:18  wisdom; no truth is true, no love is lovely, no life is Life
        but the divine; no good is, but the good God bestows.

                         The divine completeness

        Divine metaphysics, as revealed to spiritual understand-
275:21  ing, shows clearly that all is Mind, and that Mind is
        God, omnipotence, omnipresence, omniscience,
        - that is, all power, all presence, all Science.
275:24  Hence all is in reality the manifestation of Mind.

        Our material human theories are destitute of Science.
        The true understanding of God is spiritual. It robs the
275:27  grave of victory. It destroys the false evidence that mis-
        leads thought and points to other gods, or other so-called
        powers, such as matter, disease, sin, and death, superior
275:30  or contrary to the one Spirit.

        Truth, spiritually discerned, is scientifically understood.
        It casts out error and heals the sick.

                          Universal brotherhood

276:1   Having one God, one Mind, unfolds the power that
        heals the sick, and fulfils these sayings of Scripture, "I
276:3   am the Lord that healeth thee," and "I have
        found a ransom." When the divine precepts
        are understood, they unfold the foundation of fellowship,
276:6   in which one mind is not at war with another, but all have
        one Spirit, God, one intelligent source, in accordance with
        the Scriptural command: "Let this Mind be in you,
276:9   which was also in Christ Jesus." Man and his Maker
        are correlated in divine Science, and real consciousness
        is cognizant only of the things of God.

276:12  The realization that all inharmony is unreal brings
        objects and thoughts into human view in their true light,
        and presents them as beautiful and immortal. Harmony
276:15  in man is as real and immortal as in music. Discord is
        unreal and mortal.

                          Perfection requisite

        If God is admitted to be the only Mind and Life,
276:18  there ceases to be any opportunity for sin and death.
        When we learn in Science how to be perfect
        even as our Father in heaven is perfect,
276:21  thought is turned into new and healthy channels, -
        towards the contemplation of things immortal and away
        from materiality to the Principle of the universe, includ-
276:24  ing harmonious man.

        Material beliefs and spiritual understanding never
        mingle. The latter destroys the former. Discord is the
276:27  /nothingness/ named error. Harmony is the /somethingness/
        named Truth.

                           Like evolving like

        Nature and revelation inform us that like produces
276:30  like. Divine Science does not gather grapes
        from thorns nor figs from thistles. Intelli-
        gence never produces non-intelligence; but matter is
277:1   ever non-intelligent and therefore cannot spring from
        intelligence. To all that is unlike unerring and eternal
277:3   Mind, this Mind saith, "Thou shalt surely die;" and else-
        where the Scripture says that dust returns to dust. The
        non-intelligent relapses into its own unreality. Matter
277:6   never produces mind. The immortal never produces the
        mortal. Good cannot result in evil. As God Himself is
        good and is Spirit, goodness and spirituality must be im-
277:9   mortal. Their opposites, evil and matter, are mortal
        error, and error has no creator. If goodness and spirit-
        uality are real, evil and materiality are unreal and can-
277:12  not be the outcome of an infinite God, good.

        Natural history presents vegetables and animals as
        preserving their original species, - like reproducing like.
277:15  A mineral is not produced by a vegetable nor the man
        by the brute. In reproduction, the order of genus and
        species is preserved throughout the entire round of nature.
277:18  This points to the spiritual truth and Science of being.
        Error relies upon a reversal of this order, asserts that
        Spirit produces matter and matter produces all the ills
277:21  of flesh, and therefore that good is the origin of evil.
        These suppositions contradict even the order of material
        so-called science.

                             Material error

277:24  The realm of the real is Spirit. The unlikeness of Spirit
        is matter, and the opposite of the real is not divine, - it is
        a human concept. Matter is an error of state-
277:27  ment. This error in the premise leads to errors
        in the conclusion in every statement into which it enters.
        Nothing we can say or believe regarding matter is immor-
277:30  tal, for matter is temporal and is therefore a mortal phe-
        nomenon, a human concept, sometimes beautiful, always
        erroneous.

                     Substance /versus/ supposition

278:1   Is Spirit the source or creator of matter? Science re-
        veals nothing in Spirit out of which to create matter.
278:3   Divine metaphysics explains away matter.
        Spirit is the only substance and consciousness
        recognized by divine Science. The material
278:6   senses oppose this, but there are no material senses, for
        matter has no mind. In Spirit there is no matter, even
        as in Truth there is no error, and in good no evil. It is
278:9   a false supposition, the notion that there is real substance-
        matter, the opposite of Spirit. Spirit, God, is infinite,
        all. Spirit can have no opposite.

                            One cause supreme

278:12  That matter is substantial or has life and sensation, is
        one of the false beliefs of mortals, and exists only in a
        supposititious mortal consciousness. Hence,
278:15  as we approach Spirit and Truth, we lose the
        consciousness of matter. The admission that there can
        be material substance requires another admission, -
278:18  namely, that Spirit is not infinite and that matter is self-
        creative, self-existent, and eternal. From this it would
        follow that there are two eternal causes, warring forever
278:21  with each other; and yet we say that Spirit is supreme
        and all-presence.

        The belief of the eternity of matter contradicts the
278:24  demonstration of life as Spirit, and leads to the conclu-
        sion that if man is material, he originated in matter and
        must return to dust, - logic which would prove his an-
278:27  nihilation.

                           Substance is Spirit

        All that we term sin, sickness, and death is a mortal
        belief. We define matter as error, because it is the oppo-
278:30  site of life, substance, and intelligence. Mat-
        ter, with its mortality, cannot be substantial
        if Spirit is substantial and eternal. Which ought to
279:1   be substance to us, - the erring, changing, and dying,
        the mutable and mortal, or the unerring, immutable,
279:3   and immortal? A New Testament writer plainly de-
        scribes faith, a quality of mind, as "the /substance/ of things
        hoped for."

                           Material mortality

279:6   The doom of matter establishes the conclusion that
        matter, slime, or protoplasm never originated
        in the immortal Mind, and is therefore not
279:9   eternal. Matter is neither created by Mind nor for the
        manifestation and support of Mind.

                          Spiritual tangibility

        Ideas are tangible and real to immortal consciousness,
279:12  and they have the advantage of being eternal.
        Spirit and matter can neither coexist nor co-
        operate, and one can no more create the other than
279:15  Truth can create error, or /vice versa/.

        In proportion as the belief disappears that life and in-
        telligence are in or of matter, the immortal facts of
279:18  being are seen, and their only idea or intelligence is
        in God. Spirit is reached only through the understand-
        ing and demonstration of eternal Life and Truth and
279:21  Love.

                         Pantheistic tendencies

        Every system of human philosophy, doctrine, and
        medicine is more or less infected with the pantheistic
279:24  belief that there is mind in matter; but this
        belief contradicts alike revelation and right
        reasoning. A logical and scientific conclusion is reached
279:27  only through the knowledge that there are not two
        bases of being, matter and mind, but one alone, -
        Mind.

279:30  Pantheism, starting from a material sense of God,
        seeks cause in effect, Principle in its idea, and life and
        intelligence in matter.

                     The things of God are beautiful

280:1   In the infinitude of Mind, matter must be unknown.
        Symbols and elements of discord and decay are not prod-
280:3   ucts of the infinite, perfect, and eternal /All/.
        From Love and from the light and harmony
        which are the abode of Spirit, only reflections
280:6   of good can come. All things beautiful and harmless are
        ideas of Mind. Mind creates and multiplies them, and
        the product must be mental.

280:9   Finite belief can never do justice to Truth in any direc-
        tion. Finite belief limits all things, and would compress
        Mind, which is infinite, beneath a skull bone. Such be-
280:12  lief can neither apprehend nor worship the infinite; and
        to accommodate its finite sense of the divisibility of Soul
        and substance, it seeks to divide the one Spirit into per-
280:15  sons and souls.

                           Belief in many gods

        Through this error, human belief comes to have "gods
        many and lords many." Moses declared as Jehovah's
280:18  first command of the Ten: "Thou shalt have
        no other gods before me!" But behold the
        zeal of belief to establish the opposite error of many
280:21  minds. The argument of the serpent in the allegory, "Ye
        shall be as gods," urges through every avenue the belief
        that Soul is in body, and that infinite Spirit, and Life, is
280:24  in finite forms.

                           Sensationless body

        Rightly understood, instead of possessing a sentient
        material form, man has a sensationless body; and God,
280:27  the Soul of man and of all existence, being
        perpetual in His own individuality, harmony,
        and immortality, imparts and perpetuates these qualities
280:30  in man, - through Mind, not matter. The only excuse
        for entertaining human opinions and rejecting the Science
        of being is our mortal ignorance of Spirit, - ignorance
281:1   which yields only to the understanding of divine Science,
        the understanding by which we enter into the kingdom
281:3   of Truth on earth and learn that Spirit is infinite and
        supreme. Spirit and matter no more commingle than
        light and darkness. When one appears, the other dis-
281:6   appears.

                            God and His image

        Error presupposes man to be both mind and matter.
        Divine Science contradicts the corporeal senses, rebukes
281:9   mortal belief, and asks: What is the Ego,
        whence its origin and what its destiny? The
        Ego-man is the reflection of the Ego-God; the Ego-man
281:12  is the image and likeness of perfect Mind, Spirit, divine
        Principle.

        The one Ego, the one Mind or Spirit called God, is
281:15  infinite individuality, which supplies all form and come-
        liness and which reflects reality and divinity in individual
        spiritual man and things.

281:18  The mind supposed to exist in matter or beneath a
        skull bone is a myth, a misconceived sense and false
        conception as to man and Mind. When we put off the
281:21  false sense for the true, and see that sin and mortality
        have neither Principle nor permanency, we shall learn
        that sin and mortality are without actual origin or right-
281:24  ful existence. They are native nothingness, out of which
        error would simulate creation through a man formed from
        dust.

                            The true new idea

281:27  Divine Science does not put new wine into old bottles,
        Soul into matter, nor the infinite into the finite. Our
        false views of matter perish as we grasp
281:30  the facts of Spirit. The old belief must be
        cast out or the new idea will be spilled, and the in-
        spiration, which is to change our standpoint, will be
282:1   lost. Now, as of old, Truth casts out evils and heals
        the sick.

                            Figures of being

282:3   The real Life, or Mind, and its opposite, the so-called
        material life and mind, are figured by two geometrical
        symbols, a circle or sphere and a straight
282:6   line. The circle represents the infinite with-
        out beginning or end; the straight line represents the
        finite, which has both beginning and end. The sphere
282:9   represents good, the self-existent and eternal individuality
        or Mind; the straight line represents evil, a belief in
        a self-made and temporary material existence. Eternal
282:12  Mind and temporary material existence never unite in
        figure or in fact.

                            Opposite symbols

        A straight line finds no abiding-place in a curve, and a
282:15  curve finds no adjustment to a straight line. Similarly,
        matter has no place in Spirit, and Spirit has
        no place in matter. Truth has no home in
282:18  error, and error has no foothold in Truth. Mind cannot
        pass into non-intelligence and matter, nor can non-intel-
        ligence become Soul. At no point can these opposites
282:21  mingle or unite. Even though they seem to touch, one
        is still a curve and the other a straight line.

        There is no inherent power in matter; for all that is
282:24  material is a material, human, mortal thought, always
        governing itself erroneously.

        Truth is the intelligence of immortal Mind. Error is
282:27  the so-called intelligence of mortal mind.

                          Truth is not inverted

        Whatever indicates the fall of man or the opposite of
        God or God's absence, is the Adam-dream, which is neither
282:30  Mind nor man, for it is not begotten of the
        Father. The rule of inversion infers from
        error its opposite, Truth; but Truth is the light which
283:1   dispels error. As mortals begin to understand Spirit,
        they give up the belief that there is any true existence
283:3   apart from God.

                      Source of all life and action

        Mind is the source of all movement, and there is no
        inertia to retard or check its perpetual and harmonious
283:6   action. Mind is the same Life, Love, and wis-
        dom "yesterday, and to-day, and forever."
        Matter and its effects - sin, sickness, and
283:9   death - are states of mortal mind which act, react, and
        then come to a stop. They are not facts of Mind. They
        are not ideas, but illusions. Principle is absolute. It
283:12  admits of no error, but rests upon understanding.

        But what say prevalent theories? They insist that
        Life, or God, is one and the same with material life so-
283:15  called. They speak of both Truth and error as /mind/,
        and of good and evil as /spirit/. They claim that to be
        life which is but the objective state of material sense, -
283:18  such as the structural life of the tree and of material
        man, - and deem this the manifestation of the one Life,
        God.

                           Spiritual structure

283:21  This false belief as to what really constitutes life so
        detracts from God's character and nature, that the true
        sense of His power is lost to all who cling to
283:24  this falsity. The divine Principle, or Life, can-
        not be practically demonstrated in length of days, as it
        was by the patriarchs, unless its Science be accurately
283:27  stated. We must receive the divine Principle in the under-
        standing, and live it in daily life; and unless we so do, we
        can no more demonstrate Science, than we can teach and
283:30  illustrate geometry by calling a curve a straight line or a
        straight line a sphere.

        Are mentality, immortality, consciousness, resident in
284:1   matter? It is not rational to say that Mind is infinite,
        but dwells in finiteness, - in matter, - or that matter is
284:3   infinite and the medium of Mind.

                           Mind never limited

        If God were limited to man or matter, or if the infinite
        could be circumscribed within the finite, God would be
284:6   corporeal, and unlimited Mind would seem
        to spring from a limited body; but this is an
        impossibility. Infinite Mind can have no starting-point,
284:9   and can return to no limit. It can never be in bonds,
        nor be fully manifested through corporeality.

                     Material recognition impossible

        Is God's image or likeness matter, or a mortal, sin,
284:12  sickness, and death? Can matter recognize Mind?
        Can infinite Mind recognize matter? Can the
        infinite dwell in the finite or know aught un-
284:15  like the infinite? Can Deity be known through
        the material senses? Can the material senses, which re-
        ceive no direct evidence of Spirit, give correct testimony
284:18  as to spiritual life, truth, and love?

        The answer to all these questions must forever be in
        the negative.

                  Our physical insensibility to Spirit

284:21  The physical senses can obtain no proof of God. They
        can neither see Spirit through the eye nor hear it through
        the ear, nor can they feel, taste, or smell Spirit.
284:24  Even the more subtile and misnamed ma-
        terial elements are beyond the cognizance
        of these senses, and are known only by the effects com-
284:27  monly attributed to them.

        According to Christian Science, the only real senses
        of man are spiritual, emanating from divine Mind.
284:30  Thought passes from God to man, but neither sensation
        nor report goes from material body to Mind. The in-
        tercommunication is always from God to His idea, man.
285:1   Matter is not sentient and cannot be cognizant of good
        or of evil, of pleasure or of pain. Man's individu-
285:3   ality is not material. This Science of being obtains not
        alone hereafter in what men call Paradise, but here
        and now; it is the great fact of being for time and
285:6   eternity.

                          The human counterfeit

        What, then, is the material personality which suffers,
        sins, and dies? It is not man, the image and likeness
285:9   of God, but man's counterfeit, the inverted
        likeness, the /unlikeness/ called sin, sickness,
        and death. The unreality of the claim that a mortal is
285:12  the true image of God is illustrated by the opposite na-
        tures of Spirit and matter, Mind and body, for one is
        intelligence while the other is non-intelligence.

                         Material misconceptions

285:15  Is God a physical personality? Spirit is not physical.
        The belief that a material body is man is a false con-
        ception of man. The time has come for a
285:18  finite conception of the infinite and of a ma-
        terial body as the seat of Mind to give place
        to a diviner sense of intelligence and its manifestations,
285:21  to the better understanding that Science gives of the
        Supreme Being, or divine Principle, and idea.

                       Salvation is through reform

        By interpreting God as a corporeal Saviour but not as
285:24  the saving Principle, or divine Love, we shall continue
        to seek salvation through pardon and not
        through reform, and resort to matter instead
285:27  of Spirit for the cure of the sick. As mortals
        reach, through knowledge of Christian Science, a higher
        sense, they will seek to learn, not from matter, but from
285:30  the divine Principle, God, how to demonstrate the Christ,
        Truth, as the healing and saving power.

        It is essential to understand, instead of believe, what
286:1   relates most nearly to the happiness of being. To seek
        Truth through belief in a human doctrine is not to un-
286:3   derstand the infinite. We must not seek the immutable
        and immortal through the finite, mutable, and mortal,
        and so depend upon belief instead of demonstration, for
286:6   this is fatal to a knowledge of Science. The understand-
        ing of Truth gives full faith in Truth, and spiritual un-
        derstanding is better than all burnt offerings.

286:9   The Master said, "No man cometh unto the Father
        [the divine Principle of being] but by me," Christ,
        Life, Truth, Love; for Christ says, "I am the way."
286:12  Physical causation was put aside from first to
        last by this original man, Jesus. He knew that the
        divine. Principle, Love, creates and governs all that
286:15  is real.

                        Goodness a portion of God

        In the Saxon and twenty other tongues /good/ is the term
        for God. The Scriptures declare all that He
286:18  made to be good, like Himself, - good in
        Principle and in idea. Therefore the spiritual
        universe is good, and reflects God as He is.

                           Spiritual thoughts

286:21  God's thoughts are perfect and eternal, are substance
        and Life. Material and temporal thoughts are human,
        involving error, and since God, Spirit, is the
286:24  only cause, they lack a divine cause. The
        temporal and material are not then creations of Spirit.
        They are but counterfeits of the spiritual and eternal.
286:27  Transitory thoughts are the antipodes of everlasting
        Truth, though (by the supposition of opposite qualities)
        error must also say, "I am true." But by this saying
286:30  error, the lie, destroys itself.

        Sin, sickness, and death are comprised in human ma-
        terial belief, and belong not to the divine Mind. They
287:1   are without a real origin or existence. They have neither
        Principle nor permanence, but belong, with all that is
287:3   material and temporal, to the nothingness of error, which
        simulates the creations of Truth. All creations of Spirit
        are eternal; but creations of matter must return to dust.
287:6   Error supposes man to be both mental and material.
        Divine Science contradicts this postulate and maintains
        man's spiritual identity.

                             Divine allness

287:9   We call the absence of Truth, /error/. Truth and error
        are unlike. In Science, Truth is divine, and the /infinite/
        God can have no unlikeness. Did God, Truth,
287:12  create error? No! "Doth a fountain send
        forth at the same place sweet water and bitter?" God
        being everywhere and all-inclusive, how can He be absent
287:15  or suggest the absence of omnipresence and omnipotence?
        How can there be more than /all/?

        Neither understanding nor truth accompanies error,
287:18  nor is error the offshoot of Mind. Evil calls itself some-
        thing, when it is nothing. It saith, "I am man, but I am
        not the image and likeness of God;" whereas the Scrip-
287:21  tures declare that man was made in God's likeness.

                             Error unveiled

        Error is false, mortal belief; it is illusion, without spir-
        itual identity or foundation, and it has no real existence.
287:24  The supposition that life, substance, and in-
        telligence are /in/ matter, or /of/ it, is an error.
        Matter is neither a thing nor a person, but merely the
287:27  objective supposition of Spirit's opposite. The five mate-
        rial senses testify to truth and error as united in a mind
        both good and evil. Their false evidence will finally
287:30  yield to Truth, - to the recognition of Spirit and of the
        spiritual creation.

        Truth cannot be contaminated by error. The state-
288:1   ment that /Truth is real/ necessarily includes the correlated
        statement, that /error, Truth's unlikeness, is unreal/.

                           The great conflict

288:3   The suppositional warfare between truth and error is
        only the mental conflict between the evidence of the spir-
        itual senses and the testimony of the material
288:6   senses, and this warfare between the Spirit and
        flesh will settle all questions through faith in and the un-
        derstanding of divine Love.
288:9   Superstition and understanding can never combine.
        When the final physical and moral effects of Christian
        Science are fully apprehended, the conflict between truth
288:12  and error, understanding and belief, Science and material
        sense, foreshadowed by the prophets and inaugurated
        by Jesus, will cease, and spiritual harmony reign. The
288:15  lightnings and thunderbolts of error may burst and flash
        till the cloud is cleared and the tumult dies away in the
        distance. Then the raindrops of divinity refresh the
288:18  earth. As St. Paul says: "There remaineth therefore
        a rest to the people of God" (of Spirit).

                     The chief stones in the temple

        The chief stones in the temple of Christian Science are
288:21  to be found in the following postulates: that Life is God,
        good, and not evil; that Soul is sinless, not
        to be found in the body; that Spirit is not, and
288:24  cannot be, materialized; that Life is not subject
        to death; that the spiritual real man has no birth, no ma-
        terial life, and no death.

                           The Christ-element

288:27  Science reveals the glorious possibilities of immortal
        man, forever unlimited by the mortal senses.
        The Christ-element in the Messiah made him
288:30  the Way-shower, Truth and Life.

        The eternal Truth destroys what mortals seem to have
        learned from error, and man's real existence as a child
289:1   of God comes to light. Truth demonstrated is eternal
        life. Mortal man can never rise from the temporal /debris/
289:3   of error, belief in sin, sickness, and death, until he learns
        that God is the only Life. The belief that life and sensa-
        tion are in the body should be overcome by the under-
289:6   standing of what constitutes man as the image of God.
        Then Spirit will have overcome the flesh.

                          Wickedness is not man

        A wicked mortal is not the idea of God. He is little
289:9   else than the expression of error. To suppose that sin,
        lust, hatred, envy, hypocrisy, revenge, have life
        abiding in them, is a terrible mistake. Life
289:12  and life's idea, Truth and Truth's idea, never make men
        sick, sinful, or mortal.

                          Death but an illusion

        The fact that the Christ, or Truth, overcame and still
289:15  overcomes death proves the "king of terrors" to be but
        a mortal belief, or error, which Truth destroys
        with the spiritual evidences of Life; and this
289:18  shows that what appears to the senses to be death is but a
        mortal illusion, for to the real man and the real universe
        there is no death-process.

289:21  The belief that matter has life results, by the universal
        law of mortal mind, in a belief in death. So man, tree,
        and flower are supposed to die; but the fact remains,
289:24  that God's universe is spiritual and immortal.

                           Spiritual offspring

        The spiritual fact and the material belief of things are
        contradictions; but the spiritual is true, and therefore the
289:27  material must be untrue. Life is not in matter.
        Therefore it cannot be said to pass out of mat-
        ter. Matter and death are mortal illusions. Spirit and
289:30  all things spiritual are the real and eternal.

        Man is not the offspring of flesh, but of Spirit, - of
        Life, not of matter. Because Life is God, Life must be
290:1   eternal, self-existent. Life is the everlasting I AM, the Be-
        ing who was and is and shall be, whom nothing can erase.

                           Death no advantage

290:3   If the Principle, rule, and demonstration of man's being
        are not in the least understood before what is termed death
        overtakes mortals, they will rise no higher spir-
290:6   itually in the scale of existence on account of
        that single experience, but will remain as material as be-
        fore the transition, still seeking happiness through a ma-
290:9   terial, instead of through a spiritual sense of life, and from
        selfish and inferior motives. That Life or Mind is finite
        and physical or is manifested through brain and nerves,
290:12  is false. Hence Truth comes to destroy this error and
        its effects, - sickness, sin, and death. To the spiritual
        class, relates the Scripture: "On such the second death
290:15  hath no power."

                           Future purification

        If the change called /death/ destroyed the belief in sin,
        sickness, and death, happiness would be won at the mo-
290:18  ment of dissolution, and be forever permanent;
        but this is not so. Perfection is gained only
        by perfection. They who are unrighteous shall be un-
290:21  righteous still, until in divine Science Christ, Truth, re-
        moves all ignorance and sin.

                             Sin is punished

        The sin and error which possess us at the instant of
290:24  death do not cease at that moment, but endure until the
        death of these errors. To be wholly spiritual,
        man must be sinless, and he becomes thus only
290:27  when he reaches perfection. The murderer, though slain
        in the act, does not thereby forsake sin. He is no more
        spiritual for believing that his body died and learning that
290:30  his cruel mind died not. His thoughts are no purer until
        evil is disarmed by good. His body is as material as his
        mind, and /vice versa/.

291:1   The suppositions that sin is pardoned while unfor-
        saken, that happiness can be genuine in the midst of
291:3   sin, that the so-called death of the body frees from sin,
        and that God's pardon is aught but the destruction of
        sin, - these are grave mistakes. We know that all will
291:6   be changed "in the twinkling of an eye," when the last
        trump shall sound; but this last call of wisdom cannot
        come till mortals have already yielded to each lesser call
291:9   in the growth of Christian character. Mortals need not
        fancy that belief in the experience of death will awaken
        them to glorified being.

                         Salvation and probation

291:12  Universal salvation rests on progression and probation,
        and is unattainable without them. Heaven is not a local-
        ity, but a divine state of Mind in which all the
291:15  manifestations of Mind are harmonious and
        immortal, because sin is not there and man is
        found having no righteousness of his own, but in posses-
291:18  sion of "the mind of the Lord," as the Scripture says.

        "In the place where the tree falleth, there it shall
        be." So we read in Ecclesiastes. This text has been
291:21  transformed into the popular proverb, "As the tree
        falls, so it must lie." As man falleth asleep, so shall he
        awake. As death findeth mortal man, so shall he be
291:24  after death, until probation and growth shall effect the
        needed change. Mind never becomes dust. No resur-
        rection from the grave awaits Mind or Life, for the grave
291:27  has no power over either.

                             Day of judgment

        No final judgment awaits mortals, for the judgment-
        day of wisdom comes hourly and continually,
291:30  even the judgment by which mortal man is di-
        vested of all material error. As for spiritual error there
        is none.

292:1   When the last mortal fault is destroyed, then the final
        trump will sound which will end the battle of Truth with
292:3   error and mortality; "but of that day and hour, knoweth
        no man." Here prophecy pauses. Divine Science alone
        can compass the heights and depths of being and reveal
292:6   the infinite.

                             Primitive error

        Truth will be to us "the resurrection and the life" only
        as it destroys all error and the belief that Mind, the only
292:9   immortality of man, can be fettered by the
        body, and Life be controlled by death. A sin-
        ful, sick, and dying mortal is not the likeness of God, the
292:12  perfect and eternal.

        Matter is the primitive belief of mortal mind, because
        this so-called mind has no cognizance of Spirit. To
292:15  mortal mind, matter is substantial, and evil is
        real. The so-called senses of mortals are material.
        Hence the so-called life of mortals is dependent on
292:18  matter.

        Explaining the origin of material man and mortal mind,
        Jesus said: "Why do ye not understand my speech?
292:21  Even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your
        father, the devil [evil], and the lusts of your father ye will
        do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode
292:24  not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When
        he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar,
        and the father of it."

                              Immortal man

292:27  This carnal material mentality, misnamed /mind/, is
        mortal. Therefore man would be annihilated, were it
        not for the spiritual real man's indissoluble
292:30  connection with his God, which Jesus brought
        to light. In his resurrection and ascension, Jesus showed
        that a mortal man is not the real essence of manhood, and
293:1   that this unreal material mortality disappears in presence
        of the reality.

                         Elementary electricity

293:3   Electricity is not a vital fluid, but the least material
        form of illusive consciousness, - the material mindless-
        ness, which forms no link between matter and
293:6   Mind, and which destroys itself. Matter and
        mortal mind are but different strata of human belief. The
        grosser substratum is named matter or body; the more
293:9   ethereal is called mind. This so-called mind and body
        is the illusion called a mortal, a mind in matter. In reality
        and in Science, both strata, mortal mind and mortal body,
293:12  are false representatives of man.

        The material so-called gases and forces are counter-
        feits of the spiritual forces of divine Mind, whose potency
293:15  is Truth, whose attraction is Love, whose adhesion and
        cohesion are Life, perpetuating the eternal facts of being.
        Electricity is the sharp surplus of materiality which coun-
293:18  terfeits the true essence of spirituality or truth, - the
        great difference being that electricity is not intelligent,
        while spiritual truth is Mind.

                         The counterfeit forces

293:21  There is no vapid fury of mortal mind - expressed in
        earthquake, wind, wave, lightning, fire, bestial ferocity
        - and this so-called mind is self-destroyed.
293:24  The manifestations of evil, which counterfeit
        divine justice, are called in the Scriptures, "The anger
        of the Lord." In reality, they show the self-destruction
293:27  of error or matter and point to matter's opposite, the
        strength and permanency of Spirit. Christian Science
        brings to light Truth and its supremacy, universal har-
293:30  mony, the entireness of God, good, and the nothingness
        of evil.

                          Instruments of error

        The five physical senses are the avenues and instru-
294:1   ments of human error, and they correspond with error.
        These senses indicate the common human belief, that life,
294:3   substance, and intelligence are a unison of
        matter with Spirit. This is pantheism, and
        carries within itself the seeds of all error.

294:6   If man is both mind and matter, the loss of one finger
        would take away some quality and quantity of the man,
        for matter and man would be one.

                             Mortal verdict

294:9   The belief that matter thinks, sees, or feels is not more
        real than the belief that matter enjoys and suffers. This
        mortal belief, misnamed /man/, is error, saying:
294:12  "Matter has intelligence and sensation. Nerves
        feel. Brain thinks and sins. The stomach can make a
        man cross. Injury can cripple and matter can kill man."
294:15  This verdict of the so-called material senses victimizes
        mortals, taught, as they are by physiology and pathology,
        to revere false testimony, even the errors that are destroyed
294:18  by Truth through spiritual sense and Science.

                            Mythical pleasure

        The lines of demarcation between immortal man, repre-
        senting Spirit, and mortal man, representing the error that
294:21  life and intelligence are in matter, show the
        pleasures and pains of matter to be myths, and
        human belief in them to be the father of mythology, in
294:24  which matter is represented as divided into intelligent gods.
        Man's genuine selfhood is recognizable only in what is
        good and true. Man is neither self-made nor made by
294:27  mortals. God created man.

                             Severed members

        The inebriate believes that there is pleasure in intoxica-
        tion. The thief believes that he gains something by steal-
294:30  ing, and the hypocrite that he is hiding himself. The
        Science of Mind corrects such mistakes, for Truth demon-
        strates the falsity of error.

                             Severed members

295:1   The belief that a severed limb is aching in the old loca-
        tion, the sensation seeming to be in nerves which
295:3   are no longer there, is an added proof of the un-
        reliability of physical testimony.

                        Mortals unlike immortals

        God creates and governs the universe, including man.
295:6   The universe is filled with spiritual ideas, which He
        evolves, and they are obedient to the Mind
        that makes them. Mortal mind would trans-
295:9   form the spiritual into the material, and then
        recover man's original self in order to escape from the
        mortality of this error. Mortals are not like immortals,
295:12  created in God's own image; but infinite Spirit being all,
        mortal consciousness will at last yield to the scientific fact
        and disappear, and the real sense of being, perfect and
295:15  forever intact, will appear.

                          Goodness transparent

        The manifestation of God through mortals is as light
        passing through the window-pane. The light and the
295:18  glass never mingle, but as matter, the glass
        is less opaque than the walls. The mortal
        mind through which Truth appears most vividly is that
295:21  one which has lost much materiality - much error - in
        order to become a better transparency for Truth. Then,
        like a cloud melting into thin vapor, it no longer hides
295:24  the sun.

                            Brainology a myth

        All that is called mortal thought is made up of error.
        The theoretical mind is matter, named /brain/, or /mate/-
295:27  /rial consciousness/, the exact opposite of real
        Mind, or Spirit. Brainology teaches that
        mortals are created to suffer and die. It further
295:30  teaches that when man is dead, his immortal soul is
        resurrected from death and mortality. Thus error the-
        orizes that spirit is born of matter and returns to mat-
296:1   ter, and that man has a resurrection from dust; whereas
        Science unfolds the eternal verity, that man is the spiritual,
296:3   eternal reflection of God.

                          Scientific purgation

        Progress is born of experience. It is the ripening of
        mortal man, through which the mortal is dropped for
296:6   the immortal. Either here or hereafter, suf-
        fering or Science must destroy all illusions
        regarding life and mind, and regenerate material sense
296:9   and self. The old man with his deeds must be put off.
        Nothing sensual or sinful is immortal. The death of a
        false material sense and of sin, not the death of organic
296:12  matter, is what reveals man and Life, harmonious, real,
        and eternal.

        The so-called pleasures and pains of matter perish,
296:15  and they must go out under the blaze of Truth, spiritual
        sense, and the actuality of being. Mortal belief must lose
