will raise unto David a righteous BRANCH, and a king shall reign and
prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is his name
whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." Jer. xxiii. So,
before the capture and exile of Jehoiachin, it was announced of Jehoiakim
his father, "He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David; and his
dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to
the frost. And I will punish him and his seed, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem and the men of Judah." Jer. xxxvi.

Thus Jehovah in the most public and formal manner forsook and withdrew
from the temple, and terminated the theocracy; the procedure being
attended by visible exhibitions, and verbal explanations and
announcements intelligible to Ezekiel, and adapted to qualify him to
vindicate it to the captives, and to forewarn them of the inflictions
and desolations which were to follow. Accordingly, neither the Shekina
nor any tokens of the Divine presence there afterwards appeared. When
the structure was demolished by the Chaldeans, the altar and all the
interior furniture was destroyed or removed, and never again recovered.
In the new erection under Cyrus, when dedicated, and ever after, the ark
of the covenant and the mercy-seat upon it, the Shekina, the Urim and
Thummim, the holy fire upon the altar, and the spirit of prophecy, were
irrecoverably wanting. The construction which was substituted for the
original ark had neither the tables of the law nor any of its other
contents, nor any visible glory over it, nor oracles proceeding from it.
The Divine presence, always before visible in a cloud over the
mercy-seat, returned no more. An imitation altar was erected, but the
fire which came down from heaven upon the altar in the tabernacle, and
again at the dedication of the first temple, had been extinguished, and
was not again restored. Jehovah, officially, as prophet, priest, and
king, had withdrawn, not to reaeppear till he should come, the Messenger
of the Covenant, in fulfilment of Malachi's prediction.

The new structure therefore was, at least to all but those whose worship
was purely and eminently spiritual, a cold, cheerless, and dark arena of
formal and wearisome rites and ceremonies; a lifeless round of irksome
forms, without any visible tokens of the Divine presence, or of Divine
recognition or acceptance; any oracular responses, any fire from heaven,
or other vindications, confirmations, or sanctions of the doctrines or
faith professed or signified by the services and offerings of the
worshippers.

Hence the degeneracy, formalism, and hypocrisy which subsequently
characterized the temple worship, as recorded by Malachi and his
contemporaries, and in the later history of the Jews down to our
Saviour's time; their separation into discordant sects; the renunciation
by the mass of them of the divine Mediator and the doctrine of
Mediation, and their adoption exclusively of the doctrine of the UNITY,
as held by them to this day; and the necessity, in order to the
maintenance among the true worshippers of the doctrines and faith of the
patriarchs and prophets, of providing and perpetuating in their vulgar
tongue such expositions as were furnished by the Chaldee paraphrasts.

A further confirmation to the same effect might be deduced from a
consideration of the results of the scheme of reformation ascribed to
Zoroaster towards the close of the Babylonish exile, whereby he hoped to
unite the Jews with the Chaldeans, Persians, &c., in one sect, by
purging the Magian system of worship from idolatry, restoring it to what
he held to be its primitive purity, and combining with it the doctrine
of one supreme creative intelligence, the doctrine of a resurrection,
and other tenets of the Jews which might be incorporated in a system
that neither taught nor admitted a Mediator, or any doctrine of Divine
or creature mediation. This artful scheme, which was more or less
successful at the time, and which, among those Jews of Babylon and the
provinces who did not return to Palestine, may be traced down for
centuries in the history of Oriental Gnosticism, obviously furnished a
further reason for guarding the true worshippers, after the period of
exile and the cessation of prophetic gifts, by such means as the Chaldee
versions furnish.

Let it be further observed, as not unworthy of particular notice, that
the Samaritans, from the very commencement of their history, and of
their rivalship and hostility to the Jews, and the erection of their
temple on Mount Gerizim, simultaneously with that of the restored Jews
at Jerusalem, received and used no portion of the sacred writings then
extant, except the books of Moses; and that they perseveringly rejected
all traditions, and all glosses and comments on the original text. And
yet from the saying of the Samaritan woman, "I know that Messiah cometh;
(that is, _the Christ, the Anointed_;) when he is come, he will teach us
all things," it would seem that, down to our Saviour's time, they
understood the true doctrine concerning his person, his incarnation, and
the titles by which he would be distinguished. When told that he who was
then present in the form of man, and who spoke to her, was the Messiah,
she manifested no surprise or doubt. Many of the Samaritans believed in
him on her testimony. "And many more believed because of what they heard
from himself," and said, "We know that this is truly the Saviour of the
World, the Messiah." (_Campbell._)

Now, since they held no intercourse with the Jews, and, from prejudice
and hostility, would learn nothing from them; and since they received
only the Pentateuch and rejected all traditions, it would seem that they
must from the beginning of their history have understood the Mosaic
writings to teach those doctrines, and from continual study of them as
the only source of their religious knowledge, hopes and expectations,
must have perpetuated the sentiments with which they originally received
them.

"That the sentiments of the woman who conversed at the well with Christ
were the same with those of the Samaritans in general, will not admit of
a doubt; for from whence could a common person like her have obtained
the information she discovers on several points relating to the Messiah,
unless from popular traditions current amongst those of her own nation?
These sentiments then furnish us with a strong argument in answer to
those who contend that the more ancient Hebrews entertained no
expectation of a Messiah, but that this hope first, sprang up amongst
the Jews some short time before the coming of our Saviour. So deep and
inveterate was the enmity which subsisted between the Jews and the
Samaritans, that it is utterly incredible that a hope of this kind
should have been communicated from either of them to the other. It
necessarily follows, therefore, that as both of them were, at the time
of our Saviour's birth, looking for the appearance of a Messiah from
above, they must have derived the expectation from one common source,
doubtless the books of Moses and the discipline of their ancestors; and
consequently that this hope was entertained long before the Babylonish
captivity, and the rise of the Samaritans. I mention only the books of
Moses, because it is well known that the Samaritans did not consider any
of the other writings of the Old Testament as sacred or of Divine
original; and it is therefore not at all likely that any information
which they might possess respecting the Messiah that was to come should
have been drawn from any other source. In the discourse of the Samaritan
woman, we likewise discover what were the sentiments of the ancient
Hebrews respecting the Messiah. The expectation of the Jews at the time
of our Saviour's coming was, as we have seen, directed towards a
war-like leader, a hero, an emperor, who should recover for the
oppressed posterity of Abraham their liberty and rights; but the
Samaritans, as appears from the conversation of this woman, looked
forward to the Messiah in the light of a spiritual teacher and guide,
who should instruct them in a more perfect and acceptable way of serving
God than that which they then followed. Now the Samaritans had always
kept themselves entirely distinct from the Jews, and would never consent
to adopt any point of doctrine or discipline from them; and the
consequence was, that the ancient opinion respecting the Messiah had
been retained in much greater purity by the former than by the Jews,
whose arrogance and impatience under the calamities to which they were
exposed, had brought them by degrees to turn their backs on the opinions
entertained by their forefathers on this subject, and to cherish the
expectation that, in the Messiah promised to them by God, they should
have to hail an earthly prince and deliverer. Lastly, I think it
particularly deserving of attention, that it is clear from what is said
by this woman, that the Samaritans did not consider the Mosaic Law in
the light of a permanent establishment, but expected that it would pass
away, and its place be supplied by a more perfect system of discipline
on the coming of the Messiah. For when she hears our Saviour predict the
downfall of the Samaritan as well as the Jewish religion, instead of
taking fire at his words, and taxing him, after the Jewish manner, with
blasphemy against God and against Moses, (Acts vi. 13-15,) she answers
with mildness and composure that she knew the Messiah would come, and
was not unapprised that the religion of her ancestors would then undergo
a change." (Mosheim, Int. Com. chap. 2.)

The Jews, on the contrary, as is hereafter more particularly observed,
had renounced the Divine Mediator and the entire doctrine of mediation
between God and man. They did not expect the promised Messiah in the
character of Mediator, but, holding no distinction of persons in the
Godhead, they gloried in the doctrine of the _Unity_; believed the
Mosaic Law and institutions would be perpetual, and trusted to their
observance of them for salvation. It were easy to multiply citations to
show that they still entertain those views. A single instance may
suffice. In the London Jewish Chronicle for May, 1852, the chief Rabbi
of the great synagogue, in a sermon on the first day of the Feast of
Weeks, is quoted as saying: "A man who has a royal patron, when in
distress applies first to the Minister, to know if an audience will be
granted; but with respect to God, if man is in trouble he wants no
Mediator, or angels, but calls to God alone, and he shall be heard. And
this cheering belief in the unity of God is quieting to the mind."




CHAPTER XIV.

    Citations from the Chaldee Paraphrases.


The earliest Chaldee paraphrases which have been handed down are
supposed to have been compiled or written about the time of the first
advent, when the true worshippers may be supposed to have been anxious
to revive and spread abroad the knowledge of them in such manner as to
induce the Jews of that period to recognize the Messiah in the incarnate
Word. The following testimonies from those writings of the sentiments of
the Jewish Church concerning the Messiah as understood by them to be
revealed in the ancient Scriptures, and his identity with the Messenger
Jehovah, are, for the sake of his comments, taken from Faber's _Horae
Mosaicae_:

"When the text reads, _They heard the voice of the Lord God walking in
the garden_, the Targums explain the passage to mean: _They heard the_
WORD _of the Lord God walking;_ or, somewhat more fully, _they heard the
voice of the_ WORD _of the Lord God walking_. In point of grammatical
construction, even the modern Jews allow that the participle _walking_
agrees with the voice, and not with _the Lord God_. But walking is the
attribute of a person. Therefore the Targums rightly gave the sense of
the original when they introduced the WORD as the judge of our first
parents."

The exclamation of Eve, I have gotten a man from the Lord, they render,
"_I have obtained the man, the angel of Jehovah!_ Now, since _Jehovah_
is the word used in the original, it is difficult to account for this
paraphrastic exposition, unless we conclude that, at the time when it
was written, the Jews believed the angel of Jehovah to be himself
Jehovah, and expected him to be born incarnate."

"To this opinion we shall the rather incline, if we attend to another
paraphrastic interpretation. The sacred text reads: _In that day shall
Jehovah of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty
unto the residue of his people_. But the Targum of Jonathan reads: _In
that day shall the Messiah of Jehovah of hosts be for a crown of glory_.
Jonathan, however, could never have thus explained the passage, unless
he had believed that the future Messiah would be Jehovah incarnate; nor
would he have hazarded so extraordinary an interpretation, unless he had
been fully conscious of speaking the general sentiments of his
contemporaries. It is well known that the Jews so highly venerate the
Targum of this writer, as to deem it something divine; yet we see that
Jonathan identifies the Messiah with Jehovah himself. The doctrine in
question still prevailed among the Jews at the time when Justin Martyr
flourished, as is manifest from his direct appeal to Trypho. _If we
produce to them,_ says he, _those scriptures formerly rehearsed to you,
which expressly show that the Messiah is both subject to suffering, and
yet is the adorable God, they are under a necessity of acknowledging
that these respect the Christ. So that while they assert that Jesus is
not the Christ, they still confess that the Christ Himself shall come,
and suffer, and reign, and be the adorable God: which conduct of theirs
is truly most absurd and contradictory._ I need scarcely remark, that
Justin could never have hazarded such language to a Hebrew antagonist,
unless he knew that he had very good ground for what he said.

"But to return to the Targums, where the text reads: _Let not God speak
with us, lest we die_, the interpretation of Onkelos runs, _Let not the
Word from before the Lord speak with us_. So likewise where the text
reads, _She called the name of Jehovah that spake unto her, Thou God
seest me_, the Targum of Jonathan runs, _She confessed before the Lord
Jehovah, whose Word had spoken unto her_. And the Targum of Jerusalem,
_She confessed and prayed to the Word of the Lord who had appeared to
her_. Now the person who appeared to Hagar was the angel of Jehovah. The
paraphrasts therefore identify _the Word and the Angel_. Hence it is
plain that by the Word of God they do not mean a speech uttered by God,
but that they use the term to express a real person. By this personal
Word they understood the Messiah; as is evident from Jonathan's
interpretation of the text, _Jehovah said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my
right hand_. He explains its purport to be, _Jehovah said unto his
Word_. But it is manifest from our Saviour's conversation with the
Pharisees relative to the nature and parentage of the Messiah, that they
acknowledge this text to relate to him; and it appears from the Midrash
Tillim that such an application is fully recognized by the Jewish
Rabbins. Hence the inference is inevitable, that the Hebrew doctors
confess the Messiah to be the Word of God or the angel of Jehovah. And
hence we shall at once perceive why St. John so pointedly bestows the
title upon his divine Master. He did but employ the usual phraseology of
his countrymen respecting the promised Messiah; yet, by applying the
name of Jesus of Nazareth, he at once declared him to be the Messiah,
and that angel of Jehovah who was confessedly the God both of the
Patriarchal and of the Levitical Church.

"Agreeably to this obvious conclusion, the Targums exhibit the Word with
all the characteristics of the expected Messiah.

"They describe him as the Mediator between God and man.

"Thus, in paraphrasing a text from Deuteronomy iv. 7, Jonathan writes:
_God is near in the name of the Word of Jehovah_; in paraphrasing a text
of Hosea iv. 9, _God will receive the prayer of Israel by his Word, and
have mercy upon them, and will make them by his Word like a beautiful
fig tree_. And in paraphrasing a text of Jeremiah xxix. 14: _I will be
sought by you in my Word, and I will be inquired of by you through my
Word._ Thus likewise where Abraham is said by Moses to have _called on
the name of Jehovah the everlasting God_, he is described by the Targum
of Jerusalem as _praying in the name of the Word of Jehovah, the God of
the world_.

"They speak of him as making atonement for sin.

"Thus, in paraphrasing a text of Deuteronomy, (xxxii. 43,) Jonathan
writes: _God will atone by his Word for his land and for his people,
even a people saved by the Word of Jehovah._

"They exhibit him as a Redeemer.

"Thus the text from Genesis xlix. 18, _I have waited for thy salvation,
O Jehovah_, is paraphrased as follows in the Jerusalem Targum: _Our
father Jacob said thus: My soul expects not the redemption of Gideon the
son of Joash, which is a temporal salvation; nor the redemption of
Samson, which is a transitory salvation; but the redemption which thou
didst promise should come through thy Word to thy people. This salvation
my soul waits for._ Thus the same text is paraphrased by Jonathan with a
direct application to the Messiah; whence again we find it to be the
established doctrine of the ancient Hebrew Church, that the Messiah and
the Word were the same person. Our father Jacob said: _I do not expect
the deliverance of Gideon the son of Joash, which is a temporal
salvation; nor that of Samson the son of Manoah, which is a transient
salvation; but I expect the redemption of Messiah the son of David, who
shall come to gather to himself the children of Israel._

"The Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan were written immediately before the
time of Christ, and among the Jews they are in such high esteem, that
they hold them to be of the same authority with the original text. Of
this extravagant honor the ground is, that those two interpreters
committed to writing the ancient oral traditions, which [they supposed]
had come down in regular descent from their first communication to Moses
on the top of Mount Sinai.

"Such an opinion proves at least the high antiquity of the sentiments
contained in those Targums; and, as the Targums themselves were composed
before the Christian era, they must clearly be viewed as exhibiting the
doctrine of the Levitical Church ere an inveterate hatred of the gospel
led to a suppression or concealment of the ancient faith.

"The later Targums were written subsequent to the time of our Lord; but
so far as regards the present argument, their importance is not the less
on that account. Those of Onkelos and Jonathan show the tenets of the
Hebrew Church _before_ Christ; those which are later prove, by their
accordance with their predecessors, that the same doctrine continued in
full force during the first centuries _after_ the Christian era. Thus,
notwithstanding Jesus of Nazareth was denied to be the Messiah, the
Jews," [meaning of course the old school, orthodox party,] "it is plain
from the written evidence of the later Targums, did not immediately
depart from the sentiments of their forefathers relative to _the
character_ of the Messiah."

After quoting testimonies from different Jewish Rabbins, he observes:
"The reason why the Rabbins pronounced the Messiah to be Jehovah, was
