7:30    ourselves in the midst of sin with the recollection
        that we have prayed over it or mean to ask for-
        giveness at some later day. Hypocrisy is fatal to religion.

8:1     A wordy prayer may afford a quiet sense of self-
        justification, though it makes the sinner a hypocrite.
8:3     We never need to despair of an honest heart; but
        there is little hope for those who come only spasmodi-
        cally face to face with their wickedness and then seek to
8:6     hide it. Their prayers are indexes which do not correspond
        with their character. They hold secret fellowship with
        sin, and such externals are spoken of by Jesus as "like
8:9     unto whited sepulchres . . . full . . . of all uncleanness."

                           Aspiration and love

        If a man, though apparently fervent and prayerful,
        is impure and therefore insincere, what must be the
8:12    comment upon him? If he reached the
        loftiness of his prayer, there would be no
        occasion for comment. If we feel the aspiration, hu-
8:15    mility, gratitude, and love which our words express,-
        this God accepts; and it is wise not to try to deceive
        ourselves or others, for "there is nothing covered that
8:18    shall not be revealed." Professions and audible pray-
        ers are like charity in one respect,- they "cover the
        multitude of sins." Praying for humility with what-
8:21    ever fervency of expression does not always mean a
        desire for it. If we turn away from the poor, we are
        not ready to receive the reward of Him who blesses
8:24    the poor. We confess to having a very wicked heart
        and ask that it may be laid bare before us, but do
        we not already know more of this heart than we are
8:27    willing to have our neighbor see?

                           Searching the heart

        We should examine ourselves and learn what is the
        affection and purpose of the heart, for in this way
8:30    only can we learn what we honestly are. If a
        friend informs us of a fault, do we listen pa-
        tiently to the rebuke and credit what is said? Do we not
9:1     rather give thanks that we are "not as other men"?
        During many years the author has been most grateful
9:3     for merited rebuke. The wrong lies in unmerited cen-
        sure,- in the falsehood which does no one any good.

                          Summit of aspiration

        The test of all prayer lies in the answer to these
9:6     questions: Do we love our neighbor better because of
        this asking? Do we pursue the old selfish-
        ness, satisfied with having prayed for some-
9:9     thing better, though we give no evidence of the sin-
        cerity of our requests by living consistently with our
        prayer? If selfishness has given place to kindness,
9:12    we shall regard our neighbor unselfishly, and bless
        them that curse us; but we shall never meet this great
        duty simply by asking that it may be done. There is
9:15    a cross to be taken up before we can enjoy the fruition
        of our hope and faith.

                           Practical religion

        Dost thou "love the Lord thy God with all thy
9:18    heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind"?
        This command includes much, even the sur-
        render of all merely material sensation, affec-
9:21    tion, and worship. This is the El Dorado of Christianity.
        It involves the Science of Life, and recognizes only the
        divine control of Spirit, in which Soul is our master,
9:24    and material sense and human will have no place.

                         The chalice sacrificial

        Are you willing to leave all for Christ, for Truth, and
        so be counted among sinners? No! Do you really desire
9:27    to attain this point? No! Then why make long
        prayers about it and ask to be Christians,
        since you do not care to tread in the footsteps of our
9:30    dear Master? If unwilling to follow his example, why
        pray with the lips that you may be partakers of his
        nature? Consistent prayer is the desire to do right.
10:1    Prayer means that we desire to walk and will walk in
        the light so far as we receive it, even though with bleed-
10:3    ing footsteps, and that waiting patiently on the Lord,
        we will leave our real desires to be rewarded by Him.

        The world must grow to the spiritual understanding
10:6    of prayer. If good enough to profit by Jesus' cup of
        earthly sorrows, God will sustain us under these sor-
        rows. Until we are thus divinely qualified and are
10:9    willing to drink his cup, millions of vain repetitions
        will never pour into prayer the unction of Spirit in
        demonstration of power and "with signs following."
10:12   Christian Science reveals a necessity for overcoming the
        world, the flesh, and evil, and thus destroying all error.

        Seeking is not sufficient. It is striving that enables
10:15   us to enter. Spiritual attainments open the door to a
        higher understanding of the divine Life.

                           Perfunctory prayers

        One of the forms of worship in Thibet is to carry a
10:18   praying-machine through the streets, and stop at the
        doors to earn a penny by grinding out a
        prayer. But the advance guard of progress has
10:21   paid for the privilege of prayer the price of persecution.

                              Asking amiss

        Experience teaches us that we do not always receive
        the blessings we ask for in prayer. There is some mis-
10:24   apprehension of the source and means of
        all goodness and blessedness, or we should
        certainly receive that for which we ask. The Scrip-
10:27   tures say: "Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask
        amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts." That
        which we desire and for which we ask, it is not always
10:30   best for us to receive. In this case infinite Love will
        not grant the request. Do you ask wisdom to be mer-
        ciful and not to punish sin? Then "ye ask amiss."
11:1    Without punishment, sin would multiply. Jesus' prayer,
        "Forgive us our debts," specified also the terms of
11:3    forgiveness. When forgiving the adulterous woman he
        said, "Go, and sin no more."

                          Remission of penalty

        A magistrate sometimes remits the penalty, but this
11:6    may be no moral benefit to the criminal, and at best, it
        only saves the criminal from one form of
        punishment. The moral law, which has the
11:9    right to acquit or condemn, always demands restitu-
        tion before mortals can "go up higher." Broken law
        brings penalty in order to compel this progress.

                         Truth annihilates error

11:12   Mere legal pardon (and there is no other, for divine
        Principle never pardons our sins or mistakes till they
        are corrected) leaves the offender free to re-
11:15   peat the offence, if indeed, he has not already
        suffered sufficiently from vice to make him turn from it
        with loathing. Truth bestows no pardon upon error, but
11:18   wipes it out in the most effectual manner. Jesus suffered
        for our sins, not to annul the divine sentence for an in-
        dividual's sin, but because sin brings inevitable suffering.

                           Desire for holiness

11:21   Petitions bring to mortals only the results of mor-
        tals' own faith. We know that a desire for holiness is
        requisite in order to gain holiness; but if we
11:24   desire holiness above all else, we shall sac-
        rifice everything for it. We must be willing to do this,
        that we may walk securely in the only practical road
11:27   to holiness. Prayer cannot change the unalterable
        Truth, nor can prayer alone give us an understanding
        of Truth; but prayer, coupled with a fervent habitual
11:30   desire to know and do the will of God, will bring us
        into all Truth. Such a desire has little need of audible
        expression. It is best expressed in thought and in life.

                           Prayer for the sick

12:1    "The prayer of faith shall save the sick," says the
        Scripture. What is this healing prayer? A mere re-
12:3    quest that God will heal the sick has no
        power to gain more of the divine presence
        than is always at hand. The beneficial effect of
12:6    such prayer for the sick is on the human mind, mak-
        ing it act more powerfully on the body through a blind
        faith in God. This, however, is one belief casting out
12:9    another, - a belief in the unknown casting out a belief
        in sickness. It is neither Science nor Truth which
        acts through blind belief, nor is it the human under-
12:12   standing of the divine healing Principle as manifested
        in Jesus, whose humble prayers were deep and con-
        scientious protests of Truth, - of man's likeness to
12:15   God and of man's unity with Truth and Love.

        Prayer to a corporeal God affects the sick like a
        drug, which has no efficacy of its own but borrows its
12:18   power from human faith and belief. The drug does
        nothing, because it has no intelligence. It is a mortal
        belief, not divine Principle or Love, which causes a
12:21   drug to be apparently either poisonous or sanative.

        The common custom of praying for the recovery of the
        sick finds help in blind belief, whereas help should come
12:24   from the enlightened understanding. Changes in belief
        may go on indefinitely, but they are the merchandise of
        human thought and not the outgrowth of divine Science.

                      Love impartial and universal

12:27   Does Deity interpose in behalf of one worshipper,
        and not help another who offers the same measure of
        prayer? If the sick recover because they
12:30   pray or are prayed for audibly, only peti-
        tioners (/per se/ or by proxy) should get well. In divine
        Science, where prayers are mental, /all/ may avail them-
13:1    selves of God as "a very present help in trouble."
        Love is impartial and universal in its adaptation and
13:3    bestowals. It is the open fount which cries, "Ho,
        every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters."

                          Public exaggerations

        In public prayer we often go beyond our convictions,
13:6    beyond the honest standpoint of fervent desire. If we
        are not secretly yearning and openly striv-
        ing for the accomplishment of all we ask,
13:9    our prayers are "vain repetitions," such as the heathen
        use. If our petitions are sincere, we labor for what we
        ask; and our Father, who seeth in secret, will reward
13:12   us openly. Can the mere public expression of our de-
        sires increase them? Do we gain the omnipotent ear
        sooner by words than by thoughts? Even if prayer is
13:15   sincere, God knows our need before we tell Him or our
        fellow-beings about it. If we cherish the desire hon-
        estly and silently and humbly, God will bless it, and
13:18   we shall incur less risk of overwhelming our real
        wishes with a torrent of words.

                           Corporeal ignorance

        If we pray to God as a corporeal person, this will
13:21   prevent us from relinquishing the human doubts and
        fears which attend such a belief, and so we
        cannot grasp the wonders wrought by infi-
13:24   nite, incorporeal Love, to whom all things are possible.
        Because of human ignorance of the divine Principle,
        Love, the Father of all is represented as a corporeal
13:27   creator; hence men recognize themselves as merely
        physical, and are ignorant of man as God's image or re-
        flection and of man's eternal incorporeal existence. The
13:30   world of error is ignorant of the world of Truth, - blind
        to the reality of man's existence, - for the world of sen-
        sation is not cognizant of life in Soul, not in body.

                             Bodily presence

14:1    If we are sensibly with the body and regard omnipo-
        tence as a corporeal, material person, whose ear we
14:3    would gain, we are not "absent from the
        body" and "present with the Lord" in the
        demonstration of Spirit. We cannot "serve two mas-
14:6    ters." To be "present with the Lord" is to have, not
        mere emotional ecstasy or faith, but the actual demon-
        stration and understanding of Life as revealed in
14:9    Christian Science. To be "with the Lord" is to be in
        obedience to the law of God, to be absolutely governed
        by divine Love,- by Spirit, not by matter.

                       Spiritualized consciousness

14:12   Become conscious for a single moment that Life and
        intelligence are purely spiritual, - neither in nor of
        matter, - and the body will then utter no
14:15   complaints. If suffering from a belief in
        sickness, you will find yourself suddenly well. Sorrow
        is turned into joy when the body is controlled by spir-
14:18   itual Life, Truth, and Love. Hence the hope of the
        promise Jesus bestows: "He that believeth on me,
        the works that I do shall he do also; . . . because I
14:21   go unto my Father," - [because the Ego is absent from
        the body, and present with Truth and Love.] The
        Lord's Prayer is the prayer of Soul, not of material
14:24   sense.

        Entirely separate from the belief and dream of mate-
        rial living, is the Life divine, revealing spiritual under-
14:27   standing and the consciousness of man's dominion
        over the whole earth. This understanding casts out
        error and heals the sick, and with it you can speak
14:30   "as one having authority."

        "When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and,
        when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father
15:1    which is in secret; and thy Father, which seeth in
        secret, shall reward thee openly."

                           Spiritual sanctuary

15:3    So spake Jesus. The closet typifies the sanctuary of
        Spirit, the door of which shuts out sinful sense but
        lets in Truth, Life, and Love. Closed to
15:6    error, it is open to Truth, and /vice versa/.
        The Father in secret is unseen to the physical senses,
        but He knows all things and rewards according to
15:9    motives, not according to speech. To enter into the
        heart of prayer, the door of the erring senses must be
        closed. Lips must be mute and materialism silent,
15:12   that man may have audience with Spirit, the divine
        Principle, Love, which destroys all error.

                          Effectual invocation

        In order to pray aright, we must enter into the
15:15   closet and shut the door. We must close the lips and
        silence the material senses. In the quiet
        sanctuary of earnest longings, we must
15:18   deny sin and plead God's allness. We must resolve to
        take up the cross, and go forth with honest hearts to
        work and watch for wisdom, Truth, and Love. We
15:21   must "pray without ceasing." Such prayer is an-
        swered, in so far as we put our desires into practice.
        The Master's injunction is, that we pray in secret and
15:24   let our lives attest our sincerity.

                         Trustworthy beneficence

        Christians rejoice in secret beauty and bounty, hidden
        from the world, but known to God. Self-forgetfulness,
15:27   purity, and affection are constant prayers.
        Practice not profession, understanding not
        belief, gain the ear and right hand of omnipotence and
15:30   they assuredly call down infinite blessings. Trustworthi-
        ness is the foundation of enlightened faith. Without a
        fitness for holiness, we cannot receive holiness.

                           Loftiest adoration

16:1    A great sacrifice of material things must precede this
        advanced spiritual understanding. The highest prayer
16:3    is not one of faith merely; it is demonstra-
        tion. Such prayer heals sickness, and must
        destroy sin and death. It distinguishes between Truth
16:6    that is sinless and the falsity of sinful sense.

                       The prayer of Jesus Christ

        Our Master taught his disciples one brief prayer,
        which we name after him the Lord's Prayer. Our Mas-
16:9    ter said, "After this manner therefore pray
        ye," and then he gave that prayer which
        covers all human needs. There is indeed some doubt
16:12   among Bible scholars, whether the last line is not an
        addition to the prayer by a later copyist; but this does
        not affect the meaning of the prayer itself.

16:15   In the phrase, "Deliver us from evil," the original
        properly reads, "Deliver us from the evil one." This
        reading strengthens our scientific apprehension of the peti-
16:18   tion, for Christian Science teaches us that "the evil one," or
        one evil, is but another name for the first lie and all liars.

        Only as we rise above all material sensuousness and
16:21   sin, can we reach the heaven-born aspiration and spir-
        itual consciousness, which is indicated in the Lord's
        Prayer and which instantaneously heals the sick.
16:24   Here let me give what I understand to be the spir-
        itual sense of the Lord's Prayer:

        Our Father which art in heaven,
16:27      /Our Father-Mother God, all-harmonious/,

        Hallowed be Thy name.
           /Adorable One./

16:30   Thy kingdom come.
           /Thy kingdom is come; Thou art ever-present./

17:1    Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
           /Enable us to know,- as in heaven, so on earth,- God is
17:3          omnipotent, supreme/.

        Give us this day our daily bread;
           /Give us grace for to-day; feed the famished affections;/

17:6    And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
           /And Love is reflected in love;/

        And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
17:9         evil;
           /And God leadeth us not into temptation, but delivereth
             us from sin, disease, and death./

17:12   For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
             glory, forever.
           /For God is infinite, all-power, all Life, Truth, Love, over
             all, and All./




        CHAPTER II - ATONEMENT AND EUCHARIST

        And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
        affections and lusts. - PAUL.

        For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel.
        - PAUL.

        For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine,
        until the kingdom of God shall come. - JESUS.

                             Divine oneness

18:1    ATONEMENT is the exemplification of man's unity
        with God, whereby man reflects divine Truth, Life,
18:3    and Love. Jesus of Nazareth taught and demonstrated
        man's oneness with the Father, and for this we owe him
        endless homage. His mission was both in-
18:6    dividual and collective. He did life's work
        aright not only in justice to himself, but in mercy to
        mortals,- to show them how to do theirs, but not to do
18:9    it for them nor to relieve them of a single responsibility.
        Jesus acted boldly, against the accredited evidence of the
        senses, against Pharisaical creeds and practices, and he
18:12   refuted all opponents with his healing power.

                          Human reconciliation

        The atonement of Christ reconciles man to God, not
        God to man; for the divine Principle of Christ is God,
18:15   and how can God propitiate Himself? Christ
        is Truth, which reaches no higher than itself.
        The fountain can rise no higher than its source. Christ,
18:18   Truth, could conciliate no nature above his own, derived
19:1    from the eternal Love. It was therefore Christ's purpose
        to reconcile man to God, not God to man. Love and
19:3    Truth are not at war with God's image and likeness.
        Man cannot exceed divine Love, and so atone for him-
        self. Even Christ cannot reconcile Truth to error, for
19:6    Truth and error are irreconcilable. Jesus aided in recon-
        ciling man to God by giving man a truer sense of Love,
        the divine Principle of Jesus' teachings, and this truer
19:9    sense of Love redeems man from the law of matter,
        sin, and death by the law of Spirit,- the law of divine
        Love.

19:12   The Master forbore not to speak the whole truth, de-
        claring precisely what would destroy sickness, sin, and
        death, although his teaching set households at variance,
19:15   and brought to material beliefs not peace, but a
        sword.

                         Efficacious repentance

        Every pang of repentance and suffering, every effort
19:18   for reform, every good thought and deed, will help us to
        understand Jesus' atonement for sin and aid
        its efficacy; but if the sinner continues to pray
19:21   and repent, sin and be sorry, he has little part in the atone-
        ment,- in the /at-one-ment/ with God,- for he lacks the
        practical repentance, which reforms the heart and enables
19:24   man to do the will of wisdom. Those who cannot dem-
        onstrate, at least in part, the divine Principle of the teach-
        ings and practice of our Master have no part in God. If
19:27   living in disobedience to Him, we ought to feel no secur-
        ity, although God is good.

                          Jesus' sinless career

        Jesus urged the commandment, "Thou shalt have no
19:30   other gods before me," which may be ren-
        dered: Thou shalt have no belief of Life as
        mortal; thou shalt not know evil, for there is one Life,-
20:1    even God, good. He rendered "unto Caesar the things
        which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are
20:3    God's." He at last paid no homage to forms of doctrine
        or to theories of man, but acted and spake as he was moved,
        not by spirits but by Spirit.

20:6    To the ritualistic priest and hypocritical Pharisee
        Jesus said, "The publicans and the harlots go into the
        kingdom of God before you." Jesus' history made a
20:9    new calendar, which we call the Christian era; but he
        established no ritualistic worship. He knew that men
        can be baptized, partake of the Eucharist, support the
20:12   clergy, observe the Sabbath, make long prayers, and yet
        be sensual and sinful.

                             Perfect example

        Jesus bore our infirmities; he knew the error of mortal
20:15   belief, and "with his stripes [the rejection of error] we are
        healed." "Despised and rejected of men,"
        returning blessing for cursing, he taught mor-
20:18   tals the opposite of themselves, even the nature of God;
        and when error felt the power of Truth, the scourge and
        the cross awaited the great Teacher. Yet he swerved not,
20:21   well knowing that to obey the divine order and trust God,
        saves retracing and traversing anew the path from sin to
        holiness.

                           Behest of the cross

20:24   Material belief is slow to acknowledge what the
        spiritual fact implies. The truth is the centre of all
        religion. It commands sure entrance into
20:27   the realm of Love. St. Paul wrote, "Let us
        lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so
        easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that
20:30   is set before us;" that is, let us put aside material self
        and sense, and seek the divine Principle and Science of
        all healing.

                              Moral victory

21:1    If Truth is overcoming error in your daily walk and
        conversation, you can finally say, "I have fought a
21:3    good fight . . . I have kept the faith," be-
        cause you are a better man. This is having
        our part in the at-one-ment with Truth and Love.
21:6    Christians do not continue to labor and pray, expecting
        because of another's goodness, suffering, and triumph,
        that they shall reach his harmony and reward.

21:9    If the disciple is advancing spiritually, he is striv-
        ing to enter in. He constantly turns away from ma-
        terial sense, and looks towards the imperishable things
21:12   of Spirit. If honest, he will be in earnest from the
        start, and gain a little each day in the right direction,
        till at last he finishes his course with joy.

                         Inharmonious travellers

21:15   If my friends are going to Europe, while I am /en
        route/ for California, we are not journeying together.
        We have separate time-tables to consult,
21:18   different routes to pursue. Our paths have
        diverged at the very outset, and we have little oppor-
        tunity to help each other. On the contrary, if my
21:21   friends pursue my course, we have the same railroad
        guides, and our mutual interests are identical; or, if I
        take up their line of travel, they help me on, and our
21:24   companionship may continue.

                              Zigzag course

        Being in sympathy with matter, the worldly man is at
        the beck and call of error, and will be attracted thither-
21:27   ward. He is like a traveller going westward
        for a pleasure-trip. The company is alluring
        and the pleasures exciting. After following the sun for
21:30   six days, he turns east on the seventh, satisfied if he can
        only imagine himself drifting in the right direction. By-
        and-by, ashamed of his zigzag course, he would borrow
22:1    the passport of some wiser pilgrim, thinking with the aid
        of this to find and follow the right road.

                           Moral retrogression

22:3    Vibrating like a pendulum between sin and the hope
        of forgiveness,- selfishness and sensuality causing con-
        stant retrogression,- our moral progress will
22:6    be slow. Waking to Christ's demand, mortals
        experience suffering. This causes them, even as drown-
        ing men, to make vigorous efforts to save themselves; and
22:9    through Christ's precious love these efforts are crowned
        with success.

                             Wait for reward

        "Work out your own salvation," is the demand of
22:12   Life and Love, for to this end God worketh with you.
        "Occupy till I come!" Wait for your re-
        ward, and "be not weary in well doing." If
22:15   your endeavors are beset by fearful odds, and you receive
        no present reward, go not back to error, nor become a
        sluggard in the race.

22:18   When the smoke of battle clears away, you will dis-
        cern the good you have done, and receive according to
        your deserving. Love is not hasty to deliver us from
22:21   temptation, for Love means that we shall be tried and
        purified.

                        Deliverance not vicarious

        Final deliverance from error, whereby we rejoice in
22:24   immortality, boundless freedom, and sinless sense, is not
        reached through paths of flowers nor by pinning
        one's faith without works to another's vicarious
22:27   effort. Whosoever believeth that wrath is righteous or
        that divinity is appeased by human suffering, does not
        understand God.

                        Justice and substitution

22:30   Justice requires reformation of the sinner. Mercy
        cancels the debt only when justice approves. Revenge
        is inadmissible. Wrath which is only appeased is not
23:1    destroyed, but partially indulged. Wisdom and Love
        may require many sacrifices of self to save us from sin.
23:3    One sacrifice, however great, is insufficient to
        pay the debt of sin. The atonement requires
        constant self-immolation on the sinner's part. That
23:6    God's wrath should be vented upon His beloved Son, is
        divinely unnatural. Such a theory is man-made. The
        atonement is a hard problem in theology, but its scien-
23:9    tific explanation is, that suffering is an error of sinful sense
        which Truth destroys, and that eventually both sin and suf-
        fering will fall at the feet of everlasting Love.

                           Doctrines and faith

23:12   Rabbinical lore said: "He that taketh one doctrine,
        firm in faith, has the Holy Ghost dwelling in him."
        This preaching receives a strong rebuke in
23:15   the Scripture, "Faith without works is dead."
        Faith, if it be mere belief, is as a pendulum swinging be-
        tween nothing and something, having no fixity. Faith,
23:18   advanced to spiritual understanding, is the evidence gained
        from Spirit, which rebukes sin of every kind and estab-
        lishes the claims of God.

                      Self-reliance and confidence

23:21   In Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and English, /faith/ and the
        words corresponding thereto have these two defini-
        tions, /trustfulness/ and /trustworthiness/. One
23:24   kind of faith trusts one's welfare to others.
        Another kind of faith understands divine Love and how
        to work out one's "own salvation, with fear and trem-
23:27   bling." "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief!"
        expresses the helplessness of a blind faith; whereas the
        injunction, "Believe . . . and thou shalt be saved!"
23:30   demands self-reliant trustworthiness, which includes spir-
        itual understanding and confides all to God.

        The Hebrew verb /to believe/ means also /to be firm/ or
24:1    /to be constant/. This certainly applies to Truth and Love
        understood and practised. Firmness in error will never
24:3    save from sin, disease, and death.

                         Life's healing currents

        Acquaintance with the original texts, and willingness
        to give up human beliefs (established by hierarchies, and
24:6    instigated sometimes by the worst passions of
        men), open the way for Christian Science to be
        understood, and make the Bible the chart of life, where
24:9    the buoys and healing currents of Truth are pointed
        out.

                             Radical changes

        He to whom "the arm of the Lord" is revealed will
24:12   believe our report, and rise into newness of life with re-
        generation. This is having part in the atone-
        ment; this is the understanding, in which
24:15   Jesus suffered and triumphed. The time is not distant
        when the ordinary theological views of atonement will
        undergo a great change, - a change as radical as that
24:18   which has come over popular opinions in regard to pre-
        destination and future punishment.

                         Purpose of crucifixion

        Does erudite theology regard the crucifixion of Jesus
24:21   chiefly as providing a ready pardon for all sinners who
        ask for it and are willing to be forgiven?
        Does spiritualism find Jesus' death necessary
24:24   only for the presentation, after death, of the material
        Jesus, as a proof that spirits can return to earth? Then
        we must differ from them both.

24:27   The efficacy of the crucifixion lay in the practical af-
        fection and goodness it demonstrated for mankind. The
        truth had been lived among men; but until they saw that
24:30   it enabled their Master to triumph over the grave, his own
        disciples could not admit such an event to be possible.
        After the resurrection, even the unbelieving Thomas was
25:1    forced to acknowledge how complete was the great proof of
        Truth and Love.

                          True flesh and blood

25:3    The spiritual essence of blood is sacrifice. The effi-
        cacy of Jesus' spiritual offering is infinitely greater than
        can be expressed by our sense of human
25:6    blood. The material blood of Jesus was no
        more efficacious to cleanse from sin when it was shed
        upon "the accursed tree," than when it was flowing in
25:9    his veins as he went daily about his Father's business.
        His true flesh and blood were his Life; and they truly eat
        his flesh and drink his blood, who partake of that divine
25:12   Life.

                            Effective triumph

        Jesus taught the way of Life by demonstration, that
        we may understand how this divine Principle heals
25:15   the sick, casts out error, and triumphs over
        death. Jesus presented the ideal of God better
        than could any man whose origin was less spiritual. By
25:18   his obedience to God, he demonstrated more spiritu-
        ally than all others the Principle of being. Hence the
        force of his admonition, "If ye love me, keep my com-
25:21   mandments."

        Though demonstrating his control over sin and disease,
        the great Teacher by no means relieved others from giving
25:24   the requisite proofs of their own piety. He worked for
        their guidance, that they might demonstrate this power as
        he did and understand its divine Principle. Implicit faith
25:27   in the Teacher and all the emotional love we can bestow
        on him, will never alone make us imitators of him. We
        must go and do likewise, else we are not improving the
25:30   great blessings which our Master worked and suffered to
        bestow upon us. The divinity of the Christ was made
        manifest in the humanity of Jesus.

                          Individual experience

26:1    While we adore Jesus, and the heart overflows with
        gratitude for what he did for mortals, - treading alone
26:3    his loving pathway up to the throne of
        glory, in speechless agony exploring the way
        for us, - yet Jesus spares us not one individual expe-
26:6    rience, if we follow his commands faithfully; and all
        have the cup of sorrowful effort to drink in proportion
        to their demonstration of his love, till all are redeemed
26:9    through divine Love.

                         Christ's demonstration

        The Christ was the Spirit which Jesus implied in his
        own statements: "I am the way, the truth, and the life;"
26:12   "I and my Father are one." This Christ,
        or divinity of the man Jesus, was his divine
        nature, the godliness which animated him. Divine Truth,
26:15   Life, and Love gave Jesus authority over sin, sickness,
        and death. His mission was to reveal the Science of
        celestial being, to prove what God is and what He does
26:18   for man.

                            Proof in practice

        A musician demonstrates the beauty of the music he
        teaches in order to show the learner the way by prac-
26:21   tice as well as precept. Jesus' teaching and
        practice of Truth involved such a sacrifice
        as makes us admit its Principle to be Love. This was
26:24   the precious import of our Master's sinless career and
        of his demonstration of power over death. He proved
        by his deeds that Christian Science destroys sickness, sin,
26:27   and death.

        Our Master taught no mere theory, doctrine, or belief.
        It was the divine Principle of all real being which he
26:30   taught and practised. His proof of Christianity was no
        form or system of religion and worship, but Christian
        Science, working out the harmony of Life and Love.
27:1    Jesus sent a message to John the Baptist, which was in-
        tended to prove beyond a question that the Christ had
27:3    come: "Go your way, and tell John what things ye have
        seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk,
        the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised,
27:6    to the poor the gospel is preached." In other words:
        Tell John what the demonstration of divine power is,
        and he will at once perceive that God is the power in
27:9    the Messianic work.

                              Living temple

        That Life is God, Jesus proved by his reappearance
        after the crucifixion in strict accordance with his scien-
27:12   tific statement: "Destroy this temple [body],
        and in three days I [Spirit] will raise it up."
        It is as if he had said: The I - the Life, substance,
27:15   and intelligence of the universe - is not in matter to
        be destroyed.

        Jesus' parables explain Life as never mingling with
27:18   sin and death. He laid the axe of Science at the root
        of material knowledge, that it might be ready to cut
        down the false doctrine of pantheism, - that God, or
27:21   Life, is in or of matter.

                           Recreant disciples

        Jesus sent forth seventy students at one time, but only
        eleven left a desirable historic record. Tradition credits
27:24   him with two or three hundred other disciples
        who have left no name. "Many are called,
        but few are chosen." They fell away from grace because
27:27   they never truly understood their Master's instruction.

        Why do those who profess to follow Christ reject the
        essential religion he came to establish? Jesus' persecu-
27:30   tors made their strongest attack upon this very point.
        They endeavored to hold him at the mercy of matter and
        to kill him according to certain assumed material laws.

                           Help and hindrance

28:1    The Pharisees claimed to know and to teach the di-
        vine will, but they only hindered the success of Jesus'
28:3    mission. Even many of his students stood
        in his way. If the Master had not taken a
        student and taught the unseen verities of God, he would
28:6    not have been crucified. The determination to hold Spirit
        in the grasp of matter is the persecutor of Truth and
        Love.

28:9    While respecting all that is good in the Church or out
        of it, one's consecration to Christ is more on the ground
        of demonstration than of profession. In conscience, we
28:12   cannot hold to beliefs outgrown; and by understanding
        more of the divine Principle of the deathless Christ, we
        are enabled to heal the sick and to triumph over sin.

                         Misleading conceptions

28:15   Neither the origin, the character, nor the work of
        Jesus was generally understood. Not a single compo-
        nent part of his nature did the material
28:18   world measure aright. Even his righteous-
        less and purity did not hinder men from saying: He
        is a glutton and a friend of the impure, and Beelzebub is
28:21   his patron.

                          Persecution prolonged

        Remember, thou Christian martyr, it is enough if
        thou art found worthy to unloose the sandals of thy
28:24   Master's feet! To suppose that persecution
        for righteousness' sake belongs to the past,
        and that Christianity to-day is at peace with the world
28:27   because it is honored by sects and societies, is to mis-
        take the very nature of religion. Error repeats itself.
        The trials encountered by prophet, disciple, and apostle,
28:30   "of whom the world was not worthy," await, in some
        form, every pioneer of truth.

                            Christian warfare

        There is too much animal courage in society and not
29:1    sufficient moral courage. Christians must take up arms
        against error at home and abroad. They must grapple
29:3    with sin in themselves and in others, and
        continue this warfare until they have finished
        their course. If they keep the faith, they will have the
29:6    crown of rejoicing.

        Christian experience teaches faith in the right and dis-
        belief in the wrong. It bids us work the more earnestly
29:9    in times of persecution, because then our labor is more
        needed. Great is the reward of self-sacrifice, though we
        may never receive it in this world.

                          The Fatherhood of God

29:12   There is a tradition that Publius Lentulus wrote to
        the authorities at Rome: "The disciples of Jesus be-
        lieve him the Son of God." Those instructed
29:15   in Christian Science have reached the glori-
        ous perception that God is the only author of man.
        The Virgin-mother conceived this idea of God, and
29:18   gave to her ideal the name of Jesus - that is, Joshua,
        or Saviour.

                          Spiritual conception

        The illumination of Mary's spiritual sense put to
29:21   silence material law and its order of generation, and
        brought forth her child by the revelation of
        Truth, demonstrating God as the Father of
29:24   men. The Holy Ghost, or divine Spirit, overshadowed
        the pure sense of the Virgin-mother with the full recog-
        nition that being is Spirit. The Christ dwelt forever
29:27   an idea in the bosom of God, the divine Principle of the
        man Jesus, and woman perceived this spiritual idea,
        though at first faintly developed.

29:30   Man as the offspring of God, as the idea of Spirit,
        is the immortal evidence that Spirit is harmonious and
        man eternal. Jesus was the offspring of Mary's self-
30:1    conscious communion with God. Hence he could give
        a more spiritual idea of life than other men, and could
30:3    demonstrate the Science of Love - his Father or divine
        Principle.

                          Jesus the way-shower

        Born of a woman, Jesus' advent in the flesh partook
30:6    partly of Mary's earthly condition, although he was en-
        dowed with the Christ, the divine Spirit, with-
        out measure. This accounts for his struggles
30:9    in Gethsemane and on Calvary, and this enabled him to
        be the mediator, or /way-shower/, between God and men.
        Had his origin and birth been wholly apart from mortal
30:12   usage, Jesus would not have been appreciable to mortal
        mind as "the way."

        Rabbi and priest taught the Mosaic law, which said:
30:15   "An eye for an eye," and "Whoso sheddeth man's blood,
        by man shall his blood be shed." Not so did Jesus, the
        new executor for God, present the divine law of Love,
30:18   which blesses even those that curse it.

                             Rebukes helpful

        As the individual ideal of Truth, Christ Jesus came to
        rebuke rabbinical error and all sin, sickness, and death,-
30:21   to point out the way of Truth and Life. This
        ideal was demonstrated throughout the whole
        earthly career of Jesus, showing the difference between
30:24   the offspring of Soul and of material sense, of Truth and
        of error.

        If we have triumphed sufficiently over the errors of
30:27   material sense to allow Soul to hold the control, we
