

CHAPTER II.

DECLINE AND LOSS OF THIS SCIENCE AMONG THE JEWS.


    O horrid! awful! melancholy sight!
    A nation, wont to soar 'mid realms of light,
    Degraded, fallen, sunk in dark despair,
    The hiss, the scorn, the bye-word everywhere;
    No eye to pity, and no arm to save,
    Till wearied nature finds an exile's grave.

It now becomes our painful task to trace the decline of the science of
Theology and its powers among the nations, and to review the awful
consequences of such decline.

We will commence with the Jewish nation.

The science of Theology, as we have just reviewed, was enjoyed, and
its powers were wonderfully developed, under the several dispensations
called Patriarchal, Mosaic, and Jewish.

There had, however, been a great decline, a retrogression of the
powers and knowledge of the same, previous to their restoration by
John the Baptist and Jesus Christ.

This was owing to the general prevalence of sectarian principles,
divisions, precepts, commandments, and doctrines of men, by which the
Law and the Prophets were made void, and a veil was thrown over them,
or over the hearts of men, by which means they were misunderstood, or
rather, not understood at all.

It therefore became the duty of Jesus Christ and his Apostles and
Elders, as well as of his forerunner, to reprove those sects, denounce
their doctrines and traditions, and restore that which was lost in
this great science.

This restoration was at first confined strictly to the nation of the
Jews. But seeing they turned from it, and judged themselves unworthy
of eternal life, preferring their own powerless forms and doctrines,
to the science of revelation, miracles, visions, and prophecy, which
had ever illuminated the pathway of their more ancient fathers, the
Apostles turned from them, by the commandment of the Lord, and
translated this science, with its keys and legitimate powers, to the
Gentiles.

The nation had rejected and slain the Messiah, stoned the Prophets,
and imprisoned and even murdered many of the Apostles and Elders; and
Jesus had already, in tears of anguish, announced their doom--

"_O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.
For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth till ye shall say,
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord_."

Again, on another occasion, the Messiah uttered his voice,
saying--"_There shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon
this people. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall
be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden
down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled_."

Again he spake, concerning the Temple, saying--"_There shall net be
left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down_."

All these things, foretold by the science of Theology, were fulfilled
in that generation. And Jerusalem has been destroyed, trodden down by
the Gentiles, and the Jews have remained in captivity among the
nations until now.

Our readers will readily discern the entire loss of the science and
powers of Theology among this nation; the time, circumstances, and
reasons of its decline; and the time or circumstances which will
restore it unto them.

They lost it when, by the hand of the Apostles, it was taken from them
and given to the Gentiles.

The result was, the destruction of their city and temple, and of their
national existence.

Their temple, priesthood, and offerings were no longer attended by
divine power. Its outward forms were, therefore, of no possible use.

From that very time to the present--One thousand eight hundred and
fifty-one of the Christian era, the voice of a Prophet has not been
heard among the Jews.

Angels have not ministered unto them.

There has been no vision from the Lord.

No dream or interpretation.

No answer by Urim or Thummim.

No Prophet.

No voice.

No sound.

No reproof.

No comforting whisper.

All is silence--stillness--solemn blackness of despair.

All is as the similitude and shadow of death.

Oh the weariness, the painful suspense, the watchings, the wanderings,
the anxieties, the pains and sorrows of eighteen centuries! Oh the
mist of ages which has shrouded a nation as it were in the gloom of an
endless night!

When--O when, will their day dawn, and the day star of their ancient
science appear above the horizon, disperse the cloud, and usher in the
morning of a brighter day?

_When the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled_.

When they shall welcome a messenger in the name of the Lord.




CHAPTER III.

PROGRESS, DECLINE, AND FINAL LOSS OF THE SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY AMONG THE
GENTILES--FORESHADOWINGS OF ITS RESTORATION FOR THE USHERING IN OF THE
MILLENNIUM.


    Oh Mystic Babel, long has been thy reign!
    What direful evils follow in thy train!
    The veil is rent--thy mystery revealed,
    Angels cry wo! and God thy doom has sealed.
    The nations, from thy long and dreary night,
    Are waking now to everlasting light.

Returning to the Gentile Church, we find the science of Theology, with
all its miraculous powers of visions, dreams, angels, revelations,
prophecy, healings, &c., everywhere enjoyed. It had abated none of its
powers, in its transition from Jew to Gentile. The wild branches,
being engrafted into the good old stock, immediately partook of the
root and fatness of the tame olive tree, and thus was produced the
natural fruit.

But Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, in his writings to the
Romans, cautioned them to beware lest they should fall away after the
same example as the Jews had done before them.

Said he--"_If God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he
also spare not thee_."

John the Apostle also predicted the rise and universal sway of a
certain mystical power, a Babel of spiritual or religious confusion,
in short--"_Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and
abominations of the earth_."

This power should bear rule among all nations. The kings and rulers of
the earth should be drunken with the wine of her fornication. The
merchants of the earth should become rich through the abundance of her
delicacies.

This power should, according to the Prophet Daniel and the Apostle
John, "_wear out the Saints of the Most High_;" "_change times and
laws_;" "_be drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood
of the martyrs of Jesus_;" "_destroy the mighty and the holy people_;"
"_make war with the Saints, and overcome them_" until a set time.

All these predictions, and many others, foretell the doom of the
Gentile Church--its destruction from the earth, and the consequent
decline and cessation of the science of Theology, and of its powers
and blessings in the Gentile world.

Connected with these predictions, we have the most positive prophetic
declarations of Holy Writ concerning the overthrow and entire
destruction of this same mystical power, which had made war with the
Saints.

Its judgments are set forth as far more terrible than those which
befell Jerusalem. Plague, pestilence, sword, earthquake, and the flame
of devouring fire will cause her to cease to be.

Then will usher in the kingdom of our God, and the power of His
Christ. Then will the Saints of the Most High take the kingdom, and
the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven.

Thus are to be revived the ancient powers and blessings, the knowledge
and wisdom, of the science of Theology.

In the fulfilment of the foregoing predictions, the science of
Theology declined, and passed away from among the Gentiles, just in
proportion as the Church, or the Saints of the Most High, were warred
against and overcome.

For years, centuries, ages, there has been no voice from heaven among
the Gentiles, any more than among the Jews. They have fallen "_after
the same example of unbelief_," notwithstanding the caution of their
great Apostle.

No Gentile Prophet has arisen and uttered his voice.

No kind angel has ministered to them.

No vision from the Lord.

No answer.

No inspired dream.

No voice.

No sound from the heavens.

No revelation has burst upon the silence of midnight darkness which
has brooded over the nations.

Or, if such voice, such vision, such Prophet has occasionally burst
forth with the testimony of Jesus, the spirit of prophecy, his
testimony has been unheeded by the mass of the people called
Christians, his voice silenced in death, or himself and his followers
have been banished from society, to wander in the mountains, forests,
caves, or deserts of the earth; or, on the other hand, compelled to
drag out an existence in the solitude of the dungeon.

Ages, centuries have passed, and Oh! what suffering! what torture!
what rivers of tears! what oceans of blood! what groanings! what
strong crying and tears on the earth! what prayers in heaven!

"How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our
blood, on them that dwell on the earth?"

The fire consumed.

The sword devoured.

Hell's artillery bellowed.

Devils hugely grinned.

Widows and orphans mourned.

Heaven wept.

Saints prayed.

Justice stood aghast.

Mercy, retiring, dropped a tear of blood.

Angels, starting, half-drew their glittering swords.

And the Gods, in solemn council, decreed a just vengeance.

Protest upon protest! reforms and re-reforms; revolutions, struggles,
exertions of every kind, of mere human invention, have been tried, and
tried in vain. The science of Theology, with all its keys and powers,
once lost, could never, consistent with the ancient Prophetic
testimony, be restored to either Jew or Gentile, until the full time
should arrive--"_The times of restitution of all things, which God
hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the world
began_."

The time for _a mighty angel to fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel to preach to them who dwell on the earth; to every
nation, kindred, tongue, and people_. (See John's revelation.)

The time of judgment for "_Mystery Babylon_."

The times of "_the fulness of the Gentiles_."

The times for the grafting in again of the Jews, and all the natural
branches of Israel.

Then, and not till then, could the science, the keys, the powers of
Theology, be restored to man.

No individual or combined human action could obtain or restore again
these keys--this science.

A mighty angel held the keys of this science for the last days. A
mighty angel was to restore the keys of the ancient Priesthood,
Apostleship, power and blessings. A voice from heaven was to reveal
the time, and send forth the cry--"_Come out of her my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her
iniquities_."

All the darkness of the middle ages; all the priestcraft or kingcraft
of every age, since the slaughter of the Apostles; all the
oppressions, persecutions, or abuses of power; all the extravagancies
and idleness on the one hand, and all the sufferings and miseries of
the toiling millions for want of the comforts of life, on the other;
all the ignorance, superstitions, errors, divisions and contentions
which have transpired in the name of "_Christianity_" down to the
present time; have been the results of the decline, and loss of the
keys and powers, of the science of Theology, or for want of attention
to them when existing on the earth.

Nor will the "_Christian_" world ever attain to any considerable
degree of knowledge, power, or union in religious progress, until they
discover their loss of this science, become sensible of the need of
its restoration, and humble themselves as in the dust, and welcome a
messenger who comes in the name of the Lord, with a commission from
heaven, and with keys committed by the Angels of God--a new Apostolic
commission, a restoration of the Kingdom and Church, and power and
gifts of God; a new dispensation, universally proclaimed in all the
world, with power and signs following; and the whole consummated by
the glorious restoration of Israel and Judah to their own land and
nationality, and to the true fold of God; together with the second
advent of Messiah and all his Saints with him, to overthrow "Mystery
Babylon," and reign on the earth.

Such are the events, such is the remedy for the past and present
evils.




CHAPTER IV.

RISE, PROGRESS, DECLINE, AND LOSS OF THE SCIENCE OF THEOLOGY ON THE
WESTERN HEMISPHERE, AS BROUGHT TO LIGHT BY THE LATE DISCOVERY OF
ANCIENT AMERICAN RECORDS.


    The spirit world is moved, the silence broken,
    The ancient Seers from out the ground have spoken.
    The appointed years on time's fleet wings have fled.
    And voices whisper from the ancient dead.
    Volumes of truth the sacred archives yield.
    The past, the glorious future, stand revealed.

We are now, of necessity, carried back in our research to the cradle
of nations, the Tower of Babel, in order to trace the history of this
wonderful science, from the first emigration of a colony to the
western hemisphere, till its final decline and overthrow, for the
knowledge of which we are indebted to many ancient records, written by
the fathers, or ancient students and professors of this science, on
the western hemisphere.

Among these we will make honourable mention of the Prophets Jared,
Ether, Lehi, Nephi, Mosiah, Alma, Abinadi, Mormon, and Moroni, who
wrote and prophesied in the western hemisphere, during the several
ages intervening between the time of the dispersion at Babel, and the
fifth century of the Christian era.

By the science of Theology Jared and his brother led a colony from the
great tower to the sea coast, conversing with the Lord, and walking by
the light of His revelations on the way.

By this science they were instructed in the building of eight barges
similar to the ark of Noah.

By this science their leader saw God, face to face, and talked with
Him in plain humility, as one man talks with another, thus obtaining a
knowledge of His future coming and Kingdom, and of the great events of
all ages and generations.

By this science they were preserved on the great waters three hundred
and forty-four days, and were then landed, with their eight barges, in
the western hemisphere, together with their women, children, cattle,
and seeds of every kind.

By this science they became a great nation, peopling the entire
continent, and enjoying all the blessings of civilization and heavenly
light.

By the abuse and neglect of it they were at length exterminated, in
the days of their Prophet Ether, who lived about six hundred years
before Christ came in the flesh.

By this science the Prophets Lehi and Nephi came out with a colony
from Jerusalem, in the days of Jeremiah the Prophet, and after
wandering for eight years in the wilderness of Arabia, came to the sea
coast, built a vessel, obtained from the Lord a compass to guide them
on the way, and finally landed in safety on the coast of what is now
called Chili, in South America.

By this science they also became a great nation, enjoyed many visions,
had the ministering of angels, and of many Prophets, by which means
they knew of the coming, birth, ministry, death, resurrection, and
ascension of Jesus Christ.

By this science they also enjoyed a personal visit of the risen
Redeemer, who descended from heaven in their presence, taught them his
Gospel, chose and ordained twelve of their number as Apostles, and
prophesied many things.

By this science these twelve and others established the Gospel,
Church, and ordinances of God throughout the entire western
hemisphere.

By this science their sick were healed, demons were expelled, the lame
walked, the blind saw, the dumb spake, the deaf heard, and their dead
were raised.

By this science three of those Apostles, having a change wrought upon
them, tarried in the flesh upon the earth, ministered the Gospel and
its blessings nearly four hundred years, and then withdrew from the
people because of their iniquity, took away the keys of Apostleship
and of the Gospel, and its powers, sealed up the records, and caused
the work of healing, and of gifts and miracles, to cease from among
the people, because of iniquity, bloodshed, and persecution.

By this science they yet live in the flesh upon the earth, holding
keys of Apostleship and power upon the western hemisphere, being now
about one thousand eight hundred years old.

By this science (being held in reserve above the powers of mystery
Babylon,) they will soon go forth, prophesying, preaching the Gospel,
and doing mighty signs and wonders in the midst of all nations, in
order to complete and mature the Gentile fulness, and restore the
tribes of Israel. Nor is this all--John, the beloved disciple among
the Jews, is yet alive in the flesh, and is held in reserve, to
"_prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and
kings_" as it is written.

But to return to our history of the western hemisphere. After the
science of Theology had ceased to be cultivated and enjoyed among this
branch of Israel, terrible wars and bloodshed ensued. Governments and
civilization were broken up, cities and countries were overthrown, all
records and vestiges of truth were diligently sought and destroyed, as
far as obtained.

And, finally, the whole face of the country was soaked, as it were, in
blood, and strewed with the dead and dying.

The wild beasts of the forest and fowls of heaven devoured their
flesh, and their bones were left to moulder unburied.

In other instances bodies were heaped up, and covered with mounds of
earth.

All government became extinct, and the countries overrun by tribes and
bands of robbers at war with each other.

In this situation the records of Moroni leave them, in the fifth
century of the Christian era, and much in the same situation, with
some exceptions, the Europeans found them after the lapse of another
thousand years.

Oh! who can contemplate the disgusting deformity, the dark features,
the filthy habits, the idleness, the cruelty, the nakedness, the
poverty, the misery, the sufferings, the ignorance of the descendants
of this once favoured branch of the royal blood of Abraham and Joseph,
and not weep for very anguish, while his bosom yearns, and the
fountains--the depths of his inmost soul, are stirred and moved within
him!

Reader, _all these things have come upon them, on account of the
abuses, the consequent decline, and final loss of the keys and powers,
of the science of Theology_.

But comfort your heart, their redemption is at the door.




CHAPTER V.

KEYS OF THE MYSTERIES OF THE GODHEAD.


    Eternal Father, Being without end!
    Thy glorious fulness who can comprehend!
    Thine own infinitude alone is fraught
    With attributes to swell a human thought,
    To grasp thy knowledge, or thy nature scan.
    As Father of the endless race of man.

"_This is life eternal: to know the only true and living God, and
Jesus Christ whom he hath sent_."

Since the decline of the science of Theology, a mystery, dark and
deep, has shrouded the human mind, in regard to the person and nature
of the Eternal Father, and of Jesus Christ, His son.

Councils of the fathers, and wise men of Christendom, have assembled
again and again, in order to solve the mystery of Godliness, and fix
some standard or creed upon which all parties might rest and be
agreed.

This, however, was not in their power. It is impossible for the world
by its wisdom to find out God. "_Neither knoweth any man the Father
save the son, and he to whomsoever the son will reveal him_."

The key to the science of Theology, is the key of divine revelation.
Without this key, no man, no assemblage of men, ever did, or ever will
know the Eternal Father, or Jesus Christ.

When the key of revelation was lost to man, the knowledge of God was
lost. And as life eternal depended on the knowledge of God, of course
the key of eternal life was also lost.

Oh the mysteries, the absurdities, the contentions, the quarrels, the
bloodshed, the infidelity, the senseless and conflicting theories,
which have grown and multiplied among sectaries on this subject!

Among these theories, we will notice one, which is, perhaps, more
extensively received by different sects than any other. The language
runs thus--"_There is one only living and true God, without body,
parts, or passions; consisting of three persons--the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost_."

It is painful to the human mind to be compelled to admit, that such
wonderful inconsistencies of language or ideas, have ever found place
in any human creed. Yet, so it is.

It is but another way of saying, that there is a God who does not
exist, a God who is composed of nonentity, who is the negative of all
existence, who occupies no space, who exists in no time, who is
composed of no substance, known or unknown, and who has no powers or
properties in common with any thing or being known to exist, or which
can possibly be conceived of, as existing either in the heavens or on
the earth.

Such a God could never be seen, heard, or felt, by any being in the
