If the fire of a lying-in room comes in contact with the perpetual
sacred fire, then rectification must be made with the performance of
_Ashtakapala_ rites in honour of the Agniman fire.'"


SECTION CCXXI

"Markandeya continued, 'Mudita, the favourite wife of the fire Swaha,
used to live in water. And Swaha who was the regent of the earth and sky
begot in that wife of his a highly sacred fire called Advanta. There is
a tradition amongst learned Brahmanas that this fire is the ruler and
inner soul of all creatures. He is worshipful, resplendent and the lord
of all the great _Bhutas_ here. And that fire, under the name of
Grihapati, is ever worshipped at all sacrifices and conveys all the
oblations that are made in this world. That great son of Swaha--the
great Adbhuta fire is the soul of the waters and the prince and regent
of the sky and the lord of everything great. His (son), the Bharata
fire, consumes the dead bodies of all creatures. His first Kratu is
known as Niyata at the performance of the _Agnishtoma_ sacrifice. That
powerful prime fire (_Swaha_) is always missed by the gods, because when
he sees Niyata approaching him he hides himself in the sea from fear of
contamination. Searching for him in every direction, the gods could not
(once) find him out and on beholding Atharvan the fire said to him, "O
valiant being, do thou carry the oblations for the gods! I am disabled
from want of strength. Attaining the state of the red-eyed fire, do thou
condescend to do me this favour!" Having thus advised Atharvan, the fire
went away to some other place. But his place of concealment was divulged
by the finny tribe. Upon them the fire pronounced this curse in anger,
"You shall be the food of all creatures in various ways." And then that
carrier of oblations spoke unto _Atharvan_ (as before). Though entreated
by the gods, he did not agree to continue carrying their oblations. He
then became insensible and instantly gave up the ghost. And leaving his
material body, he entered into the bowels of the earth. Coming into
contact with the earth, he created the different metals. Force and scent
arose from his pus; the _Deodar_ pine from his bones; glass from his
phlegm; the _Marakata_ jewel from his bile; and the black iron from his
liver. And all the world has been embellished with these three
substances (wood, stone and iron). The clouds were made from his nails,
and corals from his veins. And, O king, various other metals were
produced from his body. Thus leaving his material body, he remained
absorbed in (spiritual) meditation. He was roused by the penance of
Bhrigu and Angiras. The powerful fire thus gratified with penance,
blazed forth intensely. But on beholding the _Rishi_ (Atharvan), he
again sought his watery refuge. At this extinction of the fire, the
whole world was frightened, and sought the protection of Atharvan, and
the gods and others began to worship him. Atharvan rummaged the whole
sea in the presence of all those beings eager with expectation, and
finding out the fire, himself began the work of creation. Thus in olden
times the fire was destroyed and called back to life by the adorable
Atharvan. But now he invariably carries the oblations of all creatures.
Living in the sea and travelling about various countries, he produced
the various fires mentioned in the _Vedas_.

"'The river Indus, the five rivers (of the Punjab), the Sone, the
Devika, the Saraswati, the Ganga, the Satakumbha, the Sarayu, the
Gandaki, the Charmanwati, the Mahi, the Medha, the Medhatithi, the three
rivers Tamravati, the Vetravati, and the Kausiki; the Tamasa, the
Narmada, the Godavari, the Vena, the Upavena, the Bhima, the Vadawa, the
Bharati, the Suprayoga, the Kaveri, the Murmura, the Tungavenna, the
Krishnavenna and the Kapila, these rivers, O Bharata, are said to be the
mothers of the fires! The fire called Adbhuta had a wife of the name
of Priya, and Vibhu was the eldest of his sons by her. There are as many
different kinds of _Soma sacrifices_ as the number of fires mentioned
before. All this race of fires, first-born of the spirit of Brahma,
sprang also from the race of Atri. Atri in his own mind conceived these
sons, desirous of extending the creation. By this act, the fires came
out of his own Brahmic frame. I have thus narrated to thee the history
of the origin of these fires. They are great, resplendent, and
unrivalled in power, and they are the destroyers of darkness. Know that
the powers of those fires are the same as those of the Adbhuta fire as
related in the Vedas. For all these fires are one and same. This
adorable being, the first born fire, must be considered as one. For like
the _Jyotishtoma_ sacrifice he came out of Angiras body in various
forms. I have thus described to thee the history of the great race of
Agni (fires) who when duly worshipped with the various hymns, carry the
oblations of all creatures to the gods.'"


SECTION CCXXII

"Markandeya continued, 'O sinless scion of Kuru's race, I have described
to thee the various branches of the race of Agni. Listen now to the
story of the birth of the intelligent Kartikeya. I shall tell thee of
that wonderful and famous and highly energetic son of the Adbhuta fire
begotten of the wives of the _Brahmarshis_. In ancient times the _gods_
and _Asuras_ were very active in destroying one another. And the
terrible _Asuras_ always succeeded in defeating the gods. And Purandara
(Indra) beholding the great slaughter of his armies by them and anxious
to find out a leader for the celestial host, thought within himself, "I
must find out a mighty person who observing the ranks of the celestial
army shattered by the _Danavas_ will be able to reorganize it with
vigour." He then repaired to the Manasa mountains and was there deeply
absorbed in thought of nature, when he heard the heart-rending cries of
a woman to the effect, "May some one come quick and rescue me, and
either indicate a husband for me, or be my husband himself." Purandara
said to her, "Do not be afraid, lady!" And having said these words, he
saw Kesin (an _Asura_) adorned with a crown and mace in hand standing
even like a hill of metals at a distance and holding that lady by the
hand. Vasava addressed then that _Asura_ saying, "Why art thou bent on
behaving insolently to this lady? Know that I am the god who wields the
thunderbolt. Refrain thou from doing any violence to this lady." To him
Kesin replied, "Do thou, O Sakra, leave her alone. I desire to possess
her. Thinkest thou, O slayer of Paka, that thou shalt be able to return
home with thy life?" With these words Kesin hurled his mace for slaying
Indra. Vasava cut it up in its course with his thunderbolt. Then Kesin,
furious with rage, hurled a huge mass of rock at him. Beholding that, he
of a hundred sacrifices rent it asunder with his thunderbolt, and it
fell down upon the ground. And Kesin himself was wounded by that falling
mass of rock. Thus sorely afflicted, he fled leaving the lady behind.
And when the _Asura_ was gone, Indra said to that lady, "Who and whose
wife art thou, O lady with a beautiful face, and what has brought thee
here?"'"


SECTION CCXXIII

"'The lady replied, "I am a daughter of Prajapati (the lord of all
creatures, Brahma) and my name is Devasena. My sister Daityasena has ere
this been ravished by Kesin. We two sisters with our maids habitually
used to come to these Manasa mountains for pleasures with the permission
of Prajapati. And the great _Asura_ Kesin used daily to pay his court to
us. Daityasena, O conqueror of Paka, listened to him, but I did not.
Daityasena was, therefore, taken away by him, but, O illustrious one,
thou hast rescued me with thy might. And now, O lord of the celestials,
I desire that thou shouldst select an invincible husband for me." To
this Indra replied, "Thou art a cousin of mine, thy mother being a
sister of my mother Dakshayani, and now I desire to hear thee relate
thine own prowess." The lady replied, "O hero with long arms, I am
_Avala_[30] (weak) but my husband must be powerful. And by the potency
of my father's boon, he will be respected by _gods_ and _Asuras_ alike."
Indra said, "O blameless creature, I wish to hear from thee, what sort
of power thou wishest thy husband to possess." The lady replied, "That
manly and famous and powerful being devoted to Brahma, who is able to
conquer all the celestials, _Asuras, Yakshas, Kinnaras, Uragas,
Rakshasas_, and the evil-minded _Daityas_ and to subdue all the worlds
with thee, shall be my husband."'

    [30] _Avala_ is a common name of women. It means one who has no
    vala or strength or power. The word is also used as an
    adjective.

"Markandeya continued, 'On hearing her speech, Indra was grieved and
deeply thought within himself, "There is no husband for this lady,
answering to her own description." And that god adorned with sun-like
effulgence, then perceived the Sun rising on the Udaya hill,[31] and the
great Soma (Moon) gliding into the Sun. It being the time of the new
Moon, he of a hundred sacrifices, at the _Raudra_[32] moment, observed
the gods and _Asuras_ fighting on the Sunrise hill. And he saw that the
morning twilight was tinged with red clouds. And he also saw that the
abode of Varuna had become blood-red. And he also observed Agni
conveying oblations offered with various hymns by Bhrigu, Angiras, and
others and entering the disc of the Sun. And he further saw the twenty
four _Parvas_ adorning the Sun, and the terrible Soma also present in
the Sun under such surroundings. And observing this union of the Sun and
the Moon and that fearful conjunction of theirs, Sakra thought within
himself, "This terrific conjunction of the Sun and the Moon forebodeth a
fearful battle on the morrow. And the river Sindhu (Indus) too is
flowing with a current of fresh blood and the jackals with fiery laces
are crying to the Sun. This great conjunction is fearful and full of
energy. This union of the Moon (Soma) with the Sun and Agni is very
wonderful. And if Soma giveth birth to a son now, that son may become
the husband of this lady. And Agni also hath similar surroundings now,
and he too is a god. If the two begetteth a son, that son may become the
husband of this lady." With these thoughts that illustrious celestial
repaired to the regions of Brahma, taking Devasena[33] with him. And
saluting the Grandsire he said unto him, "Do thou fix a renowned warrior
as husband of this lady." Brahma replied, "O slayer of _Asuras_, it
shall be as thou hast intended. The issue of that union will be mighty
and powerful accordingly. That powerful being will be the husband of
this lady and the joint leader of thy forces with thee." Thus addressed,
the lord of the celestials and the lady bowed unto him and then repaired
to the place where those great Brahmanas, the powerful celestial
_Rishis_, Vasistha and others, lived. And with Indra at their head, the
other gods also, desirous of drinking the Soma beverage, repaired to the
sacrifices of those _Rishis_ to receive their respective shares of the
offerings. Having duly performed the ceremonies with the bright blazing
fire, those great-minded persons offered oblations to the celestials.
And the _Adbhuta_ fire, that carrier of oblations, was invited with
_mantras_. And coming out of the solar disc, that lordly fire duly
repaired thither, restraining speech. And, O chief of Bharata's race,
that fire entering the sacrificial fire that had been ignited and into
which various offerings were made by the _Rishis_ with recitations of
hymns, took them with him and made them over to the dwellers of heaven.
And while returning from that place, he observed the wives of those
high-souled _Rishis_ sleeping at their ease on their beds. And those
ladies had a complexion beautiful like that of an altar of gold,
spotless like moon-beams, resembling fiery flames and looking like
blazing stars. And seeing those wives of the illustrious Brahmanas with
eager eyes, his mind became agitated and he was smitten with their
charms. Restraining his heart he considered it improper for him to be
thus agitated. And he said unto himself, "The wives of these great
Brahmanas are chaste and faithful and beyond the reach of other people's
desires. I am filled with desire to possess them. I cannot lawfully cast
my eyes upon them, nor ever touch them when they are not filled with
desire. I shall, therefore, gratify myself daily with only looking at
them by becoming their _Garhapatya_ (house-hold) fire."'

    [31] According to the Hindus, the sun rises from and sets behind
    two hills respectively. He rises from the _Udaya_ or Sun-rise
    hill and sets behind the _Asta_ or sun-set hill.

    [32] _Raudra_--belonging to Rudra, the god of fury, violence,
    war, &c.

    [33] _Devasena_ literally means the celestial army. This fable
    seems to be an allegorical representation of the attempts made
    by Indra to procure a leader for the celestial host.

"Markandeya continued, 'The _Adbhuta_ fire, thus transforming himself
into a house-hold one, was highly gratified with seeing those
gold-complexioned ladies and touching them with his flames. And
influenced by their charms he dwelt there for a long time, giving them
his heart and filled with an intense love for them. And baffled in all
his efforts to win the hearts of those Brahmana ladies, and his own
heart tortured by love, he repaired to a forest with the certain object
of destroying himself. A little while before, Swaha, the daughter of
Daksha, had bestowed her love on him. The excellent lady had been
endeavouring for a long time to detect his weak moments; but that
blameless lady did not succeed in finding out any weakness in the calm
and collected fire-god. But now that the god had betaken himself to a
forest, actually tortured by the pangs of love, she thought, "As I too
am distressed with love, I shall assume the guise of the wives of the
seven _Rishis_, and in that disguise I shall seek the fire-god so
smitten with their charms. This done, he will be gratified and my desire
too will be satisfied."'"


SECTION CCXXIV

"Markandeya continued, 'O lord of men, the beautiful Siva endowed with
great virtues and an unspotted character was the wife of Angiras (one of
the seven _Rishis_). That excellent lady (Swaha) at first assuming the
disguise of Siva, sought the presence of Agni unto whom she said, "O
Agni, I am tortured with love for thee. Do thou think it fit to woo me.
And if thou dost not accede to my request, know that I shall commit
self-destruction. I am Siva the wife of Angiras. I have come here
according to the advice of the wives of the other _Rishis_, who have
sent me here after due deliberation."

"'Agni replied, "How didst thou know that I was tortured with love and
how could the others, the beloved wives of the seven _Rishis_, of whom
thou hast spoken, know this?"

"'Swaha replied, "Thou art always a favourite with us, but we are afraid
of thee. Now having read thy mind by well-known signs, they have sent to
thy presence. I have come here to gratify my desire. Be thou quick, O
Agni, to encompass the object of thy desire, my sisters-in-law are
awaiting me. I must return soon."

"Markandeya continued, 'Then Agni, filled with great joy and delight,
married Swaha in the guise of Siva, and that lady joyfully cohabiting
with him, held the _semen virile_ in her hands. And then she thought
within herself that those who would observe her in that disguise in the
forest, would cast an unmerited slur upon the conduct of those Brahmana
ladies in connection with Agni. Therefore, to prevent this, she should
assume the disguise of a bird, and in that state she should more easily
get out of the forest.'

"Markandeya continued, 'Then assuming the disguise of a winged creature,
she went out of the forest and reached the White Mountain begirt with
clumps of heath and other plants and trees, and guarded by strange
seven-headed serpents with poison in their very looks, and abounding
with _Rakshasas_, male and female _Pisachas_, terrible spirits, and
various kinds of birds and animals. That excellent lady quickly
ascending a peak of those mountains, threw that _semen_ into a golden
lake. And then assuming successively the forms of the wives of the
high-souled seven _Rishis_, she continued to dally with Agni. But on
account of the great ascetic merit of Arundhati and her devotion to her
husband (Vasishtha), she was unable to assume her form. And, O chief of
Kuru's race, the lady Swaha on the first lunar day threw six times into
that lake the _semen_ of Agni. And thrown there, it produced a male
child endowed with great power. And from the fact of its being regarded
by the _Rishis_ as _cast off_, the child born therefrom came to be
called by the name of _Skanda_. And the child had six faces, twelve
ears, as many eyes, hands, and feet, one neck, and one stomach. And it
first assumed a form on the second lunar day, and it grew to the size of
a little child on the third. And the limbs of Guha were developed on the
fourth day. And being surrounded by masses of red clouds flashing forth
lightning, it shone like the Sun rising in the midst of a mass of red
clouds. And seizing the terrific and immense bow which was used by the
destroyer of the _Asura_ Tripura for the destruction of the enemies of
the gods, that mighty being uttered such a terrible roar that the three
worlds with their mobile and immobile divisions became struck with awe.
And hearing that sound which seemed like the rumbling of a mass of big
clouds, the great _Nagas, Chitra_ and _Airavata_, were shaken with fear.
And seeing them unsteady that lad shining with sun-like refulgence held
them with both his hands. And with a dart in (another) hand, and with a
stout, red-crested, big cock fast secured in another, that long-armed
son of Agni began to sport about making a terrible noise. And holding an
excellent conch-shell with two of his hands, that mighty being began to
blow it to the great terror of even the most powerful creatures. And
striking the air with two of his hands, and playing about on the
hill-top, the mighty Mahasena of unrivalled prowess, looked as if he
were on the point of devouring the three worlds, and shone like the
bright Sun-god at the moment of his ascension in the heavens. And that
being of wonderful prowess and matchless strength, seated on the top of
that hill, looked on with his numerous faces directed towards the
different cardinal points, and observing various things, he repeated his
loud roars. And on hearing those roars various creatures were prostrate
with fear. And frightened and troubled in mind they sought protection.
And all those persons of various orders who then sought the protection
of that god are known as his powerful Brahmana followers. And rising
from his seat, that mighty god allayed the fears of all those people,
and then drawing his bow, he discharged his arrows in the direction of
the White Mountain. And with those arrows the hill Krauncha, the son of
Himavat, was rent asunder. And that is the reason why swans and vultures
now migrate to the Sumeru mountains. The Krauncha hill, sorely wounded,
fell down uttering fearful groans. And seeing him fallen, the other
hills too began to scream. And that mighty being of unrivalled prowess,
hearing the groans of the afflicted, was not at all moved, but himself
uplifting his mace, yelled forth his war-whoop. And that high-souled
being then hurled his mace of great lustre and quickly rent in twain one
of the peaks of the White Mountain. And the White Mountain being thus
pierced by him was greatly afraid of him and dissociating himself from
the earth fled with the other mountains. And the earth was greatly
afflicted and bereft of her ornaments on all sides. And in this
distress, she went over to _Skanda_ and once more shone with all her
might. And the mountains too bowed down to _Skanda_ and came back and
stuck into the earth. And all creatures then celebrated the worship of
_Skanda_ on the fifth day of the lunar month.'"


SECTION CCXXV

"Markandeya continued, 'When that powerful, high-souled, and mighty
being was born, various kinds of fearful phenomena occurred. And the
nature of males and females, of heat and cold, and of such other pairs
of contraries, was reversed. And the planets, the cardinal points and
the firmaments became radiant with light and the earth began to rumble
very much. And the _Rishis_ even, seeking the welfare of the world,
while they observed all these terrific prodigies on all sides, began
with anxious hearts to restore tranquillity in the universe. And those
who used to live in that Chitraratha forest said, "This very miserable
condition of ours hath been brought about by Agni cohabiting with the
six wives of the seven _Rishis_." Others again who had seen the goddess
assume the disguise of a bird said, "This evil hath been brought about
by a bird." No one ever imagined that Swaha was the authoress of that
mischief. But having heard that the (new born) male child was hers, she
went to Skanda and gradually revealed to him the fact that she was his
mother. And those seven _Rishis_, when they heard that a son of great
power had been born (to them), divorced their six wives with the
exception of the adorable Arundhati, because all the dwellers of that
forest protested that those six persons had been instrumental in
bringing forth the child. Swaha too, O king, said again and again to the
seven _Rishis_, saying, "Ye ascetics, this child is mine, your wives are
not his mother."

"'The great _Muni_ Viswamitra had, after the conclusion of the
sacrifices of the seven _Rishis_, followed unseen the god of fire, while
the latter was tortured with lust. He, therefore, knew everything as it
happened and he was the first to seek the protection of Mahasena. And he
offered divine prayers to Mahasena and all the thirteen auspicious rites
appertaining to childhood, such as the natal and other ceremonies, were
all performed by the great _Muni_ in respect of that child. And for the
good of the world he promulgated the virtues of the six-faced Skanda,
and performed ceremonies in honour of the cock, the goddess _Sakti_, and
the first followers of Skanda. And for this reason he became a great
favourite of the celestial youth. That great _Muni_ then informed the
seven _Rishis_ of the transformations of Swaha and told them that their
wives were perfectly innocent. But though thus informed the seven
_Rishis_ abandoned their spouses unconditionally.'"

"Markandeya continued, 'The celestials having heard of the prowess of
Skanda, all said to Vasava, "O Sakra, do thou kill Skanda without delay
for his prowess is unbearable. And if thou dost not exterminate him, he
will conquer the three worlds with ourselves, and overpowering thee,
will himself become the mighty lord of the celestials." Perplexed in
mind, Sakra replied unto them, "This child is endowed with great
prowess. He can himself destroy the Creator of the Universe, in battle
putting forth his might. I venture not, therefore, to do away with him."
To this the gods replied, "Thou hast no manliness in thee, in that thou
talkest in this manner. Let the great Mothers of the Universe repair
to-day to Skanda. They can master at will any degree of energy. Let them
kill this child." "It shall be so."--the mothers replied. And then they
went away. But on beholding that he was possessed of great might, they
became dispirited, and considering that he was invincible, they sought
his protection and said unto him, "Do thou, O mighty being, become our
(adopted) son. We are full of affection for thee and desirous of giving
thee suck. Lo, the milk oozes from our breasts!" On hearing these words,
the mighty Mahasena became desirous of sucking their breasts and he
received them with due respect and acceded to their request. And that
mightiest of mighty creatures then beheld his father Agni come towards
him. And that god, who is the doer of all that is good, was duly
honoured by his son, and in company with the Mothers, he stayed there by
the side of Mahasena to tend him. And that lady amongst the Mothers who
was born of Anger[34] with a spike in hand kept watch over Skanda even
like a mother guarding her own offspring, and that irascible
red-coloured daughter of the Sea, who lived herself on blood, hugged
Mahasena in her breast and nursed him like a mother. And Agni
transforming himself into a trader with a goat's mouth and followed by
numerous children began to gratify that child of his with toys in that
mountain abode of his.'"

    [34] Anger personified is a deity.


SECTION CCXXVI

"Markandeya continued, 'The planets with their satellites, the _Rishis_
and the Mothers, Agni and numerous other blazing courtiers and many
other dwellers of heaven of terrible mien, waited on Mahasena along with
the Mothers. And the illustrious sovereign of the gods, desirous of
victory but believing success to be doubtful mounted his elephant
Airavata and attended by the other gods advanced towards Skanda. That
mighty being followed by all the celestials was armed with his
thunderbolt. And with the object of slaying Mahasena, he marched with
terrible celestial army of great splendour, sounding their shrill
war-cry and furnished with various sorts of standards, with warriors
encased in various armour and armed with numerous bows and riding on
various animals. When Mahasena beheld the gloriously decked Sakra,
attired in his best clothes, advancing with the determination of slaying
him, he (too on his part) advanced to meet that chief of the celestials.
O Partha, the mighty Vasava, the lord of the celestials, then uttered a
loud shout, to encourage his warriors and marching rapidly with the view
of killing Agni's son and praised by Tridasas[35] and great _Rishis_, he
at length reached the abode of Kartikeya. And then he shouted out with
other gods; and Guha too in response to this, uttered a fearful war-cry
resembling the roaring of the sea. On hearing that noise, the celestial
army behaved like an agitated sea, and was stunned and fixed to the
spot. And that son of _Pavaka_ (the Fire-god) beholding the gods come
near to him with the object of killing him, was filled with wrath, and
gave out rising flame of fire from within his mouth. And these flames
destroyed the celestial forces struggling on the ground. Their heads,
their bodies, their arms and riding animals were all burnt in that
conflagration and they appeared all on a sudden like stars displaced
from their proper spheres. Thus afflicted, the god renounced all
allegiance to the thunder-bolt, and sought the protection of Pavaka's
son; and thus peace was again secured. When he was thus forsaken by the
gods, Sakra hurled his thunder-bolt at Skanda. It pierced him on the
right side; and, O great king, it passed through the body of that
high-souled being. And from being struck with the thunder-bolt, there
arose from Skanda's body another being--a youth with a club in hand, and
adorned with a celestial amulet. And because he was born on account of
the piercing of the thunder-bolt, he was named Visakha. And Indra, when
he beheld that another person looking like the fierce destroying
Fire-god had come into being was frightened out of his wits and besought
the protection of Skanda, with the palms of his hands joined together
(as a mark of respect). And that excellent being Skanda, bade him
renounce all fear, with his arm. The gods were then transported with
joy, and their hands too struck up.'"

    [35] Another name of gods, so named from their having only three
    stages of life--viz., infancy, childhood, and youth--and being
    exempt from the fourth--old age.


SECTION CCXXVII

"Markandeya continued, 'Now hear of those terrible and curious-looking
followers of Skanda. A number of male children came into being when
Skanda was struck with the thunder-bolt,--those terrific creatures that
steal (spirit away) little children, whether born, or in the womb and a
number of female children too of great strength were born to him. Those
children adopted Visakha as their father. That adorable and dexterous
Bhadrasakha, having a face like that of a goat was at the time (of the
battle) surrounded by all his sons and daughters whom he guarded
carefully in the presence of the great mothers. And for this reason the
inhabitants of this earth call Skanda the father of _Kumaras_ (little
children). Those persons who desire to have sons born to them, worship
in their places the powerful _Rudra_ in the form of the Fire-god, and
_Uma_ in the form of _Swaha_. And by that means they are blessed with
sons. The daughters begotten by the Fire-god, _Tapa_, went over to
Skanda, who said to them, "What can I do for you?" Those girls replied,
"Do us this favour; by thy blessing, may we become the good and
respected mothers of all the world!" He replied, "Be it so." And that
liberal-minded being repeated again and again, "Ye shall be divided into
Siva and Asiva."[36] And the mothers then departed, having first
established Skanda's sonship, Kaki, Halima, Malini, Vrinhila, Arya,
Palala and Vaimitra, these were the seven mothers of Sisu. They had a
powerful, red-eyed, terrific, and very turbulent son named Sisu born by
the blessing of Skanda. He was reputed as the eighth hero, born of the
mothers of Skanda. But he is also known as the ninth, when that being
with the face of a goat, is included. Know that the sixth face of Skanda
was like that of a goat. That face, O king, is situated in the middle of
the six, and is regarded constantly by the mother. That head by which
Bhadrasakha created the divine energy, is reputed to be the best of all
his heads. O ruler of men, these virtuous wonderful events happened on
the fifth day of the bright half of the lunar month, and on the sixth, a
very fierce and terrific battle was fought at that place."

    [36] i.e., good and evil spirits.


SECTION CCXXVIII

"Markandeya continued, 'Skanda was adorned with a golden amulet and
wreath, and wore a crest and a crown of gold; his eyes were
golden-coloured, and he had a set of sharp teeth; he was dressed in a
red garment and looked very handsome; he had a comely appearance, and
was endowed with all good characteristics and was the favourite of the
three worlds. He granted boons (to people who sought them) and was
brave, youthful, and adorned with bright ear-rings. Whilst he was
reposing himself, the goddess of fortune, looking like a lotus and
assuming a personal embodiment, rendered her allegiance to him. When he
became thus possessed of good fortune, that famous and delicate-looking
creature appeared to all like the moon at its full. And high-minded
Brahmanas worshipped that mighty being, and the _Maharshis_ (great
_rishis_) then said as follows to Skanda, "O thou born of the golden
egg, mayst thou be prosperous and mayst thou become an instrument of
good to the universe! O best of the gods, although thou wast born only
six nights (days) ago, the whole world has owned allegiance to thee
(within this short time), and thou hast also allayed their fears.
Therefore do thou become the Indra (lord) of the three worlds and remove
their cause of apprehension." Skanda replied, "You gentlemen of great
ascetic wealth (tell me) what Indra does with all three worlds and how
that sovereign of the celestials protects the hosts of gods
unremittingly." The _Rishis_ replied, "Indra is the giver of strength,
power, children and happiness to all creatures and when propitiated,
that Lord of the celestials bestows on all the objects of their desire.
He destroys the wicked and fulfils the desires of the righteous; and
that Destroyer of Vala assigns to all creatures their various duties. He
officiates for the sun and the moon in places where there is no sun or
moon; he even when occasion requires it, acts for (serves the purposes
of) fire, air, earth, and water. These are the duties of Indra; his
capacities are immense. Thou too art mighty; therefore great hero, do
thou become our Indra."

"'Sakra said, "O mighty being, do thou make us happy, by becoming our
lord. Excellent being, thou art worthy of the honour; therefore shall we
anoint thee this very day."

"'Skanda replied, "Do thou continue to rule the three worlds with
self-possession, and with thy heart bent on conquest. I shall remain thy
humble servant. I covet not thy sovereignty."

"'Sakra replied, "Thy prowess is unrivalled, O hero, do thou therefore
vanquish the enemies of the gods. People have been struck with wonder at
thy prowess. More specially as I have been bereft of my prowess, and
defeated by thee, now if I were to act as Indra, I should not command
the respect of all creatures, and they would be busy in bringing about
dissensions between us; and then, my lord, they would become the
partisans of one or other of us. And when they formed themselves into
two distinct factions, war as before would be the result of that
defection. And in that war, thou wouldst undoubtedly defeat me without
difficulty and thyself become the lord of all worlds."

"'Skanda replied, "Thou, O Sakra, art my sovereign, as also of the three
worlds; mayst thou be prosperous! Tell me if I can obey any commands of
thine."

"'Indra replied, "At thy bidding, O powerful being, I shall continue to
act as Indra. And if thou hast said this deliberately and in earnest,
