
2 Mac 9:25
Again, considering how that the princes that are borderers
and neighbours unto my kingdom wait for opportunities, and
expect what shall be the event. I have appointed my son
Antiochus king, whom I often committed and commended unto many
of you, when I went up into the high provinces; to whom I have
written as followeth:

2 Mac 9:26
Therefore I pray and request you to remember the benefits
that I have done unto you generally, and in special, and that
every man will be still faithful to me and my son.

2 Mac 9:27
For I am persuaded that he understanding my mind will
favourably and graciously yield to your desires.

2 Mac 9:28
Thus the murderer and blasphemer having suffered most
grievously, as he entreated other men, so died he a miserable
death in a strange country in the mountains.

2 Mac 9:29
And Philip, that was brought up with him, carried away his
body, who also fearing the son of Antiochus went into Egypt to
Ptolemeus Philometor.

2 Mac 10:1
Now Maccabeus and his company, the Lord guiding them,
recovered the temple and the city:

2 Mac 10:2
But the altars which the heathen had built in the open
street, and also the chapels, they pulled down.

2 Mac 10:3
And having cleansed the temple they made another altar, and
striking stones they took fire out of them, and offered a
sacrifice after two years, and set forth incense, and lights,
and shewbread.

2 Mac 10:4
When that was done, they fell flat down, and besought the
Lord that they might come no more into such troubles; but if
they sinned any more against him, that he himself would chasten
them with mercy, and that they might not be delivered unto the
blasphemous and barbarous nations.

2 Mac 10:5
Now upon the same day that the strangers profaned the temple,
on the very same day it was cleansed again, even the five and
twentieth day of the same month, which is Casleu.

2 Mac 10:6
And they kept the eight days with gladness, as in the feast
of the tabernacles, remembering that not long afore they had
held the feast of the tabernacles, when as they wandered in the
mountains and dens like beasts.

2 Mac 10:7
Therefore they bare branches, and fair boughs, and palms
also, and sang psalms unto him that had given them good success
in cleansing his place.

2 Mac 10:8
They ordained also by a common statute and decree, That every
year those days should be kept of the whole nation of the Jews.

2 Mac 10:9
And this was the end of Antiochus, called Epiphanes.

2 Mac 10:10
Now will we declare the acts of Antiochus Eupator, who was
the son of this wicked man, gathering briefly the calamities of
the wars.

2 Mac 10:11
So when he was come to the crown, he set one Lysias over the
affairs of his realm, and appointed him his chief governor of
Celosyria and Phenice.

2 Mac 10:12
For Ptolemeus, that was called Macron, choosing rather to do
justice unto the Jews for the wrong that had been done unto
them, endeavoured to continue peace with them.

2 Mac 10:13
Whereupon being accused of the king's friends before Eupator,
and called traitor at every word because he had left Cyprus,
that Philometor had committed unto him, and departed to
Antiochus Epiphanes, and seeing that he was in no honourable
place, he was so discouraged, that he poisoned himself and died.

2 Mac 10:14
But when Gorgias was governor of the holds, he hired
soldiers, and nourished war continually with the Jews:

2 Mac 10:15
And therewithall the Idumeans, having gotten into their hands
the most commodious holds, kept the Jews occupied, and receiving
those that were banished from Jerusalem, they went about to
nourish war.

2 Mac 10:16
Then they that were with Maccabeus made supplication, and
besought God that he would be their helper; and so they ran with
violence upon the strong holds of the Idumeans,

2 Mac 10:17
And assaulting them strongly, they won the holds, and kept
off all that fought upon the wall, and slew all that fell into
their hands, and killed no fewer than twenty thousand.

2 Mac 10:18
And because certain, who were no less than nine thousand,
were fled together into two very strong castles, having all
manner of things convenient to sustain the siege,

2 Mac 10:19
Maccabeus left Simon and Joseph, and Zaccheus also, and them
that were with him, who were enough to besiege them, and
departed himself unto those places which more needed his help.

2 Mac 10:20
Now they that were with Simon, being led with covetousness,
were persuaded for money through certain of those that were in
the castle, and took seventy thousand drachms, and let some of
them escape.

2 Mac 10:21
But when it was told Maccabeus what was done, he called the
governors of the people together, and accused those men, that
they had sold their brethren for money, and set their enemies
free to fight against them.

2 Mac 10:22
So he slew those that were found traitors, and immediately
took the two castles.

2 Mac 10:23
And having good success with his weapons in all things he
took in hand, he slew in the two holds more than twenty
thousand.

2 Mac 10:24
Now Timotheus, whom the Jews had overcome before, when he had
gathered a great multitude of foreign forces, and horses out of
Asia not a few, came as though he would take Jewry by force of
arms.

2 Mac 10:25
But when he drew near, they that were with Maccabeus turned
themselves to pray unto God, and sprinkled earth upon their
heads, and girded their loins with sackcloth,

2 Mac 10:26
And fell down at the foot of the altar, and besought him to
be merciful to them, and to be an enemy to their enemies, and an
adversary to their adversaries, as the law declareth.

2 Mac 10:27
So after the prayer they took their weapons, and went on
further from the city: and when they drew near to their enemies,
they kept by themselves.

2 Mac 10:28
Now the sun being newly risen, they joined both together; the
one part having together with their virtue their refuge also
unto the Lord for a pledge of their success and victory: the
other side making their rage leader of their battle

2 Mac 10:29
But when the battle waxed strong, there appeared unto the
enemies from heaven five comely men upon horses, with bridles of
gold, and two of them led the Jews,

2 Mac 10:30
And took Maccabeus betwixt them, and covered him on every
side weapons, and kept him safe, but shot arrows and lightnings
against the enemies: so that being confounded with blindness,
and full of trouble, they were killed.

2 Mac 10:31
And there were slain of footmen twenty thousand and five
hundred, and six hundred horsemen.

2 Mac 10:32
As for Timotheus himself, he fled into a very strong hold,
called Gawra, where Chereas was governor.

2 Mac 10:33
But they that were with Maccabeus laid siege against the
fortress courageously four days.

2 Mac 10:34
And they that were within, trusting to the strength of the
place, blasphemed exceedingly, and uttered wicked words.

2 Mac 10:35
Nevertheless upon the fifth day early twenty young men of
Maccabeus' company, inflamed with anger because of the
blasphemies, assaulted the wall manly, and with a fierce courage
killed all that they met withal.

2 Mac 10:36
Others likewise ascending after them, whiles they were busied
with them that were within, burnt the towers, and kindling fires
burnt the blasphemers alive; and others broke open the gates,
and, having received in the rest of the army, took the city,

2 Mac 10:37
And killed Timotheus, that was hid in a certain pit, and
Chereas his brother, with Apollophanes.

2 Mac 10:38
When this was done, they praised the Lord with psalms and
thanksgiving, who had done so great things for Israel, and given
them the victory.

2 Mac 11:1
Not long after the Lysias the king's protector and cousin,
who also managed the affairs, took sore displeasure for the
things that were done.

2 Mac 11:2
And when he had gathered about fourscore thousand with all
the horsemen, he came against the Jews, thinking to make the
city an habitation of the Gentiles,

2 Mac 11:3
And to make a gain of the temple, as of the other chapels of
the heathen, and to set the high priesthood to sale every year:

2 Mac 11:4
Not at all considering the power of God but puffed up with
his ten thousands of footmen, and his thousands of horsemen, and
his fourscore elephants.

2 Mac 11:5
So he came to Judea, and drew near to Bethsura, which was a
strong town, but distant from Jerusalem about five furlongs, and
he laid sore siege unto it.

2 Mac 11:6
Now when they that were with Maccabeus heard that he besieged
the holds, they and all the people with lamentation and tears
besought the Lord that he would send a good angel to deliver
Israel.

2 Mac 11:7
Then Maccabeus himself first of all took weapons, exhorting
the other that they would jeopard themselves together with him
to help their brethren: so they went forth together with a
willing mind.

2 Mac 11:8
And as they were at Jerusalem, there appeared before them on
horseback one in white clothing, shaking his armour of gold.

2 Mac 11:9
Then they praised the merciful God all together, and took
heart, insomuch that they were ready not only to fight with men,
but with most cruel beasts, and to pierce through walls of iron.

2 Mac 11:10
Thus they marched forward in their armour, having an helper
from heaven: for the Lord was merciful unto them

2 Mac 11:11
And giving a charge upon their enemies like lions, they slew
eleven thousand footmen, and sixteen hundred horsemen, and put
all the other to flight.

2 Mac 11:12
Many of them also being wounded escaped naked; and Lysias
himself fled away shamefully, and so escaped.

2 Mac 11:13
Who, as he was a man of understanding, casting with himself
what loss he had had, and considering that the Hebrews could not
be overcome, because the Almighty God helped them, he sent unto
them,

2 Mac 11:14
And persuaded them to agree to all reasonable conditions, and
promised that he would persuade the king that he must needs be a
friend unto them.

2 Mac 11:15
Then Maccabeus consented to all that Lysias desired, being
careful of the common good; and whatsoever Maccabeus wrote unto
Lysias concerning the Jews, the king granted it.

2 Mac 11:16
For there were letters written unto the Jews from Lysias to
this effect: Lysias unto the people of the Jews sendeth
greeting:

2 Mac 11:17
John and Absolom, who were sent from you, delivered me the
petition subscribed, and made request for the performance of the
contents thereof.

2 Mac 11:18
Therefore what things soever were meet to be reported to the
king, I have declared them, and he hath granted as much as might
be.

2 Mac 11:19
And if then ye will keep yourselves loyal to the state,
hereafter also will I endeavour to be a means of your good.

2 Mac 11:20
But of the particulars I have given order both to these and
the other that came from me, to commune with you.

2 Mac 11:21
Fare ye well. The hundred and eight and fortieth year, the
four and twentieth day of the month Dioscorinthius.

2 Mac 11:22
Now the king's letter contained these words: King Antiochus
unto his brother Lysias sendeth greeting:

2 Mac 11:23
Since our father is translated unto the gods, our will is,
that they that are in our realm live quietly, that every one may
attend upon his own affairs.

2 Mac 11:24
We understand also that the Jews would not consent to our
father, for to be brought unto the custom of the Gentiles, but
had rather keep their own manner of living: for the which cause
they require of us, that we should suffer them to live after
their own laws.

2 Mac 11:25
Wherefore our mind is, that this nation shall be in rest, and
we have determined to restore them their temple, that they may
live according to the customs of their forefathers.

2 Mac 11:26
Thou shalt do well therefore to send unto them, and grant
them peace, that when they are certified of our mind, they may
be of good comfort, and ever go cheerfully about their own
affairs.

2 Mac 11:27
And the letter of the king unto the nation of the Jews was
after this manner: King Antiochus sendeth greeting unto the
council, and the rest of the Jews:

2 Mac 11:28
If ye fare well, we have our desire; we are also in good
health.

2 Mac 11:29
Menelaus declared unto us, that your desire was to return
home, and to follow your own business:

2 Mac 11:30
Wherefore they that will depart shall have safe conduct till
the thirtieth day of Xanthicus with security.

2 Mac 11:31
And the Jews shall use their own kind of meats and laws, as
before; and none of them any manner of ways shall be molested
for things ignorantly done.

2 Mac 11:32
I have sent also Menelaus, that he may comfort you.

2 Mac 11:33
Fare ye well. In the hundred forty and eighth year, and the
fifteenth day of the month Xanthicus.

2 Mac 11:34
The Romans also sent unto them a letter containing these
words: Quintus Memmius and Titus Manlius, ambassadors of the
Romans, send greeting unto the people of the Jews.

2 Mac 11:35
Whatsoever Lysias the king's cousin hath granted, therewith
we also are well pleased.

2 Mac 11:36
But touching such things as he judged to be referred to the
king, after ye have advised thereof, send one forthwith, that we
may declare as it is convenient for you: for we are now going to
Antioch.

2 Mac 11:37
Therefore send some with speed, that we may know what is your
mind.

2 Mac 11:38
Farewell. This hundred and eight and fortieth year, the
fifteenth day of the month Xanthicus.

2 Mac 12:1
When these covenants were made, Lysias went unto the king,
and the Jews were about their husbandry.

2 Mac 12:2
But of the governours of several places, Timotheus, and
Apollonius the son of Genneus, also Hieronymus, and Demophon,
and beside them Nicanor the governor of Cyprus, would not suffer
them to be quiet and live in peace.

2 Mac 12:3
The men of Joppa also did such an ungodly deed: they prayed
the Jews that dwelt among them to go with their wives and
children into the boats which they had prepared, as though they
had meant them no hurt.

2 Mac 12:4
Who accepted of it according to the common decree of the
city, as being desirous to live in peace, and suspecting
nothing: but when they were gone forth into the deep, they
drowned no less than two hundred of them.

2 Mac 12:5
When Judas heard of this cruelty done unto his countrymen, he
commanded those that were with him to make them ready.

2 Mac 12:6
And calling upon God the righteous Judge, he came against
those murderers of his brethren, and burnt the haven by night,
and set the boats on fire, and those that fled thither he slew.

2 Mac 12:7
And when the town was shut up, he went backward, as if he
would return to root out all them of the city of Joppa.

2 Mac 12:8
But when he heard that the Jamnites were minded to do in like
manner unto the Jews that dwelt among them,

2 Mac 12:9
He came upon the Jamnites also by night, and set fire on the
haven and the navy, so that the light of the fire was seen at
Jerusalem two hundred and forty furlongs off.

2 Mac 12:10
Now when they were gone from thence nine furlongs in their
journey toward Timotheus, no fewer than five thousand men on
foot and five hundred horsemen of the Arabians set upon him.

2 Mac 12:11
Whereupon there was a very sore battle; but Judas' side by
the help of God got the victory; so that the Nomades of Arabia,
being overcome, besought Judas for peace, promising both to give
him cattle, and to pleasure him otherwise.

2 Mac 12:12
Then Judas, thinking indeed that they would be profitable in
many things, granted them peace: whereupon they shook hands, and
so they departed to their tents.

2 Mac 12:13
He went also about to make a bridge to a certain strong city,
which was fenced about with walls, and inhabited by people of
divers countries; and the name of it was Caspis.

2 Mac 12:14
But they that were within it put such trust in the strength
of the walls and provision of victuals, that they behaved
themselves rudely toward them that were with Judas, railing and
blaspheming, and uttering such words as were not to be spoken.

2 Mac 12:15
Wherefore Judas with his company, calling upon the great Lord
of the world, who without rams or engines of war did cast down
Jericho in the time of Joshua, gave a fierce assault against the
walls,

2 Mac 12:16
And took the city by the will of God, and made unspeakable
slaughters, insomuch that a lake two furlongs broad near
adjoining thereunto, being filled full, was seen running with
blood.

2 Mac 12:17
Then departed they from thence seven hundred and fifty
furlongs, and came to Characa unto the Jews that are called
Tubieni.

2 Mac 12:18
But as for Timotheus, they found him not in the places: for
before he had dispatched any thing, he departed from thence,
having left a very strong garrison in a certain hold.

2 Mac 12:19
Howbeit Dositheus and Sosipater, who were of Maccabeus'
captains, went forth, and slew those that Timotheus had left in
the fortress, above ten thousand men.

2 Mac 12:20
And Maccabeus ranged his army by bands, and set them over the
bands, and went against Timotheus, who had about him an hundred
and twenty thousand men of foot, and two thousand and five
hundred horsemen.

2 Mac 12:21
Now when Timotheus had knowledge of Judas' coming, he sent
the women and children and the other baggage unto a fortress
called Carnion: for the town was hard to besiege, and uneasy to
come unto, by reason of the straitness of all the places.

2 Mac 12:22
But when Judas his first band came in sight, the enemies,
being smitten with fear and terror through the appearing of him
who seeth all things, fled amain, one running into this way,
another that way, so as that they were often hurt of their own
men, and wounded with the points of their own swords.

2 Mac 12:23
Judas also was very earnest in pursuing them, killing those
wicked wretches, of whom he slew about thirty thousand men.

2 Mac 12:24
Moreover Timotheus himself fell into the hands of Dositheus
and Sosipater, whom he besought with much craft to let him go
with his life, because he had many of the Jews' parents, and the
brethren of some of them, who, if they put him to death, should
not be regarded.

2 Mac 12:25
So when he had assured them with many words that he would
restore them without hurt, according to the agreement, they let
him go for the saving of their brethren.

2 Mac 12:26
Then Maccabeus marched forth to Carnion, and to the temple of
Atargatis, and there he slew five and twenty thousand persons.

2 Mac 12:27
And after he had put to flight and destroyed them, Judas
removed the host toward Ephron, a strong city, wherein Lysias
abode, and a great multitude of divers nations, and the strong
young men kept the walls, and defended them mightily: wherein
also was great provision of engines and darts.

2 Mac 12:28
But when Judas and his company had called upon Almighty God,
who with his power breaketh the strength of his enemies, they
won the city, and slew twenty and five thousand of them that
were within,

2 Mac 12:29
From thence they departed to Scythopolis, which lieth six
hundred furlongs from Jerusalem,

2 Mac 12:30
But when the Jews that dwelt there had testified that the
Scythopolitans dealt lovingly with them, and entreated them
kindly in the time of their adversity;

2 Mac 12:31
They gave them thanks, desiring them to be friendly still
unto them: and so they came to Jerusalem, the feast of the weeks
approaching.

2 Mac 12:32
And after the feast, called Pentecost, they went forth
against Gorgias the governor of Idumea,

2 Mac 12:33
Who came out with three thousand men of foot and four hundred
horsemen.

2 Mac 12:34
And it happened that in their fighting together a few of the
Jews were slain.

2 Mac 12:35
At which time Dositheus, one of Bacenor's company, who was on
horseback, and a strong man, was still upon Gorgias, and taking
hold of his coat drew him by force; and when he would have taken
that cursed man alive, a horseman of Thracia coming upon him
smote off his shoulder, so that Gorgias fled unto Marisa.

2 Mac 12:36
Now when they that were with Gorgias had fought long, and
were weary, Judas called upon the Lord, that he would shew
himself to be their helper and leader of the battle.

2 Mac 12:37
And with that he began in his own language, and sung psalms
with a loud voice, and rushing unawares upon Gorgias' men, he
put them to flight.

2 Mac 12:38
So Judas gathered his host, and came into the city of
Odollam, And when the seventh day came, they purified
themselves, as the custom was, and kept the sabbath in the same
place.

2 Mac 12:39
And upon the day following, as the use had been, Judas and
his company came to take up the bodies of them that were slain,
and to bury them with their kinsmen in their fathers' graves.

2 Mac 12:40
Now under the coats of every one that was slain they found
things consecrated to the idols of the Jamnites, which is
forbidden the Jews by the law. Then every man saw that this was
the cause wherefore they were slain.

2 Mac 12:41
All men therefore praising the Lord, the righteous Judge, who
had opened the things that were hid,

2 Mac 12:42
Betook themselves unto prayer, and besought him that the sin
committed might wholly be put out of remembrance. Besides, that
noble Judas exhorted the people to keep themselves from sin,
forsomuch as they saw before their eyes the things that came to
pass for the sins of those that were slain.

2 Mac 12:43
And when he had made a gathering throughout the company to
the sum of two thousand drachms of silver, he sent it to
Jerusalem to offer a sin offering, doing therein very well and
honestly, in that he was mindful of the resurrection:

2 Mac 12:44
For if he had not hoped that they that were slain should have
risen again, it had been superfluous and vain to pray for the
dead.

2 Mac 12:45
And also in that he perceived that there was great favour
laid up for those that died godly, it was an holy and good
thought. Whereupon he made a reconciliation for the dead, that
they might be delivered from sin.

2 Mac 13:1
In the hundred forty and ninth year it was told Judas, that
Antiochus Eupator was coming with a great power into Judea,

2 Mac 13:2
And with him Lysias his protector, and ruler of his affairs,
having either of them a Grecian power of footmen, an hundred and
ten thousand, and horsemen five thousand and three hundred, and
elephants two and twenty, and three hundred chariots armed with
hooks.

2 Mac 13:3
Menelaus also joined himself with them, and with great
dissimulation encouraged Antiochus, not for the safeguard of the
country, but because he thought to have been made governor.

2 Mac 13:4
But the King of kings moved Antiochus' mind against this
wicked wretch, and Lysias informed the king that this man was
the cause of all mischief, so that the king commanded to bring
him unto Berea, and to put him to death, as the manner is in
that place.

2 Mac 13:5
Now there was in that place a tower of fifty cubits high,
full of ashes, and it had a round instrument which on every side
hanged down into the ashes.

2 Mac 13:6
And whosoever was condemned of sacrilege, or had committed
any other grievous crime, there did all men thrust him unto
death.

2 Mac 13:7
Such a death it happened that wicked man to die, not having
so much as burial in the earth; and that most justly:

2 Mac 13:8
For inasmuch as he had committed many sins about the altar,
whose fire and ashes were holy, he received his death in ashes.

2 Mac 13:9
Now the king came with a barbarous and haughty mind to do far
worse to the Jews, than had been done in his father's time.

2 Mac 13:10
Which things when Judas perceived, he commanded the multitude
to call upon the Lord night and day, that if ever at any other
time, he would now also help them, being at the point to be put
from their law, from their country, and from the holy temple:

2 Mac 13:11
And that he would not suffer the people, that had even now
been but a little refreshed, to be in subjection to the
blasphemous nations.

2 Mac 13:12
So when they had all done this together, and besought the
merciful Lord with weeping and fasting, and lying flat upon the
ground three days long, Judas, having exhorted them, commanded
they should be in a readiness.

2 Mac 13:13
And Judas, being apart with the elders, determined, before
the king's host should enter into Judea, and get the city, to go
forth and try the matter in fight by the help of the Lord.

2 Mac 13:14
So when he had committed all to the Creator of the world, and
exhorted his soldiers to fight manfully, even unto death, for
the laws, the temple, the city, the country, and the
commonwealth, he camped by Modin:

2 Mac 13:15
And having given the watchword to them that were about him,
Victory is of God; with the most valiant and choice young men he
went in into the king's tent by night, and slew in the camp
about four thousand men, and the chiefest of the elephants, with
all that were upon him.

2 Mac 13:16
And at last they filled the camp with fear and tumult, and
departed with good success.

2 Mac 13:17
This was done in the break of the day, because the protection
of the Lord did help him.

2 Mac 13:18
Now when the king had taken a taste of the manliness of the
Jews, he went about to take the holds by policy,

2 Mac 13:19
And marched toward Bethsura, which was a strong hold of the
Jews: but he was put to flight, failed, and lost of his men:

2 Mac 13:20
For Judas had conveyed unto them that were in it such things
as were necessary.

2 Mac 13:21
But Rhodocus, who was in the Jews' host, disclosed the
secrets to the enemies; therefore he was sought out, and when
they had gotten him, they put him in prison.

2 Mac 13:22
The king treated with them in Bethsum the second time, gave
his hand, took their's, departed, fought with Judas, was
overcome;

2 Mac 13:23
Heard that Philip, who was left over the affairs in Antioch,
was desperately bent, confounded, intreated the Jews, submitted
himself, and sware to all equal conditions, agreed with them,
and offered sacrifice, honoured the temple, and dealt kindly
with the place,

2 Mac 13:24
And accepted well of Maccabeus, made him principal governor
from Ptolemais unto the Gerrhenians;

2 Mac 13:25
Came to Ptolemais: the people there were grieved for the
covenants; for they stormed, because they would make their
covenants void:

2 Mac 13:26
Lysias went up to the judgment seat, said as much as could be
in defence of the cause, persuaded, pacified, made them well
affected, returned to Antioch. Thus it went touching the king's
coming and departing.

2 Mac 14:1
After three years was Judas informed, that Demetrius the son
of Seleucus, having entered by the haven of Tripolis with a
great power and navy,

2 Mac 14:2
Had taken the country, and killed Antiochus, and Lysias his
protector.

2 Mac 14:3
Now one Alcimus, who had been high priest, and had defiled
himself wilfully in the times of their mingling with the
Gentiles, seeing that by no means he could save himself, nor
have any more access to the holy altar,

2 Mac 14:4
Came to king Demetrius in the hundred and one and fiftieth
year, presenting unto him a crown of gold, and a palm, and also
of the boughs which were used solemnly in the temple: and so
that day he held his peace.

2 Mac 14:5
Howbeit having gotten opportunity to further his foolish
enterprize, and being called into counsel by Demetrius, and
asked how the Jews stood affected, and what they intended, he
answered thereunto:

2 Mac 14:6
Those of the Jews that he called Assideans, whose captain is
Judas Maccabeus, nourish war and are seditious, and will not let
the rest be in peace.

2 Mac 14:7
Therefore I, being deprived of mine ancestors' honour, I mean
the high priesthood, am now come hither:

2 Mac 14:8
First, verily for the unfeigned care I have of things
pertaining to the king; and secondly, even for that I intend the
good of mine own countrymen: for all our nation is in no small
misery through the unadvised dealing of them aforersaid.

2 Mac 14:9
Wherefore, O king, seeing knowest all these things, be
careful for the country, and our nation, which is pressed on
every side, according to the clemency that thou readily shewest
unto all.

2 Mac 14:10
For as long as Judas liveth, it is not possible that the
state should be quiet.

2 Mac 14:11
This was no sooner spoken of him, but others of the king's
friends, being maliciously set against Judas, did more incense
Demetrius.

2 Mac 14:12
And forthwith calling Nicanor, who had been master of the
elephants, and making him governor over Judea, he sent him
forth,

2 Mac 14:13
Commanding him to slay Judas, and to scatter them that were
with him, and to make Alcimus high priest of the great temple.

2 Mac 14:14
Then the heathen, that had fled out of Judea from Judas, came
to Nicanor by flocks, thinking the harm and calamities of the
Jews to be their welfare.

2 Mac 14:15
Now when the Jews heard of Nicanor's coming, and that the
heathen were up against them, they cast earth upon their heads,
and made supplication to him that had established his people for
ever, and who always helpeth his portion with manifestation of
his presence.

2 Mac 14:16
So at the commandment of the captain they removed
straightways from thence, and came near unto them at the town of
Dessau.

2 Mac 14:17
Now Simon, Judas' brother, had joined battle with Nicanor,
but was somewhat discomfited through the sudden silence of his
enemies.

2 Mac 14:18
Nevertheless Nicanor, hearing of the manliness of them that
were with Judas, and the courageousness that they had to fight
for their country, durst not try the matter by the sword.

2 Mac 14:19
Wherefore he sent Posidonius, and Theodotus, and Mattathias,
to make peace.

2 Mac 14:20
So when they had taken long advisement thereupon, and the
captain had made the multitude acquainted therewith, and it
appeared that they were all of one mind, they consented to the
covenants,

2 Mac 14:21
And appointed a day to meet in together by themselves: and
when the day came, and stools were set for either of them,

2 Mac 14:22
Ludas placed armed men ready in convenient places, lest some
treachery should be suddenly practised by the enemies: so they
made a peaceable conference.

2 Mac 14:23
Now Nicanor abode in Jerusalem, and did no hurt, but sent
away the people that came flocking unto him.

2 Mac 14:24
And he would not willingly have Judas out of his sight: for
he love the man from his heart

2 Mac 14:25
He prayed him also to take a wife, and to beget children: so
he married, was quiet, and took part of this life.

2 Mac 14:26
But Alcimus, perceiving the love that was betwixt them, and
considering the covenants that were made, came to Demetrius, and
told him that Nicanor was not well affected toward the state;
for that he had ordained Judas, a traitor to his realm, to be
