  That fare the new-born Christ to see:
  For yonder is the shining sign
  Of grace perennial and divine.

  What means this star, whose piercing rays
  Outshine the sun's resplendent blaze?
  'Tis token sure that God is come
  In mortal flesh to make His home.

  No courtier of the realms of night
  Nor monthly moon's bright acolyte,
  This star directs the course of day,
  Sole sovereign of the heavenly way.

  Although the Bears their track retrace,
  Nor wholly their clear beams efface,
  Yet ofttimes 'neath the dun cloud's haze
  They hide themselves from mortal gaze.

  But yon Star's glory hath no end,
  Nor to the depths can it descend:
  It ne'er is whelmed by envious cloud
  That seeks its beauty to enshroud.

  Now let the baleful comet die,
  The brood of blazing Sirius fly:
  God's orb shall quench their sultry heats
  And drive them from their haughty seats.

  Lo! from the regions of the morn
  Wherein the radiant sun is born,
  The Persian sages see on high
  God's ensign shining in the sky.

  Soon as its rising beams prevail
  The starry hosts in order pale:
  E'en Lucifer durst not upraise
  The silvery splendours of his face.

  Who is this sovereign (they enquire)
  That lords it o'er the ethereal choir?
  'Fore whom the heavens bow down afraid,
  Of all the worlds of light obeyed?

  Sure 'tis the sign most reverend
  Of Being that doth know no end:
  Of One in state sublime arrayed
  Ere sky and chaos yet were made.

  This is the King of Israel,
  Of all in Gentile lands that dwell:
  The King to Abram and his seed
  Throughout all ages erst decreed.

  To him 'twas given his progeny
  As stars innumerous to see:
  First of believers! moved to slay
  His only son, so God to obey.

  Behold the Flower of David shine,
  Of Jesse's root the Branch benign:
  The sceptre spread with blossoms rare
  Wields o'er the world its lordship fair.

  Roused by the portent of the sky
  The sages fix their gaze on high,
  And speed them 'neath the furrowed way
  Marked by the star's effulgent ray.

  At length its flaming steps it stayed
  Poised over where the Child was laid:
  Straightway with downcast mien it shed
  Its splendours on the sacred Head.

  Whereat the travellers outpour
  Of Eastern gifts their treasure-store,
  Myrrh and sweet-smelling frankincense,
  Gold meet for regal opulence.

  Behold herein the triple sign
  Of Thy pure being, King divine:
  Seeing the Father willed in Thee
  To plant a threefold majesty.

  The gift of gold thee King proclaims:
  Thee God the fragrant incense names:
  The myrrh declares that Death shall thrust
  Within the tomb Thy body's dust.

  Ah! that dark sepulchre, whose fold
  God's body quenched in death doth hold:
  Yet shall He from that durance wake
  And Death's strong prison-fetters break.

  O Bethlehem! no longer thou
  The least of cities: all shall vow
  That thou art greatest on the earth:
  For thou man's King didst bring to birth.

  Yea thou didst on thy bosom bear
  The All-loving Father's only heir:
  Man of the Thunderer's Spirit made
  And God in human flesh arrayed.

  The prophets witnessed to the bond
  Which sealed to Him the realm profound:
  The Father's Kingdom He received
  And the vast legacy perceived.

  All things are His in sea and sky,
  In hell beneath, in heaven on high:
  From East to setting sun, in fee
  He holds the earth's immensity.

  Distraught, the tyrant base doth hear
  That now the King of Kings draws near
  To reign in David's seat of state
  And Israel's empire dominate.

  "Betrayed are we," he maddened cries,
  "Our throne's usurper doth arise:
  Go, soldiers, go with sword in hand
  And slay all babes within my land.

  "Spare no male child: each nurse's robe
  Your scrutinizing steel must probe:
  Spare not the suckling infant, though
  O'er mother's breast its life-blood flow.

  "On Bethlehem our suspicion falls,
  On every hearth within its walls:
  Lest mothers with love's tender zeal
  Some manly scion may conceal."

  With daggers drawn the infuriate crew
  Upon their murderous errand flew:
  Each latest offspring of the womb
  To bloody death they foully doom.

  Ah tiny limbs! 'twas hard to know
  How best to strike the fatal blow:
  Too wide the sword-blades are to smite
  Those throats so silken-fragile, slight.

  O horrid sight! the tender bones
  Are dashed against the jagged stones:
  Sightless and mangled there they lie,
  Poor babes! untimely doomed to die.

  Perchance the still deep river laves
  Their bodies thrust into the waves:
  The current with their sighing sighs,
  Sobs with their latest, broken cries.

  Ye flowers of martyrdom, all hail!
  Of rising morn pure blossoms frail!
  By Jesu's foe were ye downcast,
  Like budding roses by the blast.

  Lambs of the flock too early slain,
  Ye first fruits of Christ's bitter pain!
  Close to His very altar, gay
  With palms and crowns, ye now do play.

  Of what avail is deed so vile?
  Doth Herod gain by murderous guile?
  Of all to death so foully done
  Escapes triumphant Christ alone.

  Amidst that tide of infant gore
  Alone He wins the sheltering shore:
  The virgin's Child survives the stroke,
  When every mother's heart was broke.

  Thus Moses 'scaped the mad decree
  Of evil Pharaoh and set free
  The flock of God, prefiguring so
  Christ spared from fate's malignant blow.

  Vain too the king's hostility
  Who framed the pitiless decree
  That Israel's mothers should not rear
  To manhood's strength their offspring dear.

  Quickened by love, a woman's mind
  Found means to thwart that law unkind,
  And, falsely true, the child concealed
  Destined to be his people's Shield.

  On him it was that God did place
  The august priesthood's holy grace,
  The law on stony tablets writ
  Did to his trembling hands commit.

  And may we not with prophet's eye
  In such a hero Christ descry?
  The proud Egyptian's might he broke
  And freed his kinsmen from the yoke.

  So we by Error's might hemmed round
  Were by our Captain's strength unbound:
  His foe He wounded in the fight
  And saved us from Death's horrid night.

  Cheering by sign of flame their feet,
  Moses renewed with waters sweet
  His folk, albeit purified
  From stain, what time they crossed the tide.

  And he, remote on peaceful height,
  Amalek's banded hosts did smite:
  He prayed with arms stretched out above,
  Foreshadowing the Cross of Love.

  Yet truer Jesus surely he,
  Who after many a victory
  And labours long the tribes' renown
  With promised heritage did crown;

  Who when the waters rose on high
  And now the Jordan's bed was dry,
  Set up twelve stones of memory,
  Types of apostles yet to be.

  Rightly the Wise Men said, I ween,
  That they Judaea's King had seen,
  Since noble deeds of other days
  Prophetic chant the Saviour's praise.

  Of those old rulers He is King
  Who did to Jacob judgment bring,
  King of the Mother Church divine,
  God's ancient and God's present Shrine.

  Of Ephraim's sons He is adored:
  Manasseh's sacred house as Lord
  Reveres Him: to His might the seed
  Of brethren twelve their fealty plead.

  Nay, each degenerate race hath fled
  Its shameful rites and orgies dread:
  Grim Baal in glowing furnace cast
  Sinks to the earth, forsook at last.

  Idols smoke-blackened, wooden-hewn,
  Of brass and stone, in dust are strewn:
  The chiselled deities downtrod:
  For all confess in Christ their God.

  Rejoice all peoples, Jewry, Rome,
  Fair Hellas, Thrace, Aegyptus' home:
  Persians and Scythian land forlorn,
  Rejoice: the world's great King is born!

  Behold your Chief! His praise forth tell:
  Ye sick, ye hale, all heaven and hell:
  Ay, you whose vital spark hath sped:
  For lo! in Him e'en Death is dead.




                              EPILOGUS


  Inmolat Deo Patri
    pius, fidelis, innocens, pudicus
  dona conscientiae,
    quibus beata mens abundat intus:
  alter et pecuniam        5
    recidit, unde victitent egeni.
  Nos citos iambicos
    sacramus et rotatiles trochaeos,
  sanctitatis indigi
    nec ad levamen pauperum potentes;        10
  adprobat tamen Deus
    pedestre carmen, et benignus audit.
  Multa divitis domo
    sita est per omnes angulos supellex.
  Fulget aureus scyphus,        15
    nec aere defit expolita pelvis:
  est et olla fictilis,
    gravisque et ampla argentea est parabsis.
  Sunt eburna quaepiam,
    nonnulla quercu sunt cavata et ulmo:        20
  omne vas fit utile,
    quod est ad usum congruens herilem,
  Instruunt enim domum
    ut empta magno, sic parata ligno.
  Me paterno in atrio                 25
    ut obsoletum vasculum caducis
  Christus aptat usibus,
    sinitque parte in anguli manere.
  Munus ecce fictile
    inimus intra regiam salutis;      30
  attamen vel infimam
    Deo obsequelam praestitisse prodest.
  Quidquid illud accidit,
    iuvabit ore personasse Christum.




                              EPILOGUE


  The pure and faithful saint, whose heart is whole,
    To God the Father makes his sacrifice
  From out the treasures of a stainless soul,
    Glad gifts of innocence, beyond all price:
  Another with free hand bestows his gold,
    Whereby his needy neighbour may be fed.
  No wealth of holiness my heart doth hold,
