
021.038
Y: They say: "When will this promise come to pass, if ye are telling the
truth?"

P: And they say: When will this promise (be fulfilled), if ye are
truthful?

S: And they say: When will this threat come to pass if you are truthful?

021.039
Y: If only the Unbelievers knew (the time) when they will not be able to
ward off the fire from their faces, nor yet from their backs, and
(when) no help can reach them!

P: If those who disbelieved but knew the time when they will not be able
to drive off the fire from their faces and from their backs, and they
will not be helped!

S: Had those who disbelieve but known (of the time) when they shall not
be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs, nor
shall they be helped.

021.040
Y: Nay, it may come to them all of a sudden and confound them: no power
will they have then to avert it, nor will they (then) get respite.

P: Nay, but it will come upon them unawares so that it will stupefy
them, and they will be unable to repel it, neither will they be
reprieved.

S: Nay, it shall come on them all of a sudden and cause them to become
confounded, so they shall not have the power to avert it, nor shall
they be respited.

021.041
Y: Mocked were (many) messenger before thee; But their scoffers were
hemmed in by the thing that they mocked.

P: Messengers before thee, indeed, were mocked, but that whereat they
mocked surrounded those who scoffed at them.

S: And certainly messengers before you were scoffed at, then there
befell those of them who scoffed that at which they had scoffed.

021.042
Y: Say: "Who can keep you safe by night and by day from (the Wrath of)
(Allah) Most Gracious?" Yet they turn away from the mention of their
Lord.

P: Say: Who guardeth you in the night or in the day from the Beneficent?
Nay, but they turn away from mention of their Lord!

S: Say: Who guards you by night and by day from the Beneficent Allah?
Nay, they turn aside at the mention of their Lord.

021.043
Y: Or have they gods that can guard them from Us? They have no power to
aid themselves, nor can they be defended from Us.

P: Or have they gods who can shield them from Us? They cannot help
themselves nor can they be defended from Us.

S: Or, have they gods who can defend them against Us? They shall not be
able to assist themselves, nor shall they be defended from Us.

021.044
Y: Nay, We gave the good things of this life to these men and their
fathers until the period grew long for them; See they not that We
gradually reduce the land (in their control) from its outlying borders?
Is it then they who will win?

P: Nay, but We gave these and their fathers ease until life grew long
for them. See they not how we aim to the land, reducing it of its
outlying parts? Can they then be the victors?

S: Nay, We gave provision to these and their fathers until life was
prolonged to them. Do they not then see that We are visiting the land,
curtailing it of its sides? Shall they then prevail?

021.045
Y: Say, "I do but warn you according to revelation": But the deaf will
not hear the call, (even) when they are warned!

P: Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I warn you only by the Inspiration.
But the deaf hear not the call when they are warned.

S: Say: I warn you only by revelation; and the deaf do not hear the call
whenever they are warned.

021.046
Y: If but a breath of the Wrath of thy Lord do touch them, they will
then say, "Woe to us! we did wrong indeed!"

P: And if a breath of thy Lord's punishment were to touch them, they
assuredly would say: Alas for us! Lo! we were wrong-doers.

S: And if a blast of the chastisement of your Lord were to touch them,
they will certainly say: O woe to us! surely we were unjust.

021.047
Y: We shall set up scales of justice for the Day of Judgment, so that
not a soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least, and if there be
(no more than) the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it (to
account): and enough are We to take account.

P: And We set a just balance for the Day of Resurrection so that no soul
is wronged in aught. Though it be of the weight of a grain of mustard
seed, We bring it. And We suffice for reckoners.

S: And We will set up a just balance on the day of resurrection, so no
soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; and though there be the
weight of a grain of mustard seed, (yet) will We bring it, and
sufficient are We to take account.

021.048
Y: In the past We granted to Moses and Aaron the criterion (for
judgment), and a Light and a Message for those who would do right,-

P: And We verily gave Moses and Aaron the Criterion (of right and wrong)
and a light and a Reminder for those who keep from evil,

S: And certainly We gave to Musa and Haroun the Furqan and a light and a
reminder for those who would guard (against evil).

021.049
Y: Those who fear their Lord in their most secret thoughts, and who hold
the Hour (of Judgment) in awe.

P: Those who fear their Lord in secret and who dread the Hour (of doom).

S: (For) those who fear their Lord in secret and they are fearful of the
hour.

021.050
Y: And this is a blessed Message which We have sent down: will ye then
reject it?

P: This is a blessed Reminder that we have revealed: Will ye then reject
it?

S: And this is a blessed Reminder which We have revealed; will you then
deny it?

021.051
Y: We bestowed aforetime on Abraham his rectitude of conduct, and well
were We acquainted with him.

P: And We verily gave Abraham of old his proper course, and We were
Aware of him,

S: And certainly We gave to Ibrahim his rectitude before, and We knew
him fully well.

021.052
Y: Behold! he said to his father and his people, "What are these images,
to which ye are (so assiduously) devoted?"

P: When he said unto his father and his folk: What are these images unto
which ye pay devotion?

S: When he said to his father and his people: What are these images to
whose worship you cleave?

021.053
Y: They said, "We found our fathers worshipping them."

P: They said: We found our fathers worshippers of them.

S: They said: We found our fathers worshipping them.

021.054
Y: He said, "Indeed ye have been in manifest error - ye and your
fathers."

P: He said: Verily ye and your fathers were in plain error.

S: He said: Certainly you have been, (both) you and your fathers, in
manifest error.

021.055
Y: They said, "Have you brought us the Truth, or are you one of those
who jest?"

P: They said: Bringest thou unto us the truth, or art thou some jester?

S: They said: Have you brought to us the truth, or are you one of the
triflers?

021.056
Y: He said, "Nay, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, He
Who created them (from nothing): and I am a witness to this (Truth)."

P: He said: Nay, but your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth,
Who created them; and I am of those who testify unto that.

S: He said: Nay! your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who
brought them into existence, and I am of those who bear witness to
this:

021.057
Y: "And by Allah, I have a plan for your idols - after ye go away and
turn your backs"..

P: And, by Allah, I shall circumvent your idols after ye have gone away
and turned your backs.

S: And, by Allah! I will certainly do something against your idols after
you go away, turning back.

021.058
Y: So he broke them to pieces, (all) but the biggest of them, that they
might turn (and address themselves) to it.

P: Then he reduced them to fragments, all save the chief of them, that
haply they might have recourse to it.

S: So he broke them into pieces, except the chief of them, that haply
they may return to it.

021.059
Y: They said, "Who has done this to our gods? He must indeed be some man
of impiety!"

P: They said: Who hath done this to our gods? Surely it must be some
evil-doer.

S: They said: Who has done this to our gods? Most surely he is one of
the unjust.

021.060
Y: They said, "We heard a youth talk of them: He is called Abraham."

P: They said: We heard a youth make mention of them, who is called
Abraham.

S: They said: We heard a youth called Ibrahim speak of them.

021.061
Y: They said, "Then bring him before the eyes of the people, that they
may bear witness."

P: They said: Then bring him (hither) before the people's eyes that they
may testify.

S: Said they: Then bring him before the eyes of the people, perhaps they
may bear witness.

021.062
Y: They said, "Art thou the one that did this with our gods, O Abraham?"

P: They said: Is it thou who hast done this to our gods, O Abraham?

S: They said: Have you done this to our gods, O Ibrahim?

021.063
Y: He said: "Nay, this was done by - this is their biggest one! ask
them, if they can speak intelligently!"

P: He said: But this, their chief hath done it. So question them, if
they can speak.

S: He said: Surely (some doer) has done it; the chief of them is this,
therefore ask them, if they can speak.

021.064
Y: So they turned to themselves and said, "Surely ye are the ones in the
wrong!"

P: Then gathered they apart and said: Lo! ye yourselves are the
wrong-doers.

S: Then they turned to themselves and said: Surely you yourselves are
the unjust;

021.065
Y: Then were they confounded with shame: (they said), "Thou knowest full
well that these (idols) do not speak!"

P: And they were utterly confounded, and they said: Well thou knowest
that these speak not.

S: Then they were made to hang down their heads: Certainly you know that
they do not speak.

021.066
Y: (Abraham) said, "Do ye then worship, besides Allah, things that can
neither be of any good to you nor do you harm?"

P: He said: Worship ye then instead of Allah that which cannot profit
you at all, nor harm you?

S: He said: What! do you then serve besides Allah what brings you not
any benefit at all, nor does it harm you?

021.067
Y: "Fie upon you, and upon the things that ye worship besides Allah!
Have ye no sense?"..

P: Fie on you and all that ye worship instead of Allah! Have ye then no
sense?

S: Fie on you and on what you serve besides Allah; what! do you not then
understand?

021.068
Y: They said, "Burn him and protect your gods, if ye do (anything at
all)!"

P: They cried: Burn him and stand by your gods, if ye will be doing.

S: They said: Burn him and help your gods, if you are going to do
(anything).

021.069
Y: We said, "O Fire! be thou cool, and (a means of) safety for Abraham!"

P: We said: O fire, be coolness and peace for Abraham,

S: We said: O fire! be a comfort and peace to Ibrahim;

021.070
Y: Then they sought a stratagem against him: but We made them the ones
that lost most!

P: And they wished to set a snare for him, but We made them the greater
losers.

S: And they desired a war on him, but We made them the greatest losers.

021.071
Y: But We delivered him and (his nephew) Lut (and directed them) to the
land which We have blessed for the nations.

P: And We rescued him and Lot (and brought them) to the land which We
have blessed for (all) peoples.

S: And We delivered him as well as Lut (removing them) to the land which
We had blessed for all people.

021.072
Y: And We bestowed on him Isaac and, as an additional gift, (a
grandson), Jacob, and We made righteous men of every one (of them).

P: And We bestowed upon him Isaac, and Jacob as a grandson. Each of them
We made righteous.

S: And We gave him Ishaq and Yaqoub, a son's son, and We made (them) all
good.

021.073
Y: And We made them leaders, guiding (men) by Our Command, and We sent
them inspiration to do good deeds, to establish regular prayers, and to
practise regular charity; and they constantly served Us (and Us only).

P: And We made them chiefs who guide by Our command, and We inspired in
them the doing of good deeds and the right establishment of worship and
the giving of alms, and they were worshippers of Us (alone).

S: And We made them Imams who guided (people) by Our command, and We
revealed to them the doing of good and the keeping up of prayer and the
giving of the alms, and Us (alone) did they serve;

021.074
Y: And to Lut, too, We gave Judgment and Knowledge, and We saved him
from the town which practised abominations: truly they were a people
given to Evil, a rebellious people.

P: And unto Lot we gave judgment and knowledge, and We delivered him
from the community that did abominations. Lo! they were folk of evil,
lewd.

S: And (as for) Lut, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and We delivered
him from the town which wrought abominations; surely they were an evil
people, transgressors;

021.075
Y: And We admitted him to Our Mercy: for he was one of the Righteous.

P: And We brought him in unto Our mercy. Lo! he was of the righteous.

S: And We took him into Our mercy; surely he was of the good.

021.076
Y: (Remember) Noah, when he cried (to Us) aforetime: We listened to his
(prayer) and delivered him and his family from great distress.

P: And Noah, when he cried of old, We heard his prayer and saved him and
his household from the great affliction.

S: And Nuh, when he cried aforetime, so We answered him, and delivered
him and his followers from the great calamity.

021.077
Y: We helped him against people who rejected Our Signs: truly they were
a people given to Evil: so We drowned them (in the Flood) all together.

P: And delivered him from the people who denied Our revelations. Lo!
they were folk of evil, therefor did We drown them all.

S: And We helped him against the people who rejected Our communications;
surely they were an evil people, so We drowned them all.

021.078
Y: And remember David and Solomon, when they gave judgment in the matter
of the field into which the sheep of certain people had strayed by
night: We did witness their judgment.

P: And David and Solomon, when they gave judgment concerning the field,
when people's sheep had strayed and browsed therein by night; and We
were witnesses to their judgment.

S: And Dawood and Sulaiman when they gave judgment concerning the field
when the people's sheep pastured therein by night, and We were bearers
of witness to their judgment.

021.079
Y: To Solomon We inspired the (right) understanding of the matter: to
each (of them) We gave Judgment and Knowledge; it was Our power that
made the hills and the birds celebrate Our praises, with David: it was
We Who did (all these things).

P: And We made Solomon to understand (the case); and unto each of them
We gave judgment and knowledge. And we subdued the hills and the birds
to hymn (His) praise along with David. We were the doers (thereof).

S: So We made Sulaiman to understand it; and to each one We gave wisdom
and knowledge; and We made the mountains, and the birds to celebrate
Our praise with Dawood; and We were the doers.

021.080
Y: It was We Who taught him the making of coats of mail for your
benefit, to guard you from each other's violence: will ye then be
grateful?

P: And We taught him the art of making garments (of mail) to protect you
in your daring. Are ye then thankful?

S: And We taught him the making of coats of mail for you, that they
might protect you in your wars; will you then be grateful?

021.081
Y: (It was Our power that made) the violent (unruly) wind flow (tamely)
for Solomon, to his order, to the land which We had blessed: for We do
know all things.

P: And unto Solomon (We subdued) the wind in its raging. It set by his
command toward the land which We had blessed. And of everything We are
Aware.

S: And (We made subservient) to Sulaiman the wind blowing violent,
pursuing its course by his command to the land which We had blessed,
and We are knower of all things.

021.082
Y: And of the evil ones, were some who dived for him, and did other work
besides; and it was We Who guarded them.

P: And of the evil ones (subdued We unto him) some who dived (for
pearls) for him and did other work, and We were warders unto them.

S: And of the rebellious people there were those who dived for him and
did other work besides that, and We kept guard over them;

021.083
Y: And (remember) Job, when He cried to his Lord, "Truly distress has
seized me, but Thou art the Most Merciful of those that are merciful."

P: And Job, when he cried unto his Lord, (saying): Lo! adversity
afflicteth me, and Thou art Most Merciful of all who show mercy.

S: And Ayub, when he cried to his Lord, (saying): Harm has afflicted me,
and Thou art the most Merciful of the merciful.

021.084
Y: So We listened to him: We removed the distress that was on him, and
We restored his people to him, and doubled their number,- as a Grace
from Ourselves, and a thing for commemoration, for all who serve Us.

P: Then We heard his prayer and removed that adversity from which he
suffered, and We gave him his household (that he had lost) and the like
thereof along with them, a mercy from Our store, and a remembrance for
the worshippers;

S: Therefore We responded to him and took off what harm he had, and We
gave him his family and the like of them with them: a mercy from Us and
a reminder to the worshippers.

021.085
Y: And (remember) Isma'il, Idris, and Zul-kifl, all (men) of constancy
and patience;

P: And (mention) Ishmael, and Idris, and Dhu'l-Kifl. All were of the
steadfast.

S: And Ismail and Idris and Zulkifl; all were of the patient ones;

021.086
Y: We admitted them to Our mercy: for they were of the righteous ones.

P: And We brought them in unto Our mercy. Lo! they are among the
righteous.

S: And We caused them to enter into Our mercy, surely they were of the
good ones.

021.087
Y: And remember Zun-nun, when he departed in wrath: He imagined that We
had no power over him! But he cried through the depths of darkness,
"There is no god but Thou: glory to Thee: I was indeed wrong!"

P: And (mention) Dhu'n-Nun, when he went off in anger and deemed that We
had no power over him, but he cried out in the darkness, saying: There
is no God save Thee. Be Thou Glorified! Lo! I have been a wrong-doer.

S: And Yunus, when he went away in wrath, so he thought that We would
not straiten him, so he called out among afflictions: There is no god
but Thou, glory be to Thee; surely I am of those who make themselves to
suffer loss.

021.088
Y: So We listened to him: and delivered him from distress: and thus do
We deliver those who have faith.

P: Then we heard his prayer and saved him from the anguish. Thus we save
believers.

S: So We responded to him and delivered him from the grief and thus do
We deliver the believers.

021.089
Y: And (remember) Zakariya, when he cried to his Lord: "O my Lord! leave
me not without offspring, though thou art the best of inheritors."

P: And Zachariah, when he cried unto his Lord: My Lord! Leave me not
childless, though Thou art the Best of inheritors.

S: And Zakariya, when he cried to his Lord: O my Lord leave me not
alone; and Thou art the best of inheritors.

021.090
Y: So We listened to him: and We granted him Yahya: We cured his wife's
(Barrenness) for him. These (three) were ever quick in emulation in
good works; they used to call on Us with love and reverence, and humble
themselves before Us.

P: Then We heard his prayer, and bestowed upon him John, and adjusted
his wife (to bear a child) for him. Lo! they used to vie one with the
other in good deeds, and they cried unto Us in longing and in fear, and
were submissive unto Us.

S: So We responded to him and gave him Yahya and made his wife fit for
him; surely they used to hasten, one with another, in deeds of goodness
and to call upon Us, hoping and fearing; and they were humble before Us.

021.091
Y: And (remember) her who guarded her chastity: We breathed into her of
Our spirit, and We made her and her son a sign for all peoples.

P: And she who was chaste, therefor We breathed into her (something) of
Our Spirit and made her and her son a token for (all) peoples.

S: And she who guarded her chastity, so We breathed into her of Our
inspiration and made her and her son a sign for the nations.

021.092
Y: Verily, this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood, and I am
your Lord and Cherisher: therefore serve Me (and no other).

P: Lo! this, your religion, is one religion, and I am your Lord, so
worship Me.

S: Surely this Islam is your religion, one religion (only), and I am
your Lord, therefore serve Me.

021.093
Y: But (later generations) cut off their affair (of unity), one from
another: (yet) will they all return to Us.

P: And they have broken their religion (into fragments) among them,
(yet) all are returning unto Us.

S: And they broke their religion (into sects) between them: to Us shall
all come back.

021.094
Y: Whoever works any act of righteousness and has faith,- his endeavour
will not be rejected: We shall record it in his favour.

P: Then whoso doeth some good works and is a believer, there will be no
rejection of his effort. Lo! We record (it) for him.

S: Therefore whoever shall do of good deeds and he is a believer, there
shall be no denying of his exertion, and surely We will write (It) down
for him.

021.095
Y: But there is a ban on any population which We have destroyed: that
they shall not return,

P: And there is a ban upon any community which We have destroyed: that
they shall not return.

S: And it is binding on a town which We destroy that they shall not
return.

021.096
Y: Until the Gog and Magog (people) are let through (their barrier), and
they swiftly swarm from every hill.

P: Until, when Gog and Magog are let loose, and they hasten out of every
mound,

S: Even when Gog and Magog are let loose and they shall break forth from
every elevated place.

021.097
Y: Then will the true promise draw nigh (of fulfilment): then behold!
the eyes of the Unbelievers will fixedly stare in horror: "Ah! Woe to
us! we were indeed heedless of this; nay, we truly did wrong!"

P: And the True Promise draweth nigh; then behold them, staring wide (in
terror), the eyes of those who disbelieve! (They say): Alas for us! We
(lived) in forgetfulness of this. Ah, but we were wrong-doers!

S: And the true promise shall draw nigh, then lo! the eyes of those who
disbelieved shall be fixedly open: O woe to us! surely we were in a
state of heedlessness as to this; nay, we were unjust.

021.098
Y: Verily ye, (unbelievers), and the (false) gods that ye worship
besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell! to it will ye (surely) come!

P: Lo! ye (idolaters) and that which ye worship beside Allah are fuel of
hell. Thereunto ye will come.

S: Surely you and what you worship besides Allah are the firewood of
hell; to it you shall come.

021.099
Y: If these had been gods, they would not have got there! but each one
will abide therein.

P: If these had been gods they would not have come thither, but all will
abide therein.

S: Had these been gods, they would not have come to it and all shall
abide therein.

021.100
Y: There, sobbing will be their lot, nor will they there hear (aught
else).

P: Therein wailing is their portion, and therein they hear not.

S: For them therein shall be groaning and therein they shall not hear.

021.101
Y: Those for whom the good (record) from Us has gone before, will be
removed far therefrom.

P: Lo! those unto whom kindness hath gone forth before from Us, they
will be far removed from thence.

S: Surely (as for) those for whom the good has already gone forth from
Us, they shall be kept far off from it;

021.102
Y: Not the slightest sound will they hear of Hell: what their souls
desired, in that will they dwell.

P: They will not hear the slightest sound thereof, while they abide in
that which their souls desire.

S: They will not hear its faintest sound, and they shall abide in that
which their souls long for.

021.103
Y: The Great Terror will bring them no grief: but the angels will meet
them (with mutual greetings): "This is your Day,- (the Day) that ye
were promised."

P: The Supreme Horror will not grieve them, and the angels will welcome
them, (saying): This is your Day which ye were promised;

S: The great fearful event shall not grieve them, and the angels shall
meet them: This is your day which you were promised.

021.104
Y: The Day that We roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books
(completed),- even as We produced the first creation, so shall We
produce a new one: a promise We have undertaken: truly shall We fulfil
it.

P: The Day when We shall roll up the heavens as a recorder rolleth up a
written scroll. As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it. (It
is) a promise (binding) upon Us. Lo! We are to perform it.

S: On the day when We will roll up heaven like the rolling up of the
scroll for writings, as We originated the first creation, (so) We shall
reproduce it; a promise (binding on Us); surely We will bring it about.

021.105
Y: Before this We wrote in the Psalms, after the Message (given to
Moses): "My servants the righteous, shall inherit the earth."

P: And verily we have written in the Scripture, after the Reminder: My
righteous slaves will inherit the earth:

S: And certainly We wrote in the Book after the reminder that (as for)
the land, My righteous servants shall inherit it.

021.106
Y: Verily in this (Qur'an) is a Message for people who would (truly)
worship Allah.

P: Lo! there is a plain statement for folk who are devout.

S: Most surely in this is a message to a people who serve

021.107
Y: We sent thee not, but as a Mercy for all creatures.

P: We sent thee not save as a mercy for the peoples.

S: And We have not sent you but as a mercy to the worlds.

021.108
Y: Say: "What has come to me by inspiration is that your Allah is One
Allah: will ye therefore bow to His Will (in Islam)?"

P: Say: It is only inspired in me that your Allah is One Allah. Will ye
then surrender (unto Him)?

S: Say: It is only revealed to me that your Allah is one Allah; will you
then submit?

021.109
Y: But if they turn back, say: "I have proclaimed the Message to you all
alike and in truth; but I know not whether that which ye are promised
is near or far."

P: But if they are averse, then say: I have warned you all alike,
although I know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised.

S: But if they turn back, say: I have given you warning in fairness and I
do not know whether what you are threatened with is near or far:

021.110
Y: "It is He Who knows what is open in speech and what ye hide (in your
hearts)."

P: Lo! He knoweth that which is said openly, and that which ye conceal.

S: Surely He knows what is spoken openly and He knows what you hide:

021.111
Y: "I know not but that it may be a trial for you, and a grant of
(worldly) livelihood (to you) for a time."

P: And I know not but that this may be a trial for you, and enjoyment
for a while.

S: And I do not know if this may be a trial for you and a provision till
a time.

021.112
Y: Say: "O my Lord! judge Thou in truth!" "Our Lord Most Gracious is the
One Whose assistance should be sought against the blasphemies ye
utter!"

P: He saith: My Lord! Judge Thou with truth. Our Lord is the Beneficent,
Whose help is to be implored against that which ye ascribe (unto Him).

S: He said: O my Lord! judge Thou with truth; and our Lord is the
Beneficent Allah, Whose help is sought against what you ascribe (to
Him).

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 22:

                          AL-HAJJ (THE PILGRIMAGE)
 Total Verses: 78 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

022.001
Y: O mankind! fear your Lord! for the convulsion of the Hour (of
Judgment) will be a thing terrible!

P: O mankind! Fear your Lord. Lo! the earthquake of the Hour (of Doom)
is a tremendous thing.

S: O people! guard against (the punishment from) your Lord; surely the
violence of the hour is a grievous thing.

022.002
Y: The Day ye shall see it, every mother giving suck shall forget her
suckling-babe, and every pregnant female shall drop her load
(unformed): thou shalt see mankind as in a drunken riot, yet not drunk:
but dreadful will be the Wrath of Allah.

P: On the day when ye behold it, every nursing mother will forget her
nursling and every pregnant one will be delivered of her burden, and
thou (Muhammad) wilt see mankind as drunken, yet they will not be
drunken, but the Doom of Allah will be strong (upon them).

S: On the day when you shall see it, every woman giving suck shall quit
in confusion what she suckled, and every pregnant woman shall lay down
her burden, and you shall see men intoxicated, and they shall not be
intoxicated but the chastisement of Allah will be severe.

022.003
Y: And yet among men there are such as dispute about Allah, without
knowledge, and follow every evil one obstinate in rebellion!

P: Among mankind is he who disputeth concerning Allah without knowledge,
and followeth each froward devil;

S: And among men there is he who disputes about Allah without knowledge
and follows every rebellious Shaitan;

022.004
Y: About the (Evil One) it is decreed that whoever turns to him for
friendship, him will he lead astray, and he will guide him to the
Penalty of the Fire.

P: For him it is decreed that whoso taketh him for friend, he verily
will mislead him and will guide him to the punishment of the Flame.

S: Against him it is written down that whoever takes him for a friend,
he shall lead him astray and conduct him to the chastisement of the
burning fire.

022.005
Y: O mankind! if ye have a doubt about the Resurrection, (consider) that
We created you out of dust, then out of sperm, then out of a leech-like
clot, then out of a morsel of flesh, partly formed and partly unformed,
in order that We may manifest (our power) to you; and We cause whom We
will to rest in the wombs for an appointed term, then do We bring you
out as babes, then (foster you) that ye may reach your age of full
strength; and some of you are called to die, and some are sent back to
the feeblest old age, so that they know nothing after having known
(much), and (further), thou seest the earth barren and lifeless, but
when We pour down rain on it, it is stirred (to life), it swells, and
it puts forth every kind of beautiful growth (in pairs).

P: O mankind! if ye are in doubt concerning the Resurrection, then lo!
We have created you from dust, then from a drop of seed, then from a
clot, then from a little lump of flesh shapely and shapeless, that We
may make (it) clear for you. And We cause what We will to remain in the
wombs for an appointed time, and afterward We bring you forth as
infants, then (give you growth) that ye attain your full strength. And
among you there is he who dieth (young), and among you there is he who
is brought back to the most abject time of life, so that, after
knowledge, he knoweth naught. And thou (Muhammad) seest the earth
barren, but when We send down water thereon, it doth thrill and swell
and put forth every lovely kind (of growth).

S: O people! if you are in doubt about the raising, then surely We
created you from dust, then from a small seed, then from a clot, then
from a lump of flesh, complete in make and incomplete, that We may make
clear to you; and We cause what We please to stay in the wombs till an
appointed time, then We bring you forth as babies, then that you may
attain your maturity; and of you is he who is caused to die, and of you
is he who is brought back to the worst part of life, so that after
having knowledge he does not know anything; and you see the earth
sterile land, but when We send down on it the water, it stirs and
swells and brings forth of every kind a beautiful herbage.

022.006
Y: This is so, because Allah is the Reality: it is He Who gives life to
the dead, and it is He Who has power over all things.

P: That is because Allah, He is the Truth and because He quickeneth the
dead, and because He is Able to do all things;

S: This is because Allah is the Truth and because He gives life to the
dead and because He has power over all things,

022.007
Y: And verily the Hour will come: there can be no doubt about it, or
about (the fact) that Allah will raise up all who are in the graves.

P: And because the Hour will come, there is no doubt thereof; and
because Allah will raise those who are in the graves.

S: And because the hour is coming, there is no doubt about it; and
because Allah shall raise up those who are in the graves.

022.008
Y: Yet there is among men such a one as disputes about Allah, without
Knowledge, without Guidance, and without a Book of Enlightenment,-

P: And among mankind is he who disputeth concerning Allah without
knowledge or guidance or a scripture giving light,

S: And among men there is he who disputes about Allah without knowledge
and without guidance and without an illuminating book,

022.009
Y: (Disdainfully) bending his side, in order to lead (men) astray from
the Path of Allah: for him there is disgrace in this life, and on the
Day of Judgment We shall make him taste the Penalty of burning (Fire).

P: Turning away in pride to beguile (men) from the way of Allah. For him
in this world is ignominy, and on the Day of Resurrection We make him
taste the doom of burning.

S: Turning away haughtily that he may lead (others) astray from the way
of Allah; for him is disgrace in this world, and on the day of
resurrection We will make him taste the punishment of burning:

022.010
Y: (It will be said): "This is because of the deeds which thy hands sent
forth, for verily Allah is not unjust to His servants."

P: (And unto him it will be said): This is for that which thy two hands
have sent before, and because Allah is no oppressor of His slaves.

S: This is due to what your two hands have sent before, and because
Allah is not in the least unjust to the servants.

022.011
Y: There are among men some who serve Allah, as it were, on the verge:
if good befalls them, they are, therewith, well content; but if a trial
comes to them, they turn on their faces: they lose both this world and
the Hereafter: that is loss for all to see!

P: And among mankind is he who worshippeth Allah upon a narrow marge so
that if good befalleth him he is content therewith, but if a trial
befalleth him, he falleth away utterly. He loseth both the world and
the Hereafter. That is the sheer loss.

S: And among men is he who serves Allah (standing) on the verge, so that
if good befalls him he is satisfied therewith, but if a trial afflict
him he turns back headlong; he loses this world as well as the
hereafter; that is a manifest loss.

022.012
Y: They call on such deities, besides Allah, as can neither hurt nor
profit them: that is straying far indeed (from the Way)!

P: He calleth, beside Allah, unto that which hurteth him not nor
benefiteth him. That is the far error.

S: He calls besides Allah upon that which does not harm him and that
which does not profit him, that is the great straying.

022.013
Y: (Perhaps) they call on one whose hurt is nearer than his profit:
evil, indeed, is the patron, and evil the companion (or help)!

P: He calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his benefit; verily an
evil patron and verily an evil friend!

S: He calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his profit; evil
certainly is the guardian and evil certainly is the associate.

022.014
Y: Verily Allah will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds,
to Gardens, beneath which rivers flow: for Allah carries out all that
He plans.

P: Lo! Allah causeth those who believe and do good works to enter
Gardens underneath which rivers flow. Lo! Allah doth what He intendeth.

S: Surely Allah will cause those who believe and do good deeds to enter
gardens beneath which rivers flow, surely Allah does what He pleases.

022.015
Y: If any think that Allah will not help him (His Messenger) in this
world and the Hereafter, let him stretch out a rope to the ceiling and
cut (himself) off: then let him see whether his plan will remove that
which enrages (him)!

P: Whoso is wont to think (through envy) that Allah will not give him
(Muhammad) victory in the world and the Hereafter (and is enraged at
the thought of his victory), let him stretch a rope up to the roof (of
his dwelling), and let him hang himself. Then let him see whether his
strategy dispelleth that whereat he rageth!

S: Whoever thinks that Allah will not assist him in this life and the
hereafter, let him stretch a rope to the ceiling, then let him cut (it)
off, then let him see if his struggle will take away that at which he
is enraged.

022.016
Y: Thus have We sent down Clear Signs; and verily Allah doth guide whom
He will!

P: Thus We reveal it as plain revelations, and verily Allah guideth whom
He will.

S: And thus have We revealed it, being clear arguments, and because
Allah guides whom He intends.

022.017
Y: Those who believe (in the Qur'an), those who follow the Jewish
(scriptures), and the Sabians, Christians, Magians, and Polytheists,-
Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgment: for Allah is
witness of all things.

P: Lo! those who believe (this revelation), and those who are Jews, and
the Sabaeans and the Christians and the Magians and the idolaters - Lo!
Allah will decide between them on the Day of Resurrection. Lo! Allah is
Witness over all things.

S: Surely those who believe and those who are Jews and the Sabeans and
the Christians and the Magians and those who associate (others with
Allah)-- surely Allah will decide between them on the day of
resurrection; surely Allah is a witness over all things.

022.018
Y: Seest thou not that to Allah bow down in worship all things that are
in the heavens and on earth,- the sun, the moon, the stars; the hills,
the trees, the animals; and a great number among mankind? But a great
number are (also) such as are fit for Punishment: and such as Allah
shall disgrace,- None can raise to honour: for Allah carries out all
that He wills.

P: Hast thou not seen that unto Allah payeth adoration whosoever is in
the heavens and whosoever is in the earth, and the sun, and the moon,
and the stars, and the hills, and the trees, and the beasts, and many
of mankind, while there are many unto whom the doom is justly due. He
whom Allah scorneth, there is none to give him honour. Lo! Allah doeth
what He will.

S: Do you not see that Allah is He, Whom obeys whoever is in the heavens
and whoever is in the earth, and the sun and the moon and the stars,
and the mountains and the trees, and the animals and many of the
people; and many there are against whom chastisement has become
necessary; and whomsoever Allah abases, there is none who can make him
honorable; surely Allah does what He pleases.

022.019
Y: These two antagonists dispute with each other about their Lord: But
those who deny (their Lord),- for them will be cut out a garment of
Fire: over their heads will be poured out boiling water.

P: These twain (the believers and the disbelievers) are two opponents
who contend concerning their Lord. But as for those who disbelieve,
garments of fire will be cut out for them; boiling fluid will be poured
down on their heads,

S: These are two adversaries who dispute about their Lord; then (as to)
those who disbelieve, for them are cut out garments of fire, boiling
water shall be poured over their heads.

022.020
Y: With it will be scalded what is within their bodies, as well as
(their) skins.

P: Whereby that which is in their bellies, and their skins too, will be
melted;

S: With it shall be melted what is in their bellies and (their) skins as
well.

022.021
Y: In addition there will be maces of iron (to punish) them.

P: And for them are hooked rods of iron.

S: And for them are whips of iron.

022.022
Y: Every time they wish to get away therefrom, from anguish, they will
be forced back therein, and (it will be said), "Taste ye the Penalty of
Burning!"

P: Whenever, in their anguish, they would go forth from thence they are
driven back therein and (it is said unto them): Taste the doom of
burning.

S: Whenever they will desire to go forth from it, from grief, they shall
be turned back into it, and taste the chastisement of burning.

022.023
Y: Allah will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds, to
Gardens beneath which rivers flow: they shall be adorned therein with
bracelets of gold and pearls; and their garments there will be of silk.

P: Lo! Allah will cause those who believe and do good works to enter
Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will be allowed
armlets of gold, and pearls, and their raiment therein will be silk.

S: Surely Allah will make those who believe and do good deeds enter
gardens beneath which rivers flow; they shall be adorned therein with
bracelets of gold and (with) pearls, and their garments therein shall
be of silk.

022.024
Y: For they have been guided (in this life) to the purest of speeches;
they have been guided to the Path of Him Who is Worthy of (all) Praise.

P: They are guided unto gentle speech; they are guided unto the path of
the Glorious One.

S: And they are guided to goodly words and they are guided into the path
of the Praised One.

022.025
Y: As to those who have rejected (Allah), and would keep back (men) from
the Way of Allah, and from the Sacred Mosque, which We have made (open)
to (all) men - equal is the dweller there and the visitor from the
country - and any whose purpose therein is profanity or wrong-doing -
them will We cause to taste of a most Grievous Penalty.

P: Lo! those who disbelieve and bar (men) from the way of Allah and from
the Inviolable Place of Worship, which We have appointed for mankind
together, the dweller therein and the nomad: whosoever seeketh wrongful
partiality therein, him We shall cause to taste a painful doom.

S: Surely (as for) those who disbelieve, and hinder (men) from Allah's
way and from the Sacred Mosque which We have made equally for all men,
(for) the dweller therein and (for) the visitor, and whoever shall
incline therein to wrong unjustly, We will make him taste of a painful
chastisement.

022.026
Y: Behold! We gave the site, to Abraham, of the (Sacred) House,
(saying): "Associate not anything (in worship) with Me; and sanctify My
House for those who compass it round, or stand up, or bow, or prostrate
themselves (therein in prayer)."

P: And (remember) when We prepared for Abraham the place of the (holy)
House, saying: Ascribe thou no thing as partner unto Me, and purify My
House for those who make the round (thereof) and those who stand and
those who bow and make prostration.

S: And when We assigned to Ibrahim the place of the House, saying: Do
not associate with Me aught, and purify My House for those who make the
circuit and stand to pray and bow and prostrate themselves.

022.027
Y: "And proclaim the Pilgrimage among men: they will come to thee on
foot and (mounted) on every kind of camel, lean on account of journeys
through deep and distant mountain highways;"

P: And proclaim unto mankind the pilgrimage. They will come unto thee on
foot and on every lean camel; they will come from every deep ravine,

S: And proclaim among men the Pilgrimage: they will come to you on foot
and on every lean camel, coming from every remote path,

022.028
Y: "That they may witness the benefits (provided) for them, and
celebrate the name of Allah, through the Days appointed, over the
cattle which He has provided for them (for sacrifice): then eat ye
thereof and feed the distressed ones in want."

P: That they may witness things that are of benefit to them, and mention
the name of Allah on appointed days over the beast of cattle that He
hath bestowed upon them. Then eat thereof and feed therewith the poor
unfortunate.

S: That they may witness advantages for them and mention the name of
Allah during stated days over what He has given them of the cattle
quadrupeds, then eat of them and feed the distressed one, the needy.

022.029
Y: "Then let them complete the rites prescribed for them, perform their
vows, and (again) circumambulate the Ancient House."

P: Then let them make an end of their unkemptness and pay their vows and
go around the ancient House.

S: Then let them accomplish their needful acts of shaving and cleansing,
and let them fulfil their vows and let them go round the Ancient House.

022.030
Y: Such (is the Pilgrimage): whoever honours the sacred rites of Allah,
for him it is good in the Sight of his Lord. Lawful to you (for food in
Pilgrimage) are cattle, except those mentioned to you (as exception):
but shun the abomination of idols, and shun the word that is false,-

P: That (is the command). And whoso magnifieth the sacred things of
Allah, it will be well for him in the sight of his Lord. The cattle are
lawful unto you save that which hath been told you. So shun the filth
of idols, and shun lying speech,

S: That (shall be so); and whoever respects the sacred ordinances of
Allah, it is better for him with his Lord; and the cattle are made
lawful for you, except that which is recited to you, therefore avoid
the uncleanness of the idols and avoid false words,

022.031
Y: Being true in faith to Allah, and never assigning partners to Him: if
anyone assigns partners to Allah, is as if he had fallen from heaven
and been snatched up by birds, or the wind had swooped (like a bird on
its prey) and thrown him into a far-distant place.

P: Turning unto Allah (only), not ascribing partners unto Him; for whoso
ascribeth partners unto Allah, it is as if he had fallen from the sky
and the birds had snatched him or the wind had blown him to a far-off
place.

S: Being upright for Allah, not associating aught with Him and whoever
associates (others) with Allah, it is as though he had fallen from on
high, then the birds snatch him away or the wind carries him off to a
far-distant place.

022.032
Y: Such (is his state): and whoever holds in honour the symbols of
Allah, (in the sacrifice of animals), such (honour) should come truly
from piety of heart.

P: That (is the command). And whoso magnifieth the offerings consecrated
to Allah, it surely is from devotion of the hearts,

S: That (shall be so); and whoever respects the signs of Allah, this
surely is (the outcome) of the piety of hearts.

022.033
Y: In them ye have benefits for a term appointed: in the end their place
of sacrifice is near the Ancient House.

P: Therein are benefits for you for an appointed term; and afterward
they are brought for sacrifice unto the ancient House.

S: You have advantages in them till a fixed time, then their place of
sacrifice is the Ancient House.

022.034
Y: To every people did We appoint rites (of sacrifice), that they might
celebrate the name of Allah over the sustenance He gave them from
animals (fit for food). But your Allah is One Allah: submit then your
wills to Him (in Islam): and give thou the good news to those who
humble themselves,-

P: And for every nation have We appointed a ritual, that they may
mention the name of Allah over the beast of cattle that He hath given
them for food; and your Allah is One Allah, therefor surrender unto
Him. And give good tidings (O Muhammad) to the humble,

S: And to every nation We appointed acts of devotion that they may
mention the name of Allah on what He has given them of the cattle
quadrupeds; so your Allah is One Allah, therefore to Him should you
submit, and give good news to the humble,

022.035
Y: To those whose hearts when Allah is mentioned, are filled with fear,
who show patient perseverance over their afflictions, keep up regular
prayer, and spend (in charity) out of what We have bestowed upon them.

P: Whose hearts fear when Allah is mentioned, and the patient of
whatever may befall them, and those who establish worship and who spend
of that We have bestowed on them.

S: (To) those whose hearts tremble when Allah is mentioned, and those
who are patient under that which afflicts them, and those who keep up
prayer, and spend (benevolently) out of what We have given them.

022.036
Y: The sacrificial camels we have made for you as among the symbols from
Allah: in them is (much) good for you: then pronounce the name of Allah
over them as they line up (for sacrifice): when they are down on their
sides (after slaughter), eat ye thereof, and feed such as (beg not but)
live in contentment, and such as beg with due humility: thus have We
made animals subject to you, that ye may be grateful.

P: And the camels! We have appointed them among the ceremonies of Allah.
Therein ye have much good. So mention the name of Allah over them when
they are drawn up in lines. Then when their flanks fall (dead), eat
thereof and feed the beggar and the suppliant. Thus have We made them
subject unto you, that haply ye may give thanks.

S: And (as for) the camels, We have made them of the signs of the
religion of Allah for you; for you therein is much good; therefore
mention the name of Allah on them as they stand in a row, then when
they fall down eat of them and feed the poor man who is contented and
the beggar; thus have We made them subservient to you, that you may be
grateful.

022.037
Y: It is not their meat nor their blood, that reaches Allah: it is your
piety that reaches Him: He has thus made them subject to you, that ye
may glorify Allah for His Guidance to you and proclaim the good news to
all who do right.

P: Their flesh and their food reach not Allah, but the devotion from you
reacheth Him. Thus have We made them subject unto you that ye may
magnify Allah that He hath guided you. And give good tidings (O
Muhammad) to the good.

S: There does not reach Allah their flesh nor their blood, but to Him is
acceptable the guarding (against evil) on your part; thus has He made
them subservient to you, that you may magnify Allah because He has
guided you aright; and give good news to those who do good (to others).

022.038
Y: Verily Allah will defend (from ill) those who believe: verily, Allah
loveth not any that is a traitor to faith, or show ingratitude.

P: Lo! Allah defendeth those who are true. Lo! Allah loveth not each
treacherous ingrate.

S: Surely Allah will defend those who believe; surely Allah does not
love any one who is unfaithful, ungrateful.

022.039
Y: To those against whom war is made, permission is given (to fight),
because they are wronged;- and verily, Allah is most powerful for their
aid;-

P: Sanction is given unto those who fight because they have been
wronged; and Allah is indeed Able to give them victory;

S: Permission (to fight) is given to those upon whom war is made because
they are oppressed, and most surely Allah is well able to assist them;

022.040
Y: (They are) those who have been expelled from their homes in defiance
of right,- (for no cause) except that they say, "Our Lord is Allah".
Did not Allah check one set of people by means of another, there would
surely have been pulled down monasteries, churches, synagogues, and
mosques, in which the name of Allah is commemorated in abundant
measure. Allah will certainly aid those who aid his (cause);- for
verily Allah is full of Strength, Exalted in Might, (able to enforce
His Will).

P: Those who have been driven from their homes unjustly only because
they said: Our Lord is Allah - For had it not been for Allah's
repelling some men by means of others, cloisters and churches and
oratories and mosques, wherein the name of Allah is oft mentioned,
would assuredly have been pulled down. Verily Allah helpeth one who
helpeth Him. Lo! Allah is Strong, Almighty -

S: Those who have been expelled from their homes without a just cause
except that they say: Our Lord is Allah. And had there not been Allah's
repelling some people by others, certainly there would have been pulled
down cloisters and churches and synagogues and mosques in which Allah's
name is much remembered; and surely Allah will help him who helps His
cause; most surely Allah is Strong, Mighty.

022.041
Y: (They are) those who, if We establish them in the land, establish
regular prayer and give regular charity, enjoin the right and forbid
wrong: with Allah rests the end (and decision) of (all) affairs.

P: Those who, if We give them power in the land, establish worship and
pay the poor-due and enjoin kindness and forbid iniquity. And Allah's
is the sequel of events.

S: Those who, should We establish them in the land, will keep up prayer
and pay the poor-rate and enjoin good and forbid evil; and Allah's is
the end of affairs.

022.042
Y: If they treat thy (mission) as false, so did the peoples before them
(with their prophets),- the People of Noah, and 'Ad and Thamud;

P: If they deny thee (Muhammad), even so the folk of Noah, and (the
tribes of) A'ad and Thamud, before thee, denied (Our messengers);

S: And if they reject you, then already before you did the people of Nuh
and Ad and Samood reject (prophets).

022.043
Y: Those of Abraham and Lut;

P: And the folk of Abraham and the folk of Lot;

S: And the people of Ibrahim and the people of Lut,

022.044
Y: And the Companions of the Madyan People; and Moses was rejected (in
the same way). But I granted respite to the Unbelievers, and (only)
after that did I punish them: but how (terrible) was my rejection (of
them)!

P: (And) the dwellers in Midian. And Moses was denied; but I indulged
the disbelievers a long while, then I seized them, and how (terrible)
was My abhorrence!

S: As well as those of Madyan and Musa (too) was rejected, but I gave
respite to the unbelievers, then did I overtake them, so how (severe)
was My disapproval.

022.045
Y: How many populations have We destroyed, which were given to
wrong-doing? They tumbled down on their roofs. And how many wells are
lying idle and neglected, and castles lofty and well-built?

P: How many a township have We destroyed while it was sinful, so that it
lieth (to this day) in ruins, and (how many) a deserted well and lofty
tower!

S: So how many a town did We destroy while it was unjust, so it was
fallen down upon its roofs, and (how many a) deserted well and palace
raised high.

022.046
Y: Do they not travel through the land, so that their hearts (and minds)
may thus learn wisdom and their ears may thus learn to hear? Truly it
is not their eyes that are blind, but their hearts which are in their
breasts.

P: Have they not travelled in the land, and have they hearts wherewith
to feel and ears wherewith to hear? For indeed it is not the eyes that
grow blind, but it is the hearts, which are within the bosoms, that
grow blind.

S: Have they not travelled in the land so that they should have hearts
with which to understand, or ears with which to hear? For surely it is
not the eyes that are blind, but blind are the hearts which are in the
breasts.

022.047
Y: Yet they ask thee to hasten on the Punishment! But Allah will not
fail in His Promise. Verily a Day in the sight of thy Lord is like a
thousand years of your reckoning.

P: And they will bid thee hasten on the Doom, and Allah faileth not His
promise, but lo! a Day with Allah is as a thousand years of what ye
reckon.

S: And they ask you to hasten on the punishment, and Allah will by no
means fail in His promise, and surely a day with your Lord is as a
thousand years of what you number.

022.048
Y: And to how many populations did I give respite, which were given to
wrong-doing? in the end I punished them. To me is the destination (of
all).

P: And how many a township did I suffer long though it was sinful! Then
I grasped it. Unto Me is the return.

S: And how many a town to which I gave respite while it was unjust, then
I overtook it, and to Me is the return.

022.049
Y: Say: "O men! I am (sent) to you only to give a Clear Warning:"

P: Say: O mankind! I am only a plain warner unto you.

S: Say: O people! I am only a plain warner to you.

022.050
Y: "Those who believe and work righteousness, for them is forgiveness
and a sustenance most generous."

P: Those who believe and do good works, for them is pardon and a rich
provision;

S: Then (as for) those who believe and do good, they shall have
forgiveness and an honorable sustenance.

022.051
Y: "But those who strive against Our Signs, to frustrate them,- they
will be Companions of the Fire."

P: While those who strive to thwart Our revelations, such are rightful
owners of the Fire.

S: And (as for) those who strive to oppose Our communications, they
shall be the inmates of the flaming fire.

022.052
Y: Never did We send a messenger or a prophet before thee, but, when he
framed a desire, Satan threw some (vanity) into his desire: but Allah
will cancel anything (vain) that Satan throws in, and Allah will
confirm (and establish) His Signs: for Allah is full of Knowledge and
Wisdom:

P: Never sent We a messenger or a prophet before thee but when He
recited (the message) Satan proposed (opposition) in respect of that
which he recited thereof. But Allah abolisheth that which Satan
proposeth. Then Allah establisheth His revelations. Allah is Knower,
Wise;

S: And We did not send before you any messenger or prophet, but when he
desired, the Shaitan made a suggestion respecting his desire; but Allah
annuls that which the Shaitan casts, then does Allah establish His
communications, and Allah is Knowing, Wise,

022.053
Y: That He may make the suggestions thrown in by Satan, but a trial for
those in whose hearts is a disease and who are hardened of heart:
verily the wrong-doers are in a schism far (from the Truth):

P: That He may make that which the devil proposeth a temptation for
those in whose hearts is a disease, and those whose hearts are hardened
- Lo! the evil-doers are in open schism -

S: So that He may make what the Shaitan casts a trial for those in whose
hearts is disease and those whose hearts are hard; and most surely the
unjust are in a great opposition,

022.054
Y: And that those on whom knowledge has been bestowed may learn that the
(Qur'an) is the Truth from thy Lord, and that they may believe therein,
and their hearts may be made humbly (open) to it: for verily Allah is
the Guide of those who believe, to the Straight Way.

P: And that those who have been given knowledge may know that it is the
truth from thy Lord, so that they may believe therein and their hearts
may submit humbly unto Him. Lo! Allah verily is guiding those who
believe unto a right path.

S: And that those who have been given the knowledge may know that it is
the truth from your Lord, so they may believe in it and their hearts
may be lowly before it; and most surely Allah is the Guide of those who
believe into a right path.

022.055
Y: Those who reject Faith will not cease to be in doubt concerning
(Revelation) until the Hour (of Judgment) comes suddenly upon them, or
there comes to them the Penalty of a Day of Disaster.

P: And those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until
the Hour come upon them unawares, or there come unto them the doom of a
disastrous day.

S: And those who disbelieve shall not cease to be in doubt concerning it
until the hour overtakes them suddenly, or there comes on them the
chastisement of a destructive day.

022.056
Y: On that Day of Dominion will be that of Allah: He will judge between
them: so those who believe and work righteous deeds will be in Gardens
of Delight.

P: The Sovereignty on that day will be Allah's, He will judge between
them. Then those who believed and did good works will be in Gardens of
Delight,

S: The kingdom on that day shall be Allah's; He will judge between them;
so those who believe and do good will be in gardens of bliss.

022.057
Y: And for those who reject Faith and deny our Signs, there will be a
humiliating Punishment.

P: While those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations, for them will
be a shameful doom.

S: And (as for) those who disbelieve in and reject Our communications,
these it is who shall have a disgraceful chastisement.

022.058
Y: Those who leave their homes in the cause of Allah, and are then slain
or die,- On them will Allah bestow verily a goodly Provision: Truly
Allah is He Who bestows the best provision.

P: Those who fled their homes for the cause of Allah and then were slain
or died, Allah verily will provide for them a good provision. Lo!
Allah, He verily is Best of all who make provision.

S: And (as for) those who fly in Allah's way and are then slain or die,
Allah will most certainly grant them a goodly sustenance, and most
surely Allah is the best Giver of sustenance.

022.059
Y: Verily He will admit them to a place with which they shall be well
pleased: for Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.

P: Assuredly He will cause them to enter by an entry that they will
love. Lo! Allah verily is Knower, Indulgent.

S: He will certainly cause them to enter a place of entrance which they
shall be well pleased with, and most surely Allah is Knowing,
Forbearing.

022.060
Y: That (is so). And if one has retaliated to no greater extent than the
injury he received, and is again set upon inordinately, Allah will help
him: for Allah is One that blots out (sins) and forgives (again and
again).

P: That (is so). And whoso hath retaliated with the like of that which
he was made to suffer and then hath (again) been wronged, Allah will
succour him. Lo! Allah verily is Mild, Forgiving.

S: That (shall be so); and he who retaliates with the like of that with
which he has been afflicted and he has been oppressed, Allah will most
certainly aid him; most surely Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.

022.061
Y: That is because Allah merges night into day, and He merges day into
night, and verily it is Allah Who hears and sees (all things).

P: That is because Allah maketh the night to pass into the day and
maketh the day to pass into the night, and because Allah is Hearer,
Seer.

S: That is because Allah causes the night to enter into the day and
causes the day to enter into the night, and because Allah is Hearing,
Seeing.

022.062
Y: That is because Allah - He is the Reality; and those besides Him whom
they invoke,- they are but vain Falsehood: verily Allah is He, Most
High, Most Great.

P: That is because Allah, He is the True, and that whereon they call
instead of Him, it is the false, and because Allah, He is the High, the
Great.

S: That is because Allah is the Truth, and that what they call upon
besides Him-- that is the falsehood, and because Allah is the High, the
Great.

022.063
Y: Seest thou not that Allah sends down rain from the sky, and forthwith
the earth becomes clothed with green? for Allah is He Who understands
the finest mysteries, and is well-acquainted (with them).

P: Seest thou not how Allah sendeth down water from the sky and then the
earth becometh green upon the morrow? Lo! Allah is Subtile, Aware.

S: Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the cloud so the
earth becomes green? Surely Allah is Benignant, Aware.

022.064
Y: To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: for verily
Allah,- He is free of all wants, Worthy of all Praise.

P: Unto Him belongeth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the
earth. Lo! Allah, He verily is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise.

S: His is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth;
and most surely Allah is the Self-sufficient, the Praised.

022.065
Y: Seest thou not that Allah has made subject to you (men) all that is
on the earth, and the ships that sail through the sea by His Command?
He withholds the sky (rain) from failing on the earth except by His
leave: for Allah is Most Kind and Most Merciful to man.

P: Hast thou not seen how Allah hath made all that is in the earth
subservient unto you? And the ship runneth upon the sea by His command,
and He holdeth back the heaven from falling on the earth unless by His
leave. Lo! Allah is, for mankind, Full of Pity, Merciful.

S: Do you not see that Allah has made subservient to you whatsoever is
in the earth and the ships running in the sea by His command? And He
withholds the heaven from falling on the earth except with His
permission; most surely Allah is Compassionate, Merciful to men.

022.066
Y: It is He Who gave you life, will cause you to die, and will again
give you life: Truly man is a most ungrateful creature!

P: And He it is Who gave you life, then He will cause you to die, and
then will give you life (again). Lo! man is verily an ingrate.

S: And He it is Who has brought you to life, then He will cause you to
die, then bring you to life (again); most surely man is ungrateful.

022.067
Y: To every People have We appointed rites and ceremonies which they
must follow: let them not then dispute with thee on the matter, but do
thou invite (them) to thy Lord: for thou art assuredly on the Right
Way.

P: Unto each nation have We given sacred rites which they are to
perform; so let them not dispute with thee of the matter, but summon
thou unto thy Lord. Lo! thou indeed followest right guidance.

S: To every nation We appointed acts of devotion which they observe,
therefore they should not dispute with you about the matter and call to
your Lord; most surely you are on a right way.

022.068
Y: If they do wrangle with thee, say, "Allah knows best what it is ye
are doing."

P: And if they wrangle with thee, say: Allah is Best Aware of what ye
do.

S: And if they contend with you, say: Allah best knows what you do.

022.069
Y: "Allah will judge between you on the Day of Judgment concerning the
matters in which ye differ."

P: Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning
that wherein ye used to differ.

S: Allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection respecting
that in which you differ.

022.070
Y: Knowest thou not that Allah knows all that is in heaven and on earth?
Indeed it is all in a Record, and that is easy for Allah.

P: Hast thou not known that Allah knoweth all that is in the heaven and
the earth? Lo! it is in a record. Lo! that is easy for Allah.

S: Do you not know that Allah knows what is in the heaven and the earth?
Surely this is in a book; surely this is easy to Allah.

022.071
Y: Yet they worship, besides Allah, things for which no authority has
been sent down to them, and of which they have (really) no knowledge:
for those that do wrong there is no helper.

P: And they worship instead of Allah that for which He hath sent down no
warrant, and that whereof they have no knowledge. For evil-doers there
is no helper.

S: And they serve besides Allah that for which He has not sent any
authority, and that of which they have no knowledge; and for the unjust
there shall be no helper.

022.072
Y: When Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them, thou wilt notice a denial
on the faces of the Unbelievers! they nearly attack with violence those
who rehearse Our Signs to them. Say, "Shall I tell you of something
(far) worse than these Signs? It is the Fire (of Hell)! Allah has
promised it to the Unbelievers! and evil is that destination!"

P: And when Our revelations are recited unto them, thou knowest the
denial in the faces of those who disbelieve; they all but attack those
who recite Our revelations unto them. Say: Shall I proclaim unto you
worse than that? The Fire! Allah hath promised it for those who
disbelieve. A hapless journey's end!

S: And when Our clear communications are recited to them you will find
denial on the faces of those who disbelieve; they almost spring upon
those who recite to them Our communications. Say: Shall I inform you of
what is worse than this? The fire; Allah has promised it to those who
disbelieve; and how evil the resort!

022.073
Y: O men! Here is a parable set forth! listen to it! Those on whom,
besides Allah, ye call, cannot create (even) a fly, if they all met
together for the purpose! and if the fly should snatch away anything
from them, they would have no power to release it from the fly. Feeble
are those who petition and those whom they petition!

P: O mankind! A similitude is coined, so pay ye heed to it: Lo! those on
whom ye call beside Allah will never create a fly though they combine
together for the purpose. And if the fly took something from them, they
could not rescue it from it. So weak are (both) the seeker and the
sought!

S: O people! a parable is set forth, therefore listen to it: surely
those whom you call upon besides Allah cannot create fly, though they
should all gather for it, and should the fly snatch away anything from
them, they could not take it back from it; weak are the invoker and the
invoked.

022.074
Y: No just estimate have they made of Allah: for Allah is He Who is
strong and able to Carry out His Will.

P: They measure not Allah His rightful measure. Lo! Allah is Strong,
Almighty.

S: They have not estimated Allah with the estimation that is due to Him;
most surely Allah is Strong, Mighty.

022.075
Y: Allah chooses messengers from angels and from men for Allah is He Who
hears and sees (all things).

P: Allah chooseth from the angels messengers, and (also) from mankind.
Lo! Allah is Hearer, Seer.

S: Allah chooses messengers from among the angels and from among the
men; surely Allah is Hearing, Seeing.

022.076
Y: He knows what is before them and what is behind them: and to Allah go
back all questions (for decision).

P: He knoweth all that is before them and all that is behind them, and
unto Allah all things are returned.

S: He knows what is before them and what is behind them and to Allah are
all affairs turned back.

022.077
Y: O ye who believe! bow down, prostrate yourselves, and adore your
Lord; and do good; that ye may prosper.

P: O ye who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves, and worship your
Lord, and do good, that haply ye may prosper.

S: O you who believe! bow down and prostrate yourselves and serve your
Lord, and do good that you may succeed.

022.078
Y: And strive in His cause as ye ought to strive, (with sincerity and
under discipline). He has chosen you, and has imposed no difficulties
on you in religion; it is the cult of your father Abraham. It is He Who
has named you Muslims, both before and in this (Revelation); that the
Messenger may be a witness for you, and ye be witnesses for mankind! So
establish regular Prayer, give regular Charity, and hold fast to Allah!
He is your Protector - the Best to protect and the Best to help!

P: And strive for Allah with the endeavour which is His right. He hath
chosen you and hath not laid upon you in religion any hardship; the
faith of your father Abraham (is yours). He hath named you Muslims of
old time and in this (Scripture), that the messenger may be a witness
against you, and that ye may be witnesses against mankind. So establish
worship, pay the poor-due, and hold fast to Allah. He is your
Protecting friend. A blessed Patron and a blessed Helper!

S: And strive hard in (the way of) Allah, (such) a striving a is due to
Him; He has chosen you and has not laid upon you an hardship in
religion; the faith of your father Ibrahim; He named you Muslims before
and in this, that the Messenger may be a bearer of witness to you, and
you may be bearers of witness to the people; therefore keep up prayer
and pay the poor-rate and hold fast by Allah; He is your Guardian; how
excellent the Guardian and how excellent the Helper!

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 23:

                        AL-MUMENOON (THE BELIEVERS)
 Total Verses: 118 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

023.001
Y: The believers must (eventually) win through,-

P: Successful indeed are the believers

S: Successful indeed are the believers,

023.002
Y: Those who humble themselves in their prayers;

P: Who are humble in their prayers,

S: Who are humble in their prayers,

023.003
Y: Who avoid vain talk;

P: And who shun vain conversation,

S: And who keep aloof from what is vain,

023.004
Y: Who are active in deeds of charity;

P: And who are payers of the poor-due;

S: And who are givers of poor-rate,

023.005
Y: Who abstain from sex,

P: And who guard their modesty -

S: And who guard their private parts,

023.006
Y: Except with those joined to them in the marriage bond, or (the
captives) whom their right hands possess,- for (in their case) they are
free from blame,

P: Save from their wives or the (slaves) that their right hands possess,
for then they are not blameworthy,

S: Except before their mates or those whom their right hands possess,
for they surely are not blameable,

023.007
Y: But those whose desires exceed those limits are transgressors;-

P: But whoso craveth beyond that, such are transgressors -

S: But whoever seeks to go beyond that, these are they that exceed the
limits;

023.008
Y: Those who faithfully observe their trusts and their covenants;

P: And who are shepherds of their pledge and their covenant,

S: And those who are keepers of their trusts and their covenant,

023.009
Y: And who (strictly) guard their prayers;-

P: And who pay heed to their prayers.

S: And those who keep a guard on their prayers;

023.010
Y: These will be the heirs,

P: These are the heirs

S: These are they who are the heirs,

023.011
Y: Who will inherit Paradise: they will dwell therein (for ever).

P: Who will inherit paradise. There they will abide.

S: Who shall inherit the Paradise; they shall abide therein.

023.012
Y: Man We did create from a quintessence (of clay);

P: Verily We created man from a product of wet earth;

S: And certainly We created man of an extract of clay,

023.013
Y: Then We placed him as (a drop of) sperm in a place of rest, firmly
fixed;

P: Then placed him as a drop (of seed) in a safe lodging;

S: Then We made him a small seed in a firm resting-place,

023.014
Y: Then We made the sperm into a clot of congealed blood; then of that
clot We made a (foetus) lump; then we made out of that lump bones and
clothed the bones with flesh; then we developed out of it another
creature. So blessed be Allah, the best to create!

P: Then fashioned We the drop a clot, then fashioned We the clot a
little lump, then fashioned We the little lump bones, then clothed the
bones with flesh, and then produced it as another creation. So blessed
be Allah, the Best of creators!

S: Then We made the seed a clot, then We made the clot a lump of flesh,
then We made (in) the lump of flesh bones, then We clothed the bones
with flesh, then We caused it to grow into another creation, so blessed
be Allah, the best of the creators.

023.015
Y: After that, at length ye will die.

P: Then lo! after that ye surely die.

S: Then after that you will most surely die.

023.016
Y: Again, on the Day of Judgment, will ye be raised up.

P: Then lo! on the Day of Resurrection ye are raised (again).

S: Then surely on the day of resurrection you shall be raised.

023.017
Y: And We have made, above you, seven tracts; and We are never unmindful
of (our) Creation.

P: And We have created above you seven paths, and We are never unmindful
of creation.

S: And certainly We made above you seven heavens; and never are We
heedless of creation.

023.018
Y: And We send down water from the sky according to (due) measure, and
We cause it to soak in the soil; and We certainly are able to drain it
off (with ease).

P: And we send down from the sky water in measure, and We give it
lodging in the earth, and lo! We are Able to withdraw it.

S: And We send down water from the cloud according to a measure, then We
cause it to settle in the earth, and most surely We are able to carry
it away.

023.019
Y: With it We grow for you gardens of date-palms and vines: in them have
ye abundant fruits: and of them ye eat (and have enjoyment),-

P: Then We produce for you therewith gardens of date-palms and grapes,
wherein is much fruit for you and whereof ye eat;

S: Then We cause to grow thereby gardens of palm trees and grapes for
you; you have in them many fruits and from them do you eat;

023.020
Y: Also a tree springing out of Mount Sinai, which produces oil, and
relish for those who use it for food.

P: And a tree that springeth forth from Mount Sinai that groweth oil and
relish for the eaters.

S: And a tree that grows out of Mount Sinai which produces oil and a
condiment for those who eat.

023.021
Y: And in cattle (too) ye have an instructive example: from within their
bodies We produce (milk) for you to drink; there are, in them,
(besides), numerous (other) benefits for you; and of their (meat) ye
eat;

P: And lo! in the cattle there is verily a lesson for you. We give you
to drink of that which is in their bellies, and many uses have ye in
them, and of them do ye eat;

S: And most surely there is a lesson for you in the cattle: We make you
to drink of what is in their bellies, and you have in them many
advantages and of them you eat,

023.022
Y: An on them, as well as in slips, ye side.

P: And on them and on the ship ye are carried.

S: And on them and on the ships you are borne.

023.023
Y: (Further, We sent a long line of prophets for your instruction). We
sent Noah to his people: He said, "O my people! worship Allah! Ye have
no other god but Him. Will ye not fear (Him)?"

P: And We verily sent Noah unto his folk, and he said: O my people!
Serve Allah. Ye have no other Allah save Him. Will ye not ward off
(evil)?

S: And certainly We sent Nuh to his people, and he said: O my people!
serve Allah, you have no god other than Him; will you not then guard
(against evil)?

023.024
Y: The chiefs of the Unbelievers among his people said: "He is no more
than a man like yourselves: his wish is to assert his superiority over
you: if Allah had wished (to send messengers), He could have sent down
angels; never did we hear such a thing (as he says), among our
ancestors of old."

P: But the chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved, said: This is only a
mortal like you who would make himself superior to you. Had Allah
willed, He surely could have sent down angels. We heard not of this in
the case of our fathers of old.

S: And the chiefs of those who disbelieved from among his people said:
He is nothing but a mortal like yourselves who desires that he may have
superiority over you, and if Allah had pleased, He could certainly have
sent down angels. We have not heard of this among our fathers of yore:

023.025
Y: (And some said): "He is only a man possessed: wait (and have
patience) with him for a time."

P: He is only a man in whom is a madness, so watch him for a while.

S: He is only a madman, so bear with him for a time.

023.026
Y: (Noah) said: "O my Lord! help me: for that they accuse me of
falsehood!"

P: He said: My Lord! Help me because they deny me.

S: He said: O my Lord! help me against their calling me a liar.

023.027
Y: So We inspired him (with this message): "Construct the Ark within Our
sight and under Our guidance: then when comes Our Command, and the
fountains of the earth gush forth, take thou on board pairs of every
species, male and female, and thy family- except those of them against
whom the Word has already gone forth: And address Me not in favour of
the wrong-doers; for they shall be drowned (in the Flood)."

P: Then We inspired in him, saying: Make the ship under Our eyes and Our
inspiration. Then, when Our command cometh and the oven gusheth water,
introduce therein of every (kind) two spouses, and thy household save
him thereof against whom the Word hath already gone forth. And plead
not with Me on behalf of those who have done wrong. Lo! they will be
drowned.

S: So We revealed to him, saying: Make the ark before Our eyes and
(according to) Our revelation; and when Our command is given and the
valley overflows, take into it of every kind a pair, two, and your
followers, except those among them against whom the word has gone
forth, and do not speak to Me in respect of those who are unjust;
surely they shall be drowned.

023.028
Y: And when thou hast embarked on the Ark - thou and those with thee,-
say: "Praise be to Allah, Who has saved us from the people who do
wrong."

P: And when thou art on board the ship, thou and whoso is with thee,
then say: Praise be to Allah Who hath saved us from the wrongdoing
folk!

S: And when you are firmly seated, you and those with you, in the ark,
say: All praise is due to Allah who delivered us from the unjust
people:

023.029
Y: And say: "O my Lord! enable me to disembark with thy blessing: for
Thou art the Best to enable (us) to disembark."

P: And say: My Lord! Cause me to land at a blessed landing-place, for
Thou art Best of all who bring to land.

S: And say: O my Lord! cause me to disembark a blessed alighting, and
Thou art the best to cause to alight.

023.030
Y: Verily in this there are Signs (for men to understand); (thus) do We
try (men).

P: Lo! herein verily are portents, for lo! We are ever putting (mankind)
to the test.

S: Most surely there are signs in this, and most surely We are ever
trying (men).

023.031
Y: Then We raised after them another generation.

P: Then, after them, We brought forth another generation;

S: Then We raised up after them another generation.

023.032
Y: And We sent to them a messenger from among themselves, (saying),
"Worship Allah! ye have no other god but Him. Will ye not fear (Him)?"

P: And we sent among them a messenger of their own, saying: Serve Allah,
Ye have no other Allah save Him. Will ye not ward off (evil)?

S: So We sent among them a messenger from among them, saying: Serve
Allah, you have no god other than Him; will you not then guard (against
evil)?

023.033
Y: And the chiefs of his people, who disbelieved and denied the Meeting
in the Hereafter, and on whom We had bestowed the good things of this
life, said: "He is no more than a man like yourselves: he eats of that
of which ye eat, and drinks of what ye drink."

P: And the chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved and denied the
meeting of the Hereafter, and whom We had made soft in the life of the
world, said: This is only a mortal like you, who eateth of that whereof
ye eat and drinketh of that ye drink.

S: And the chiefs of his people who disbelieved and called the meeting
of the hereafter a lie, and whom We had given plenty to enjoy in this
world's life, said: This is nothing but a mortal like yourselves,
eating of what you eat from and drinking of what you drink.

023.034
Y: "If ye obey a man like yourselves, behold, it is certain ye will be
lost."

P: If ye were to obey a mortal like yourselves, then, lo! ye surely
would be losers.

S: And if you obey a mortal like yourselves, then most surely you will
be losers:

023.035
Y: "Does he promise that when ye die and become dust and bones, ye shall
be brought forth (again)?"

P: Doth he promise you that you, when ye are dead and have become dust
and bones, will (again) be brought forth?

S: What! does he threaten you that when you are dead and become dust and
bones that you shall then be brought forth?

023.036
Y: "Far, very far is that which ye are promised!"

P: Begone, begone, with that which ye are promised!

S: Far, far is that which you are threatened with.

023.037
Y: "There is nothing but our life in this world! We shall die and we
live! But we shall never be raised up again!"

P: There is naught but our life of the world; we die and we live, and we
shall not be raised (again).

S: There is naught but our life in this world; we die and we live and we
shall not be raised again.

023.038
Y: "He is only a man who invents a lie against Allah, but we are not the
ones to believe in him!"

P: He is only a man who hath invented a lie about Allah. We are not
going to put faith in him.

S: He is naught but a man who has forged a lie against Allah, and we are
not going to believe in him.

023.039
Y: (The prophet) said: "O my Lord! help me: for that they accuse me of
falsehood."

P: He said: My Lord! Help me because they deny me.

S: He said: O my Lord! help me against their calling me a liar.

023.040
Y: (Allah) said: "In but a little while, they are sure to be sorry!"

P: He said: In a little while they surely will become repentant.

S: He said: In a little while they will most certainly be repenting.

023.041
Y: Then the Blast overtook them with justice, and We made them as
rubbish of dead leaves (floating on the stream of Time)! So away with
the people who do wrong!

P: So the (Awful) Cry overtook them rightfully, and We made them like as
wreckage (that a torrent hurleth). A far removal for wrongdoing folk!

S: So the punishment overtook them in justice, and We made them as
rubbish; so away with the unjust people.

023.042
Y: Then We raised after them other generations.

P: Then after them We brought forth other generations.

S: Then We raised after them other generations.

023.043
Y: No people can hasten their term, nor can they delay (it).

P: No nation can outstrip its term, nor yet postpone it.

S: No people can hasten on their doom nor can they postpone (it).

023.044
Y: Then sent We our messengers in succession: every time there came to a
people their messenger, they accused him of falsehood: so We made them
follow each other (in punishment): We made them as a tale (that is
told): So away with a people that will not believe!

P: Then We sent our messengers one after another. Whenever its messenger
came unto a nation they denied him; so We caused them to follow one
another (to disaster) and We made them bywords. A far removal for folk
who believe not!

S: Then We sent Our messengers one after another; whenever there came to
a people their messenger, they called him a liar, so We made some of
them follow others and We made them stories; so away with a people who
do not believe!

023.045
Y: Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron, with Our Signs and
authority manifest,

P: Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our tokens and a clear
warrant,

S: Then We sent Musa and his brother Haroun, with Our communications and
a clear authority,

023.046
Y: To Pharaoh and his Chiefs: But these behaved insolently: they were an
arrogant people.

P: Unto Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they scorned (them) and they were
despotic folk.

S: To Firon and his chiefs, but they behaved haughtily and they were an
insolent people.

023.047
Y: They said: "Shall we believe in two men like ourselves? And their
people are subject to us!"

P: And they said: Shall we put faith in two mortals like ourselves, and
whose folk are servile unto us?

S: And they said: What! shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves
while their people serve us?

023.048
Y: So they accused them of falsehood, and they became of those who were
destroyed.

P: So they denied them, and became of those who were destroyed.

S: So they rejected them and became of those who were destroyed.

023.049
Y: And We gave Moses the Book, in order that they might receive
guidance.

P: And We verily gave Moses the Scripture, that haply they might go
aright.

S: And certainly We gave Musa the Book that they may follow a right
direction.

023.050
Y: And We made the son of Mary and his mother as a Sign: We gave them
both shelter on high ground, affording rest and security and furnished
with springs.

P: And We made the son of Mary and his mother a portent, and We gave
them refuge on a height, a place of flocks and watersprings.

S: And We made the son of Marium and his mother a sign, and We gave them
a shelter on a lofty ground having meadows and springs.

023.051
Y: O ye messengers! enjoy (all) things good and pure, and work
righteousness: for I am well-acquainted with (all) that ye do.

P: O ye messengers! Eat of the good things, and do right. Lo! I am Aware
of what ye do.

S: O messengers! eat of the good things and do good; surely I know what
you do.

023.052
Y: And verily this Brotherhood of yours is a single Brotherhood, and I
am your Lord and Cherisher: therefore fear Me (and no other).

P: And lo! this your religion is one religion and I am your Lord, so
keep your duty unto Me.

S: And surely this your religion is one religion and I am your Lord,
therefore be careful (of your duty) to Me.

023.053
Y: But people have cut off their affair (of unity), between them, into
sects: each party rejoices in that which is with itself.

P: But they (mankind) have broken their religion among them into sects,
each group rejoicing in its tenets.

S: But they cut off their religion among themselves into sects, each
part rejoicing in that which is with them.

023.054
Y: But leave them in their confused ignorance for a time.

P: So leave them in their error till a time.

S: Therefore leave them in their overwhelming ignorance till

023.055
Y: Do they think that because We have granted them abundance of wealth
and sons,

P: Think they that in the wealth and sons wherewith We provide them

S: Do they think that by what We aid them with of wealth and children,

023.056
Y: We would hasten them on in every good? Nay, they do not understand.

P: We hasten unto them with good things? Nay, but they perceive not.

S: We are hastening to them of good things? Nay, they do not perceive.

023.057
Y: Verily those who live in awe for fear of their Lord;

P: Lo! those who go in awe for fear of their Lord.

S: Surely they who from fear of their Lord are cautious,

023.058
Y: Those who believe in the Signs of their Lord;

P: And those who believe in the revelations of their Lord,

S: And those who believe in the communications of their Lord,

023.059
Y: Those who join not (in worship) partners with their Lord;

P: And those who ascribe not partners unto their Lord,

S: And those who do not associate (aught) with their Lord,

023.060
Y: And those who dispense their charity with their hearts full of fear,
because they will return to their Lord;-

P: And those who give that which they give with hearts afraid because
they are about to return unto their Lord,

S: And those who give what they give (in alms) while their hearts are
full of fear that to their Lord they must return,

023.061
Y: It is these who hasten in every good work, and these who are foremost
in them.

P: These race for the good things, and they shall win them in the race.

S: These hasten to good things and they are foremost in (attaining)
them.

023.062
Y: On no soul do We place a burden greater than it can bear: before Us
is a record which clearly shows the truth: they will never be wronged.

P: And we task not any soul beyond its scope, and with Us is a Record
which speaketh the truth, and they will not be wronged.

S: And We do not lay on any soul a burden except to the extent of its
ability, and with Us is a book which speaks the truth, and they shall
not be dealt with unjustly.

023.063
Y: But their hearts are in confused ignorance of this; and there are,
besides that, deeds of theirs, which they will (continue) to do,-

