 confidently conclude from thence, that themselves are right and all
 others are wrong. Yet so it is.

 The other is an error of mistaken religionists. They sometimes regard
 the Sermon on the Mount as if it were a collection of moral precepts,
 and consequently, strictly speaking, not Christianity at all. To them
 it seems as if the chief value, the chief intention of the discourse,
 was to show the breadth and spirituality of the requirements of the
 law of Moses--its chief religious significance, to show the utter
 impossibility of fulfilling the law, and thus to lead to the necessary
 inference that justification must be by faith alone. And so they would
 not scruple to assert that, in the highest sense of that term, it is
 not Christianity at all, but only preparatory to it--a kind of
 spiritual Judaism; and that the higher and more developed principles
 of Christianity are to be found in the writings of the apostles.
 Before we proceed further, we would remark here that it seems
 extremely startling to say that He who came to this world expressly to
 preach the Gospel, should, in the most elaborate of all His
 discourses, omit to do so: it is indeed something more than startling,
 it is absolutely revolting to suppose that the letters of those who
 spoke _of_ Christ, should contain a more perfectly-developed, a freer
 and fuller Christianity than is to be found in Christ's own words.

 Now you will observe that these two parties, so opposed to each other
 in their general religious views, are agreed in this--that the Sermon
 on the Mount is nothing but morality. The man of the world says--"It
 is morality only, and that is the whole of religion." The mistaken
 religionist says--"It is morality only, not the entire essence of
 Christianity." In opposition to both these views, we maintain that the
 Sermon on the Mount contains the sum and substance of
 Christianity--the very chief matter of the gospel of our Redeemer.

 It is not, you will observe, a pure and spiritualized Judaism; it is
 contrasted with Judaism again and again by Him who spoke it. Quoting
 the words of Moses, he affirmed, "So was it spoken by them of old
 time, but _I say unto you_--" For example, "Thou shalt not forswear
 thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths." That is
 Judaism. "But I say unto you swear not at all, but let your yea be
 yea, and your nay nay." That is Christianity. And that which is the
 essential peculiarity of this Christianity lies in these two things.
 First of all, that the morality which it teaches is _disinterested_
 goodness--goodness not for the sake of the blessing that follows it,
 but for its own sake, and because it is right. "Love your enemies," is
 the Gospel precept. Why?--Because if you love them you shall be
 blessed; and if you do not cursed? No; but "Love your enemies, bless
 them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
 which despitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be the
 children of"--that is, may be like--"your Father which is in Heaven."
 The second essential peculiarity of Christianity--and this, too, is an
 essential peculiarity of this Sermon--is, that it teaches and enforces
 the law of self-sacrifice. "If thy right eye offend thee pluck it out;
 if thy right hand offend thee cut it off." This, brethren, is the law
 of self-sacrifice--the very law and spirit of the blessed cross of
 Christ.

 How deeply and essentially Christian, then, this Sermon on the Mount
 is, we shall understand if we are enabled in any measure to reach the
 meaning and spirit of the single passage which I have taken as my
 text. It tells two things--the Christian aim and the Christian motive.

 1st. The Christian aim--perfection. 2nd. The Christian
 motive--because it is right and Godlike to be perfect.

 I. The Christian aim is this--to be perfect. "Be ye therefore
 perfect." Now distinguish this, I pray you, from mere worldly
 morality. It is not conformity to a creed that is here required, but
 aspiration after a _state_. It is not demanded of us to perform a
 number of duties, but to yield obedience to a certain spiritual law.
 But let us endeavour to explain this more fully. What is the meaning
 of this expression, "Be ye perfect?" Why is it that in this discourse,
 instead of being commanded to perform religious duties, we are
 commanded to think of being like God? Will not that inflame our pride,
 and increase our natural vainglory? Now the nature and possibility of
 human perfection, what it is and how it is possible, are both
 contained in one single expression in the text. "Even as your Father
 which is in Heaven is perfect." The relationship between father and
 son implies consanguinity, likeness, similarity of character and
 nature. God _made_ the insect, the stone, the lily; but God is not the
 Father of the caterpillar, the lily, or the stone.

 When therefore, God is said to be our Father, something more is
 implied in this than that God created man. And so when the Son of Man
 came proclaiming the fact that we are the children of God, it was in
 the truest sense a revelation. He told us that the nature of God
 resembles the nature of man, that love in God is not a mere figure of
 speech, but means the same thing as love in us, and that divine anger
 is the same thing as human anger divested of its emotions and
 imperfections. When we are commanded to be like God, it implies that
 God has that nature of which we have already the germs. And this has
 been taught by the incarnation of the Redeemer. Things absolutely
 dissimilar in their nature cannot mingle. Water cannot coalesce with
 fire--water cannot mix with oil. If, then, Humanity and Divinity were
 united in the person of the Redeemer, it follows that there must be
 something kindred between the two, or else the incarnation had been
 impossible. So that the incarnation is the realization of man's
 perfection.

 But let us examine more deeply this assertion, that _our_ nature is
 kindred with that of God--for if man has not a nature kindred to
 God's, then a demand such as that, "Be ye the children of"--that is,
 like--"God," is but a mockery of man. We say then, in the first place,
 that in the truest sense of the word man can be a creator. The beaver
 _makes_ its hole, the bee _makes_ its cell; man alone has the power of
 _creating_. The mason _makes_, the architect _creates_. In the same
 sense that we say God created the universe, we say that man is also a
 creator. The creation of the universe was the Eternal Thought taking
 reality. And thought taking expression is also a creation. Whenever
 therefore, there is a living thought shaping itself in word or in
 stone, there is there a creation. And therefore it is, that the
 simplest effort of what we call genius is prized infinitely more than
 the most elaborate performances which are done by mere workmanship,
 and for this reason: that the one is produced by an effort of power
 which we share with the beaver and the bee, that of _making_, and the
 other by a faculty and power which man alone shares with God.

 Here however, you will observe another difficulty. It will be said at
 once--there is something in this comparison of man with God which
 looks like blasphemy, because one is finite and the other
 infinite--man is bounded, God boundless; and to speak of resemblance
 and kindred between these two, is to speak of resemblance and kindred
 between two natures essentially different. But this is precisely the
 argument which is brought by the Socinians against the doctrine of
 the incarnation; and we are bound to add that the Socinian argument is
 right, unless there be the similarity of which we have been speaking.
 Unless there be something in man's nature which truly and properly
 partakes of the divine nature, there could be no incarnation, and the
 demand for perfection would be a mockery and an impossibility.

 Let us then endeavour to find out the evidences of this infinitude in
 the nature of man. First of all we find it in this--that the desires
 of man are for something boundless and unattainable. Thus speaks our
 Lord--"What shall it profit a man if he should gain the whole world
 and lose his own soul?" Every schoolboy has heard the story of the
 youthful prince who enumerated one by one the countries he meant to
 conquer year after year; and when the enumeration was completed, was
 asked what he meant to do when all those victories were achieved, and
 he replied--to sit down, to be happy, to take his rest. But then came
 the ready rejoinder--Why not do so now? But it is not every schoolboy
 who has paused to consider the folly of the question. He who asked his
 son why he did not at once take the rest which it was his ultimate
 purpose to enjoy, knew not the immensity and nobility of the human
 soul. He could not _then_ take his rest and be happy. As long as one
 realm remained unconquered, so long rest was impossible; he would weep
 for fresh worlds to conquer. And thus, that which was spoken by our
 Lord of one earthly gratification, is true of all--"Whosoever drinketh
 of this water shall thirst again." The boundless, endless, infinite
 void in the soul of man can be satisfied with nothing but God.
 Satisfaction lies not in _having_, but in _being_. There is no
 satisfaction even in _doing_. Man cannot be satisfied with his own
 performances. When the righteous young ruler came to Christ, and
 declared that in reference to the life gone by, he had kept all the
 commandments and fulfilled all the duties required by the Law, still
 came the question--"What lack I yet?"

 The Scribes and Pharisees were the strictest observers of the
 ceremonies of the Jewish religion, "touching the righteousness which
 is by the Law" they were blameless, but yet they wanted something more
 than that, and they were found on the brink of Jordan imploring the
 baptism of John, seeking after a new and higher state than they had
 yet attained to,--a significant proof that man cannot be satisfied
 with his own works. And again, there is not one of us who has ever
 been satisfied with his own performances. There is no man whose doings
 are worth anything, who has not felt that he has not yet done that
 which he feels himself able to do. While he was doing it, he was kept
 up by the spirit of hope; but when done the thing seemed to him
 worthless. And therefore it is that the author cannot read his own
 book again, nor the sculptor look with pleasure upon his finished
 work. With respect to one of the greatest of all modern sculptors, we
 are told that he longed for the termination of his earthly career,
 for this reason--that he had been satisfied with his own performance:
 satisfied for the first time in his life. And this expression of his
 satisfaction was but equivalent to saying that he had reached the
 goal, beyond which there could be no progress. This impossibility of
 being satisfied with his own performances is one of the strongest
 proofs of our immortality--a proof of that perfection towards which we
 shall for ever tend, but which we can never attain.

 A second trace of this infinitude in man's nature we find in the
 infinite capacities of the soul. This is true intellectually and
 morally. With reference to our intellectual capacities, it would
 perhaps be more strictly correct to say that they are indefinite,
 rather than infinite; that is we can affix to them no limit. For there
 is no man, however low his intellectual powers may be, who has not at
 one time or another felt a rush of thought, a glow of inspiration,
 which seemed to make all things possible, as if it were merely the
 effect of some imperfect organization which stood in the way of his
 doing whatever he desired to do. With respect to our moral and
 spiritual capacities, we remark that they are not only indefinite, but
 absolutely infinite. Let that man answer who has ever truly and
 heartily loved another. That man knows what it is to partake of the
 infinitude of God. Literally, in the emphatic language of the Apostle
 John, he has felt his immortality--"God in him and he in God." For
 that moment, infinitude was to him not a name, but a reality. He
 entered into the infinite of time and space, which is not measured by
 days, or months, or years, but is alike boundless and eternal.

 Again, we perceive a third trace of this infinitude in man, in the
 power which he possesses of giving up self. In this, perhaps more than
 in anything else, man may claim kindred with God. Nor is this power
 confined to the best of mankind, but is possessed, to some extent at
 least, by all. There is no man, how low soever he may be, who has not
 one or two causes or secrets, which no earthly consideration would
 induce him to betray. There is no man who does not feel towards one or
 two at least, in this world, a devotion which all the bribes of the
 universe would not be able to shake. We have heard the story of that
 degraded criminal who, when sentence of death was passed upon him,
 turned to his accomplice in guilt, in whose favour a verdict of
 acquittal was brought in, and in glorious self-forgetfulness
 exclaimed--"Thank God, _you_ are saved!" The savage and barbarous
 Indian whose life has been one unbroken series of cruelty and crime,
 will submit to a slow, lingering, torturing death, rather than betray
 his country. Now, what shall we say to these things? Do they not tell
 of an indestructible something in the nature of man, of which the
 origin is divine?--the remains of a majesty which, though it may be
 sullied, can never be entirely lost?

 Before passing on let us observe, that were it not for this conviction
 of the divine origin, and consequent perfectibility of our nature,
 the very thought of God would be painful to us. God is so great, so
 glorious, that the mind is overwhelmed by, and shrinks from, the
 contemplation of His excellence, unless there comes the tender,
 ennobling thought that we are the children of God, who are to become
 like our Father in Heaven, whose blessed career it is to go on in an
 advance of love and duty towards Him, until we love Him as we are
 loved, and know Him almost as we are known.


 II. We pass on, in the second place, to consider the Christian
 motive--"Even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect." Brethren,
 worldly prudence, miscalled morality, says--"Be honest; you will find
 your gain in being so. Do right; you will be the better for it--even
 in this world you will not lose by it." The mistaken religionist only
 magnifies this on a large scale. "Your duty," he says, "is to save
 your soul. Give up this world to have the next. Lose _here_, that you
 may gain _hereafter_." Now this is but prudence after all--it is but
 magnified selfishness, carried on into eternity,--none the more noble
 for being _eternal_ selfishness. In opposition to all such sentiments
 as these, thus speaks the Gospel--"Be ye perfect." Why? "Because your
 Father which is in Heaven is perfect." Do right, because it is Godlike
 and right so to do. Here however, let us be understood. We do not mean
 to say that the Gospel ignores altogether the personal results of
 doing right. This would be unnatural--because God has linked together
 well-doing and blessedness. But we do say that this blessedness is not
 the motive which the Gospel gives us. It is true the Gospel
 says--"Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth; blessed
 are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy; blessed are they which
 do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled."
 But when these are made our motives--when we become meek in order that
 we may inherit here--then the promised enjoyment will not come. If we
 are merciful merely that we may ourselves obtain mercy, we shall not
 have that in-dwelling love of God which is the result and token of His
 forgiveness. Such was the law and such the example of our Lord and
 Master.

 True it is that in the prosecution of the great work of redemption He
 had "respect to the recompense of reward." True it is He was
 conscious--how could He but be conscious--that when His work was
 completed He should be "glorified with that glory which He had with
 the Father before the world began;" but we deny that this was the
 _motive_ which induced Him to undertake that work; and that man has a
 very mistaken idea of the character of the Redeemer, and understands
 but little of His spirit, who has so mean an opinion of Him as to
 suppose that it was any consideration of personal happiness and
 blessedness which led the Son of God to die. "For this end was He
 born, and for this end came He into the world to bear witness unto the
 Truth," and "to finish the work which was given Him to do."

 If we were asked, Can you select one text in which more than in any
 other this unselfish, disinterested feature comes forth, it should be
 this, "Love ye your enemies, do good and lend, hoping for nothing
 again." This is the true spirit of Christianity--doing right
 disinterestedly, not from the hope of any personal advantage or
 reward, either temporal or spiritual, but entirely forgetting self,
 "hoping for nothing again." When that glorious philanthropist, whose
 whole life had been spent in procuring the abolition of the
 slave-trade, was demanded of by some systematic theologian, whether in
 his ardour in this great cause he had not been neglecting his personal
 prospects, and endangering his own soul, this was his magnanimous
 reply--one of those which show the light of truth breaking through
 like an inspiration. He said, "I did not think about my own soul, I
 had no time to think about myself, I had forgotten all about my soul."
 The Christian is not concerned about his own happiness; he has not
 time to consider himself; he has not time to put that selfish question
 which the disciples put to their Lord, when they were but half
 baptized with His spirit, "Lo, we have left all and followed Thee,
 what shall we have therefore?"

 In conclusion we observe, there are two things which are to be learned
 from this passage. The first is this, that happiness is not our end
 and aim. It has been said, and has since been repeated as frequently
 as if it were an indisputable axiom, that "Happiness is our being's
 end and aim." Brethren, happiness is _not_ our being's end and aim.
 The Christian's aim is perfection, not happiness, and every one of the
 sons of God must have something of that spirit which marked their
 Master; that holy sadness, that peculiar unrest, that high and lofty
 melancholy which belongs to a spirit which strives after heights to
 which it can never attain.

 The second thing we have to learn is this, that on this earth there
 can be no rest for man. By rest we mean the attainment of a state
 beyond which there can be no change. Politically, morally,
 spiritually, there can be no rest for man here. In one country alone
 has that system been fully carried out which, conservative of the
 past, excludes all desire of progress and improvement for the future:
 but it is not to China that we should look for the perfection of human
 society. There is one ecclesiastical system which carries out the same
 spirit, looking rather to the Church of the past than to the Church of
 the future; but it is not in the Romish that we shall find the model
 of a Christian Church. In Paradise it may have been right to be at
 rest, to desire no change, but ever since the Fall every system that
 tends to check the onward progress of mankind is fatally, radically,
 curelessly wrong. The motto on every Christian banner is "Forwards."
 There is no resting in the present, no satisfaction in the past.

 The last thing we learn from this is the impossibility of obtaining
 that of which some men speak--the satisfaction of a good conscience.
 Some men write and speak as if the difference between the Christian
 and the worldly man was this, that in the one conscience is a
 self-reproaching hell, and in the other a self-congratulating heaven.
 Oh, brethren, is this the fact? Think you that the Christian goes home
 at night counting up the noble deeds done during the day, saying to
