such a premature request, and, evidently guided by God, you
replied that Carmelites should save souls by prayer rather than by
letters. When I heard your decision I said to the little Sister:
"We must set to work and pray hard; if our prayers are answered at
the end of Lent, what a joy it will be!" O Infinite Mercy of our
Lord! At the close of Lent, one soul more had given herself to
God. It was a real miracle of grace--a miracle obtained through
the fervour of a humble novice.

How wonderful is the power of prayer! It is like unto a queen,
who, having free access to the king, obtains whatsoever she asks.
In order to secure a hearing there is no need to recite set
prayers composed for the occasion--were it so, I ought indeed to
be pitied!

Apart from the Divine Office, which in spite of my unworthiness is
a daily joy, I have not the courage to look through books for
beautiful prayers. I only get a headache because of their number,
and besides, one is more lovely than another. Unable therefore to
say them all, and lost in choice, I do as children who have not
learnt to read--I simply tell Our Lord all that I want, and He
always understands.

With me prayer is an uplifting of the heart; a glance towards
heaven; a cry of gratitude and love, uttered equally in sorrow and
in joy. In a word, it is something noble, supernatural, which
expands my soul and unites it to God. Sometimes when I am in such
a state of spiritual dryness that not a single good thought occurs
to me, I say very slowly the "Our Father" or the "Hail Mary," and
these prayers suffice to take me out of myself, and wonderfully
refresh me.

But what was I speaking of? Again I am lost in a maze of
reflections. Forgive me, dear Mother, for wandering thus. My story
is like a tangled skein, but I fear I can do no better. I write my
thoughts as they come; I fish at random in the stream of my heart,
and offer you all that I catch.

I was telling you about the novices. They often say: "You have an
answer for everything. This time I thought I should puzzle you.
Where do you find all that you teach us?" Some are even simple
enough to think I can read their souls, because at times it
happens I discover to them--without revelation--the subject of
their thoughts. The senior novice had determined to hide from me a
great sorrow. She spent the night in anguish, keeping back her
tears lest her eyes might betray her. Yet she came to me with a
smile next day, seeming even more cheerful than usual, and when I
said: "You are in trouble, I am sure," she looked at me in
inexpressible amazement. Her surprise was so great that it reacted
on me, and imparted a sense of the supernatural. I felt that God
was close to us. Unwittingly--for I have not the gift of reading
souls--I had spoken as one inspired, and was able to console her
completely.

And now, dear Mother, I will tell you wherein I gain most with the
novices. You know they are allowed without restriction to say
anything to me, agreeable or the reverse; this is all the easier
since they do not owe me the respect due to a Novice-Mistress. I
cannot say that Our Lord makes me walk in the way of exterior
humiliation; He is satisfied with humbling me in my inmost soul.
In the eyes of creatures all is success, and I walk in the
dangerous path of honour--if a religious may so speak. I
understand God's way and that of my superiors in this respect; for
if the Community thought me incapable, unintelligent, and wanting
in judgment, I could be of no possible use to you, dear Mother.
This is why the Divine Master has thrown a veil over all my
shortcomings, both interior and exterior. Because of this veil I
receive many compliments from the novices--compliments without
flattery, for they really mean what they say; and they do not
inspire me with vanity, for the remembrance of my weakness is ever
before me. At times my soul tires of this over-sweet food, and I
long to hear something other than praise; then Our Lord serves me
with a nice little salad, well spiced, with plenty of vinegar--oil
alone is wanting, and this it is which makes it more to my taste.
And the salad is offered to me by the novices at the moment I
least expect. God lifts the veil that hides my faults, and my dear
little Sisters, beholding me as I really am, do not find me
altogether agreeable. With charming simplicity, they tell me how I
try them and what they dislike in me; in fact, they are as frank
as though they were speaking of someone else, for they are aware
that I am pleased when they act in this way.

I am more than pleased--I am transported with delight by this
splendid banquet set before me. How can anything so contrary to
our natural inclinations afford such extraordinary pleasure? Had I
not experienced it, I could not have believed it possible.

One day, when I was ardently longing for some humiliation, a young
postulant came to me and sated my desire so completely, that I was
reminded of the occasion when Semei cursed David, and I repeated
to myself the words of the holy King: "Yea, it is the Lord who
hath bidden him say all these things."[7] In this way God takes
care of me. He cannot always provide that strength-giving bread,
exterior humiliation, but from time to time He allows me to eat of
"the crumbs from the table of the children."[8] How magnificent
are His Mercies!

Dear Mother, since that Infinite Mercy is the subject of this my
earthly song, I ought also to discover to you one real advantage,
reaped with many others in the discharge of my task. Formerly, if
I saw a Sister acting in a way that displeased me, and was
seemingly contrary to rule, I would think: "Ah, how glad I should
be if only I could warn her and point out where she is wrong."
Since, however, this burden has been laid upon me my ideas have
changed, and when I happen to see something not quite right, I say
with a sigh of relief: "Thank God! It is not a novice, and I am
not obliged to correct"; and at once I try to find excuses, and
credit the doer with the good intentions she no doubt possesses.

Your devotedness, dear Mother, now that I am ill, has also taught
me many a lesson of charity. No remedy is too costly, and if one
does not succeed, you unhesitatingly try something new. When I am
present at recreation, how careful you are to shield me from
draughts. I feel that I ought to be as compassionate for the
spiritual infirmities of my Sisters as you are for my bodily ills.

I have noticed that it is the holiest nuns who are most deeply
loved; everyone is anxious to seek their company, and do them
service, without even being asked. These very souls who are well
able to bear with want of affection and little attentions are
always surrounded by an atmosphere of love. Our Father, St. John
of the Cross, says with great truth: "All good things have come
unto me, since I no longer sought them for myself."

Imperfect souls, on the contrary, are left alone. They are
treated, it is true, with the measure of politeness which
religious life demands; yet their company is avoided, lest a word
might be said which would hurt their feelings. When I say
imperfect souls, I am not referring to souls with spiritual
imperfections only, for the holiest souls will not be perfect till
they are in heaven. I mean those who are also afflicted with want
of tact and refinement, as well as ultra-sensitive souls. I know
such defects are incurable, but I also know how patient you would
be, in nursing and striving to relieve me, were my illness to last
for many years.

From all this I draw the conclusion:--I ought to seek the
companionship of those Sisters towards whom I feel a natural
aversion, and try to be their good Samaritan. A word or a smile is
often enough to put fresh life in a despondent soul. And yet it is
not merely in the hope of giving consolation that I try to be
kind. If it were, I know that I should soon be discouraged, for
well-intentioned words are often totally misunderstood.
Consequently, not to lose my time or labour, I try to act solely
to please Our Lord, and follow this precept of the Gospel: "When
thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends or thy
brethren, lest perhaps they also invite thee again and a
recompense be made to thee. But when thou makest a feast, call the
poor, the maimed, the blind, and the lame, and thou shalt be
blessed, because they have naught wherewith to make thee
recompense, and thy Father Who seeth in secret will repay thee."[9]

What feast can I offer my Sisters but a spiritual one of sweet and
joyful charity! I know none other, and I wish to imitate St. Paul,
who rejoiced with those who rejoiced. It is true that he wept with
those who wept, and at my feast, too, the tears must sometimes
fall, still I shall always try to change them into smiles, for
"God loveth a cheerful giver."[10]

I remember an act of charity with which God inspired me while I
was still a novice, and this act, though seemingly small, has been
rewarded even in this life by Our Heavenly Father, "Who seeth in
secret."

Shortly before Sister St. Peter became quite bedridden, it was
necessary every evening, at ten minutes to six, for someone to
leave meditation and take her to the refectory. It cost me a good
deal to offer my services, for I knew the difficulty, or I should
say the impossibility, of pleasing the poor invalid. But I did not
want to lose such a good opportunity, for I recalled Our Lord's
words: "As long as you did it to one of these my least brethren,
you did it to Me."[11] I therefore humbly offered my aid. It was
not without difficulty I induced her to accept it, but after
considerable persuasion I succeeded. Every evening, when I saw her
shake her sand-glass, I understood that she meant: "Let us go!"
Summoning up all my courage I rose, and the ceremony began. First
of all, her stool had to be moved and carried in a particular way,
and on no account must there be any hurry. The solemn procession
ensued. I had to follow the good Sister, supporting her by her
girdle; I did it as gently as possible, but if by some mischance
she stumbled, she imagined I had not a firm hold, and that she was
going to fall. "You are going too fast," she would say, "I shall
fall and hurt myself!" Then when I tried to lead her more quietly:
"Come quicker . . . I cannot feel you . . . you are letting me go!
I was right when I said you were too young to take care of me."

When we reached the refectory without further mishap, more
troubles were in store. I had to settle my poor invalid in her
place, taking great pains not to hurt her. Then I had to turn back
her sleeves, always according to her own special rubric, and after
that I was allowed to go.

But I soon noticed that she found it very difficult to cut her
bread, so I did not leave her till I had performed this last
service. She was much touched by this attention on my part, for
she had not expressed any wish on the subject; it was by this
unsought-for kindness that I gained her entire confidence, and
chiefly because--as I learnt later--at the end of my humble task
I bestowed upon her my sweetest smile.

Dear Mother, it is long since all this happened, but Our Lord
allows the memory of it to linger with me like a perfume from
Heaven. One cold winter evening, I was occupied in the lowly work
of which I have just spoken, when suddenly I heard in the distance
the harmonious strains of music outside the convent walls. I
pictured a drawing-room, brilliantly lighted and decorated, and
richly furnished. Young ladies, elegantly dressed, exchanged a
thousand compliments, as is the way of the world. Then I looked on
the poor invalid I was tending. Instead of sweet music I heard her
complaints, instead of rich gilding I saw the brick walls of our
bare cloister, scarcely visible in the dim light. The contrast was
very moving. Our Lord so illuminated my soul with the rays of
truth, before which the pleasures of the world are but as
darkness, that for a thousand years of such worldly delights, I
would not have bartered even the ten minutes spent in my act of
charity.

If even now, in days of pain and amid the smoke of battle, the
thought that God has withdrawn us from the world is so entrancing,
what will it be when, in eternal glory and everlasting repose, we
realise the favour beyond compare He has done us here, by singling
us out to dwell in His Carmel, the very portal of Heaven?

I have not always felt these transports of joy in performing acts
of charity, but at the beginning of my religious life Jesus wished
to make me feel how sweet to Him is charity, when found in the
hearts of his Spouses. Thus when I led Sister St. Peter, it was
with so much love that I could not have shown more were I guiding
Our Divine Lord Himself.

The practice of charity has not always been so pleasant as I have
just pointed out, dear Mother, and to prove it I will recount some
of my many struggles.

For a long time my place at meditation was near a Sister who
fidgeted continually, either with her Rosary, or something else;
possibly, as I am very quick of hearing, I alone heard her, but I
cannot tell you how much it tried me. I should have liked to turn
round, and by looking at the offender, make her stop the noise;
but in my heart I knew that I ought to bear it tranquilly, both
for the love of God and to avoid giving pain. So I kept quiet, but
the effort cost me so much that sometimes I was bathed in
perspiration, and my meditation consisted merely in suffering with
patience. After a time I tried to endure it in peace and joy, at
least deep down in my soul, and I strove to take actual pleasure
in the disagreeable little noise. Instead of trying not to hear
it, which was impossible, I set myself to listen, as though it had
been some delightful music, and my meditation--which was not the
"prayer of quiet"--was passed in offering this music to Our Lord.

Another time I was working in the laundry, and the Sister
opposite, while washing handkerchiefs, repeatedly splashed me with
dirty water. My first impulse was to draw back and wipe my face,
to show the offender I should be glad if she would behave more
quietly; but the next minute I thought how foolish it was to
refuse the treasures God offered me so generously, and I refrained
from betraying my annoyance. On the contrary, I made such efforts
to welcome the shower of dirty water, that at the end of half an
hour I had taken quite a fancy to this novel kind of aspersion,
and I resolved to come as often as I could to the happy spot where
such treasures were freely bestowed.

Dear Mother, you see that I am a very little soul, who can only
offer very little things to Our Lord. It still happens that I
frequently let slip the occasion of these slender sacrifices,
which bring so much peace, but this does not discourage me; I bear
the loss of a little peace, and I try to be more watchful for the
future.

How happy does Our Lord make me, and how sweet and easy is His
service on this earth! He has always given me what I desired, or
rather He has made me desire what He wishes to give. A short time
before my terrible temptation against Faith, I had reflected how
few exterior trials, worthy of mention, had fallen to my lot, and
that if I were to have interior trials, God must change my path;
and this I did not think He would do. Yet I could not always live
at ease. Of what means, then, would He make use?

I had not long to wait for an answer, and it showed me that He
whom I love is never at a loss, for without changing my way, He
sent me this great trial; and thus mingled a healing bitterness
with all the sweet.
______________________________

[1] Cf. Rom. 8:15.

[2] Exod. 9:16.

[3] Cf. Ps. 33[34]:6.

[4] Ps. 111[112]:4.

[5] Prov. 18:19.

[6] John 10:12.

[7] Cf. 2 Kings 16:10.

[8] Mark 7:28.

[9] Cf. Luke 14:12, 13, 14.

[10] 2 Cor. 9:7.

[11] Matt. 25:40.

______________________________


CHAPTER XI A CANTICLE OF LOVE

It is not only when He is about to send me some trial that Our
Lord gives me warning and awakens my desire for it. For years I
had cherished a longing which seemed impossible of realisation--to
have a brother a Priest. I often used to think that if my little
brothers had not gone to Heaven, I should have had the happiness
of seeing them at the Altar. I greatly regretted being deprived of
this joy. Yet God went beyond my dream; I only asked for one
brother who would remember me each day at the Holy Altar, and He
has united me in the bonds of spiritual friendship with two of His
apostles. I should like to tell you, dear Mother, how Our Divine
Master fulfilled my desire.

In 1895 our holy Mother, St. Teresa, sent my first brother as a
gift for my feast. It was washing day, and I was busy at my work,
when Mother Agnes of Jesus, then Prioress, called me aside and
read me a letter from a young Seminarist, in which he said he had
been inspired by St. Teresa to ask for a sister who would devote
herself specially to his salvation, and to the salvation of his
future flock. He promised always to remember this spiritual sister
when saying Mass, and the choice fell upon me. Dear Mother, I
cannot tell you how happy this made me. Such unlooked-for
fulfillment of my desire awoke in my heart the joy of a child; it
carried me back to those early days, when pleasures were so keen,
that my heart seemed too small to contain them. Years had passed
since I had tasted a like happiness, so fresh, so unfamiliar, as
if forgotten chords had been stirred within me.

Fully aware of my obligations, I set to work, and strove to
redouble my fervour. Now and again I wrote to my new brother.
Undoubtedly, it is by prayer and sacrifice that we can help our
missionaries, but sometimes, when it pleases Our Lord to unite two
souls for His Glory, He permits them to communicate their
thoughts, and thus inspire each other to love God more. Of course
an express command from those in authority is needed for this,
otherwise, it seems to me, that such a correspondence would do
more harm than good, if not to the missionary, at least to the
Carmelite, whose manner of life tends to continual introversion.
This exchange of letters, though rare, would occupy her mind
uselessly; instead of uniting her to God, she would perhaps fancy
she was doing wonders, when in reality, under cover of zeal, she
was doing nothing but producing needless distraction.--And here
am I, launched, not upon a distraction, but upon a dissertation
equally superfluous. I shall never be able to correct myself of
these lengthy digressions which must be so wearisome to you, dear
Mother. Forgive me, should I offend again.

Last year, at the end of May, it was your turn to give me my
second brother, and when I represented that, having given all my
merits to one future apostle, I feared they could not be given to
another, you told me that obedience would double their value. In
the depths of my heart I thought the same thing, and, since the
zeal of a Carmelite ought to embrace the whole world, I hope, with
God's help, to be of use to even more than two missionaries. I
pray for all, not forgetting our Priests at home, whose ministry
is quite as difficult as that of the missionary preaching to the
heathen. . . . In a word, I wish to be a true daughter of the
Church, like our holy Mother St. Teresa, and pray for all the
intentions of Christ's Vicar. That is the one great aim of my
life. But just as I should have had a special interest in my
little brothers had they lived, and that, without neglecting the
general interests of the Church, so now, I unite myself in a
special way to the new brothers whom Jesus has given me. All that
I possess is theirs also. God is too good to give by halves; He is
so rich that He gives me all I ask for, even though I do not lose
myself in lengthy enumerations. As I have two brothers and my
little sisters, the novices, the days would be too short were I to
ask in detail for the needs of each soul, and I fear I might
forget something important. Simple souls cannot understand
complicated methods, and, as I am one of their number, Our Lord
has inspired me with a very simple way of fulfilling my
obligations. One day, after Holy Communion, He made me understand
these words of the Canticles: "Draw me: we will run after Thee to
the odour of Thy ointments."[1] O my Jesus, there is no need to
say: "In drawing me, draw also the souls that I love": these
words, "Draw me," suffice. When a soul has let herself be taken
captive by the inebriating odour of Thy perfumes, she cannot run
alone; as a natural consequence of her attraction towards Thee,
the souls of all those she loves are drawn in her train.

Just as a torrent carries into the depths of the sea all that it
meets on its way, so, my Jesus, does the soul who plunges into the
shoreless ocean of Thy Love bring with it all its treasures. My
treasures are the souls it has pleased thee to unite with mine;
Thou hast confided them to me, and therefore I do not fear to use
Thy own words, uttered by Thee on the last night that saw Thee
still a traveller on this earth. Jesus, my Beloved! I know not
when my exile will have an end. Many a night I may yet sing Thy
Mercies here below, but for me also will come the last night, and
then I shall be able to say:

"I have glorified Thee upon earth: I have finished the work which
Thou gavest me to do. I have manifested Thy name to the men whom
Thou hast given me out of the world. Thine they were, and to me
