FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 61, Art. 4]

Whether the Four Cardinal Virtues Differ from One Another?

Objection 1: It would seem that the above four virtues are not
diverse and distinct from one another. For Gregory says (Moral. xxii,
1): "There is no true prudence, unless it be just, temperate and
brave; no perfect temperance, that is not brave, just and prudent; no
sound fortitude, that is not prudent, temperate and just; no real
justice, without prudence, fortitude and temperance." But this would
not be so, if the above virtues were distinct from one another: since
the different species of one genus do not qualify one another.
Therefore the aforesaid virtues are not distinct from one another.

Obj. 2: Further, among things distinct from one another the function
of one is not attributed to another. But the function of temperance
is attributed to fortitude: for Ambrose says (De Offic. xxxvi):
"Rightly do we call it fortitude, when a man conquers himself, and is
not weakened and bent by any enticement." And of temperance he says
(De Offic. xliii, xlv) that it "safeguards the manner and order in
all things that we decide to do and say." Therefore it seems that
these virtues are not distinct from one another.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 4) that the
necessary conditions of virtue are first of all "that a man should
have knowledge; secondly, that he should exercise choice for a
particular end; thirdly, that he should possess the habit and act
with firmness and steadfastness." But the first of these seems to
belong to prudence which is rectitude of reason in things to be done;
the second, i.e. choice, belongs to temperance, whereby a man,
holding his passions on the curb, acts, not from passion but from
choice; the third, that a man should act for the sake of a due end,
implies a certain rectitude, which seemingly belongs to justice;
while the last, viz. firmness and steadfastness, belongs to
fortitude. Therefore each of these virtues is general in comparison
to other virtues. Therefore they are not distinct from one another.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. xi) that "there
are four virtues, corresponding to the various emotions of love," and
he applies this to the four virtues mentioned above. Therefore the
same four virtues are distinct from one another.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), these four virtues are
understood differently by various writers. For some take them as
signifying certain general conditions of the human mind, to be found
in all the virtues: so that, to wit, prudence is merely a certain
rectitude of discretion in any actions or matters whatever; justice,
a certain rectitude of the mind, whereby a man does what he ought in
any matters; temperance, a disposition of the mind, moderating any
passions or operations, so as to keep them within bounds; and
fortitude, a disposition whereby the soul is strengthened for that
which is in accord with reason, against any assaults of the passions,
or the toil involved by any operations. To distinguish these four
virtues in this way does not imply that justice, temperance and
fortitude are distinct virtuous habits: because it is fitting that
every moral virtue, from the fact that it is a _habit,_ should be
accompanied by a certain firmness so as not to be moved by its
contrary: and this, we have said, belongs to fortitude. Moreover,
inasmuch as it is a _virtue,_ it is directed to good which involves
the notion of right and due; and this, we have said, belongs to
justice. Again, owing to the fact that it is a _moral virtue_
partaking of reason, it observes the mode of reason in all things,
and does not exceed its bounds, which has been stated to belong to
temperance. It is only in the point of having discretion, which we
ascribed to prudence, that there seems to be a distinction from the
other three, inasmuch as discretion belongs essentially to reason;
whereas the other three imply a certain share of reason by way of a
kind of application (of reason) to passions or operations. According
to the above explanation, then, prudence would be distinct from the
other three virtues: but these would not be distinct from one
another; for it is evident that one and the same virtue is both
habit, and virtue, and moral virtue.

Others, however, with better reason, take these four virtues,
according as they have their special determinate matter; each of its
own matter, in which special commendation is given to that general
condition from which the virtue's name is taken as stated above (A.
3). In this way it is clear that the aforesaid virtues are distinct
habits, differentiated in respect of their diverse objects.

Reply Obj. 1: Gregory is speaking of these four virtues in the first
sense given above. It may also be said that these four virtues
qualify one another by a kind of overflow. For the qualities of
prudence overflow on to the other virtues in so far as they are
directed by prudence. And each of the others overflows on to the
rest, for the reason that whoever can do what is harder, can do what
is less difficult. Wherefore whoever can curb his desires for the
pleasures of touch, so that they keep within bounds, which is a very
hard thing to do, for this very reason is more able to check his
daring in dangers of death, so as not to go too far, which is much
easier; and in this sense fortitude is said to be temperate. Again,
temperance is said to be brave, by reason of fortitude overflowing
into temperance: in so far, to wit, as he whose mind is strengthened
by fortitude against dangers of death, which is a matter of very
great difficulty, is more able to remain firm against the onslaught
of pleasures; for as Cicero says (De Offic. i), "it would be
inconsistent for a man to be unbroken by fear, and yet vanquished by
cupidity; or that he should be conquered by lust, after showing
himself to be unconquered by toil."

From this the Reply to the Second Objection is clear. For temperance
observes the mean in all things, and fortitude keeps the mind unbent
by the enticements of pleasures, either in so far as these virtues
are taken to denote certain general conditions of virtue, or in the
sense that they overflow on to one another, as explained above.

Reply Obj. 3: These four general conditions of virtue set down by the
Philosopher, are not proper to the aforesaid virtues. They may,
however, be appropriated to them, in the way above stated.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 61, Art. 5]

Whether the Cardinal Virtues Are Fittingly Divided into Social
Virtues, Perfecting, Perfect, and Exemplar Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that these four virtues are unfittingly
divided into exemplar virtues, perfecting virtues, perfect virtues,
and social virtues. For as Macrobius says (Super Somn. Scip. 1), the
"exemplar virtues are such as exist in the mind of God." Now the
Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 8) that "it is absurd to ascribe justice,
fortitude, temperance, and prudence to God." Therefore these virtues
cannot be exemplar.

Obj. 2: Further, the _perfect_ virtues are those which are without
any passion: for Macrobius says (Super Somn. Scip. 1) that "in a soul
that is cleansed, temperance has not to check worldly desires, for it
has forgotten all about them: fortitude knows nothing about the
passions; it does not have to conquer them." Now it was stated above
(Q. 59, A. 5) that the aforesaid virtues cannot be without passions.
Therefore there is no such thing as _perfect_ virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, he says (Macrobius: Super Somn. Scip. 1) that the
"perfecting" virtues are those of the man "who flies from human
affairs and devotes himself exclusively to the things of God." But it
seems wrong to do this, for Cicero says (De Offic. i): "I reckon that
it is not only unworthy of praise, but wicked for a man to say that
he despises what most men admire, viz. power and office." Therefore
there are no "perfecting" virtues.

Obj. 4: Further, he says (Macrobius: Super Somn. Scip. 1) that the
"social" virtues are those "whereby good men work for the good of
their country and for the safety of the city." But it is only legal
justice that is directed to the common weal, as the Philosopher states
(Ethic. v, 1). Therefore other virtues should not be called "social."

_On the contrary,_ Macrobius says (Super Somn. Scip. 1): "Plotinus,
together with Plato foremost among teachers of philosophy, says: 'The
four kinds of virtue are fourfold: In the first place there are
social* virtues; secondly, there are perfecting virtues [*Virtutes
purgatoriae: literally meaning, cleansing virtues]; thirdly, there
are perfect [*Virtutes purgati animi: literally, virtues of the clean
soul] virtues; and fourthly, there are exemplar virtues.'" [*Cf.
Chrysostom's fifteenth homily on St. Matthew, where he says: "The
gentle, the modest, the merciful, the just man does not shut up his
good deeds within himself . . . He that is clean of heart and
peaceful, and suffers persecution for the sake of the truth, lives
for the common weal."]

_I answer that,_ As Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. vi), "the soul
needs to follow something in order to give birth to virtue: this
something is God: if we follow Him we shall live aright."
Consequently the exemplar of human virtue must needs pre-exist in
God, just as in Him pre-exist the types of all things. Accordingly
virtue may be considered as existing originally in God, and thus we
speak of "exemplar" virtues: so that in God the Divine Mind itself
may be called prudence; while temperance is the turning of God's gaze
on Himself, even as in us it is that which conforms the appetite to
reason. God's fortitude is His unchangeableness; His justice is the
observance of the Eternal Law in His works, as Plotinus states (Cf.
Macrobius, Super Somn. Scip. 1).

Again, since man by his nature is a social [*See above note on
Chrysostom] animal, these virtues, in so far as they are in him
according to the condition of his nature, are called "social"
virtues; since it is by reason of them that man behaves himself well
in the conduct of human affairs. It is in this sense that we have
been speaking of these virtues until now.

But since it behooves a man to do his utmost to strive onward even to
Divine things, as even the Philosopher declares in _Ethic._ x, 7, and
as Scripture often admonishes us--for instance: "Be ye . . . perfect,
as your heavenly Father is perfect" (Matt. 5:48), we must needs place
some virtues between the social or human virtues, and the exemplar
virtues which are Divine. Now these virtues differ by reason of a
difference of movement and term: so that some are virtues of men who
are on their way and tending towards the Divine similitude; and these
are called "perfecting" virtues. Thus prudence, by contemplating the
things of God, counts as nothing all things of the world, and directs
all the thoughts of the soul to God alone: temperance, so far as
nature allows, neglects the needs of the body; fortitude prevents the
soul from being afraid of neglecting the body and rising to heavenly
things; and justice consists in the soul giving a whole-hearted
consent to follow the way thus proposed. Besides these there are the
virtues of those who have already attained to the Divine similitude:
these are called the "perfect virtues." Thus prudence sees nought
else but the things of God; temperance knows no earthly desires;
fortitude has no knowledge of passion; and justice, by imitating the
Divine Mind, is united thereto by an everlasting covenant. Such as
the virtues attributed to the Blessed, or, in this life, to some who
are at the summit of perfection.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher is speaking of these virtues according
as they relate to human affairs; for instance, justice, about buying
and selling; fortitude, about fear; temperance, about desires; for in
this sense it is absurd to attribute them to God.

Reply Obj. 2: Human virtues, that is to say, virtues of men living
together in this world, are about the passions. But the virtues of
those who have attained to perfect bliss are without passions. Hence
Plotinus says (Cf. Macrobius, Super Somn. Scip. 1) that "the social
virtues check the passions," i.e. they bring them to the relative
mean; "the second kind," viz. the perfecting virtues, "uproot them";
"the third kind," viz. the perfect virtues, "forget them; while it is
impious to mention them in connection with virtues of the fourth
kind," viz. the exemplar virtues. It may also be said that here he is
speaking of passions as denoting inordinate emotions.

Reply Obj. 3: To neglect human affairs when necessity forbids is
wicked; otherwise it is virtuous. Hence Cicero says a little earlier:
"Perhaps one should make allowances for those who by reason of their
exceptional talents have devoted themselves to learning; as also to
those who have retired from public life on account of failing health,
or for some other yet weightier motive; when such men yielded to
others the power and renown of authority." This agrees with what
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 19): "The love of truth demands a
hallowed leisure; charity necessitates good works. If no one lays
this burden on us we may devote ourselves to the study and
contemplation of truth; but if the burden is laid on us it is to be
taken up under the pressure of charity."

Reply Obj. 4: Legal justice alone regards the common weal directly:
but by commanding the other virtues it draws them all into the
service of the common weal, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. v,
1). For we must take note that it concerns the human virtues, as we
understand them here, to do well not only towards the community, but
also towards the parts of the community, viz. towards the household,
or even towards one individual.
________________________

QUESTION 62

OF THE THEOLOGICAL VIRTUES
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the Theological Virtues: under which head there
are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there are any theological virtues?

(2) Whether the theological virtues are distinct from the intellectual
and moral virtues?

(3) How many, and which are they?

(4) Of their order.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 62, Art. 1]

Whether There Are Any Theological Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are not any theological
virtues. For according to _Phys._ vii, text. 17, "virtue is the
disposition of a perfect thing to that which is best: and by perfect,
I mean that which is disposed according to nature." But that which is
Divine is above man's nature. Therefore the theological virtues are
not virtues of a man.

Obj. 2: Further, theological virtues are quasi-Divine virtues. But
the Divine virtues are exemplars, as stated above (Q. 61, A. 5),
which are not in us but in God. Therefore the theological virtues are
not virtues of man.

Obj. 3: Further, the theological virtues are so called because they
direct us to God, Who is the first beginning and last end of all
things. But by the very nature of his reason and will, man is
directed to his first beginning and last end. Therefore there is no
need for any habits of theological virtue, to direct the reason and
will to God.

_On the contrary,_ The precepts of the Law are about acts of virtue.
Now the Divine Law contains precepts about the acts of faith, hope,
and charity: for it is written (Ecclus. 2:8, seqq.): "Ye that fear
the Lord believe Him," and again, "hope in Him," and again, "love
Him." Therefore faith, hope, and charity are virtues directing us to
God. Therefore they are theological virtues.

_I answer that,_ Man is perfected by virtue, for those actions
whereby he is directed to happiness, as was explained above (Q. 5, A.
7). Now man's happiness is twofold, as was also stated above (Q. 5,
A. 5). One is proportionate to human nature, a happiness, to wit,
which man can obtain by means of his natural principles. The other is
a happiness surpassing man's nature, and which man can obtain by the
power of God alone, by a kind of participation of the Godhead, about
which it is written (2 Pet. 1:4) that by Christ we are made
"partakers of the Divine nature." And because such happiness
surpasses the capacity of human nature, man's natural principles
which enable him to act well according to his capacity, do not
suffice to direct man to this same happiness. Hence it is necessary
for man to receive from God some additional principles, whereby he
may be directed to supernatural happiness, even as he is directed to
his connatural end, by means of his natural principles, albeit not
without Divine assistance. Such like principles are called
"theological virtues": first, because their object is God, inasmuch
as they direct us aright to God: secondly, because they are infused
in us by God alone: thirdly, because these virtues are not made known
to us, save by Divine revelation, contained in Holy Writ.

Reply Obj. 1: A certain nature may be ascribed to a certain thing in
two ways. First, essentially: and thus these theological virtues
surpass the nature of man. Secondly, by participation, as kindled
wood partakes of the nature of fire: and thus, after a fashion, man
becomes a partaker of the Divine Nature, as stated above: so that
these virtues are proportionate to man in respect of the Nature of
which he is made a partaker.

Reply Obj. 2: These virtues are called Divine, not as though God were
virtuous by reason of them, but because of them God makes us
virtuous, and directs us to Himself. Hence they are not exemplar but
exemplate virtues.

Reply Obj. 3: The reason and will are naturally directed to
God, inasmuch as He is the beginning and end of nature, but in
proportion to nature. But the reason and will, according to their
nature, are not sufficiently directed to Him in so far as He is the
object of supernatural happiness.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 62, Art. 2]

Whether the Theological Virtues Are Distinct from the Intellectual
and Moral Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that the theological virtues are not
distinct from the moral and intellectual virtues. For the theological
virtues, if they be in a human soul, must needs perfect it, either as
to the intellective, or as to the appetitive part. Now the virtues
which perfect the intellective part are called intellectual; and the
virtues which perfect the appetitive part, are called moral.
Therefore, the theological virtues are not distinct from the moral
and intellectual virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, the theological virtues are those which direct us to
God. Now, among the intellectual virtues there is one which directs
us to God: this is wisdom, which is about Divine things, since it
considers the highest cause. Therefore the theological virtues are
not distinct from the intellectual virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine (De Moribus Eccl. xv) shows how the four
cardinal virtues are the "order of love." Now love is charity, which
is a theological virtue. Therefore the moral virtues are not distinct
from the theological.

_On the contrary,_ That which is above man's nature is distinct from
that which is according to his nature. But the theological virtues
are above man's nature; while the intellectual and moral virtues are
in proportion to his nature, as clearly shown above (Q. 58, A. 3).
Therefore they are distinct from one another.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 54, A. 2, ad 1), habits are
specifically distinct from one another in respect of the formal
difference of their objects. Now the object of the theological
virtues is God Himself, Who is the last end of all, as surpassing the
knowledge of our reason. On the other hand, the object of the
intellectual and moral virtues is something comprehensible to human
reason. Wherefore the theological virtues are specifically distinct
from the moral and intellectual virtues.

Reply Obj. 1: The intellectual and moral virtues perfect man's
intellect and appetite according to the capacity of human nature; the
theological virtues, supernaturally.

Reply Obj. 2: The wisdom which the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 3, 7)
reckons as an intellectual virtue, considers Divine things so far as
they are open to the research of human reason. Theological virtue, on
the other hand, is about those same things so far as they surpass
human reason.

Reply Obj. 3: Though charity is love, yet love is not always charity.
When, then, it is stated that every virtue is the order of love, this
can be understood either of love in the general sense, or of the love
of charity. If it be understood of love, commonly so called, then
each virtue is stated to be the order of love, in so far as each
cardinal virtue requires ordinate emotions; and love is the root and
cause of every emotion, as stated above (Q. 27, A. 4; Q. 28, A. 6, ad
2; Q. 41, A. 2, ad 1). If, however, it be understood of the love of
charity, it does not mean that every other virtue is charity
essentially: but that all other virtues depend on charity in some
way, as we shall show further on (Q. 65, AA. 2, 5; II-II, Q. 23, A.
7).
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 62, Art. 3]

Whether Faith, Hope, and Charity Are Fittingly Reckoned As
Theological Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith, hope, and charity are not
fittingly reckoned as three theological virtues. For the theological
virtues are in relation to Divine happiness, what the natural
inclination is in relation to the connatural end. Now among the
virtues directed to the connatural end there is but one natural
virtue, viz. the understanding of principles. Therefore there should
be but one theological virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, the theological virtues are more perfect than the
intellectual and moral virtues. Now faith is not reckoned among the
intellectual virtues, but is something less than a virtue, since it
is imperfect knowledge. Likewise hope is not reckoned among the moral
virtues, but is something less than a virtue, since it is a passion.
Much less therefore should they be reckoned as theological virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, the theological virtues direct man's soul to God.
Now man's soul cannot be directed to God, save through the
intellective part, wherein are the intellect and will. Therefore
there should be only two theological virtues, one perfecting the
intellect, the other, the will.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:13): "Now there remain
faith, hope, charity, these three."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the theological virtues
direct man to supernatural happiness in the same way as by the
natural inclination man is directed to his connatural end. Now the
latter happens in respect of two things. First, in respect of the
reason or intellect, in so far as it contains the first universal
principles which are known to us by the natural light of the
intellect, and which are reason's starting-point, both in speculative
and in practical matters. Secondly, through the rectitude of the will
which tends naturally to good as defined by reason.

But these two fall short of the order of supernatural happiness,
according to 1 Cor. 2:9: "The eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither hath it entered into the heart of man, what things God hath
prepared for them that love Him." Consequently in respect of both the
above things man needed to receive in addition something supernatural
to direct him to a supernatural end. First, as regards the intellect,
man receives certain supernatural principles, which are held by means
of a Divine light: these are the articles of faith, about which is
faith. Secondly, the will is directed to this end, both as to that
end as something attainable--and this pertains to hope--and as to a
certain spiritual union, whereby the will is, so to speak,
transformed into that end--and this belongs to charity. For the
appetite of a thing is moved and tends towards its connatural end
naturally; and this movement is due to a certain conformity of the
thing with its end.

Reply Obj. 1: The intellect requires intelligible species whereby to
understand: consequently there is need of a natural habit in addition
to the power. But the very nature of the will suffices for it to be
directed naturally to the end, both as to the intention of the end
and as to its conformity with the end. But the nature of the power is
insufficient in either of these respects, for the will to be directed
to things that are above its nature. Consequently there was need for
an additional supernatural habit in both respects.

Reply Obj. 2: Faith and hope imply a certain imperfection: since
faith is of things unseen, and hope, of things not possessed. Hence
faith and hope, in things that are subject to human power, fall short
of the notion of virtue. But faith and hope in things which are above
the capacity of human nature surpass all virtue that is in proportion
to man, according to 1 Cor. 1:25: "The weakness of God is stronger
than men."

Reply Obj. 3: Two things pertain to the appetite, viz. movement to
the end, and conformity with the end by means of love. Hence there
must needs be two theological virtues in the human appetite, namely,
hope and charity.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 62, Art. 4]

Whether Faith Precedes Hope, and Hope Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that the order of the theological virtues
is not that faith precedes hope, and hope charity. For the root
precedes that which grows from it. Now charity is the root of all the
virtues, according to Eph. 3:17: "Being rooted and founded in
charity." Therefore charity precedes the others.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i): "A man cannot
love what he does not believe to exist. But if he believes and loves,
by doing good works he ends in hoping." Therefore it seems that faith
precedes charity, and charity hope.

Obj. 3: Further, love is the principle of all our emotions, as stated
above (A. 2, ad 3). Now hope is a kind of emotion, since it is a
passion, as stated above (Q. 25, A. 2). Therefore charity, which is
love, precedes hope.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle enumerates them thus (1 Cor. 13:13):
"Now there remain faith, hope, charity."

_I answer that,_ Order is twofold: order of generation, and order of
perfection. By order of generation, in respect of which matter
precedes form, and the imperfect precedes the perfect, in one same
subject faith precedes hope, and hope charity, as to their acts:
because habits are all infused together. For the movement of the
appetite cannot tend to anything, either by hoping or loving, unless
that thing be apprehended by the sense or by the intellect. Now it is
by faith that the intellect apprehends the object of hope and love.
Hence in the order of generation, faith precedes hope and charity. In
like manner a man loves a thing because he apprehends it as his good.
Now from the very fact that a man hopes to be able to obtain some
good through someone, he looks on the man in whom he hopes as a good
of his own. Hence for the very reason that a man hopes in someone, he
proceeds to love him: so that in the order of generation, hope
precedes charity as regards their respective acts.

But in the order of perfection, charity precedes faith and hope:
because both faith and hope are quickened by charity, and receive
from charity their full complement as virtues. For thus charity is
the mother and the root of all the virtues, inasmuch as it is the
form of them all, as we shall state further on (II-II, Q. 23, A. 8).

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Augustine is speaking of that hope whereby a man hopes
to obtain bliss through the merits which he has already: this belongs
to hope quickened by and following charity. But it is possible for a
man before having charity, to hope through merits not already
possessed, but which he hopes to possess.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 40, A. 7), in treating of the
passions, hope regards two things. One as its principal object, viz.
the good hoped for. With regard to this, love always precedes hope:
for good is never hoped for unless it be desired and loved. Hope also
regards the person from whom a man hopes to be able to obtain some
good. With regard to this, hope precedes love at first; though
afterwards hope is increased by love. Because from the fact that a
man thinks that he can obtain a good through someone, he begins to
love him: and from the fact that he loves him, he then hopes all the
more in him.
________________________

QUESTION 63

OF THE CAUSE OF VIRTUES
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the cause of virtues; and under this head there
are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether virtue is in us by nature?

(2) Whether any virtue is caused in us by habituation?

(3) Whether any moral virtues are in us by infusion?

(4) Whether virtue acquired by habituation, is of the same species
as infused virtue?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 63, Art. 1]

Whether Virtue Is in Us by Nature?

Objection 1: It would seem that virtue is in us by nature. For
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 14): "Virtues are natural to us
and are equally in all of us." And Antony says in his sermon to the
monks: "If the will contradicts nature it is perverse, if it follow
nature it is virtuous." Moreover, a gloss on Matt. 4:23, "Jesus went
about," etc., says: "He taught them natural virtues, i.e. chastity,
justice, humility, which man possesses naturally."

Obj. 2: Further, the virtuous good consists in accord with reason, as
was clearly shown above (Q. 55, A. 4, ad 2). But that which accords
with reason is natural to man; since reason is part of man's nature.
Therefore virtue is in man by nature.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is in us from birth is said to be natural
to us. Now virtues are in some from birth: for it is written (Job
31:18): "From my infancy mercy grew up with me; and it came out with
me from my mother's womb." Therefore virtue is in man by nature.

_On the contrary,_ Whatever is in man by nature is common to all men,
and is not taken away by sin, since even in the demons natural gifts
remain, as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). But virtue is not in all
men; and is cast out by sin. Therefore it is not in man by nature.

_I answer that,_ With regard to corporeal forms, it has been
maintained by some that they are wholly from within, by those, for
instance, who upheld the theory of "latent forms" [*Anaxagoras; Cf.
I, Q. 45, A. 8; Q. 65, A. 4]. Others held that forms are entirely
from without, those, for instance, who thought that corporeal forms
originated from some separate cause. Others, however, esteemed that
they are partly from within, in so far as they pre-exist potentially
in matter; and partly from without, in so far as they are brought
into act by the agent.

In like manner with regard to sciences and virtues, some held that
they are wholly from within, so that all virtues and sciences would
pre-exist in the soul naturally, but that the hindrances to science
and virtue, which are due to the soul being weighed down by the body,
are removed by study and practice, even as iron is made bright by
being polished. This was the opinion of the Platonists. Others said
that they are wholly from without, being due to the inflow of the
active intellect, as Avicenna maintained. Others said that sciences
and virtues are within us by nature, so far as we are adapted to
them, but not in their perfection: this is the teaching of the
Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 1), and is nearer the truth.

To make this clear, it must be observed that there are two ways in
which something is said to be natural to a man; one is according to
his specific nature, the other according to his individual nature.
And, since each thing derives its species from its form, and its
individuation from matter, and, again, since man's form is his
rational soul, while his matter is his body, whatever belongs to him
in respect of his rational soul, is natural to him in respect of his
specific nature; while whatever belongs to him in respect of the
particular temperament of his body, is natural to him in respect of
his individual nature. For whatever is natural to man in respect of
his body, considered as part of his species, is to be referred, in a
way, to the soul, in so far as this particular body is adapted to
this particular soul.

In both these ways virtue is natural to man inchoatively. This is so
in respect of the specific nature, in so far as in man's reason are
to be found instilled by nature certain naturally known principles of
both knowledge and action, which are the nurseries of intellectual
and moral virtues, and in so far as there is in the will a natural
appetite for good in accordance with reason. Again, this is so in
respect of the individual nature, in so far as by reason of a
disposition in the body, some are disposed either well or ill to
certain virtues: because, to wit, certain sensitive powers are acts
of certain parts of the body, according to the disposition of which
these powers are helped or hindered in the exercise of their acts,
and, in consequence, the rational powers also, which the aforesaid
sensitive powers assist. In this way one man has a natural aptitude
for science, another for fortitude, another for temperance: and in
these ways, both intellectual and moral virtues are in us by way of a
natural aptitude, inchoatively, but not perfectly, since nature is
determined to one, while the perfection of these virtues does not
depend on one particular mode of action, but on various modes, in
respect of the various matters, which constitute the sphere of
virtue's action, and according to various circumstances.

It is therefore evident that all virtues are in us by nature,
according to aptitude and inchoation, but not according to
perfection, except the theological virtues, which are entirely from
without.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections. For the first two
argue about the nurseries of virtue which are in us by nature,
inasmuch as we are rational beings. The third objection must be taken
in the sense that, owing to the natural disposition which the body
has from birth, one has an aptitude for pity, another for living
temperately, another for some other virtue.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 63, Art. 2]

Whether Any Virtue Is Caused in Us by Habituation?

Objection 1: It would seem that virtues can not be caused in us by
habituation. Because a gloss of Augustine [*Cf. Lib. Sentent.
Prosperi cvi.] commenting on Rom. 14:23, "All that is not of faith is
sin," says: "The whole life of an unbeliever is a sin: and there is
no good without the Sovereign Good. Where knowledge of the truth is
lacking, virtue is a mockery even in the best behaved people." Now
faith cannot be acquired by means of works, but is caused in us by
God, according to Eph. 2:8: "By grace you are saved through faith."
Therefore no acquired virtue can be in us by habituation.

Obj. 2: Further, sin and virtue are contraries, so that they are
incompatible. Now man cannot avoid sin except by the grace of God,
according to Wis. 8:21: "I knew that I could not otherwise be
continent, except God gave it." Therefore neither can any virtues be
caused in us by habituation, but only by the gift of God.

Obj. 3: Further, actions which lead toward virtue, lack the
perfection of virtue. But an effect cannot be more perfect than its
cause. Therefore a virtue cannot be caused by actions that precede it.

_On the contrary,_ Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that good is more
efficacious than evil. But vicious habits are caused by evil acts.
Much more, therefore, can virtuous habits be caused by good acts.

_I answer that,_ We have spoken above (Q. 51, AA. 2, 3) in a general
way about the production of habits from acts; and speaking now in a
special way of this matter in relation to virtue, we must take note
that, as stated above (Q. 55, AA. 3, 4), man's virtue perfects him in
relation to good. Now since the notion of good consists in "mode,
species, and order," as Augustine states (De Nat. Boni. iii) or in
"number, weight, and measure," as expressed in Wis. 11:21, man's good
must needs be appraised with respect to some rule. Now this rule is
twofold, as stated above (Q. 19, AA. 3, 4), viz. human reason and
Divine Law. And since Divine Law is the higher rule, it extends to
more things, so that whatever is ruled by human reason, is ruled by
the Divine Law too; but the converse does not hold.

It follows that human virtue directed to the good which is defined
according to the rule of human reason can be caused by human acts:
inasmuch as such acts proceed from reason, by whose power and rule
the aforesaid good is established. On the other hand, virtue which
directs man to good as defined by the Divine Law, and not by human
reason, cannot be caused by human acts, the principle of which is
reason, but is produced in us by the Divine operation alone. Hence
Augustine in giving the definition of the latter virtue inserts the
words, "which God works in us without us" (Super Ps. 118, Serm.
xxvi). It is also of these virtues that the First Objection holds
good.

Reply Obj. 2: Mortal sin is incompatible with divinely infused
virtue, especially if this be considered in its perfect state. But
actual sin, even mortal, is compatible with humanly acquired virtue;
because the use of a habit in us is subject to our will, as stated
above (Q. 49, A. 3): and one sinful act does not destroy a habit of
acquired virtue, since it is not an act but a habit, that is directly
contrary to a habit. Wherefore, though man cannot avoid mortal sin
without grace, so as never to sin mortally, yet he is not hindered
from acquiring a habit of virtue, whereby he may abstain from evil in
the majority of cases, and chiefly in matters most opposed to reason.
There are also certain mortal sins which man can nowise avoid without
grace, those, namely, which are directly opposed to the theological
virtues, which are in us through the gift of grace. This, however,
will be more fully explained later (Q. 109, A. 4).

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (A. 1; Q. 51, A. 1), certain seeds or
principles of acquired virtue pre-exist in us by nature. These
principles are more excellent than the virtues acquired through them:
thus the understanding of speculative principles is more excellent
than the science of conclusions, and the natural rectitude of the
reason is more excellent than the rectification of the appetite which
results through the appetite partaking of reason, which rectification
belongs to moral virtue. Accordingly human acts, in so far as they
proceed from higher principles, can cause acquired human virtues.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 63, Art. 3]

Whether Any Moral Virtues Are in Us by Infusion?

Objection 1: It would seem that no virtues besides the theological
virtues are infused in us by God. Because God does not do by Himself,
save perhaps sometimes miraculously, those things that can be done by
second causes; for, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv), "it is God's
rule to bring about extremes through the mean." Now intellectual and
moral virtues can be caused in us by our acts, as stated above (A.
2). Therefore it is not reasonable that they should be caused in us
by infusion.

Obj. 2: Further, much less superfluity is found in God's works than
in the works of nature. Now the theological virtues suffice to direct
us to supernatural good. Therefore there are no other supernatural
virtues needing to be caused in us by God.

Obj. 3: Further, nature does not employ two means where one suffices:
much less does God. But God sowed the seeds of virtue in our souls,
according to a gloss on Heb. 1 [*Cf. Jerome on Gal. 1: 15, 16].
Therefore it is unfitting for Him to cause in us other virtues by
means of infusion.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Wis. 8:7): "She teacheth temperance
and prudence and justice and fortitude."

_I answer that,_ Effects must needs be proportionate to their causes
and principles. Now all virtues, intellectual and moral, that are
acquired by our actions, arise from certain natural principles
pre-existing in us, as above stated (A. 1; Q. 51, A. 1): instead of
which natural principles, God bestows on us the theological virtues,
whereby we are directed to a supernatural end, as stated (Q. 62, A.
1). Wherefore we need to receive from God other habits corresponding,
in due proportion, to the theological virtues, which habits are to
the theological virtues, what the moral and intellectual virtues are
to the natural principles of virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Some moral and intellectual virtues can indeed be
caused in us by our actions: but such are not proportionate to the
theological virtues. Therefore it was necessary for us to receive,
from God immediately, others that are proportionate to these virtues.

Reply Obj. 2: The theological virtues direct us sufficiently to our
supernatural end, inchoatively: i.e. to God Himself immediately. But
the soul needs further to be perfected by infused virtues in regard
to other things, yet in relation to God.

Reply Obj. 3: The power of those naturally instilled principles does
not extend beyond the capacity of nature. Consequently man needs in
addition to be perfected by other principles in relation to his
supernatural end.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 63, Art. 4]

Whether Virtue by Habituation Belongs to the Same Species As Infused
Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that infused virtue does not differ in
species from acquired virtue. Because acquired and infused virtues,
according to what has been said (A. 3), do not differ seemingly, save
in relation to the last end. Now human habits and acts are specified,
not by their last, but by their proximate end. Therefore the infused
moral or intellectual virtue does not differ from the acquired virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, habits are known by their acts. But the act of
infused and acquired temperance is the same, viz. to moderate desires
of touch. Therefore they do not differ in species.

Obj. 3: Further, acquired and infused virtue differ as that which is
wrought by God immediately, from that which is wrought by a creature.
But the man whom God made, is of the same species as a man begotten
naturally; and the eye which He gave to the man born blind, as one
produced by the power of generation. Therefore it seems that acquired
and infused virtue belong to the same species.

_On the contrary,_ Any change introduced into the difference
expressed in a definition involves a difference of species. But the
definition of infused virtue contains the words, "which God works in
us without us," as stated above (Q. 55, A. 4). Therefore acquired
virtue, to which these words cannot apply, is not of the same species
as infused virtue.

_I answer that,_ There is a twofold specific difference among habits.
The first, as stated above (Q. 54, A. 2; Q. 56, A. 2; Q. 60, A. 1),
is taken from the specific and formal aspects of their objects. Now
the object of every virtue is a good considered as in that virtue's
proper matter: thus the object of temperance is a good in respect of
the pleasures connected with the concupiscence of touch. The formal
aspect of this object is from reason which fixes the mean in these
concupiscences: while the material element is something on the part
of the concupiscences. Now it is evident that the mean that is
appointed in such like concupiscences according to the rule of human
reason, is seen under a different aspect from the mean which is fixed
according to Divine rule. For instance, in the consumption of food,
the mean fixed by human reason, is that food should not harm the
health of the body, nor hinder the use of reason: whereas, according
to the Divine rule, it behooves man to "chastise his body, and bring
it into subjection" (1 Cor. 9:27), by abstinence in food, drink and
the like. It is therefore evident that infused and acquired
temperance differ in species; and the same applies to the other
virtues.

The other specific difference among habits is taken from the things
to which they are directed: for a man's health and a horse's are not
of the same species, on account of the difference between the natures
to which their respective healths are directed. In the same sense,
the Philosopher says (Polit. iii, 3) that citizens have diverse
virtues according as they are well directed to diverse forms of
government. In the same way, too, those infused moral virtues,
whereby men behave well in respect of their being "fellow-citizens
with the saints, and of the household [Douay: 'domestics'] of God"
(Eph. 2:19), differ from the acquired virtues, whereby man behaves
well in respect of human affairs.

Reply Obj. 1: Infused and acquired virtue differ not only in relation
to the ultimate end, but also in relation to their proper objects, as
stated.

Reply Obj. 2: Both acquired and infused temperance moderate desires
for pleasures of touch, but for different reasons, as stated:
wherefore their respective acts are not identical.

Reply Obj. 3: God gave the man born blind an eye for the same act as
the act for which other eyes are formed naturally: consequently it
was of the same species. It would be the same if God wished to give a
man miraculously virtues, such as those that are acquired by acts.
But the case is not so in the question before us, as stated.
________________________

QUESTION 64

OF THE MEAN OF VIRTUE
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the properties of virtues: and (1) the mean of
virtue, (2) the connection between virtues, (3) equality of virtues,
(4) the duration of virtues. Under the first head there are four
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether moral virtue observes the mean?

(2) Whether the mean of moral virtue is the real mean or the rational
mean?

(3) Whether the intellectual virtues observe the mean?

(4) Whether the theological virtues do?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 64, Art. 1]

Whether Moral Virtues Observe the Mean?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtue does not observe the
mean. For the nature of a mean is incompatible with that which is
extreme. Now the nature of virtue is to be something extreme; for it
is stated in _De Coelo_ i that "virtue is the limit of power."
Therefore moral virtue does not observe the mean.

Obj. 2: Further, the maximum is not a mean. Now some moral virtues
tend to a maximum: for instance, magnanimity to very great honors,
and magnificence to very large expenditure, as stated in _Ethic._ iv,
2, 3. Therefore not every moral virtue observes the mean.

Obj. 3: Further, if it is essential to a moral virtue to observe the
mean, it follows that a moral virtue is not perfected, but the
contrary corrupted, through tending to something extreme. Now some
moral virtues are perfected by tending to something extreme; thus
virginity, which abstains from all sexual pleasure, observes the
extreme, and is the most perfect chastity: and to give all to the
poor is the most perfect mercy or liberality. Therefore it seems that
it is not essential to moral virtue that it should observe the mean.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6) that "moral
virtue is a habit of choosing the mean."

_I answer that,_ As already explained (Q. 55, A. 3), the nature of
virtue is that it should direct man to good. Now moral virtue is
properly a perfection of the appetitive part of the soul in regard to
some determinate matter: and the measure or rule of the appetitive
movement in respect of appetible objects is the reason. But the good
of that which is measured or ruled consists in its conformity with
its rule: thus the good things made by art is that they follow the
rule of art. Consequently, in things of this sort, evil consists in
discordance from their rule or measure. Now this may happen either by
their exceeding the measure or by their falling short of it; as is
clearly the case in all things ruled or measured. Hence it is evident
that the good of moral virtue consists in conformity with the rule of
reason. Now it is clear that between excess and deficiency the mean
is equality or conformity. Therefore it is evident that moral virtue
observes the mean.

Reply Obj. 1: Moral virtue derives goodness from the rule of reason,
while its matter consists in passions or operations. If therefore we
compare moral virtue to reason, then, if we look at that which it has
of reason, it holds the position of one extreme, viz. conformity;
while excess and defect take the position of the other extreme, viz.
deformity. But if we consider moral virtue in respect of its matter,
then it holds the position of mean, in so far as it makes the passion
conform to the rule of reason. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii,
6) that "virtue, as to its essence, is a mean state," in so far as
the rule of virtue is imposed on its proper matter: "but it is an
extreme in reference to the 'best' and the 'excellent, '" viz. as to
its conformity with reason.

Reply Obj. 2: In actions and passions the mean and the extremes
depend on various circumstances: hence nothing hinders something from
being extreme in a particular virtue as to one circumstance, while
the same thing is a mean in respect of other circumstances, through
being in conformity with reason. This is the case with magnanimity
and magnificence. For if we look at the absolute quantity of the
respective objects of these virtues, we shall call it an extreme and
a maximum: but if we consider the quantity in relation to other
circumstances, then it has the character of a mean: since these
virtues tend to this maximum in accordance with the rule of reason,
i.e. _where_ it is right, _when_ it is right, and for an _end_ that
is right. There will be excess, if one tends to this maximum _when_
it is not right, or _where_ it is not right, or for an undue _end;_
and there will be deficiency if one fails to tend thereto _where_ one
ought, and _when_ one ought. This agrees with the saying of the
Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 3) that the "magnanimous man observes the
extreme in quantity, but the mean in the right mode of his action."

Reply Obj. 3: The same is to be said of virginity and poverty as of
magnanimity. For virginity abstains from all sexual matters, and
poverty from all wealth, for a right end, and in a right manner, i.e.
according to God's word, and for the sake of eternal life. But if
this be done in an undue manner, i.e. out of unlawful superstition,
or again for vainglory, it will be in excess. And if it be not done
when it ought to be done, or as it ought to be done, it is a vice by
deficiency: for instance, in those who break their vows of virginity
or poverty.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 64, Art. 2]

Whether the Mean of Moral Virtue Is the Real Mean, or the Rational
Mean?

Objection 1: It would seem that the mean of moral virtue is not the
rational mean, but the real mean. For the good of moral virtue
consists in its observing the mean. Now, good, as stated in _Metaph._
ii, text. 8, is in things themselves. Therefore the mean of moral
virtue is a real mean.

Obj. 2: Further, the reason is a power of apprehension. But moral
virtue does not observe a mean between apprehensions, but rather a
mean between operations or passions. Therefore the mean of moral
virtue is not the rational, but the real mean.

Obj. 3: Further, a mean that is observed according to arithmetical or
geometrical proportion is a real mean. Now such is the mean of
justice, as stated in _Ethic._ v, 3. Therefore the mean of moral
virtue is not the rational, but the real mean.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6) that "moral
virtue observes the mean fixed, in our regard, by reason."

_I answer that,_ The rational mean can be understood in two ways.
First, according as the mean is observed in the act itself of reason,
as though the very act of reason were made to observe the mean: in
this sense, since moral virtue perfects not the act of reason, but
the act of the appetitive power, the mean of moral virtue is not the
rational mean. Secondly, the mean of reason may be considered as that
which the reason puts into some particular matter. In this sense
every mean of moral virtue is a rational mean, since, as above stated
(A. 1), moral virtue is said to observe the mean, through conformity
with right reason.

But it happens sometimes that the rational mean is also the real
mean: in which case the mean of moral virtue is the real mean, for
instance, in justice. On the other hand, sometimes the rational mean
is not the real mean, but is considered in relation to us: and such
is the mean in all the other moral virtues. The reason for this is
that justice is about operations, which deal with external things,
wherein the right has to be established simply and absolutely, as
stated above (Q. 60, A. 2): wherefore the rational mean in justice is
the same as the real mean, in so far, to wit as justice gives to each
one his due, neither more nor less. But the other moral virtues deal
with interior passions wherein the right cannot be established in the
same way, since men are variously situated in relation to their
passions; hence the rectitude of reason has to be established in the
passions, with due regard to us, who are moved in respect of the
passions.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections. For the first two
arguments take the rational mean as being in the very act of reason,
while the third argues from the mean of justice.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 64, Art. 3]

Whether the Intellectual Virtues Observe the Mean?

Objection 1: It would seem that the intellectual virtues do not
observe the mean. Because moral virtue observes the mean by
conforming to the rule of reason. But the intellectual virtues are in
reason itself, so that they seem to have no higher rule. Therefore
the intellectual virtues do not observe the mean.

Obj. 2: Further, the mean of moral virtue is fixed by an intellectual
virtue: for it is stated in _Ethic._ ii, 6, that "virtue observes the
mean appointed by reason, as a prudent man would appoint it." If
therefore intellectual virtue also observe the mean, this mean will
have to be appointed for them by another virtue, so that there would
be an indefinite series of virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, a mean is, properly speaking, between contraries, as
the Philosopher explains (Metaph. x, text. 22, 23). But there seems
to be no contrariety in the intellect; since contraries themselves,
as they are in the intellect, are not in opposition to one another,
but are understood together, as white and black, healthy and sick.
Therefore there is no mean in the intellectual virtues.

_On the contrary,_ Art is an intellectual virtue; and yet there is a
mean in art (Ethic. ii, 6). Therefore also intellectual virtue
observes the mean.

_I answer that,_ The good of anything consists in its observing the
mean, by conforming with a rule or measure in respect of which it may
happen to be excessive or deficient, as stated above (A. 1). Now
intellectual virtue, like moral virtue, is directed to the good, as
stated above (Q. 56, A. 3). Hence the good of an intellectual virtue
consists in observing the mean, in so far as it is subject to a
measure. Now the good of intellectual virtue is the true; in the case
of contemplative virtue, it is the true taken absolutely (Ethic. vi,
2); in the case of practical virtue, it is the true in conformity
with a right appetite.

Now truth apprehended by our intellect, if we consider it absolutely,
is measured by things; since things are the measure of our intellect,
as stated in _Metaph._ x, text. 5; because there is truth in what we
think or say, according as the thing is so or not. Accordingly the
good of speculative intellectual virtue consists in a certain mean,
by way of conformity with things themselves, in so far as the
intellect expresses them as being what they are, or as not being what
they are not: and it is in this that the nature of truth consists.
There will be excess if something false is affirmed, as though
something were, which in reality it is not: and there will be
deficiency if something is falsely denied, and declared not to be,
whereas in reality it is.

The truth of practical intellectual virtue, if we consider it in
relation to things, is by way of that which is measured; so that both
in practical and in speculative intellectual virtues, the mean
consists in conformity with things. But if we consider it in relation
to the appetite, it has the character of a rule and measure.
Consequently the rectitude of reason is the mean of moral virtue, and
also the mean of prudence--of prudence as ruling and measuring, of
moral virtue, as ruled and measured by that mean. In like manner the
difference between excess and deficiency is to be applied in both
cases.

Reply Obj. 1: Intellectual virtues also have their measure, as
stated, and they observe the mean according as they conform to that
measure.

Reply Obj. 2: There is no need for an indefinite series of virtues:
because the measure and rule of intellectual virtue is not another
kind of virtue, but things themselves.

Reply Obj. 3: The things themselves that are contrary have no
contrariety in the mind, because one is the reason for knowing the
other: nevertheless there is in the intellect contrariety of
affirmation and negation, which are contraries, as stated at the end
of _Peri Hermen[e]ias._ For though "to be" and "not to be" are not in
contrary, but in contradictory opposition to one another, so long as
we consider their signification in things themselves, for on the one
hand we have "being" and on the other we have simply "non-being"; yet
if we refer them to the act of the mind, there is something positive
in both cases. Hence "to be" and "not to be" are contradictory: but
the opinion stating that "good is good" is contrary to the opinion
stating that "good is not good": and between two such contraries
intellectual virtue observes the mean.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 64, Art. 4]

Whether the Theological Virtues Observe the Mean?

Objection 1: It would seem that theological virtue observes the mean.
For the good of other virtues consists in their observing the mean.
Now the theological virtues surpass the others in goodness. Therefore
much more does theological virtue observe the mean.

Obj. 2: Further, the mean of moral virtue depends on the appetite
being ruled by reason; while the mean of intellectual virtue consists
in the intellect being measured by things. Now theological virtue
perfects both intellect and appetite, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 3).
Therefore theological virtue also observes the mean.

Obj. 3: Further, hope, which is a theological virtue, is a mean
between despair and presumption. Likewise faith holds a middle course
between contrary heresies, as Boethius states (De Duab. Natur. vii):
thus, by confessing one Person and two natures in Christ, we observe
the mean between the heresy of Nestorius, who maintained the
existence of two persons and two natures, and the heresy of Eutyches,
who held to one person and one nature. Therefore theological virtue
observes the mean.

_On the contrary,_ Wherever virtue observes the mean it is possible
to sin by excess as well as by deficiency. But there is no sinning by
excess against God, Who is the object of theological virtue: for it
is written (Ecclus. 43:33): "Blessing the Lord, exalt Him as much as
you can: for He is above all praise." Therefore theological virtue
does not observe the mean.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the mean of virtue depends
on conformity with virtue's rule or measure, in so far as one may
exceed or fall short of that rule. Now the measure of theological
virtue may be twofold. One is taken from the very nature of virtue,
and thus the measure and rule of theological virtue is God Himself:
because our faith is ruled according to Divine truth; charity,
according to His goodness; hope, according to the immensity of His
omnipotence and loving kindness. This measure surpasses all human
power: so that never can we love God as much as He ought to be loved,
nor believe and hope in Him as much as we should. Much less therefore
can there be excess in such things. Accordingly the good of such
virtues does not consist in a mean, but increases the more we
approach to the summit.

The other rule or measure of theological virtue is by comparison with
us: for although we cannot be borne towards God as much as we ought,
yet we should approach to Him by believing, hoping and loving,
according to the measure of our condition. Consequently it is
possible to find a mean and extremes in theological virtue,
accidentally and in reference to us.

Reply Obj. 1: The good of intellectual and moral virtues consists in
a mean of reason by conformity with a measure that may be exceeded:
whereas this is not so in the case of theological virtue, considered
in itself, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Moral and intellectual virtues perfect our intellect
and appetite in relation to a created measure and rule; whereas the
theological virtues perfect them in relation to an uncreated rule and
measure. Wherefore the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 3: Hope observes the mean between presumption and
despair, in relation to us, in so far, to wit, as a man is said to be
presumptuous, through hoping to receive from God a good in excess of
his condition; or to despair through failing to hope for that which
according to his condition he might hope for. But there can be no
excess of hope in comparison with God, Whose goodness is infinite. In
like manner faith holds a middle course between contrary heresies, not
by comparison with its object, which is God, in Whom we cannot believe
too much; but in so far as human opinion itself takes a middle
position between contrary opinions, as was explained above.
________________________

QUESTION 65

OF THE CONNECTION OF VIRTUES
(In Five Articles)

We must now consider the connection of virtues: under which head
there are five points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the moral virtues are connected with one another?

(2) Whether the moral virtues can be without charity?

(3) Whether charity can be without them?

(4) Whether faith and hope can be without charity?

(5) Whether charity can be without them?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 65, Art. 1]

Whether the Moral Virtues Are Connected with One Another?

Objection 1: It would seem that the moral virtues are not connected
with one another. Because moral virtues are sometimes caused by the
exercise of acts, as is proved in _Ethic._ ii, 1, 2. But man can
exercise himself in the acts of one virtue, without exercising
himself in the acts of some other virtue. Therefore it is possible to
have one moral virtue without another.

Obj. 2: Further, magnificence and magnanimity are moral virtues. Now
a man may have other moral virtues without having magnificence or
magnanimity: for the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 2, 3) that "a poor
man cannot be magnificent," and yet he may have other virtues; and
(Ethic. iv) that "he who is worthy of small things, and so accounts
his worth, is modest, but not magnanimous." Therefore the moral
virtues are not connected with one another.

Obj. 3: Further, as the moral virtues perfect the appetitive part of
the soul, so do the intellectual virtues perfect the intellective
part. But the intellectual virtues are not mutually connected: since
we may have one science, without having another. Neither, therefore,
are the moral virtues connected with one another.

Obj. 4: Further, if the moral virtues are mutually connected, this
can only be because they are united together in prudence. But this
does not suffice to connect the moral virtues together. For,
seemingly, one may be prudent about things to be done in relation to
one virtue, without being prudent in those that concern another
virtue: even as one may have the art of making certain things,
without the art of making certain others. Now prudence is right
reason about things to be done. Therefore the moral virtues are not
necessarily connected with one another.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says on Luke 6:20: "The virtues are
connected and linked together, so that whoever has one, is seen to
have several": and Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 4) that "the virtues
that reside in the human mind are quite inseparable from one
another": and Gregory says (Moral. xxii, 1) that "one virtue without
the other is either of no account whatever, or very imperfect": and
Cicero says (Quaest. Tusc. ii): "If you confess to not having one
particular virtue, it must needs be that you have none at all."

_I answer that,_ Moral virtue may be considered either as perfect or
as imperfect. An imperfect moral virtue, temperance for instance, or
fortitude, is nothing but an inclination in us to do some kind of
good deed, whether such inclination be in us by nature or by
habituation. If we take the moral virtues in this way, they are not
connected: since we find men who, by natural temperament or by being
accustomed, are prompt in doing deeds of liberality, but are not
prompt in doing deeds of chastity.

But the perfect moral virtue is a habit that inclines us to do a good
deed well; and if we take moral virtues in this way, we must say that
they are connected, as nearly as all are agreed in saying. For this
two reasons are given, corresponding to the different ways of
assigning the distinction of the cardinal virtues. For, as we stated
above (Q. 61, AA. 3, 4), some distinguish them according to certain
general properties of the virtues: for instance, by saying that
discretion belongs to prudence, rectitude to justice, moderation to
temperance, and strength of mind to fortitude, in whatever matter we
consider these properties to be. In this way the reason for the
connection is evident: for strength of mind is not commended as
virtuous, if it be without moderation or rectitude or discretion: and
so forth. This, too, is the reason assigned for the connection by
Gregory, who says (Moral. xxii, 1) that "a virtue cannot be perfect"
as a virtue, "if isolated from the others: for there can be no true
prudence without temperance, justice and fortitude": and he continues
to speak in like manner of the other virtues (cf. Q. 61, A. 4, Obj.
1). Augustine also gives the same reason (De Trin. vi, 4).

Others, however, differentiate these virtues in respect of their
matters, and it is in this way that Aristotle assigns the reason for
their connection (Ethic. vi, 13). Because, as stated above (Q. 58, A.
4), no moral virtue can be without prudence; since it is proper to
moral virtue to make a right choice, for it is an elective habit. Now
right choice requires not only the inclination to a due end, which
inclination is the direct outcome of moral virtue, but also correct
choice of things conducive to the end, which choice is made by
prudence, that counsels, judges, and commands in those things that
are directed to the end. In like manner one cannot have prudence
unless one has the moral virtues: since prudence is "right reason
about things to be done," and the starting point of reason is the end
of the thing to be done, to which end man is rightly disposed by
moral virtue. Hence, just as we cannot have speculative science
unless we have the understanding of the principles, so neither can we
have prudence without the moral virtues: and from this it follows
clearly that the moral virtues are connected with one another.

Reply Obj. 1: Some moral virtues perfect man as regards his general
state, in other words, with regard to those things which have to be
done in every kind of human life. Hence man needs to exercise himself
at the same time in the matters of all moral virtues. And if he
exercise himself, by good deeds, in all such matters, he will acquire
the habits of all the moral virtues. But if he exercise himself by
good deeds in regard to one matter, but not in regard to another, for
instance, by behaving well in matters of anger, but not in matters of
concupiscence; he will indeed acquire a certain habit of restraining
his anger; but this habit will lack the nature of virtue, through the
absence of prudence, which is wanting in matters of concupiscence. In
the same way, natural inclinations fail to have the complete
character of virtue, if prudence be lacking.

But there are some moral virtues which perfect man with regard to
some eminent state, such as magnificence and magnanimity; and since
it does not happen to all in common to be exercised in the matter of
such virtues, it is possible for a man to have the other moral
virtues, without actually having the habits of these
virtues--provided we speak of acquired virtue. Nevertheless, when
once a man has acquired those other virtues he possesses these in
proximate potentiality. Because when, by practice, a man has acquired
liberality in small gifts and expenditure, if he were to come in for
a large sum of money, he would acquire the habit of magnificence with
but little practice: even as a geometrician, by dint of little study,
acquires scientific knowledge about some conclusion which had never
been presented to his mind before. Now we speak of having a thing
when we are on the point of having it, according to the saying of the
Philosopher (Phys. ii, text. 56): "That which is scarcely lacking is
not lacking at all."

This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: The intellectual virtues are about divers matters
having no relation to one another, as is clearly the case with the
various sciences and arts. Hence we do not observe in them the
connection that is to be found among the moral virtues, which are
about passions and operations, that are clearly related to one
another. For all the passions have their rise in certain initial
passions, viz. love and hatred, and terminate in certain others, viz.
pleasure and sorrow. In like manner all the operations that are the
matter of moral virtue are related to one another, and to the
passions. Hence the whole matter of moral virtues falls under the one
rule of prudence.

Nevertheless, all intelligible things are related to first
principles. And in this way, all the intellectual virtues depend on
the understanding of principles; even as prudence depends on the
moral virtues, as stated. On the other hand, the universal principles
which are the object of the virtue of understanding of principles, do
not depend on the conclusions, which are the objects of the other
intellectual virtues, as do the moral virtues depend on prudence,
because the appetite, in a fashion, moves the reason, and the reason
the appetite, as stated above (Q. 9, A. 1; Q. 58, A. 5, ad 1).

Reply Obj. 4: Those things to which the moral virtues incline, are as
the principles of prudence: whereas the products of art are not the
principles, but the matter of art. Now it is evident that, though
reason may be right in one part of the matter, and not in another,
yet in no way can it be called right reason, if it be deficient in
any principle whatever. Thus, if a man be wrong about the principle,
"A whole is greater than its part," he cannot acquire the science of
geometry, because he must necessarily wander from the truth in his
conclusion. Moreover, things _done_ are related to one another, but
not things _made,_ as stated above (ad 3). Consequently the lack of
prudence in one department of things to be done, would result in a
deficiency affecting other things to be done: whereas this does not
occur in things to be made.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 65, Art. 2]

Whether Moral Virtues Can Be Without Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtues can be without charity.
For it is stated in the _Liber Sentent. Prosperi_ vii, that "every
virtue save charity may be common to the good and bad." But "charity
can be in none except the good," as stated in the same book.
Therefore the other virtues can be had without charity.

Obj. 2: Further, moral virtues can be acquired by means of human
acts, as stated in _Ethic._ ii, 1, 2, whereas charity cannot be had
otherwise than by infusion, according to Rom. 5:5: "The charity of
God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost Who is given to
us." Therefore it is possible to have the other virtues without
charity.

Obj. 3: Further, the moral virtues are connected together, through
depending on prudence. But charity does not depend on prudence;
indeed, it surpasses prudence, according to Eph. 3:19: "The charity
of Christ, which surpasseth all knowledge." Therefore the moral
virtues are not connected with charity, and can be without it.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (1 John 3:14): "He that loveth not,
abideth in death." Now the spiritual life is perfected by the
virtues, since it is "by them" that "we lead a good life," as
Augustine states (De Lib. Arb. ii, 17, 19). Therefore they cannot be
without the love of charity.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 63, A. 2), it is possible by
means of human works to acquire moral virtues, in so far as they
produce good works that are directed to an end not surpassing the
natural power of man: and when they are acquired thus, they can be
without charity, even as they were in many of the Gentiles. But in so
far as they produce good works in proportion to a supernatural last
end, thus they have the character of virtue, truly and perfectly; and
cannot be acquired by human acts, but are infused by God. Such like
moral virtues cannot be without charity. For it has been stated above
(A. 1; Q. 58, AA. 4, 5) that the other moral virtues cannot be
without prudence; and that prudence cannot be without the moral
virtues, because these latter make man well disposed to certain ends,
which are the starting-point of the procedure of prudence. Now for
prudence to proceed aright, it is much more necessary that man be
well disposed towards his ultimate end, which is the effect of
charity, than that he be well disposed in respect of other ends,
which is the effect of moral virtue: just as in speculative matters
right reason has greatest need of the first indemonstrable principle,
that "contradictories cannot both be true at the same time." It is
therefore evident that neither can infused prudence be without
charity; nor, consequently, the other moral virtues, since they
cannot be without prudence.

It is therefore clear from what has been said that only the infused
virtues are perfect, and deserve to be called virtues simply: since
they direct man well to the ultimate end. But the other virtues,
those, namely, that are acquired, are virtues in a restricted sense,
but not simply: for they direct man well in respect of the last end
in some particular genus of action, but not in respect of the last
end simply. Hence a gloss of Augustine [*Cf. Lib. Sentent. Prosperi
cvi.] on the words, "All that is not of faith is sin" (Rom. 14:23),
says: "He that fails to acknowledge the truth, has no true virtue,
even if his conduct be good."

Reply Obj. 1: Virtue, in the words quoted, denotes imperfect virtue.
Else if we take moral virtue in its perfect state, "it makes its
possessor good," and consequently cannot be in the wicked.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument holds good of virtue in the sense of
acquired virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Though charity surpasses science and prudence, yet
prudence depends on charity, as stated: and consequently so do all
the infused moral virtues.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 65, Art. 3]

Whether Charity Can Be Without Moral Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem possible to have charity without the moral
virtues. For when one thing suffices for a certain purpose, it is
superfluous to employ others. Now charity alone suffices for the
fulfilment of all the works of virtue, as is clear from 1 Cor. 13:4,
seqq.: "Charity is patient, is kind," etc. Therefore it seems that if
one has charity, other virtues are superfluous.

Obj. 2: Further, he that has a habit of virtue easily performs the
works of that virtue, and those works are pleasing to him for their
own sake: hence "pleasure taken in a work is a sign of habit" (Ethic.
ii, 3). Now many have charity, being free from mortal sin, and yet
they find it difficult to do works of virtue; nor are these works
pleasing to them for their own sake, but only for the sake of
charity. Therefore many have charity without the other virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is to be found in every saint: and yet there
are some saints who are without certain virtues. For Bede says (on
Luke 17:10) that the saints are more humbled on account of their not
having certain virtues, than rejoiced at the virtues they have.
Therefore, if a man has charity, it does not follow of necessity that
he has all the moral virtues.

_On the contrary,_ The whole Law is fulfilled through charity, for it
is written (Rom. 13:8): "He that loveth his neighbor, hath fulfilled
the Law." Now it is not possible to fulfil the whole Law, without
having all the moral virtues: since the law contains precepts about
all acts of virtue, as stated in _Ethic._ v, 1, 2. Therefore he that
has charity, has all the moral virtues. Moreover, Augustine says in a
letter (Epis. clxvii) [*Cf. Serm. xxxix and xlvi de Temp.] that
charity contains all the cardinal virtues.

_I answer that,_ All the moral virtues are infused together with
charity. The reason for this is that God operates no less perfectly
in works of grace than in works of nature. Now, in the works of
nature, we find that whenever a thing contains a principle of certain
works, it has also whatever is necessary for their execution: thus
animals are provided with organs whereby to perform the actions that
their souls empower them to do. Now it is evident that charity,
inasmuch as it directs man to his last end, is the principle of all
the good works that are referable to his last end. Wherefore all the
moral virtues must needs be infused together with charity, since it
is through them that man performs each different kind of good work.

It is therefore clear that the infused moral virtues are connected,
not only through prudence, but also on account of charity: and,
again, that whoever loses charity through mortal sin, forfeits all
the infused moral virtues.

Reply Obj. 1: In order that the act of a lower power be perfect, not
only must there be perfection in the higher, but also in the lower
power: for if the principal agent were well disposed, perfect action
would not follow, if the instrument also were not well disposed.
Consequently, in order that man work well in things referred to the
end, he needs not only a virtue disposing him well to the end, but
also those virtues which dispose him well to whatever is referred to
the end: for the virtue which regards the end is the chief and moving
principle in respect of those things that are referred to the end.
Therefore it is necessary to have the moral virtues together with
charity.

Reply Obj. 2: It happens sometimes that a man who has a habit, finds
it difficult to act in accordance with the habit, and consequently
feels no pleasure and complacency in the act, on account of some
impediment supervening from without: thus a man who has a habit of
science, finds it difficult to understand, through being sleepy or
unwell. In like manner sometimes the habits of moral virtue
experience difficulty in their works, by reason of certain ordinary
dispositions remaining from previous acts. This difficulty does not
occur in respect of acquired moral virtue: because the repeated acts
by which they are acquired, remove also the contrary dispositions.

Reply Obj. 3: Certain saints are said not to have certain virtues, in
so far as they experience difficulty in the acts of those virtues,
for the reason stated; although they have the habits of all the
virtues.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 65, Art. 4]

Whether Faith and Hope Can Be Without Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith and hope are never without
charity. Because, since they are theological virtues, they seem to be
more excellent than even the infused moral virtues. But the infused
moral virtues cannot be without charity. Neither therefore can faith
and hope be without charity.

Obj. 2: Further, "no man believes unwillingly" as Augustine says
(Tract. xxvi in Joan.). But charity is in the will as a perfection
thereof, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 3). Therefore faith cannot be
without charity.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (Enchiridion viii) that "there can be
no hope without love." But love is charity: for it is of this love
that he speaks. Therefore hope cannot be without charity.

_On the contrary,_ A gloss on Matt. 1:2 says that "faith begets hope,
and hope, charity." Now the begetter precedes the begotten, and can
be without it. Therefore faith can be without hope; and hope, without
charity.

_I answer that,_ Faith and hope, like the moral virtues, can be
considered in two ways; first in an inchoate state; secondly, as
complete virtues. For since virtue is directed to the doing of good
works, perfect virtue is that which gives the faculty of doing a
perfectly good work, and this consists in not only doing what is
good, but also in doing it well. Else, if what is done is good, but
not well done, it will not be perfectly good; wherefore neither will
the habit that is the principle of such an act, have the perfect
character of virtue. For instance, if a man do what is just, what he
does is good: but it will not be the work of a perfect virtue unless
he do it well, i.e. by choosing rightly, which is the result of
prudence; for which reason justice cannot be a perfect virtue without
prudence.

Accordingly faith and hope can exist indeed in a fashion without
charity: but they have not the perfect character of virtue without
charity. For, since the act of faith is to believe in God; and since
to believe is to assent to someone of one's own free will: to will
not as one ought, will not be a perfect act of faith. To will as one
ought is the outcome of charity which perfects the will: since every
right movement of the will proceeds from a right love, as Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 9). Hence faith may be without charity, but
not as a perfect virtue: just as temperance and fortitude can be
without prudence. The same applies to hope. Because the act of hope
consists in looking to God for future bliss. This act is perfect, if
it is based on the merits which we have; and this cannot be without
charity. But to expect future bliss through merits which one has not
yet, but which one proposes to acquire at some future time, will be
an imperfect act; and this is possible without charity. Consequently,
faith and hope can be without charity; yet, without charity, they are
not virtues properly so-called; because the nature of virtue requires
that by it, we should not only do what is good, but also that we
should do it well (Ethic. ii, 6).

Reply Obj. 1: Moral virtue depends on prudence: and not even infused
prudence has the character of prudence without charity; for this
involves the absence of due order to the first principle, viz. the
ultimate end. On the other hand faith and hope, as such, do not
depend either on prudence or charity; so that they can be without
charity, although they are not virtues without charity, as stated.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument is true of faith considered as a perfect
virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Augustine is speaking here of that hope whereby we look
to gain future bliss through merits which we have already; and this
is not without charity.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 65, Art. 5]

Whether Charity Can Be Without Faith and Hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity can be without faith and
hope. For charity is the love of God. But it is possible for us to
love God naturally, without already having faith, or hope in future
bliss. Therefore charity can be without faith and hope.

Obj. 2: Further, charity is the root of all the virtues, according to
Eph. 3:17: "Rooted and founded in charity." Now the root is sometimes
without branches. Therefore charity can sometimes be without faith
and hope, and the other virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, there was perfect charity in Christ. And yet He had
neither faith nor hope: because He was a perfect comprehensor, as we
shall explain further on (III, Q. 7, AA. 3, 4). Therefore charity can
be without faith and hope.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Heb. 11:6): "Without faith it is
impossible to please God"; and this evidently belongs most to
charity, according to Prov. 8:17: "I love them that love me." Again,
it is by hope that we are brought to charity, as stated above (Q. 62,
A. 4). Therefore it is not possible to have charity without faith and
hope.

_I answer that,_ Charity signifies not only the love of God, but also
a certain friendship with Him; which implies, besides love, a certain
mutual return of love, together with mutual communion, as stated in
_Ethic._ viii, 2. That this belongs to charity is evident from 1 John
4:16: "He that abideth in charity, abideth in God, and God in him,"
and from 1 Cor. 1:9, where it is written: "God is faithful, by Whom
you are called unto the fellowship of His Son." Now this fellowship
of man with God, which consists in a certain familiar colloquy with
Him, is begun here, in this life, by grace, but will be perfected in
the future life, by glory; each of which things we hold by faith and
hope. Wherefore just as friendship with a person would be impossible,
if one disbelieved in, or despaired of, the possibility of their
fellowship or familiar colloquy; so too, friendship with God, which
is charity, is impossible without faith, so as to believe in this
fellowship and colloquy with God, and to hope to attain to this
fellowship. Therefore charity is quite impossible without faith and
hope.

Reply Obj. 1: Charity is not any kind of love of God, but that love
of God, by which He is loved as the object of bliss, to which object
we are directed by faith and hope.

Reply Obj. 2: Charity is the root of faith and hope, in so far as it
gives them the perfection of virtue. But faith and hope as such are
the precursors of charity, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 4), and so
charity is impossible without them.

Reply Obj. 3: In Christ there was neither faith nor hope, on account
of their implying an imperfection. But instead of faith, He had
manifest vision, and instead of hope, full comprehension [*See above,
Q. 4, A. 3]: so that in Him was perfect charity.
________________________

QUESTION 66

OF EQUALITY AMONG THE VIRTUES
(In Six Articles)

We must now consider equality among the virtues: under which head
there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether one virtue can be greater or less than another?

(2) Whether all the virtues existing together in one subject are
equal?

(3) Of moral virtue in comparison with intellectual virtue;

(4) Of the moral virtues as compared with one another;

(5) Of the intellectual virtues in comparison with one another;

(6) Of the theological virtues in comparison with one another.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 66, Art. 1]

Whether One Virtue Can Be Greater or Less Than Another?

Objection 1: It would seem that one virtue cannot be greater or less
than another. For it is written (Apoc. 21:16) that the sides of the
city of Jerusalem are equal; and a gloss says that the sides denote
the virtues. Therefore all virtues are equal; and consequently one
cannot be greater than another.

Obj. 2: Further, a thing that, by its nature, consists in a maximum,
cannot be more or less. Now the nature of virtue consists in a
maximum, for virtue is "the limit of power," as the Philosopher
states (De Coelo i, text. 116); and Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii,
19) that "virtues are very great boons, and no one can use them to
evil purpose." Therefore it seems that one virtue cannot be greater
or less than another.

Obj. 3: Further, the quantity of an effect is measured by the power
of the agent. But perfect, viz. infused virtues, are from God Whose
power is uniform and infinite. Therefore it seems that one virtue
cannot be greater than another.

_On the contrary,_ Wherever there can be increase and greater
abundance, there can be inequality. Now virtues admit of greater
abundance and increase: for it is written (Matt. 5:20): "Unless your
justice abound more than that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven": and (Prov. 15:5): "In abundant
justice there is the greatest strength (_virtus_)." Therefore it
seems that a virtue can be greater or less than another.

_I answer that,_ When it is asked whether one virtue can be greater
than another, the question can be taken in two senses. First, as
applying to virtues of different species. In this sense it is clear
that one virtue is greater than another; since a cause is always more
excellent than its effect; and among effects, those nearest to the
cause are the most excellent. Now it is clear from what has been said
(Q. 18, A. 5; Q. 61, A. 2) that the cause and root of human good is
the reason. Hence prudence which perfects the reason, surpasses in
goodness the other moral virtues which perfect the appetitive power,
in so far as it partakes of reason. And among these, one is better
than another, according as it approaches nearer to the reason.
Consequently justice, which is in the will, excels the remaining
moral virtues; and fortitude, which is in the irascible part, stands
before temperance, which is in the concupiscible, which has a smaller
share of reason, as stated in _Ethic._ vii, 6.

The question can be taken in another way, as referring to virtues of
the same species. In this way, according to what was said above (Q.
52, A. 1), when we were treating of the intensity of habits, virtue
may be said to be greater or less in two ways: first, in itself;
secondly with regard to the subject that partakes of it. If we
consider it in itself, we shall call it great or little, according to
the things to which it extends. Now whosoever has a virtue, e.g.
temperance, has it in respect of whatever temperance extends to. But
this does not apply to science and art: for every grammarian does not
know everything relating to grammar. And in this sense the Stoics
said rightly, as Simplicius states in his _Commentary on the
Predicaments,_ that virtue cannot be more or less, as science and art
can; because the nature of virtue consists in a maximum.

If, however, we consider virtue on the part of the subject, it may
then be greater or less, either in relation to different times, or in
different men. Because one man is better disposed than another to
attain to the mean of virtue which is defined by right reason; and
this, on account of either greater habituation, or a better natural
disposition, or a more discerning judgment of reason, or again a
greater gift of grace, which is given to each one "according to the
measure of the giving of Christ," as stated in Eph. 4:9. And here the
Stoics erred, for they held that no man should be deemed virtuous,
unless he were, in the highest degree, disposed to virtue. Because
the nature of virtue does not require that man should reach the mean
of right reason as though it were an indivisible point, as the Stoics
thought; but it is enough that he should approach the mean, as stated
in _Ethic._ ii, 6. Moreover, one same indivisible mark is reached
more nearly and more readily by one than by another: as may be seen
when several archers aim at a fixed target.

Reply Obj. 1: This equality is not one of absolute quantity, but of
proportion: because all virtues grow in a man proportionately, as we
shall see further on (A. 2).

Reply Obj. 2: This "limit" which belongs to virtue, can have the
character of something _more_ or _less_ good, in the ways explained
above: since, as stated, it is not an indivisible limit.

Reply Obj. 3: God does not work by necessity of nature, but according
to the order of His wisdom, whereby He bestows on men various
measures of virtue, according to Eph. 4:7: "To every one of you
[Vulg.: 'us'] is given grace according to the measure of the giving
of Christ."
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 66, Art. 2]

Whether All the Virtues That Are Together in One Man, Are Equal?

Objection 1: It would seem that the virtues in one same man are not
all equally intense. For the Apostle says (1 Cor. 7:7): "Everyone
hath his proper gift from God; one after this manner, and another
after that." Now one gift would not be more proper than another to a
man, if God infused all the virtues equally into each man. Therefore
it seems that the virtues are not all equal in one and the same man.

Obj. 2: Further, if all the virtues were equally intense in one and
the same man, it would follow that whoever surpasses another in one
virtue, would surpass him in all the others. But this is clearly not
the case: since various saints are specially praised for different
virtues; e.g. Abraham for faith (Rom. 4), Moses for his meekness
(Num. 7:3), Job for his patience (Tob. 2:12). This is why of each
Confessor the Church sings: "There was not found his like in keeping
the law of the most High," [*See _Lesson_ in the Mass _Statuit_
(Dominican Missal)], since each one was remarkable for some virtue or
other. Therefore the virtues are not all equal in one and the same
man.

Obj. 3: Further, the more intense a habit is, the greater one's
pleasure and readiness in making use of it. Now experience shows that
a man is more pleased and ready to make use of one virtue than of
another. Therefore the virtues are not all equal in one and the same
man.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 4) that "those who
are equal in fortitude are equal in prudence and temperance," and so
on. Now it would not be so, unless all the virtues in one man were
equal. Therefore all virtues are equal in one man.

_I answer that,_ As explained above (A. 1), the comparative greatness
of virtues can be understood in two ways. First, as referring to
their specific nature: and in this way there is no doubt that in a
man one virtue is greater than another, for example, charity, than
faith and hope. Secondly, it may be taken as referring to the degree
of participation by the subject, according as a virtue becomes
intense or remiss in its subject. In this sense all the virtues in
one man are equal with an equality of proportion, in so far as their
growth in man is equal: thus the fingers are unequal in size, but
equal in proportion, since they grow in proportion to one another.

Now the nature of this equality is to be explained in the same way as
the connection of virtues; for equality among virtues is their
connection as to greatness. Now it has been stated above (Q. 65, A.
1) that a twofold connection of virtues may be assigned. The first is
according to the opinion of those who understood these four virtues
to be four general properties of virtues, each of which is found
together with the other in any matter. In this way virtues cannot be
said to be equal in any matter unless they have all these properties
equal. Augustine alludes to this kind of equality (De Trin. vi, 4)
when he says: "If you say these men are equal in fortitude, but that
one is more prudent than the other; it follows that the fortitude of
the latter is less prudent. Consequently they are not really equal in
