   believe.  The nobleman saith unto him, Sir, come down ere my child
   die.  Jesus saith unto him, Go thy way; thy son liveth.

These words of our Lord are found in the Gospel for this day.  They are a
rebuke, though a gentle one.  He reproved the nobleman, seemingly, for
his want of faith: but He worked the miracle, and saved the life of the
child.

We do not know enough of the circumstances of this case, to know exactly
why our Lord reproved the nobleman; and what want of faith He saw in him.
Some think that the man's fault was his mean notion of our Lord's power;
his wish that He should come down the hills to Capernaum, and see the boy
Himself, in order to cure him; whereas he ought to have known that our
Lord could cure him--as He did--at a distance, and by a mere wish, which
was no less than a command to nature, and to that universe which He had
made.

I cannot tell how this may be: but of one thing I think we may be
sure--That this saying of our Lord's is very deep, and very wide; and
applies to many people, in many times--perhaps to us in these modern
times.

We must recollect one thing--That our Lord did not put forward the mere
power of His miracles as the chief sign of His being the Son of God.  Not
so: He declared His almighty power most chiefly by shewing mercy and
pity.  Twice He refused to give the Scribes and Pharisees a sign from
heaven.  "An evil and adulterous generation," He said, "seeketh after a
sign: but there shall be no sign given them, but the sign of the prophet
Jonas."  And what was that,--but a warning to repent, and mend their
ways, ere it was too late?

Now the slightest use of our common sense must tell us, that our Lord
could have given a sign of His almighty power if He had chosen; and such
a sign as no man, even the dullest, could have mistaken.  What prodigy
could He not have performed, before Scribes and Pharisees, Herod, and
Pontius Pilate?  "Thinkest thou," He said Himself, "that I cannot now
pray to My Father, and He will send Me presently more than twelve legions
of angels?"  Yet how did our Lord use that miraculous and almighty power
of His?  Sparingly, and secretly.  Sparingly; for He used it almost
entirely in curing the diseases of poor people; and secretly; for He used
it almost entirely in remote places.  Jerusalem itself, recollect, was at
best a remote city compared with any of the great cities of the Roman
empire.  And even there He refused to cast Himself down from a pinnacle
of the temple, for a sign and wonder to the Jews.  If He, the Lord of the
world, had meant to convert the world by prodigious miracles, He would
surely have gone to Rome itself, the very heart and centre of the
civilized world, and have shewn such signs and wonders therein, as would
have made the Caesar himself come down from his throne, and worship Him,
the Lord of all.

But no.  Our Lord wished for the obedience, not of men's lips, but of
their hearts.  It was their hearts which He wished to win, that they
might love Him--and be loyal to Him--for the sake of His goodness; and
not fear and tremble before Him for the sake of His power.  And therefore
He kept, so to speak, His power in the background, and put His goodness
foremost; only shewing His power in miracles of healing and mercy; that
so poor neglected, oppressed, hardworked souls might understand that
whoever did not care for them, Christ their Lord did; and that their
disease and misery were not His will; nor the will of His Father and
their Father in heaven.

But because, also, Christ was Lord of heaven and earth; therefore--if I
may make so bold as to guess at the reason for anything which He did--He
seems to have interfered as little as possible with those regular rules
and customs of this world about us, which we now call the Laws of Nature.
He did not offer--as the magicians of His time did offer--and as too many
have pretended since to do--to change the courses of the elements, to
bring down tempests or thunderbolts, to shew prodigies in the heaven
above, and in the earth beneath.  Why should He?  Heaven and earth, moon
and stars, fire and tempest, and all the physical forces in the universe,
were fulfilling His will already; doing their work right well according
to the law which He had given them from the beginning.  He had no need to
disturb them, no need to disturb the growth of a single flower at His
feet.

Rather He loved to tell men to look at them, and see how they went well,
because His Father in heaven cared for them.  To tell people to look, not
at prodigies, comets, earthquakes, and the seeming exceptions of God's
rule: but at the common, regular, simple, peaceful work of God, which is
going on around us all day long in every blade of grass, and flower, and
singing bird, and sunbeam, and shower.  To consider the lilies of the
field how they grow: which toil not, neither do they spin: and yet I say
unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these.--And the birds of the air: They sow not, neither reap, nor gather
into barns; and yet your heavenly Father feedeth them.  How much more
will He feed you, who can sow, and reap, and gather into barns?--O ye of
little faith, who fancy always that besides sowing and reaping honestly,
you must covet, and cheat, and lie, and break God's laws instead of
obeying them; or else, forsooth, you cannot earn your living?  To see
that the signs of God's Kingdom are not astonishing convulsions, terrible
catastrophes and disorders: but order, and peace, and usefulness, in
creatures which are happy, because they live according to the law which
God has given them, and do their duty--that duty, of which the great poet
of the English Church has sung--

         Stern Lawgiver!  Thou yet dost wear
            The Godhead's most benignant grace
         Nor know we anything so fair
            As is the smile upon thy face.
         Flowers laugh before thee on their beds,
         And fragrance in thy footing treads;
      Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong,
   And the most ancient heavens, through thee, are fresh and strong.

But men would not believe that in our Lord's time; neither would they
believe it after His time.  Will they believe it even now?  They craved
after signs and wonders; they saw God's hand, not in the common sights of
this beautiful world; not in seed-time and harvest, summer and winter;
not in the blossoming of flowers, and the song of birds: but only in
strange portents, absurd and lying miracles, which they pretended had
happened, because they fancied that they ought to have happened: and so
built up a whole literature of _un_reason, which remains to this day, a
doleful monument of human folly and superstition.

But is not this too true of some at least of us in this very day?  Must
not people now see signs and wonders before they believe in God?

Do they not consider whatever is strange and inexplicable, as coming
immediately from God?  While whatever they are accustomed to, or fancy
that they can explain, they consider comes in what they call the course
of nature, without God's having anything to do with it?

If a man drops down dead, they say he died "by the hand of God," or "by
the visitation of God:" as if any created thing or being could die, or
live either, save by the will and presence of God: as if a sparrow could
fall to the ground without our Father's knowledge.  But so it is; because
men's hearts are far from God.

If an earthquake swallowed up half London this very day, how many would
be ready to cry, "Here is a visitation of God.  Here is the immediate
hand of God.  Perhaps Christ is coming, and the end of the world at
hand."  And yet they will not see the true visitation, the immediate hand
of God, in every drop of rain which comes down from heaven; and returneth
not again void, but gives seed to the sower and bread to the eater.  But
so it always has been.  Men used to see God and His power and glory
almost exclusively in comets, auroras, earthquakes.  It was not so very
long ago, that the birth of monstrous or misshapen animals, and all other
prodigies, as they were called, were carefully noted down, and talked of
far and wide, as signs of God's anger, presages of some coming
calamity.--Atheists while they are in safety, superstitious when they are
in danger--Requiring signs and wonders to make them believe--Interested
only in what is uncommon and seems to break God's laws--Careless about
what is common, and far more wonderful, because it fulfils God's
laws--Such have most men been for ages, and will be, perhaps, to the end;
shewing themselves, in that respect, carnal and no wiser than dumb
animals.

For it is carnal, animal and brutish, and a sign of want of true
civilization, as well as of true faith, only to be interested and
surprised by what is strange; like dumb beasts, who, if they see anything
new, are attracted by it and frightened by it, at the same time: but who,
when once they are accustomed to it, and have found out that it will do
them no harm, are too stupid to feel any curiosity or interest about it,
though it were the most beautiful or the most wonderful object on earth.

But I will tell you of a man after God's own heart, who was not like the
dumb animals, nor like the ungodly and superstitious; because he was
taught by the Spirit of God, and spoke by the Spirit of God.  One who saw
no signs and wonders, and yet believed in God--namely, the man who wrote
the 139th Psalm.  He needed no prodigies to make him believe.  The
thought of his own body, how fearfully and wonderfully it was made, was
enough to make him do that.  He looked on the perfect order and law which
ruled over the development of his own organization, and said--"I will
praise Thee.  For I am fearfully and wonderfully made.  Marvellous are
Thy works, and that my soul knoweth right well.  Thine eyes did see my
substance, yet being imperfect; and in Thy Book were all my members
written, which day by day were fashioned, when as yet there was none of
them.  How dear are Thy counsels unto me, O God! how great is the sum of
them!"

And I will tell you of another man who needed no signs and wonders to
make him believe--the man, namely, who wrote the 19th Psalm.  He looked
upon the perfect order and law of the heavens over his head, and the mere
sight of the sun and moon and stars was enough for him; and he said--"The
heavens declare the glory of God, the firmament sheweth His handy-work.
One day telleth another, and one night certifieth another.  There is
neither speech nor language, where their voice is not heard among them."

And I will tell you of yet another man who needed no signs and wonders to
make him believe--namely, the man who wrote the 104th Psalm.  He looked
on the perfect order and law of the world about his feet; and said,--"O
Lord, how manifold are Thy works.  In wisdom hast Thou made them all: the
earth is full of Thy riches.  So is the great and wide sea also, wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts.  These all
wait upon Thee, that Thou mayest give them their meat in due season.  Thou
givest to them; they gather.  Thou openest Thy hand; they are filled with
good.  Thou hidest Thy face; they are troubled.  Thou takest away their
breath, they die, and return to their dust.  Thou sendest forth Thy
breath, they are created; and Thou renewest the face of the earth.  The
glory of the Lord shall endure for ever.  The Lord shall rejoice in His
works."

My friends, let us all pray to God and to Christ, that They will put into
our hearts the Spirit by which those psalms were written: that They will
take from us the evil heart of unbelief, which must needs have signs and
wonders, and forgets that in God we live and move and have our being.  For
are we not all--even the very best of us--apt to tempt our Lord in this
very matter?

When all things go on in a common-place way with us--that is, in this
well-made world, comfortably, easily, prosperously--how apt we all
are--God forgive us--to forget God.  How we forget that on Him we depend
for every breath we draw; that Christ is guarding us daily from a hundred
dangers, a hundred sorrows, it may be from a hundred disgraces, of which
we, in our own self-satisfied blindness, never dream.  How dull our
prayers become, and how short.  We almost think, at times, that there is
no use in praying, for we get all we want without asking for it, in what
we choose to call the course of circumstances and nature.--God forgive
us, indeed.

But when sorrow comes, anxiety, danger, how changed we are all of a
sudden.  How gracious we are when pangs come upon us--like the wicked
queen-mother in Jerusalem of old, when the invaders drove her out of her
cedar palace.  How we cry to the Lord then, and get us to our God right
humbly.  Then, indeed, we feel the need of prayer.  Then we try to
wrestle with God, and cry to Him--and what else can we do?--like children
lost in the dark; entreat Him, if there be mercy in Him--as there is, in
spite of all our folly--to grant some special providence, to give us some
answer to our bitter entreaties.  If He will but do for us this one
thing, then we will believe indeed.  Then we will trust Him, obey Him,
serve Him, as we never did before.

Ah, if there were in Christ any touch of pride or malice!  Ah, if there
were in Christ aught but a magnanimity and a generosity altogether
boundless!  Ah, if He were to deal with us as we have dealt with Him!  Ah,
if He were to deal with us after our sins, and reward us according to our
iniquities!

If He refused to hear us; if He said to us,--You forgot me in your
prosperity, why should I not forget you in your adversity?--What could we
answer?  Would that answer not be just?  Would it not be deserved,
however terrible?  But our hope and trust is, that He will not answer us
so; because He is not our God only, but our Saviour; that He will deal
with us as one who seeks and saves that which is lost, whether it knows
that it is lost or not.

Our hope is, that the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy; that
because He is man, as well as God, He can be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities; that He knoweth our frame, He remembereth of what we are
made: else the spirit would fail before Him, and the souls which He has
made.  So we can have hope, that, though Christ rebuke us, He will yet
hear us, if our prayers are reasonable, and therefore according to His
will.  And surely, surely, surely, if our prayers are for the improvement
of any human being; if we are praying that we, or any human being, may be
made better men and truer Christians at last, and saved from the
temptations of the world, the flesh, and the devil--oh then, then shall
we not be heard?  The Lord may keep us long waiting, as He kept St Monica
of old, when she wept over St Augustine's youthful sins and follies.  But
He may answer us, as He answered her by the good bishop--"Be of good
cheer.  It is impossible that the son of so many prayers should perish."
And so, though He may shame us, in our inmost heart, by the
rebuke--"Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe"--He will
in the same breath grant our prayer, undeserved though His condescension
be, and say--"Go in peace, thy son liveth."




SERMON XX.  THE JUDGMENTS OF GOD.


LUKE XIII. 1-5.

   There were present at that season some that told him of the Galilaeans,
   whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.  And Jesus
   answering said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were
   sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they suffered such things?  I
   tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.  Or
   those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them,
   think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem?
   I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

This story is often used, it seems to me, for a purpose exactly opposite
to that for which it is told.  It is said that because these Galilaeans,
whom Pilate slew, and these eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell,
were no worse than the people round them, that therefore similar
calamities must not be considered judgments and punishments of God; that
it is an offence against Christian charity to say that such sufferers are
the objects of God's anger; that it is an offence against good manners to
introduce the name of God, or the theory of a Divine Providence, in
speaking of historical events.  They must be ascribed to certain brute
forces of nature; to certain inevitable laws of history; to the passions
of men, to chance, to fate, to anything and everything: rather than to
the will of God.

No man disagrees more utterly than I do with the latter part of this
language.  But I cannot be astonished at its popularity.  It cannot be
denied that the theory of a Divine Providence has been much misstated;
that the doctrine of final causes has been much abused; that, in plain
English, God's name has been too often taken in vain, about calamities,
private and public.  Rational men of the world, therefore, may be excused
for begging at times not to hear any more of Divine Providence; excused
for doubting the existence of final causes; excused for shrinking,
whenever they hear a preacher begin to interpret the will of God about
this event or that.  They dread a repetition of the mistake--to call it
by the very gentlest term--which priests, in all ages, have been but too
ready to commit.  For all priesthoods--whether heathen or Christian,
whether calling themselves priests, or merely ministers and
preachers--have been in all ages tempted to talk as if Divine Providence
was exercised solely on their behalf; in favour of their class, their
needs, their health and comfort; as if the thunders of Jove never fell
save when the priesthood needed, I had almost said commanded, them.  Thus
they have too often arrogated to themselves a right to define who was
cursed by God, which has too soon, again and again, degenerated into a
right to curse men in God's name; while they have too often taught men to
believe only in a Providence who interfered now and then on behalf of
certain favoured persons, instead of a Providence who rules, always and
everywhere, over all mankind.  But men have again and again reversed
their judgments.  They have had to say--The facts are against you.  You
prophesied destruction to such and such persons; and behold: they have
not been destroyed, but live and thrive.  You said that such and such
persons' calamities were a proof of God's anger for their sins.  We find
them, on the contrary, to have been innocent and virtuous persons; often
martyrs for truth, for humanity, for God.  The facts, we say, are against
you.  If there be a Providence, it is not such as you describe.  If there
be judgments of God, you have not found out the laws by which He judges:
and rather than believe in your theory of Providence, your theory of
judgments, we will believe in none.

Thus, in age after age, in land after land, has fanaticism and bigotry
brought forth, by a natural revulsion, its usual fruit of unbelief.

But--let men believe or disbelieve as they choose--the warning of the
Psalmist still stands true--"Be wise.  Take heed, ye unwise among the
people.  He that nurtureth the heathen; it is He that teacheth man
knowledge, shall He not punish?"  For as surely as there is a God, so
surely does that God judge the earth; and every individual, family,
institution, and nation on the face thereof; and judge them all in
righteousness by His Son Jesus Christ, whom He hath appointed heir of all
things, and given Him all power in heaven and earth; who reigns and will
reign till He hath put all enemies under His feet.

This is the good news of Advent.  And therefore it is well that in
Advent, if we believe that Christ is ruling us, we should look somewhat
into the laws of His kingdom, as far as He has revealed them to us; and
among others, into the law which--as I think--He laid down in the text.

Now I beg you to remark that the text, taken fully and fairly, means the
very opposite to that popular notion of which I spoke in the beginning of
my sermon.

Our Lord does not say--Those Galilaeans were not sinners at all.  Their
sins had nothing to do with their death.  Those on whom the tower fell
were innocent men.  He rather implies the very opposite.

We know nothing of the circumstances of either calamity: but this we
know--That our Lord warned the rest of the Jews, that unless they
repented--that is, changed their mind, and therefore their conduct, they
would all perish in the same way.  And we know that that warning was
fulfilled, within forty years, so hideously, and so awfully, that the
destruction of Jerusalem remains, as one of the most terrible cases of
wholesale ruin and horror recorded in history; and--as I believe--a key
to many a calamity before and since.  Like the taking of Babylon, the
fall of Rome, and the French Revolution, it stands out in lurid
splendour, as of the nether pit itself, forcing all who believe to say in
fear and trembling--Verily there is a God that judgeth the earth--and a
warning to every man, class, institution, and nation on earth, to set
their houses in order betimes, and bear fruit meet for repentance, lest
the day come when they too shall be weighed in the balance of God's
eternal justice, and found wanting.

But another lesson we may learn from the text, which I wish to impress
earnestly on your minds.  These Galilaeans, it seems, were no worse than
the other Galilaeans: yet they were singled out as examples: as warnings
to the rest.

Believing--as I do--that our Lord was always teaching the universal
through the particular, and in each parable, nay in each comment on
passing events, laying down world-wide laws of His own kingdom, enduring
through all time--I presume that this also is one of the laws of the
kingdom of God.  And I think that facts--to which after all is the only
safe appeal--prove that it is so; that we see the same law at work around
us every day.  I think that pestilences, conflagrations, accidents of any
kind which destroy life wholesale, even earthquakes and storms, are
instances of this law; warnings from God; judgments of God, in the very
strictest sense; by which He tells men, in a voice awful enough to the
few, but merciful and beneficent to the many, to be prudent and wise; to
learn henceforth either not to interfere with the physical laws of His
universe, or to master and to wield them by reason and by science.

I would gladly say more on this point, did time allow: but I had rather
now ask you to consider, whether this same law does not reveal itself
throughout history; in many great national changes, or even calamities;
and in the fall of many an ancient and time-honoured institution.  I
believe that the law does reveal itself; and in forms which, rightly
studied, may at once teach us Christian charity, and give us faith and
comfort, as we see that God, however severe, is still just.

I mean this--The more we read, in history, of the fall of great
dynasties, or of the ruin of whole classes, or whole nations, the more we
feel--however much we may acquiesce with the judgment as a whole--sympathy
with the fallen.  It is not the worst, but often the best, specimens of a
class or of a system, who are swallowed up by the moral earthquake, which
has been accumulating its forces, perhaps for centuries.  Innocent and
estimable on the whole, as persons, they are involved in the ruin which
falls on the system to which they belong.  So far from being sinners
above all around them, they are often better people than those around
them.  It is as if they were punished, not for being who they were, but
for being what they were.

History is full of such instances; instances of which we say and cannot
help saying--What have they done above all others, that on them above all
others the thunderbolt should fall?

Was Charles the First, for example, the worst, or the best, of the
Stuarts; and Louis the Sixteenth, of the Bourbons?  Look, again, at the
fate of Sir Thomas More, Bishop Fisher, and the hapless monks of the
Charterhouse.  Were they sinners above all who upheld the Romish system
in England?  Were they not rather among the righteous men who ought to
have saved it, if it could have been saved?  And yet on them--the purest
and the holiest of their party--and not on hypocrites and profligates,
fell the thunderbolt.

What is the meaning of these things?--for a meaning there must be; and
we, I dare to believe, must be meant to discover it; for we are the
children of God, into whose hearts, because we are human beings and not
mere animals, He has implanted the inextinguishable longing to ascertain
final causes; to seek not merely the means of things, but the reason of
things; to ask not merely How? but Why?

May not the reason be--I speak with all timidity and reverence, as one
who shrinks from pretending to thrust himself into the counsels of the
Almighty--But may not the reason be that God has wished thereby to
condemn not the persons, but the systems?  That He has punished them, not
for their private, but for their public faults?  It is not the men who
are judged, it is the state of things which they represent; and for that
very reason may not God have made an example, a warning, not of the
worst, but of the very best, specimens of a doomed class or system, which
has been weighed in His balance, and found wanting?

Therefore we need not suppose that these sufferers themselves were the
objects of God's wrath.  We may believe that of them, too, stands true
the great Law, "Whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth, and scourgeth every
son whom He receiveth."  We may believe that of them, too, stands true St
Paul's great parable in 1 Cor. xii., which, though a parable, is the
expression of a perpetually active law.  They have built, it may be, on
the true foundation: but they have built on it wood, hay, stubble,
instead of gold and precious stone.  And the fire of God, which burns for
