the Divine Nature, which is impassible, but by reason of the human
nature. Hence, in a Synodal Epistle of Cyril [*Act. Conc. Ephes., P.
i, cap. 26] we read: "If any man does not confess that the Word of
God suffered in the flesh and was crucified in the flesh, let him be
anathema." Therefore Christ's Passion belongs to the _suppositum_ of
the Divine Nature by reason of the passible nature assumed, but not
on account of the impassible Divine Nature.

Reply Obj. 1: The Lord of glory is said to be crucified, not as the
Lord of glory, but as a man capable of suffering.

Reply Obj. 2: As is said in a sermon of the Council of Ephesus
[*P. iii, cap. 10], "Christ's death being, as it were, God's
death"--namely, by union in Person--"destroyed death"; since He who
suffered "was both God and man. For God's Nature was not wounded,
nor did It undergo any change by those sufferings."

Reply Obj. 3: As the passage quoted goes on to say: "The Jews did not
crucify one who was simply a man; they inflicted their presumptions
upon God. For suppose a prince to speak by word of mouth, and that
his words are committed to writing on a parchment and sent out to the
cities, and that some rebel tears up the document, he will be led
forth to endure the death sentence, not for merely tearing up a
document, but as destroying the imperial message. Let not the Jew,
then, stand in security, as crucifying a mere man; since what he saw
was as the parchment, but what was hidden under it was the imperial
Word, the Son by nature, not the mere utterance of a tongue."
_______________________

QUESTION 47

OF THE EFFICIENT CAUSE OF CHRIST'S PASSION
(In Six Articles)

We have now to consider the efficient cause of Christ's Passion,
concerning which there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Christ was slain by others, or by Himself?

(2) From what motive did He deliver Himself up to the Passion?

(3) Whether the Father delivered Him up to suffer?

(4) Whether it was fitting that He should suffer at the hands of the
Gentiles, or rather of the Jews?

(5) Whether His slayers knew who He was?

(6) Of the sin of them who slew Christ.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 47, Art. 1]

Whether Christ Was Slain by Another or by Himself?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was not slain by another, but
by Himself. For He says Himself (John 10:18): "No man taketh My life
from Me, but I lay it down of Myself." But he is said to kill another
who takes away his life. Consequently, Christ was not slain by
others, but by Himself.

Obj. 2: Further, those slain by others sink gradually from exhausted
nature, and this is strikingly apparent in the crucified: for, as
Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "Those who were crucified were
tormented with a lingering death." But this did not happen in
Christ's case, since "crying out, with a loud voice, He yielded up
the ghost" (Matt. 27:50). Therefore Christ was not slain by others,
but by Himself.

Obj. 3: Further, those slain by others suffer a violent death, and
hence die unwillingly, because violent is opposed to voluntary. But
Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "Christ's spirit did not quit the flesh
unwillingly, but because He willed it, when He willed it, and as He
willed it." Consequently Christ was not slain by others, but by
Himself.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 18:33): "After they have
scourged Him, they will put him to death."

_I answer that,_ A thing may cause an effect in two ways: in the
first instance by acting directly so as to produce the effect; and in
this manner Christ's persecutors slew Him because they inflicted on
Him what was a sufficient cause of death, and with the intention of
slaying Him, and the effect followed, since death resulted from that
cause. In another way someone causes an effect indirectly--that is,
by not preventing it when he can do so; just as one person is said to
drench another by not closing the window through which the shower is
entering: and in this way Christ was the cause of His own Passion and
death. For He could have prevented His Passion and death. Firstly, by
holding His enemies in check, so that they would not have been eager
to slay Him, or would have been powerless to do so. Secondly, because
His spirit had the power of preserving His fleshly nature from the
infliction of any injury; and Christ's soul had this power, because
it was united in unity of person with the Divine Word, as Augustine
says (De Trin. iv). Therefore, since Christ's soul did not repel the
injury inflicted on His body, but willed His corporeal nature to
succumb to such injury, He is said to have laid down His life, or to
have died voluntarily.

Reply Obj. 1: When we hear the words, "No man taketh away My life
from Me," we must understand "against My will": for that is properly
said to be "taken away" which one takes from someone who is unwilling
and unable to resist.

Reply Obj. 2: In order for Christ to show that the Passion inflicted
by violence did not take away His life, He preserved the strength of
His bodily nature, so that at the last moment He was able to cry out
with a loud voice: and hence His death should be computed among His
other miracles. Accordingly it is written (Mk. 15:39): "And the
centurion who stood over against Him, seeing that crying out in this
manner, He had given up the ghost, said: Indeed, this man was the Son
of God." It was also a subject of wonder in Christ's death that He
died sooner than the others who were tormented with the same
suffering. Hence John says (19:32) that "they broke the legs of the
first, and of the other that was crucified with Him," that they might
die more speedily; "but after they were come to Jesus, when they saw
that He was already dead, they did not break His legs." Mark also
states (15:44) that "Pilate wondered that He should be already dead."
For as of His own will His bodily nature kept its vigor to the end,
so likewise, when He willed, He suddenly succumbed to the injury
inflicted.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ at the same time suffered violence in order to
die, and died, nevertheless, voluntarily; because violence was
inflicted on His body, which, however, prevailed over His body only
so far as He willed it.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 47, Art. 2]

Whether Christ Died Out of Obedience?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not die out of obedience.
For obedience is referred to a command. But we do not read that
Christ was commanded to suffer. Therefore He did not suffer out of
obedience.

Obj. 2: Further, a man is said to do from obedience what he does from
necessity of precept. But Christ did not suffer necessarily, but
voluntarily. Therefore He did not suffer out of obedience.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is a more excellent virtue than obedience.
But we read that Christ suffered out of charity, according to Eph.
5:2: "Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and delivered
Himself up for us." Therefore Christ's Passion ought to be ascribed
rather to charity than to obedience.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Phil. 2:8): "He became obedient" to
the Father "unto death."

_I answer that,_ It was befitting that Christ should suffer out of
obedience. First of all, because it was in keeping with human
justification, that "as by the disobedience of one man, many were
made sinners: so also by the obedience of one, many shall be made
just," as is written Rom. 5:19. Secondly, it was suitable for
reconciling man with God: hence it is written (Rom. 5:10): "We are
reconciled to God by the death of His Son," in so far as Christ's
death was a most acceptable sacrifice to God, according to Eph. 5:2:
"He delivered Himself for us an oblation and a sacrifice to God for
an odor of sweetness." Now obedience is preferred to all sacrifices.
according to 1 Kings 15:22: "Obedience is better than sacrifices."
Therefore it was fitting that the sacrifice of Christ's Passion and
death should proceed from obedience. Thirdly, it was in keeping with
His victory whereby He triumphed over death and its author; because a
soldier cannot conquer unless he obey his captain. And so the
Man-Christ secured the victory through being obedient to God,
according to Prov. 21:28: "An obedient man shall speak of victory."

Reply Obj. 1: Christ received a command from the Father to suffer.
For it is written (John 10:18): "I have power to lay down My life,
and I have power to take it up again: (and) this commandment have I
received of My Father"--namely, of laying down His life and of
resuming it again. "From which," as Chrysostom says (Hom. lix in
Joan.), it is not to be understood "that at first He awaited the
command, and that He had need to be told, but He showed the
proceeding to be a voluntary one, and destroyed suspicion of
opposition" to the Father. Yet because the Old Law was ended by
Christ's death, according to His dying words, "It is consummated"
(John 19:30), it may be understood that by His suffering He fulfilled
all the precepts of the Old Law. He fulfilled those of the moral
order which are founded on the precepts of charity, inasmuch as He
suffered both out of love of the Father, according to John 14:31:
"That the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father
hath given Me commandment, so do I: arise, let us go hence"--namely,
to the place of His Passion: and out of love of His neighbor,
according to Gal. 2:20: "He loved me, and delivered Himself up for
me." Christ likewise by His Passion fulfilled the ceremonial precepts
of the Law, which are chiefly ordained for sacrifices and oblations,
in so far as all the ancient sacrifices were figures of that true
sacrifice which the dying Christ offered for us. Hence it is written
(Col. 2:16, 17): "Let no man judge you in meat or drink, or in
respect of a festival day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbaths,
which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ's," for
the reason that Christ is compared to them as a body is to a shadow.
Christ also by His Passion fulfilled the judicial precepts of the
Law, which are chiefly ordained for making compensation to them who
have suffered wrong, since, as is written Ps. 68:5: He "paid that
which" He "took not away," suffering Himself to be fastened to a tree
on account of the apple which man had plucked from the tree against
God's command.

Reply Obj. 2: Although obedience implies necessity with regard to the
thing commanded, nevertheless it implies free-will with regard to the
fulfilling of the precept. And, indeed, such was Christ's obedience,
for, although His Passion and death, considered in themselves, were
repugnant to the natural will, yet Christ resolved to fulfill God's
will with respect to the same, according to Ps. 39:9: "That I should
do Thy will: O my God, I have desired it." Hence He said (Matt.
26:42): "If this chalice may not pass away, but I must drink it, Thy
will be done."

Reply Obj. 3: For the same reason Christ suffered out of charity and
out of obedience; because He fulfilled even the precepts of charity
out of obedience only; and was obedient, out of love, to the Father's
command.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 47, Art. 3]

Whether God the Father Delivered Up Christ to the Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that God the Father did not deliver up
Christ to the Passion. For it is a wicked and cruel act to hand over
an innocent man to torment and death. But, as it is written (Deut.
32:4): "God is faithful, and without any iniquity." Therefore He did
not hand over the innocent Christ to His Passion and death.

Obj. 2: Further, it is not likely that a man be given over to death
by himself and by another also. But Christ gave Himself up for us, as
it is written (Isa. 53:12): "He hath delivered His soul unto death."
Consequently it does not appear that God the Father delivered Him up.

Obj. 3: Further, Judas is held to be guilty because he betrayed
Christ to the Jews, according to John 6:71: "One of you is a devil,"
  alluding to Judas, who was to betray Him. The Jews are likewise
reviled for delivering Him up to Pilate; as we read in John 18:35:
"Thy own nation, and the chief priests have delivered Thee up to me."
Moreover, as is related in John 19:16: Pilate "delivered Him to them
to be crucified"; and according to 2 Cor. 6:14: there is no
"participation of justice with injustice." It seems, therefore, that
God the Father did not deliver up Christ to His Passion.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Rom. 8:32): "God hath not spared
His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all."

_I answer that,_ As observed above (A. 2), Christ suffered
voluntarily out of obedience to the Father. Hence in three respects
God the Father did deliver up Christ to the Passion. In the first
way, because by His eternal will He preordained Christ's Passion for
the deliverance of the human race, according to the words of Isaias
(53:6): "The Lord hath laid on Him the iniquities of us all"; and
again (Isa. 53:10): "The Lord was pleased to bruise Him in
infirmity." Secondly, inasmuch as, by the infusion of charity, He
inspired Him with the will to suffer for us; hence we read in the
same passage: "He was offered because it was His own will" (Isa.
53:7). Thirdly, by not shielding Him from the Passion, but abandoning
Him to His persecutors: thus we read (Matt. 27:46) that Christ, while
hanging upon the cross, cried out: "My God, My God, why hast Thou
forsaken Me?" because, to wit, He left Him to the power of His
persecutors, as Augustine says (Ep. cxl).

Reply Obj. 1: It is indeed a wicked and cruel act to hand over an
innocent man to torment and to death against his will. Yet God the
Father did not so deliver up Christ, but inspired Him with the will
to suffer for us. God's "severity" (cf. Rom. 11:22) is thereby shown,
for He would not remit sin without penalty: and the Apostle indicates
this when (Rom. 8:32) he says: "God spared not even His own Son."
Likewise His "goodness" (Rom. 11:22) shines forth, since by no
penalty endured could man pay Him enough satisfaction: and the
Apostle denotes this when he says: "He delivered Him up for us all":
and, again (Rom. 3:25): "Whom"--that is to say, Christ--God "hath
proposed to be a propitiation through faith in His blood."

Reply Obj. 2: Christ as God delivered Himself up to death by the same
will and action as that by which the Father delivered Him up; but as
man He gave Himself up by a will inspired of the Father. Consequently
there is no contrariety in the Father delivering Him up and in Christ
delivering Himself up.

Reply Obj. 3: The same act, for good or evil, is judged differently,
accordingly as it proceeds from a different source. The Father
delivered up Christ, and Christ surrendered Himself, from charity,
and consequently we give praise to both: but Judas betrayed Christ
from greed, the Jews from envy, and Pilate from worldly fear, for he
stood in fear of Caesar; and these accordingly are held guilty.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 47, Art. 4]

Whether It Was Fitting for Christ to Suffer at the Hands of the
Gentiles?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting that Christ should suffer at the
hands of the Gentiles. For since men were to be freed from sin by
Christ's death, it would seem fitting that very few should sin in His
death. But the Jews sinned in His death, on whose behalf it is said
(Matt. 21:38): "This is the heir; come, let us kill him." It seems
fitting, therefore, that the Gentiles should not be implicated in the
sin of Christ's slaying.

Obj. 2: Further, the truth should respond to the figure. Now it was
not the Gentiles but the Jews who offered the figurative sacrifices
of the Old Law. Therefore neither ought Christ's Passion, which was a
true sacrifice, to be fulfilled at the hands of the Gentiles.

Obj. 3: Further, as related John 5:18, "the Jews sought to kill"
Christ because "He did not only break the sabbath, but also said God
was His Father, making Himself equal to God." But these things seemed
to be only against the Law of the Jews: hence they themselves said
(John 19:7): "According to the Law He ought to die because He made
Himself the Son of God." It seems fitting, therefore, that Christ
should suffer, at the hands not of the Gentiles, but of the Jews, and
that what they said was untrue: "It is not lawful for us to put any
man to death," since many sins are punishable with death according to
the Law, as is evident from Lev. 20.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord Himself says (Matt. 20:19): "They shall
deliver Him to the Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged, and
crucified."

_I answer that,_ The effect of Christ's Passion was foreshown by the
very manner of His death. For Christ's Passion wrought its effect of
salvation first of all among the Jews, very many of whom were
baptized in His death, as is evident from Acts 2:41 and Acts 4:4.
Afterwards, by the preaching of Jews, Christ's Passion passed on to
the Gentiles. Consequently it was fitting that Christ should begin
His sufferings at the hands of the Jews, and, after they had
delivered Him up, finish His Passion at the hands of the Gentiles.

Reply Obj. 1: In order to demonstrate the fulness of His love, on
account of which He suffered, Christ upon the cross prayed for His
persecutors. Therefore, that the fruits of His petition might accrue
to Jews and Gentiles, Christ willed to suffer from both.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's Passion was the offering of a sacrifice,
inasmuch as He endured death of His own free-will out of charity: but
in so far as He suffered from His persecutors it was not a sacrifice,
but a most grievous sin.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (Tract. cxiv in Joan.): "The Jews
said that 'it is not lawful for us to put any man to death,' because
they understood that it was not lawful for them to put any man to
death" owing to the sacredness of the feast-day, which they had
already begun to celebrate. or, as Chrysostom observes (Hom. lxxxiii
in Joan.), because they wanted Him to be slain, not as a transgressor
of the Law, but as a public enemy, since He had made Himself out to
be a king, of which it was not their place to judge. Or, again,
because it was not lawful for them to crucify Him (as they wanted
to), but to stone Him, as they did to Stephen. Better still is it to
say that the power of putting to death was taken from them by the
Romans, whose subjects they were.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 47, Art. 5]

Whether Christ's Persecutors Knew Who He Was?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's persecutors did know who He
was. For it is written (Matt. 21:38) that the husbandmen seeing the
son said within themselves: "This is the heir; come, let us kill
him." On this Jerome remarks: "Our Lord proves most manifestly by
these words that the rulers of the Jews crucified the Son of God, not
from ignorance, but out of envy: for they understood that it was He
to whom the Father says by the Prophet: 'Ask of Me, and I will give
Thee the Gentiles for Thy inheritance.'" It seems, therefore, that
they knew Him to be Christ or the Son of God.

Obj. 2: Further, our Lord says (John 15:24): "But now they have both
seen and hated both Me and My Father." Now what is seen is known
manifestly. Therefore the Jews, knowing Christ, inflicted the Passion
on Him out of hatred.

Obj. 3: Further, it is said in a sermon delivered in the Council of
Ephesus (P. iii, cap. x): "Just as he who tears up the imperial
message is doomed to die, as despising the prince's word; so the Jew,
who crucified Him whom he had seen, will pay the penalty for daring
to lay his hands on God the Word Himself." Now this would not be so
had they not known Him to be the Son of God, because their ignorance
would have excused them. Therefore it seems that the Jews in
crucifying Christ knew Him to be the Son of God.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (1 Cor. 2:8): "If they had known it,
they would never have crucified the Lord of glory." And (Acts 3:17),
Peter, addressing the Jews, says: "I know that you did it through
ignorance, as did also your rulers." Likewise the Lord hanging upon
the cross said: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do" (Luke 23:34).

_I answer that,_ Among the Jews some were elders, and others of
lesser degree. Now according to the author of De Qq. Nov. et Vet.
Test., qu. lxvi, the elders, who were called "rulers, knew," as did
also the devils, "that He was the Christ promised in the Law: for
they saw all the signs in Him which the prophets said would come to
pass: but they did not know the mystery of His Godhead." Consequently
the Apostle says: "If they had known it, they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory." It must, however, be understood that
their ignorance did not excuse them from crime, because it was, as it
were, affected ignorance. For they saw manifest signs of His Godhead;
yet they perverted them out of hatred and envy of Christ; neither
would they believe His words, whereby He avowed that He was the Son
of God. Hence He Himself says of them (John 15:22): "If I had not
come, and spoken to them, they would not have sin; but now they have
no excuse for their sin." And afterwards He adds (John 15:24): "If I
had not done among them the works that no other man hath done, they
would not have sin." And so the expression employed by Job (21:14)
can be accepted on their behalf: "(Who) said to God: depart from us,
we desire not the knowledge of Thy ways."

But those of lesser degree--namely, the common folk--who had not
grasped the mysteries of the Scriptures, did not fully comprehend
that He was the Christ or the Son of God. For although some of them
believed in Him, yet the multitude did not; and if they doubted
sometimes whether He was the Christ, on account of the manifold signs
and force of His teaching, as is stated John 7:31, 41, nevertheless
they were deceived afterwards by their rulers, so that they did not
believe Him to be the Son of God or the Christ. Hence Peter said to
them: "I know that you did it through ignorance, as did also your
rulers"--namely, because they were seduced by the rulers.

Reply Obj. 1: Those words are spoken by the husbandmen of the
vineyard; and these signify the rulers of the people, who knew Him to
be the heir, inasmuch as they knew Him to be the Christ promised in
the Law, but the words of Ps. 2:8 seem to militate against this
answer: "Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the Gentiles for Thy
inheritance"; which are addressed to Him of whom it is said: "Thou
art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee." If, then, they knew Him
to be the one to whom the words were addressed: "Ask of Me, and I
will give Thee the Gentiles for Thy inheritance," it follows that
they knew Him to be the Son of God. Chrysostom, too, says upon the
same passage that "they knew Him to be the Son of God." Bede
likewise, commenting on the words, "For they know not what they do"
(Luke 23:34), says: "It is to be observed that He does not pray for
them who, understanding Him to be the Son of God, preferred to
crucify Him rather than acknowledge Him." But to this it may be
replied that they knew Him to be the Son of God, not from His Nature,
but from the excellence of His singular grace.

Yet we may hold that they are said to have known also that He was
verily the Son of God, in that they had evident signs thereof: yet
out of hatred and envy, they refused credence to these signs, by
which they might have known that He was the Son of God.

Reply Obj. 2: The words quoted are preceded by the following: "If I
had not done among them the works that no other man hath done, they
would not have sin"; and then follow the words: "But now they have
both seen and hated both Me and My Father." Now all this shows that
while they beheld Christ's marvelous works, it was owing to their
hatred that they did not know Him to be the Son of God.

Reply Obj. 3: Affected ignorance does not excuse from guilt, but
seems, rather, to aggravate it: for it shows that a man is so
strongly attached to sin that he wishes to incur ignorance lest he
avoid sinning. The Jews therefore sinned, as crucifiers not only of
the Man-Christ, but also as of God.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 47, Art. 6]

Whether the Sin of Those Who Crucified Christ Was Most Grievous?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sin of Christ's crucifiers was
not the most grievous. Because the sin which has some excuse cannot
be most grievous. But our Lord Himself excused the sin of His
crucifiers when He said: "Father, forgive them: for they know not
what they do" (Luke 23:34). Therefore theirs was not the most
grievous sin.

Obj. 2: Further, our Lord said to Pilate (John 19:11): "He that hath
delivered Me to thee hath the greater sin." But it was Pilate who
caused Christ to be crucified by his minions. Therefore the sin of
Judas the traitor seems to be greater than that of those who
crucified Him.

Obj. 3: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v): "No one
suffers injustice willingly"; and in the same place he adds: "Where
no one suffers injustice, nobody works injustice." Consequently
nobody wreaks injustice upon a willing subject. But Christ suffered
willingly, as was shown above (AA. 1, 2). Therefore those who
crucified Christ did Him no injustice; and hence their sin was not
the most grievous.

_On the contrary,_ Chrysostom, commenting on the words, "Fill ye up,
then, the measure of your fathers" (Matt. 23:32), says: "In very
truth they exceeded the measure of their fathers; for these latter
slew men, but they crucified God."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 5), the rulers of the Jews knew
that He was the Christ: and if there was any ignorance in them, it
was affected ignorance, which could not excuse them. Therefore their
sin was the most grievous, both on account of the kind of sin, as
well as from the malice of their will. The Jews also of the common
order sinned most grievously as to the kind of their sin: yet in one
respect their crime was lessened by reason of their ignorance. Hence
Bede, commenting on Luke 23:34, "Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do," says: "He prays for them who know not what they
are doing, as having the zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge." But the sin of the Gentiles, by whose hands He was
crucified, was much more excusable, since they had no knowledge of
the Law.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above, the excuse made by our Lord is not to
be referred to the rulers among the Jews, but to the common people.

Reply Obj. 2: Judas did not deliver up Christ to Pilate, but to the
chief priests who gave Him up to Pilate, according to John 18:35:
"Thy own nation and the chief priests have delivered Thee up to me."
But the sin of all these was greater than that of Pilate, who slew
Christ from fear of Caesar; and even greater than the sin of the
soldiers who crucified Him at the governor's bidding, not out of
cupidity like Judas, nor from envy and hate like the chief priests.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ, indeed willed His Passion just as the Father
willed it; yet He did not will the unjust action of the Jews.
Consequently Christ's slayers are not excused of their injustice.
Nevertheless, whoever slays a man not only does a wrong to the one
slain, but likewise to God and to the State; just as he who kills
himself, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. v). Hence it was that David
condemned to death the man who "did not fear to lay hands upon the
Lord's anointed," even though he (Saul) had requested it, as related
2 Kings 1:5-14.
_______________________

QUESTION 48

OF THE EFFICIENCY OF CHRIST'S PASSION
(In Six Articles)

We now have to consider Christ's Passion as to its effect; first of
all, as to the manner in which it was brought about; and, secondly,
as to the effect in itself. Under the first heading there are six
points for inquiry:

(1) Whether Christ's Passion brought about our salvation by way of
merit?

(2) Whether it was by way of atonement?

(3) Whether it was by way of sacrifice?

(4) Whether it was by way of redemption?

(5) Whether it is proper to Christ to be the Redeemer?

(6) Whether (the Passion) secured man's salvation efficiently?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 48, Art. 1]

Whether Christ's Passion Brought About Our Salvation by Way of Merit?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion did not bring about
our salvation by way of merit. For the sources of our sufferings are
not within us. But no one merits or is praised except for that whose
principle lies within him. Therefore Christ's Passion wrought nothing
by way of merit.

Obj. 2: Further, from the beginning of His conception Christ merited
for Himself and for us, as stated above (Q. 9, A. 4; Q. 34, A. 3).
But it is superfluous to merit over again what has been merited
before. Therefore by His Passion Christ did not merit our salvation.

Obj. 3: Further, the source of merit is charity. But Christ's charity
was not made greater by the Passion than it was before. Therefore He
did not merit our salvation by suffering more than He had already.

_On the contrary,_ on the words of Phil. 2:9, "Therefore God exalted
Him," etc., Augustine says (Tract. civ in Joan.): "The lowliness" of
the Passion "merited glory; glory was the reward of lowliness." But
He was glorified, not merely in Himself, but likewise in His faithful
ones, as He says Himself (John 17:10). Therefore it appears that He
merited the salvation of the faithful.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 7, AA. 1, 9; Q. 8, AA. 1, 5),
grace was bestowed upon Christ, not only as an individual, but
inasmuch as He is the Head of the Church, so that it might overflow
into His members; and therefore Christ's works are referred to
Himself and to His members in the same way as the works of any other
man in a state of grace are referred to himself. But it is evident
that whosoever suffers for justice's sake, provided that he be in a
state of grace, merits his salvation thereby, according to Matt.
5:10: "Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice's sake."
Consequently Christ by His Passion merited salvation, not only for
Himself, but likewise for all His members.

Reply Obj. 1: Suffering, as such, is caused by an outward principle:
but inasmuch as one bears it willingly, it has an inward principle.

Reply Obj. 2: From the beginning of His conception Christ merited our
eternal salvation; but on our side there were some obstacles, whereby
we were hindered from securing the effect of His preceding merits:
consequently, in order to remove such hindrances, "it was necessary
for Christ to suffer," as stated above (Q. 46, A. 3).

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's Passion has a special effect, which His
preceding merits did not possess, not on account of greater charity,
but because of the nature of the work, which was suitable for such an
effect, as is clear from the arguments brought forward above all the
fittingness of Christ's Passion (Q. 46, AA, 3, 4).
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 48, Art. 2]

Whether Christ's Passion Brought About Our Salvation by Way of
Atonement?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion did not bring about
our salvation by way of atonement. For it seems that to make the
atonement devolves on him who commits the sin; as is clear in the
other parts of penance, because he who has done the wrong must grieve
over it and confess it. But Christ never sinned, according to 1 Pet.
2:22: "Who did no sin." Therefore He made no atonement by His
personal suffering.

Obj. 2: Further, no atonement is made to another by committing a
graver offense. But in Christ's Passion the gravest of all offenses
was perpetrated, because those who slew Him sinned most grievously,
as stated above (Q. 47, A. 6). Consequently it seems that atonement
could not be made to God by Christ's Passion.

Obj. 3: Further, atonement implies equality with the trespass, since
it is an act of justice. But Christ's Passion does not appear equal
to all the sins of the human race, because Christ did not suffer in
His Godhead, but in His flesh, according to 1 Pet. 4:1: "Christ
therefore having suffered in the flesh." Now the soul, which is the
subject of sin, is of greater account than the flesh. Therefore
Christ did not atone for our sins by His Passion.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ps. 68:5) in Christ's person: "Then
did I pay that which I took not away." But he has not paid who has
not fully atoned. Therefore it appears that Christ by His suffering
has fully atoned for our sins.

_I answer that,_ He properly atones for an offense who offers
something which the offended one loves equally, or even more than he
detested the offense. But by suffering out of love and obedience,
Christ gave more to God than was required to compensate for the
offense of the whole human race. First of all, because of the
exceeding charity from which He suffered; secondly, on account of the
dignity of His life which He laid down in atonement, for it was the
life of one who was God and man; thirdly, on account of the extent of
the Passion, and the greatness of the grief endured, as stated above
(Q. 46, A. 6). And therefore Christ's Passion was not only a
sufficient but a superabundant atonement for the sins of the human
race; according to 1 John 2:2: "He is the propitiation for our sins:
and not for ours only, but also for those of the whole world."

Reply Obj. 1: The head and members are as one mystic person; and
therefore Christ's satisfaction belongs to all the faithful as being
His members. Also, in so far as any two men are one in charity, the
one can atone for the other as shall be shown later (Suppl., Q. 13,
A. 2). But the same reason does not hold good of confession and
contrition, because atonement consists in an outward action, for
which helps may be used, among which friends are to be computed.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's love was greater than His slayers' malice: and
therefore the value of His Passion in atoning surpassed the murderous
guilt of those who crucified Him: so much so that Christ's suffering
was sufficient and superabundant atonement for His murderer's crime.

Reply Obj. 3: The dignity of Christ's flesh is not to be estimated
solely from the nature of flesh, but also from the Person assuming
it--namely, inasmuch as it was God's flesh, the result of which was
that it was of infinite worth.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 48, Art. 3]

Whether Christ's Passion Operated by Way of Sacrifice?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion did not operate by
way of sacrifice. For the truth should correspond with the figure.
But human flesh was never offered up in the sacrifices of the Old
Law, which were figures of Christ: nay, such sacrifices were reputed
as impious, according to Ps. 105:38: "And they shed innocent blood:
the blood of their sons and of their daughters, which they sacrificed
to the idols of Chanaan." It seems therefore that Christ's Passion
cannot be called a sacrifice.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x) that "a visible
sacrifice is a sacrament--that is, a sacred sign--of an invisible
sacrifice." Now Christ's Passion is not a sign, but rather the thing
signified by other signs. Therefore it seems that Christ's Passion is
not a sacrifice.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever offers sacrifice performs some sacred rite,
as the very word "sacrifice" shows. But those men who slew Christ did
not perform any sacred act, but rather wrought a great wrong.
Therefore Christ's Passion was rather a malefice than a sacrifice.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Eph. 5:2): "He delivered Himself
up for us, an oblation and a sacrifice to God for an odor of
sweetness."

_I answer that,_ A sacrifice properly so called is something done for
that honor which is properly due to God, in order to appease Him: and
hence it is that Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x): "A true sacrifice is
every good work done in order that we may cling to God in holy
fellowship, yet referred to that consummation of happiness wherein we
can be truly blessed." But, as is added in the same place, "Christ
offered Himself up for us in the Passion": and this voluntary
enduring of the Passion was most acceptable to God, as coming from
charity. Therefore it is manifest that Christ's Passion was a true
sacrifice. Moreover, as Augustine says farther on in the same book,
"the primitive sacrifices of the holy Fathers were many and various
signs of this true sacrifice, one being prefigured by many, in the
same way as a single concept of thought is expressed in many words,
in order to commend it without tediousness": and, as Augustine
observe, (De Trin. iv), "since there are four things to be noted in
every sacrifice--to wit, to whom it is offered, by whom it is
offered, what is offered, and for whom it is offered--that the same
one true Mediator reconciling us with God through the peace-sacrifice
might continue to be one with Him to whom He offered it, might be one
with them for whom He offered it, and might Himself be the offerer
and what He offered."

Reply Obj. 1: Although the truth answers to the figure in some
respects, yet it does not in all, since the truth must go beyond the
figure. Therefore the figure of this sacrifice, in which Christ's
flesh is offered, was flesh right fittingly, not the flesh of men,
but of animals, as denoting Christ's. And this is a most perfect
sacrifice. First of all, since being flesh of human nature, it is
fittingly offered for men, and is partaken of by them under the
Sacrament. Secondly, because being passible and mortal, it was fit
for immolation. Thirdly, because, being sinless, it had virtue to
cleanse from sins. Fourthly, because, being the offerer's own flesh,
it was acceptable to God on account of His charity in offering up His
own flesh. Hence it is that Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "What else
could be so fittingly partaken of by men, or offered up for men, as
human flesh? What else could be so appropriate for this immolation as
mortal flesh? What else is there so clean for cleansing mortals as
the flesh born in the womb without fleshly concupiscence, and coming
from a virginal womb? What could be so favorably offered and accepted
as the flesh of our sacrifice, which was made the body of our Priest?"

Reply Obj. 2: Augustine is speaking there of visible figurative
sacrifices: and even Christ's Passion, although denoted by other
figurative sacrifices, is yet a sign of something to be observed by
us, according to 1 Pet. 4:1: "Christ therefore, having suffered in
the flesh, be you also armed with the same thought: for he that hath
suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sins: that now he may live the
rest of his time in the flesh, not after the desires of men, but
according to the will of God."

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's Passion was indeed a malefice on His slayers'
part; but on His own it was the sacrifice of one suffering out of
charity. Hence it is Christ who is said to have offered this
sacrifice, and not the executioners.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 48, Art. 3]

Whether Christ's Passion Brought About Our Salvation by Way of
Redemption?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion did not effect our
salvation by way of redemption. For no one purchases or redeems what
never ceased to belong to him. But men never ceased to belong to God
according to Ps. 23:1: "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness
thereof: the world and all they that dwell therein." Therefore it
seems that Christ did not redeem us by His Passion.

Obj. 2: Further, as Augustine says (De Trin. xiii): "The devil had to
be overthrown by Christ's justice." But justice requires that the man
who has treacherously seized another's property shall be deprived of
it, because deceit and cunning should not benefit anyone, as even
human laws declare. Consequently, since the devil by treachery
deceived and subjugated to himself man, who is God's creature, it
seems that man ought not to be rescued from his power by way of
redemption.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever buys or redeems an object pays the price to
the holder. But it was not to the devil, who held us in bondage, that
Christ paid His blood as the price of our redemption. Therefore
Christ did not redeem us by His Passion.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (1 Pet. 1:18): "You were not
redeemed with corruptible things as gold or silver from your vain
conversation of the tradition of your fathers: but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled." And (Gal.
3:13): "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made
a curse for us." Now He is said to be a curse for us inasmuch as He
suffered upon the tree, as stated above (Q. 46, A. 4). Therefore He
did redeem us by His Passion.

_I answer that,_ Man was held captive on account of sin in two ways:
first of all, by the bondage of sin, because (John 8:34): "Whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin"; and (2 Pet. 2:19): "By whom a
man is overcome, of the same also he is the slave." Since, then, the
devil had overcome man by inducing him to sin, man was subject to the
devil's bondage. Secondly, as to the debt of punishment, to the
payment of which man was held fast by God's justice: and this, too,
is a kind of bondage, since it savors of bondage for a man to suffer
what he does not wish, just as it is the free man's condition to
apply himself to what he wills.

Since, then, Christ's Passion was a sufficient and a superabundant
atonement for the sin and the debt of the human race, it was as a
price at the cost of which we were freed from both obligations. For
the atonement by which one satisfies for self or another is called
the price, by which he ransoms himself or someone else from sin and
its penalty, according to Dan. 4:24: "Redeem thou thy sins with
alms." Now Christ made satisfaction, not by giving money or anything
of the sort, but by bestowing what was of greatest
price--Himself--for us. And therefore Christ's Passion is called our
redemption.

Reply Obj. 1: Man is said to belong to God in two ways. First of all,
in so far as he comes under God's power: in which way he never ceased
to belong to God; according to Dan. 4:22: "The Most High ruleth over
the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will." Secondly,
by being united to Him in charity, according to Rom. 8:9: "If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." In the first way,
then, man never ceased to belong to God, but in the second way he did
cease because of sin. And therefore in so far as he was delivered
from sin by the satisfaction of Christ's Passion, he is said to be
redeemed by the Passion of Christ.

Reply Obj. 2: Man by sinning became the bondsman both of God and of
the devil. Through guilt he had offended God, and put himself under
the devil by consenting to him; consequently he did not become God's
servant on account of his guilt, but rather, by withdrawing from
God's service, he, by God's just permission, fell under the devil's
servitude on account of the offense perpetrated. But as to the
penalty, man was chiefly bound to God as his sovereign judge, and to
the devil as his torturer, according to Matt. 5:25: "Lest perhaps the
adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to
the officer"--that is, "to the relentless avenging angel," as
Chrysostom says (Hom. xi). Consequently, although, after deceiving
man, the devil, so far as in him lay, held him unjustly in bondage as
to both sin and penalty, still it was just that man should suffer it,
God so permitting it as to the sin and ordaining it as to the
penalty. And therefore justice required man's redemption with regard
to God, but not with regard to the devil.

Reply Obj. 3: Because, with regard to God, redemption was necessary
for man's deliverance, but not with regard to the devil, the price
had to be paid not to the devil, but to God. And therefore Christ is
said to have paid the price of our redemption--His own precious
blood--not to the devil, but to God.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 48, Art. 5]

Whether It Is Proper to Christ to Be the Redeemer?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not proper to Christ to be the
Redeemer, because it is written (Ps. 30:6): "Thou hast redeemed me, O
Lord, the God of Truth." But to be the Lord God of Truth belongs to
the entire Trinity. Therefore it is not proper to Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, he is said to redeem who pays the price of
redemption. But God the Father gave His Son in redemption for our
sins, as is written (Ps. 110:9): "The Lord hath sent redemption to
His people," upon which the gloss adds, "that is, Christ, who gives
redemption to captives." Therefore not only Christ, but the Father
also, redeemed us.

Obj. 3: Further, not only Christ's Passion, but also that of other
saints conduced to our salvation, according to Col. 1:24: "I now
rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up those things that are
wanting of the sufferings of Christ, in my flesh for His body, which
is the Church." Therefore the title of Redeemer belongs not only to
Christ, but also to the other saints.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Gal. 3:13): "Christ redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us." But only
Christ was made a curse for us. Therefore only Christ ought to be
called our Redeemer.

_I answer that,_ For someone to redeem, two things are
required--namely, the act of paying and the price paid. For if in
redeeming something a man pays a price which is not his own, but
another's, he is not said to be the chief redeemer, but rather the
other is, whose price it is. Now Christ's blood or His bodily life,
which "is in the blood," is the price of our redemption (Lev. 17:11,
14), and that life He paid. Hence both of these belong immediately to
Christ as man; but to the Trinity as to the first and remote cause,
to whom Christ's life belonged as to its first author, and from whom
Christ received the inspiration of suffering for us. Consequently it
is proper to Christ as man to be the Redeemer immediately; although
the redemption may be ascribed to the whole Trinity as its first
cause.

Reply Obj. 1: A gloss explains the text thus: "Thou, O Lord God of
Truth, hast redeemed me in Christ, crying out, 'Lord, into Thy hands
I commend my spirit.'" And so redemption belongs immediately to the
Man-Christ, but principally to God.

Reply Obj. 2: The Man-Christ paid the price of our redemption
immediately, but at the command of the Father as the original author.

Reply Obj. 3: The sufferings of the saints are beneficial to the
Church, as by way, not of redemption, but of example and exhortation,
according to 2 Cor. 1:6: "Whether we be in tribulation, it is for
your exhortation and salvation."
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 48, Art. 6]

Whether Christ's Passion Brought About Our Salvation Efficiently?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion did not bring about
our salvation efficiently. For the efficient cause of our salvation
is the greatness of the Divine power, according to Isa. 59:1: "Behold
the hand of the Lord is not shortened that it cannot save." But
"Christ was crucified through weakness," as it is written (2 Cor.
13:4). Therefore, Christ's Passion did not bring about our salvation
efficiently.

Obj. 2: Further, no corporeal agency acts efficiently except by
contact: hence even Christ cleansed the leper by touching him "in
order to show that His flesh had saving power," as Chrysostom
[*Theophylact, Enarr. in Luc.] says. But Christ's Passion could not
touch all mankind. Therefore it could not efficiently bring about the
salvation of all men.

Obj. 3: Further, it does not seem to be consistent for the same agent
to operate by way of merit and by way of efficiency, since he who
merits awaits the result from someone else. But it was by way of
merit that Christ's Passion accomplished our salvation. Therefore it
was not by way of efficiency.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (1 Cor. 1:18) that "the word of the
cross to them that are saved . . . is the power of God." But God's
power brings about our salvation efficiently. Therefore Christ's
Passion on the cross accomplished our salvation efficiently.

_I answer that,_ There is a twofold efficient agency--namely, the
principal and the instrumental. Now the principal efficient cause of
man's salvation is God. But since Christ's humanity is the
"instrument of the Godhead," as stated above (Q. 43, A. 2), therefore
all Christ's actions and sufferings operate instrumentally in virtue
of His Godhead for the salvation of men. Consequently, then, Christ's
Passion accomplishes man's salvation efficiently.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ's Passion in relation to His flesh is consistent
with the infirmity which He took upon Himself, but in relation to the
Godhead it draws infinite might from It, according to 1 Cor. 1:25:
"The weakness of God is stronger than men"; because Christ's
weakness, inasmuch as He is God, has a might exceeding all human
power.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's Passion, although corporeal, has yet a
spiritual effect from the Godhead united: and therefore it secures
its efficacy by spiritual contact--namely, by faith and the
sacraments of faith, as the Apostle says (Rom. 3:25): "Whom God hath
proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in His blood."

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's Passion, according as it is compared with His
Godhead, operates in an efficient manner: but in so far as it is
compared with the will of Christ's soul it acts in a meritorious
manner: considered as being within Christ's very flesh, it acts by
way of satisfaction, inasmuch as we are liberated by it from the debt
of punishment; while inasmuch as we are freed from the servitude of
guilt, it acts by way of redemption: but in so far as we are
reconciled with God it acts by way of sacrifice, as shall be shown
farther on (Q. 49).
_______________________

QUESTION 49

OF THE EFFECTS OF CHRIST'S PASSION
(In Six Articles)

We have now to consider what are the effects of Christ's Passion,
concerning which there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether we were freed from sin by Christ's Passion?

(2) Whether we were thereby delivered from the power of the devil?

(3) Whether we were freed thereby from our debt of punishment?

(4) Whether we were thereby reconciled with God?

(5) Whether heaven's gate was opened to us thereby?

(6) Whether Christ derived exaltation from it?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 49, Art. 1]

Whether We Were Delivered from Sin Through Christ's Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that we were not delivered from sin
through Christ's Passion. For to deliver from sin belongs to God
alone, according to Isa. 43:25: "I am He who blot out your iniquities
for My own sake." But Christ did not suffer as God, but as man.
Therefore Christ's Passion did not free us from sin.

Obj. 2: Further, what is corporeal does not act upon what is
spiritual. But Christ's Passion is corporeal, whereas sin exists in
the soul, which is a spiritual creature. Therefore Christ's Passion
could not cleanse us from sin.

Obj. 3: Further, one cannot be purged from a sin not yet committed,
but which shall be committed hereafter. Since, then, many sins have
been committed since Christ's death, and are being committed daily,
it seems that we were not delivered from sin by Christ's death.

Obj. 4: Further, given an efficient cause, nothing else is required
for producing the effect. But other things besides are required for
the forgiveness of sins, such as baptism and penance. Consequently it
seems that Christ's Passion is not the sufficient cause of the
forgiveness of sins.

Obj. 5: Further, it is written (Prov. 10:12): "Charity covereth all
sins"; and (Prov. 15:27): "By mercy and faith, sins are purged away."
But there are many other things of which we have faith, and which
excite charity. Therefore Christ's Passion is not the proper cause of
the forgiveness of sins.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Apoc. 1:5): "He loved us, and
washed us from our sins in His own blood."

_I answer that,_ Christ's Passion is the proper cause of the
forgiveness of sins in three ways. First of all, by way of exciting
our charity, because, as the Apostle says (Rom. 5:8): "God commendeth
His charity towards us: because when as yet we were sinners,
according to the time, Christ died for us." But it is by charity that
we procure pardon of our sins, according to Luke 7:47: "Many sins are
forgiven her because she hath loved much." Secondly, Christ's Passion
causes forgiveness of sins by way of redemption. For since He is our
head, then, by the Passion which He endured from love and obedience,
He delivered us as His members from our sins, as by the price of His
Passion: in the same way as if a man by the good industry of his
hands were to redeem himself from a sin committed with his feet. For,
just as the natural body is one though made up of diverse members, so
the whole Church, Christ's mystic body, is reckoned as one person
with its head, which is Christ. Thirdly, by way of efficiency,
inasmuch as Christ's flesh, wherein He endured the Passion, is the
instrument of the Godhead, so that His sufferings and actions operate
with Divine power for expelling sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Although Christ did not suffer as God, nevertheless His
flesh is the instrument of the Godhead; and hence it is that His
Passion has a kind of Divine Power of casting out sin, as was said
above.

Reply Obj. 2: Although Christ's Passion is corporeal, still it
derives a kind of spiritual energy from the Godhead, to which the
flesh is united as an instrument: and according to this power
Christ's Passion is the cause of the forgiveness of sins.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ by His Passion delivered us from our sins
causally--that is, by setting up the cause of our deliverance, from
which cause all sins whatsoever, past, present, or to come, could be
forgiven: just as if a doctor were to prepare a medicine by which all
sicknesses can be cured even in future.

Reply Obj. 4: As stated above, since Christ's Passion preceded, as a
kind of universal cause of the forgiveness of sins, it needs to be
applied to each individual for the cleansing of personal sins. Now
this is done by baptism and penance and the other sacraments, which
derive their power from Christ's Passion, as shall be shown later (Q.
62, A. 5).

Reply Obj. 5: Christ's Passion is applied to us even through faith,
that we may share in its fruits, according to Rom. 3:25: "Whom God
hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in His blood." But
the faith through which we are cleansed from sin is not _lifeless
faith,_ which can exist even with sin, but _faith living_ through
charity; that thus Christ's Passion may be applied to us, not only as
to our minds, but also as to our hearts. And even in this way sins
are forgiven through the power of the Passion of Christ.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 49, Art. 2]

Whether We Were Delivered from the Devil's Power Through Christ's
Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that we were not delivered from the power
of the devil through Christ's Passion. For he has no power over
others, who can do nothing to them without the sanction of another.
But without the Divine permission the devil could never do hurt to
any man, as is evident in the instance of Job (1, 2), where, by power
received from God, the devil first injured him in his possessions,
and afterwards in his body. In like manner it is stated (Matt. 8:31,
32) that the devils could not enter into the swine except with
Christ's leave. Therefore the devil never had power over men: and
hence we are not delivered from his power through Christ's Passion.

Obj. 2: Further, the devil exercises his power over men by tempting
them and molesting their bodies. But even after the Passion he
continues to do the same to men. Therefore we are not delivered from
his power through Christ's Passion.

Obj. 3: Further, the might of Christ's Passion endures for ever, as,
according to Heb. 10:14: "By one oblation He hath perfected for ever
them that are sanctified." But deliverance from the devil's power is
not found everywhere, since there are still idolaters in many regions
of the world; nor will it endure for ever, because in the time of
Antichrist he will be especially active in using his power to the
hurt of men; because it is said of him (2 Thess. 2:9): "Whose coming
is according to the working of Satan, in all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, and in all seduction of iniquity." Consequently it
seems that Christ's Passion is not the cause of the human race being
delivered from the power of the devil.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord said (John 12:31), when His Passion was
drawing nigh: "Now shall the prince of this world be cast out; and I,
if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all things to Myself."
Now He was lifted up from the earth by His Passion on the cross.
Therefore by His Passion the devil was deprived of his power over man.

_I answer that,_ There are three things to be considered regarding
the power which the devil exercised over men previous to Christ's
Passion. The first is on man's own part, who by his sin deserved to
be delivered over to the devil's power, and was overcome by his
tempting. Another point is on God's part, whom man had offended by
sinning, and who with justice left man under the devil's power. The
third is on the devil's part, who out of his most wicked will
hindered man from securing his salvation.

As to the first point, by Christ's Passion man was delivered from the
devil's power, in so far as the Passion is the cause of the
forgiveness of sins, as stated above (A. 1). As to the second, it
must be said that Christ's Passion freed us from the devil's power,
inasmuch as it reconciled us with God, as shall be shown later (A.
4). But as to the third, Christ's Passion delivered us from the
devil, inasmuch as in Christ's Passion he exceeded the limit of power
assigned him by God, by conspiring to bring about Christ's death,
Who, being sinless, did not deserve to die. Hence Augustine says (De
Trin. xiii, cap. xiv): "The devil was vanquished by Christ's justice:
because, while discovering in Him nothing deserving of death,
nevertheless he slew Him. And it is certainly just that the debtors
whom he held captive should be set at liberty since they believed in
Him whom the devil slew, though He was no debtor."

Reply Obj. 1: The devil is said to have had such power over men not
as though he were able to injure them without God's sanction, but
because he was justly permitted to injure men whom by tempting he had
induced to give consent.

Reply Obj. 2: God so permitting it, the devil can still tempt men's
souls and harass their bodies: yet there is a remedy provided for man
through Christ's Passion, whereby he can safeguard himself against
the enemy's assaults, so as not to be dragged down into the
destruction of everlasting death. And all who resisted the devil
previous to the Passion were enabled to do so through faith in the
Passion, although it was not yet accomplished. Yet in one respect no
one was able to escape the devil's hands, i.e. so as not to descend
into hell. But after Christ's Passion, men can defend themselves from
this by its power.

Reply Obj. 3: God permits the devil to deceive men by certain
persons, and in times and places, according to the hidden motive of
His judgments; still, there is always a remedy provided through
Christ's Passion, for defending themselves against the wicked snares
of the demons, even in Antichrist's time. But if any man neglect to
make use of this remedy, it detracts nothing from the efficacy of
Christ's Passion.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 49, Art. 3]

Whether Men Were Freed from the Punishment of Sin Through Christ's
Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that men were not freed from the
punishment of sin by Christ's Passion. For the chief punishment of
sin is eternal damnation. But those damned in hell for their sins
were not set free by Christ's Passion, because "in hell there is no
redemption" [*Office of the Dead, Resp. vii]. It seems, therefore,
that Christ's Passion did not deliver men from the punishment of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no punishment should be imposed upon them who are
delivered from the debt of punishment. But a satisfactory punishment
is imposed upon penitents. Consequently, men were not freed from the
debt of punishment by Christ's Passion.

Obj. 3: Further, death is a punishment of sin, according to Rom.
6:23: "The wages of sin is death." But men still die after Christ's
Passion. Therefore it seems that we have not been delivered from the
debt of punishment.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Isa. 53:4): "Surely He hath borne
our iniquities and carried our sorrows."

_I answer that,_ Through Christ's Passion we have been delivered from
the debt of punishment in two ways. First of all, directly--namely,
inasmuch as Christ's Passion was sufficient and superabundant
satisfaction for the sins of the whole human race: but when
sufficient satisfaction has been paid, then the debt of punishment is
abolished. In another way--indirectly, that is to say--in so far as
Christ's Passion is the cause of the forgiveness of sin, upon which
the debt of punishment rests.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ's Passion works its effect in them to whom it is
applied, through faith and charity and the sacraments of faith. And,
consequently, the lost in hell cannot avail themselves of its
effects, since they are not united to Christ in the aforesaid manner.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (A. 1, ad 4, 5), in order to secure the
effects of Christ's Passion, we must be likened unto Him. Now we are
likened unto Him sacramentally in Baptism, according to Rom. 6:4:
"For we are buried together with Him by baptism into death." Hence no
punishment of satisfaction is imposed upon men at their baptism,
since they are fully delivered by Christ's satisfaction. But because,
as it is written (1 Pet. 3:18), "Christ died" but "once for our
sins," therefore a man cannot a second time be likened unto Christ's
death by the sacrament of Baptism. Hence it is necessary that those
who sin after Baptism be likened unto Christ suffering by some form
of punishment or suffering which they endure in their own person;
yet, by the co-operation of Christ's satisfaction, much lighter
penalty suffices than one that is proportionate to the sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's satisfaction works its effect in us inasmuch
as we are incorporated with Him, as the members with their head, as
stated above (A. 1). Now the members must be conformed to their head.
Consequently, as Christ first had grace in His soul with bodily
passibility, and through the Passion attained to the glory of
immortality, so we likewise, who are His members, are freed by His
Passion from all debt of punishment, yet so that we first receive in
our souls "the spirit of adoption of sons," whereby our names are
written down for the inheritance of immortal glory, while we yet have
a passible and mortal body: but afterwards, "being made conformable"
to the sufferings and death of Christ, we are brought into immortal
glory, according to the saying of the Apostle (Rom. 8:17): "And if
sons, heirs also: heirs indeed of God, and joint heirs with Christ;
yet so if we suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified with Him."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 49, Art. 4]

Whether We Were Reconciled to God Through Christ's Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that we were not reconciled to God through
Christ's Passion. For there is no need of reconciliation between
friends. But God always loved us, according to Wis. 11:25: "Thou
lovest all the things that are, and hatest none of the things which
Thou hast made." Therefore Christ's Passion did not reconcile us to
God.

Obj. 2: Further, the same thing cannot be cause and effect: hence
grace, which is the cause of meriting, does not come under merit. But
God's love is the cause of Christ's Passion, according to John 3:16:
"God so loved the world, as to give His only-begotten Son." It does
not appear, then, that we were reconciled to God through Christ's
Passion, so that He began to love us anew.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ's Passion was completed by men slaying Him;
and thereby they offended God grievously. Therefore Christ's Passion
is rather the cause of wrath than of reconciliation to God.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 5:10): "We are reconciled
to God by the death of His Son."

_I answer that,_ Christ's Passion is in two ways the cause of our
reconciliation to God. In the first way, inasmuch as it takes away
sin by which men became God's enemies, according to Wis. 14:9: "To
God the wicked and his wickedness are hateful alike"; and Ps. 5:7:
"Thou hatest all the workers of iniquity." In another way, inasmuch
as it is a most acceptable sacrifice to God. Now it is the proper
effect of sacrifice to appease God: just as man likewise overlooks an
offense committed against him on account of some pleasing act of
homage shown him. Hence it is written (1 Kings 26:19): "If the Lord
stir thee up against me, let Him accept of sacrifice." And in like
fashion Christ's voluntary suffering was such a good act that,
because of its being found in human nature, God was appeased for
every offense of the human race with regard to those who are made one
with the crucified Christ in the aforesaid manner (A. 1, ad 4).

Reply Obj. 1: God loves all men as to their nature, which He Himself
made; yet He hates them with respect to the crimes they commit
against Him, according to Ecclus. 12:3: "The Highest hateth sinners."

Reply Obj. 2: Christ is not said to have reconciled us with God, as
if God had begun anew to love us, since it is written (Jer. 31:3): "I
have loved thee with an everlasting love"; but because the source of
hatred was taken away by Christ's Passion, both through sin being
washed away and through compensation being made in the shape of a
more pleasing offering.

Reply Obj. 3: As Christ's slayers were men, so also was the Christ
slain. Now the charity of the suffering Christ surpassed the
wickedness of His slayers. Accordingly Christ's Passion prevailed
more in reconciling God to the whole human race than in provoking Him
to wrath.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 49, Art. 5]

Whether Christ Opened the Gate of Heaven to Us by His Passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not open the gate of
heaven to us by His Passion. For it is written (Prov. 11:18): "To him
that soweth justice, there is a faithful reward." But the reward of
justice is the entering into the kingdom of heaven. It seems,
therefore, that the holy Fathers who wrought works of justice,
obtained by faith the entering into the heavenly kingdom even without
Christ's Passion. Consequently Christ's Passion is not the cause of
the opening of the gate of the kingdom of heaven.

Obj. 2: Further, Elias was caught up to heaven previous to Christ's
Passion (4 Kings 2). But the effect never precedes the cause.
Therefore it seems that the opening of heaven's gate is not the
result of Christ's Passion.

Obj. 3: Further, as it is written (Matt. 3:16), when Christ was
baptized the heavens were opened to Him. But His baptism preceded the
Passion. Consequently the opening of heaven is not the result of
Christ's Passion.

Obj. 4: Further, it is written (Mic. 2:13): "For He shall go up that
shall open the way before them." But to open the way to heaven seems
to be nothing else than to throw open its gate. Therefore it seems
that the gate of heaven was opened to us, not by Christ's Passion,
but by His Ascension.

_On the contrary,_ is the saying of the Apostle (Heb. 10:19): "We
have [Vulg.: 'having a'] confidence in the entering into the
Holies"--that is, of the heavenly places--"through the blood of
Christ."

_I answer that,_ The shutting of the gate is the obstacle which
hinders men from entering in. But it is on account of sin that men
were prevented from entering into the heavenly kingdom, since,
according to Isa. 35:8: "It shall be called the holy way, and the
unclean shall not pass over it." Now there is a twofold sin which
prevents men from entering into the kingdom of heaven. The first is
common to the whole race, for it is our first parents' sin, and by
that sin heaven's entrance is closed to man. Hence we read in Gen.
3:24 that after our first parents' sin God "placed . . . cherubim and
a flaming sword, turning every way, to keep the way of the tree of
life." The other is the personal sin of each one of us, committed by
our personal act.

Now by Christ's Passion we have been delivered not only from the
common sin of the whole human race, both as to its guilt and as to
the debt of punishment, for which He paid the penalty on our behalf;
but, furthermore, from the personal sins of individuals, who share in
His Passion by faith and charity and the sacraments of faith.
Consequently, then the gate of heaven's kingdom is thrown open to us
through Christ's Passion. This is precisely what the Apostle says
(Heb. 9:11, 12): "Christ being come a high-priest of the good things
to come . . . by His own blood entered once into the Holies, having
obtained eternal redemption." And this is foreshadowed (Num. 35:25,
28), where it is said that the slayer* "shall abide there"--that is
to say, in the city of refuge--"until the death of the high-priest,
that is anointed with the holy oil: but after he is dead, then shall
he return home." [*The Septuagint has 'slayer', the Vulgate,
'innocent'--i.e. the man who has slain 'without hatred and enmity'.]

Reply Obj. 1: The holy Fathers, by doing works of justice, merited to
enter into the heavenly kingdom, through faith in Christ's Passion,
according to Heb. 11:33: The saints "by faith conquered kingdoms,
wrought justice," and each of them was thereby cleansed from sin, so
far as the cleansing of the individual is concerned. Nevertheless the
faith and righteousness of no one of them sufficed for removing the
barrier arising from the guilt of the whole human race: but this was
removed at the cost of Christ's blood. Consequently, before Christ's
Passion no one could enter the kingdom of heaven by obtaining
everlasting beatitude, which consists in the full enjoyment of God.

Reply Obj. 2: Elias was taken up into the atmospheric heaven, but not
in to the empyrean heaven, which is the abode of the saints: and
likewise Enoch was translated into the earthly paradise, where he is
believed to live with Elias until the coming of Antichrist.

Reply Obj. 3: As was stated above (Q. 39, A. 5), the heavens were
opened at Christ's baptism, not for Christ's sake, to whom heaven was
ever open, but in order to signify that heaven is opened to the
baptized, through Christ's baptism, which has its efficacy from His
Passion.

Reply Obj. 4: Christ by His Passion merited for us the opening of the
kingdom of heaven, and removed the obstacle; but by His ascension He,
as it were, brought us to the possession of the heavenly kingdom. And
consequently it is said that by ascending He "opened the way before
them."
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 49, Art. 6]

Whether by His Passion Christ Merited to Be Exalted?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ did not merit to be exalted on
account of His Passion. For eminence of rank belongs to God alone,
just as knowledge of truth, according to Ps. 112:4: "The Lord is high
above all nations, and His glory above the heavens." But Christ as
man had the knowledge of all truth, not on account of any preceding
merit, but from the very union of God and man, according to John
1:14: "We saw His glory . . . as it were of the only-Begotten of the
Father, full of grace and of truth." Therefore neither had He
exaltation from the merit of the Passion but from the union alone.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ merited for Himself from the first instant of
His conception, as stated above (Q. 34, A. 3). But His love was no
greater during the Passion than before. Therefore, since charity is
the principle of merit, it seems that He did not merit exaltation
from the Passion more than before.

Obj. 3: Further, the glory of the body comes from the glory of the
soul, as Augustine says (Ep. ad Dioscor.). But by His Passion Christ
did not merit exaltation as to the glory of His soul, because His
soul was beatified from the first instant of His conception.
Therefore neither did He merit exaltation, as to the glory of His
body, from the Passion.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Phil. 2:8): "He became obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross; for which cause God also
exalted Him."

_I answer that,_ Merit implies a certain equality of justice: hence
the Apostle says (Rom. 4:4): "Now to him that worketh, the reward is
reckoned according to debt." But when anyone by reason of his unjust
will ascribes to himself something beyond his due, it is only just
that he be deprived of something else which is his due; thus, "when a
man steals a sheep he shall pay back four" (Ex. 22:1). And he is said
to deserve it, inasmuch as his unjust will is chastised thereby. So
likewise when any man through his just will has stripped himself of
what he ought to have, he deserves that something further be granted
to him as the reward of his just will. And hence it is written (Luke
14:11): "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted."

Now in His Passion Christ humbled Himself beneath His dignity in four
respects. In the first place as to His Passion and death, to which He
was not bound; secondly, as to the place, since His body was laid in
a sepulchre and His soul in hell; thirdly, as to the shame and
mockeries He endured; fourthly, as to His being delivered up to man's
power, as He Himself said to Pilate (John 19:11): "Thou shouldst not
have any power against Me, unless it were given thee from above."
And, consequently, He merited a four-fold exaltation from His
Passion. First of all, as to His glorious Resurrection: hence it is
written (Ps. 138:1): "Thou hast known my sitting down"--that is, the
lowliness of My Passion--"and My rising up." Secondly, as to His
ascension into heaven: hence it is written (Eph. 4:9): "Now that He
ascended, what is it, but because He also descended first into the
lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the same also that
ascended above all the heavens." Thirdly, as to the sitting on the
right hand of the Father and the showing forth of His Godhead,
according to Isa. 52:13: "He shall be exalted and extolled, and shall
be exceeding high: as many have been astonished at him, so shall His
visage be inglorious among men." Moreover (Phil. 2:8) it is written:
"He humbled Himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to the death
of the cross: for which cause also God hath exalted Him, and hath
given Him a name which is above all names"--that is to say, so that
He shall be hailed as God by all; and all shall pay Him homage as
God. And this is expressed in what follows: "That in the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, of those that are in heaven, on earth,
and under the earth." Fourthly, as to His judiciary power: for it is
written (Job 36:17): "Thy cause hath been judged as that of the
wicked cause and judgment Thou shalt recover."

Reply Obj. 1: The source of meriting comes of the soul, while the
body is the instrument of the meritorious work. And consequently the
perfection of Christ's soul, which was the source of meriting, ought
not to be acquired in Him by merit, like the perfection of the body,
which was the subject of suffering, and was thereby the instrument of
His merit.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ by His previous merits did merit exaltation on
behalf of His soul, whose will was animated with charity and the
other virtues; but in the Passion He merited His exaltation by way of
recompense even on behalf of His body: since it is only just that the
body, which from charity was subjected to the Passion, should receive
recompense in glory.

Reply Obj. 3: It was owing to a special dispensation in Christ that
before the Passion the glory of His soul did not shine out in His
body, in order that He might procure His bodily glory with greater
honor, when He had merited it by His Passion. But it was not
beseeming for the glory of His soul to be postponed, since the soul
was united immediately with the Word; hence it was beseeming that its
glory should be filled by the Word Himself. But the body was united
with the Word through the soul.
_______________________

QUESTION 50

OF THE DEATH OF CHRIST

We have now to consider the death of Christ; concerning which there
are six subjects of inquiry:

(1) Whether it was fitting that Christ should die?

(2) Whether His death severed the union of Godhead and flesh?

(3) Whether His Godhead was separated from His soul?

(4) Whether Christ was a man during the three days of His death?

(5) Whether His was the same body, living and dead?

(6) Whether His death conduced in any way to our salvation?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 50, Art. 1]

Whether It Was Fitting That Christ Should Die?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not fitting that Christ should
die. For a first principle in any order is not affected by anything
contrary to such order: thus fire, which is the principle of heat,
can never become cold. But the Son of God is the fountain-head and
principle of all life, according to Ps. 35:10: "With Thee is the
fountain of life." Therefore it does not seem fitting for Christ to
die.

Obj. 2: Further, death is a greater defect than sickness, because it
is through sickness that one comes to die. But it was not beseeming
for Christ to languish from sickness, as Chrysostom [*Athanasius,
Orat. de Incarn. Verbi] says. Consequently, neither was it becoming
for Christ to die.

Obj. 3: Further, our Lord said (John 10:10): "I am come that they may
have life, and may have it more abundantly." But one opposite does
not lead to another. Therefore it seems that neither was it fitting
for Christ to die.

_On the contrary,_ It is written, (John 11:50): "It is expedient that
one man should die for the people . . . that the whole nation perish
not": which words were spoken prophetically by Caiphas, as the
Evangelist testifies.

_I answer that,_ It was fitting for Christ to die. First of all to
satisfy for the whole human race, which was sentenced to die on
account of sin, according to Gen. 2:17: "In what day soever ye shall
[Vulg.: 'thou shalt'] eat of it ye shall [Vulg.: 'thou shalt'] die
the death." Now it is a fitting way of satisfying for another to
submit oneself to the penalty deserved by that other. And so Christ
resolved to die, that by dying He might atone for us, according to 1
Pet. 3:18: "Christ also died once for our sins." Secondly, in order
to show the reality of the flesh assumed. For, as Eusebius says
(Orat. de Laud. Constant. xv), "if, after dwelling among men Christ
were suddenly to disappear from men's sight, as though shunning
death, then by all men He would be likened to a phantom." Thirdly,
that by dying He might deliver us from fearing death: hence it is
written (Heb. 2:14, 15) that He communicated "to flesh and blood,
that through death He might destroy him who had the empire of death
and might deliver them who, through the fear of death, were all their
lifetime subject to servitude." Fourthly, that by dying in the body
to the likeness of sin--that is, to its penalty--He might set us the
example of dying to sin spiritually. Hence it is written (Rom. 6:10):
"For in that He died to sin, He died once, but in that He liveth, He
liveth unto God: so do you also reckon that you are dead to sin, but
alive unto God." Fifthly, that by rising from the dead, and
manifesting His power whereby He overthrew death, He might instill
into us the hope of rising from the dead. Hence the Apostle says (1
Cor. 15:12): "If Christ be preached that He rose again from the dead,
how do some among you say, that there is no resurrection from the
dead?"

Reply Obj. 1: Christ is the fountain of life, as God, and not as man:
but He died as man, and not as God. Hence Augustine [*Vigilius
Tapsensis] says against Felician: "Far be it from us to suppose that
Christ so felt death that He lost His life inasmuch as He is life in
Himself; for, were it so, the fountain of life would have run dry.
Accordingly, He experienced death by sharing in our human feeling,
which of His own accord He had taken upon Himself, but He did not
lose the power of His Nature, through which He gives life to all
things."

Reply Obj. 2: Christ did not suffer death which comes of sickness,
lest He should seem to die of necessity from exhausted nature: but He
endured death inflicted from without, to which He willingly
surrendered Himself, that His death might be shown to be a voluntary
one.

Reply Obj. 3: One opposite does not of itself lead to the other, yet
it does so indirectly at times: thus cold sometimes is the indirect
cause of heat: and in this way Christ by His death brought us back to
life, when by His death He destroyed our death; just as he who bears
another's punishment takes such punishment away.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 50, Art. 2]

Whether the Godhead Was Separated from the Flesh When Christ Died?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Godhead was separated from the
flesh when Christ died. For as Matthew relates (27:46), when our Lord
was hanging upon the cross He cried out: "My God, My God, why hast
Thou forsaken Me?" which words Ambrose, commenting on Luke 23:46,
explains as follows: "The man cried out when about to expire by being
severed from the Godhead; for since the Godhead is immune from death,
assuredly death could not be there, except life departed, for the
Godhead is life." And so it seems that when Christ died, the Godhead
was separated from His flesh.

Obj. 2: Further, extremes are severed when the mean is removed. But
the soul was the mean through which the Godhead was united with the
flesh, as stated above (Q. 6, A. 1). Therefore since the soul was
severed from the flesh by death, it seems that, in consequence, His
Godhead was also separated from it.

Obj. 3: Further, God's life-giving power is greater than that of the
soul. But the body could not die unless the soul quitted it.
Therefore, much less could it die unless the Godhead departed.

_On the contrary,_ As stated above (Q. 16, AA. 4, 5), the attributes
of human nature are predicated of the Son of God only by reason of
the union. But what belongs to the body of Christ after death is
predicated of the Son of God--namely, being buried: as is evident
from the Creed, in which it is said that the Son of God "was
conceived and born of a Virgin, suffered, died, and was buried."
Therefore Christ's Godhead was not separated from the flesh when He
died.

_I answer that,_ What is bestowed through God's grace is never
withdrawn except through fault. Hence it is written (Rom. 11:29):
"The gifts and the calling of God are without repentance." But the
grace of union whereby the Godhead was united to the flesh in
Christ's Person, is greater than the grace of adoption whereby others
are sanctified: also it is more enduring of itself, because this
grace is ordained for personal union, whereas the grace of adoption
is referred to a certain affective union. And yet we see that the
grace of adoption is never lost without fault. Since, then there was
no sin in Christ, it was impossible for the union of the Godhead with
the flesh to be dissolved. Consequently, as before death Christ's
flesh was united personally and hypostatically with the Word of God,
it remained so after His death, so that the hypostasis of the Word of
God was not different from that of Christ's flesh after death, as
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii).

Reply Obj. 1: Such forsaking is not to be referred to the dissolving
of the personal union, but to this, that God the Father gave Him up
to the Passion: hence there "to forsake" means simply not to protect
from persecutors. Or else He says there that He is forsaken, with
reference to the prayer He had made: "Father, if it be possible, let
this chalice pass away from Me," as Augustine explains it (De Gratia
Novi Test.).

Reply Obj. 2: The Word of God is said to be united with the flesh
through the medium of the soul, inasmuch as it is through the soul
that the flesh belongs to human nature, which the Son of God intended
to assume; but not as though the soul were the medium linking them
together. But it is due to the soul that the flesh is human even
after the soul has been separated from it--namely, inasmuch as by
God's ordinance there remains in the dead flesh a certain relation to
the resurrection. And therefore the union of the Godhead with the
flesh is not taken away.

Reply Obj. 3: The soul formally possesses the life-giving
energy, and therefore, while it is present, and united formally, the
body must necessarily be a living one, whereas the Godhead has not the
life-giving energy formally, but effectively; because It cannot be the
form of the body: and therefore it is not necessary for the flesh to
be living while the union of the Godhead with the flesh remains, since
God does not act of necessity, but of His own will.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 50, Art. 3]

Whether in Christ's Death There Was a Severance Between His Godhead
and His Soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was a severance in death
between Christ's Godhead and His soul, because our Lord said (John
10:18): "No man taketh away My soul from Me: but I lay it down of
Myself, and I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
up again." But it does not appear that the body can set the soul
aside, by separating the soul from itself, because the soul is not
subject to the power of the body, but rather conversely: and so it
appears that it belongs to Christ, as the Word of God, to lay down
His soul: but this is to separate it from Himself. Consequently, by
death His soul was severed from the Godhead.

Obj. 2: Further, Athanasius [*Vigilius Tapsensis, De Trin. vi;
Bardenhewer assigns it to St. Athanasius: 45, iii. The full title is
De Trinitate et Spiritu Sancto] says that he "is accursed who does
not confess that the entire man, whom the Son of God took to Himself,
after being assumed once more or delivered by Him, rose again from
the dead on the third day." But the entire man could not be assumed
again, unless the entire man was at one time separated from the Word
of God: and the entire man is made of soul and body. Therefore there
was a separation made at one time of the Godhead from both the body
and the soul.

Obj. 3: Further, the Son of God is truly styled a man because of the
union with the entire man. If then, when the union of the soul with
the body was dissolved by death, the Word of God continued united
with the soul, it would follow that the Son of God could be truly
called a soul. But this is false, because since the soul is the form
of the body, it would result in the Word of God being the form of the
body; which is impossible. Therefore, in death the soul of Christ was
separated from the Word of God.

Obj. 4: Further, the separated soul and body are not one hypostasis,
but two. Therefore, if the Word of God remained united with Christ's
soul and body, then, when they were severed by Christ's death, it
seems to follow that the Word of God was two hypostases during such
time as Christ was dead; which cannot be admitted. Therefore after
Christ's death His soul did not continue to be united with the Word.

_On the contrary,_ Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): "Although
Christ died as man, and His holy soul was separated from His spotless
body, nevertheless His Godhead remained unseparated from both--from
the soul, I mean, and from the body."

_I answer that,_ The soul is united with the Word of God more
immediately and more primarily than the body is, because it is
through the soul that the body is united with the Word of God, as
stated above (Q. 6, A. 1). Since, then, the Word of God was not
separated from the body at Christ's death, much less was He separated
from the soul. Accordingly, since what regards the body severed from
the soul is affirmed of the Son of God--namely, that "it was
buried"--so is it said of Him in the Creed that "He descended into
hell," because His soul when separated from the body did go down into
hell.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine (Tract. xlvii in Joan.), in commenting on the
text of John, asks, since Christ is Word and soul and body, "whether
He putteth down His soul, for that He is the Word? Or, for that He is
a soul?" Or, again, "for that He is flesh?" And he says that, "should
we say that the Word of God laid down His soul" . . . it would follow
that "there was a time when that soul was severed from the
Word"--which is untrue. "For death severed the body and soul . . .
but that the soul was severed from the Word I do not affirm . . . But
should we say that the soul laid itself down," it follows "that it is
severed from itself: which is most absurd." It remains, therefore,
that "the flesh itself layeth down its soul and taketh it again, not
