
           [Footnote 304: The early American missionaries to Hawaii named
           the musical notes of the scale _pa, ko, li, ha, no, la, mi_.]

           The one regrettable fact, from a historical point of view, is
           that a record was not made of indigenous Hawaiian song before
           this process of substitution and adulteration had begun. It
           is no easy matter now to obtain the data for definite
           knowledge of the subject.

           While the central purpose of this chapter will be a study of
           the music native to old Hawaii, and especially of that
           produced in the halau, Hawaiian music of later times and of
           the present day can not be entirely neglected; nor will it be
           without its value for the indirect light it will shed on
           ancient conditions and on racial characteristics. The
           reaction that has taken place in Hawaii within historic times
           in response to the stimulus from abroad can not fail to be of
[Page 139] interest in itself.

           There is a peculiarity of the Hawaiian speech which can not
           but have its effect in determining the lyric tone-quality of
           Hawaiian music; this is the predominance of vowel and labial
           sounds in the language. The phonics of Hawaiian speech, we
           must remember, lack the sounds represented by our alphabetic
           symbols _b, c_ or _s, d, f, g, j, q, x_, and _z_--a poverty
           for which no richness in vowel sounds can make amends. The
           Hawaiian speech, therefore, does not call into full play the
           uppermost vocal cavities to modify and strengthen, or refine,
           the throat and mouth tones of the speaker and to give reach
           and emphasis to his utterances. When he strove for dramatic
           and passional effect, he did not make his voice resound in
           the topmost cavities of the voice-trumpet, but left it to
           rumble and mutter low down in the throat-pipe, thus producing
           a feature that colors Hawaiian musical recitation.

           This feature, or mannerism, as it might be called, specially
           marks Hawaiian music of the bombastic bravura sort in modern
           times, imparting to it in its strife for emphasis a sensual
           barbaric quality. It can be described further only as a
           gurgling throatiness, suggestive at times of ventriloquism,
           as if the singer were gloating over some wild physical
           sensation, glutting his appetite of savagery, the meaning of
           which is almost as foreign to us and as primitive as are the
           mewing of a cat, the gurgling of an infant, and the snarl of
           a mother-tiger. At the very opposite pole of development from
           this throat-talk of the Hawaiian must we reckon the
           highly-specialized tones of the French speech, in which we
           find the nasal cavities are called upon to do their full
           share in modifying the voice-sounds.

           The vocal execution of Hawaiian music, like the recitation of
           much of their poetry, showed a surprising mastery of a
           certain kind of technique, the peculiarity of which was a
           sustained and continuous outpouring of the breath to the end
           of a certain period, when the lungs again drank their fill.
           This seems to have been an inheritance from the old religious
           style of prayer-recitation, which required the priest to
           repeat the whole incantation to its finish with the outpour
           of one lungful of breath. Satisfactory utterance of those old
           prayer-songs of the Aryans, the _mantras_, was conditioned
           likewise on its being a one-breath performance. A logical
           analogy may be seen between all this and that unwritten law,
           or superstition, which made it imperative for the heroes and
           demigods, _kupua_, of Hawaii's mythologic age to discontinue
           any unfinished work on the coming of daylight.[305]

           [Footnote 305: The author can see no reason for supposing that
           this prolonged utterance had anything to do with that Hindoo
           practice belonging to the _yoga_, the exercise of which
           consists in regulating the breath.]
[Page 140]
           When one listens for the first time to the musical utterance
           of a Hawaiian poem, it may seem only a monotonous onflow of
           sounds faintly punctuated by the primary rhythm that belongs
           to accent, but lacking those milestones of secondary rhythm
           which set a period to such broader divisions as distinguish
           rhetorical and musical phrasing. Further attention will
           correct this impression and show that the Hawaiians paid
           strict attention not only to the lesser rhythm which deals
           with the time and accent of the syllable, but also to that
           more comprehensive form which puts a limit to the verse.

           With the Hawaiians musical phrasing was arranged to fit the
           verse of the mele, not to express a musical idea. The
           cadencing of a musical phrase in Hawaiian song was marked by
           a peculiarity all its own. It consisted of a prolonged
           trilling or fluctuating movement called _i'i_, in which the
           voice went up and down in a weaving manner, touching the main
           note that formed the framework of the melody, then springing
           away from it for some short interval--a half of a step, or
           even some shorter interval--like an electrified pith-ball,
           only to return and then spring away again and again until the
           impulse ceased. This was more extensively employed in the oil
           proper, the verses of which were longer drawn out, than in
           the mele such as formed the stock pieces of the hula. These
           latter were generally divided into shorter verses.


                               MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS

           The musical instruments of the Hawaiians included many
           classes, and their study can not fail to furnish substantial
           data for any attempt to estimate the musical performances,
           attainments, and genius of the people.

           Of drums, or drumlike instruments of percussion, the
           Hawaiians had four:

           1. The _pahu_, or _pahu-hula_ (pl. x), was a section of
           hollowed log. Breadfruit and coconut were the woods generally
           used for this purpose. The tough skin of the shark was the
           choice for the drumhead, which was held in place and kept
           tense by tightening cords of coconut fiber, that passed down
           the side of the cylinder.

           The workmanship of the pahu, though rude, was of tasteful
           design. So far as the author has studied them, each pahu was
           constructed with a diaphragm placed about two-thirds the
           distance from the head, obtained by leaving in place a cross
           section of the log, thus making a closed chamber of the
           drum-cavity proper, after the fashion of the kettledrum. The
           lower part of the drum also was hollowed out and carved, as
           will be seen in the illustration. In the carving of all the
           specimens examined the artists have shown a notable fondness
           for a fenestrated design representing a series of arches,
[Page 141] after the fashion of a two-storied arcade, the haunch of the
           superimposed arch resting directly on the crown of that
           below. In one case the lower arcade was composed of
           Roman,-while the upper was of Gothic, arches. The grace of
           the design and the manner of its execution are highly
           pleasing, and suggest the inquiry, Whence came the
           opportunity for this intimate study of the arch?

           The tone of the pahu was produced by striking its head with
           the finger-tips, or with the palm of the hand; never with a
           stick, so far as the writer has been able to learn. Being
           both heavy and unwieldly, it was allowed to rest upon the
           ground, and, if used alone, was placed to the front of the
           operator; if sounded in connection with the instrument next
           to be mentioned, it stood at his left side.

           The pahu, if not the most original, was the most important
           instrument used in connection with the hula. The drum, with
           its deep and solemn tones, is an instrument of recognized
           efficiency in its power to stir the heart to more vigorous
           pulsations, and in all ages it has been relied upon as a
           means of inspiring emotions of mystery, awe, terror,
           sublimity, or martial enthusiasm.

           Tradition of the most direct sort ascribes the introduction
           of the pahu to La'a--generally known as La'a-mai-Kahiki
           (La'a-from-Kahiki)--a prince who flourished about six
           centuries ago. He was of a volatile, adventurous disposition,
           a navigator of some renown, having made the long voyage
           between Hawaii and the archipelagoes in the southern
           Pacific--Kahiki--not less than twice in each direction. On
           his second arrival from the South he brought with him the big
           drum, the pahu, which he sounded as he skirted the coast
           quite out to sea, to the wonder and admiration of the natives
           on the land. La'a, being of an artistic temperament and an
           ardent patron of the hula, at once gave the divine art of
           Laka the benefit of this newly imported instrument. He
           traveled from place to place, instructing the teachers and
           inspiring them with new ideals. It was he also who introduced
           into the hula the kaekeeke as an instrument of music.

           2. The _pu-niu_ (pl. XVI) was a small drum made from the
           shell of a coconut. The top part, that containing the eyes,
           was removed, and the shell having been smoothed and polished,
           the opening was tightly covered with the skin of some
           scaleless fish--that of the _kala_ (Acanthurus unicornis) was
           preferred. A venerable kumu-hula states that it was his
           practice to use only the skin taken from the right side of
           the fish, because he found that it produced a finer quality
           of sound than that of the other side. The Hawaiian mind was
           very insistent on little matters of this sort--the mint,
           anise, and cummin of their system. The drumhead was stretched
           and placed in position while moist and flexible, and was then
           made fast to a ring-shaped cushion--_poaha_--of fiber or tapa
           that hugged the base of the shell.
[Page 142]
           The Hawaiians sometimes made use of the clear gum of the
           _kukui_ tree to aid in fixing the drumhead in place.

           When in use the pu-niu was lashed to the right thigh for the
           convenience of the performer, who played upon it with a thong
           of braided fibers held in his right hand (fig. 2), his left
           thus being free to manipulate the big drum that stood on the
           other side.

           Of three pu-niu in the author's collection, one, when struck,
           gives off the sound of [=c] below the staff; another that of
           [=c]# below the staff, and a third that of [==c]# in the
           staff.

           While the grand vibrations of the pahu filled the air with
           their solemn tremor, the lighter and sharper tones of the
           pu-niu gave a piquancy to the effect, adding a feature which
           may be likened to the sparkling ripples which the breeze
           carves in the ocean's swell.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Ka, drumstick for pu-niu. (Pl. XVI.)]

           3. The _ipu_ or _ipu-hula_ (pl. VII), though not strictly a
           drum, was a drumlike instrument. It was made by joining
           closely together two pear-shaped gourds of large size in such
           fashion as to make a body shaped like a figure 8. An opening
           was made in the upper end of the smaller gourd to give exit
           to the sound. The cavities of the two gourds were thrown into
           one, thus making a single column of air, which, in vibration,
           gave off a note of clear bass pitch. An ipu of large size in
           the author's collection emits the tone of c in the bass.
           Though of large volume, the tone is of low intensity and has
           small carrying power.

           For ease in handling, the ipu is provided about its waist
           with a loop of cord or tapa, by which device the performer
           was enabled to manipulate this bulky instrument with one
           hand. The instrument was sounded by dropping or striking it
           with well-adjusted force against the padded earth-floor of
           the Hawaiian house.

           The manner and style of performing on the ipu varied with the
           sentiment of the mele, a light and caressing action when the
           feeling was sentimental or pathetic, wild and emphatic when
           the subject was such as to stir the feelings with enthusiasm
           and passion.

           Musicians inform us that the drum--exception is made in the
           case of the snare and the kettle drum--is an instrument in
           which the pitch is a matter of comparative indifference, its
           function being to mark the time and emphasize the rhythm.
[Page 143] There are other elements, it would seem, that must be taken
           into the account in estimating the value of the drum.
           Attention may be directed first to its tone-character, the
           quality of its note which touches the heart in its own
           peculiar way, moving it to enthusiasm or bringing it within
           the easy reach of awe, fear, and courage. Again, while,
           except in the orchestra, the drum and other instruments of
           percussion may require no exact pitch, still this does not
           necessarily determine their effectiveness. The very depth and
           gravity of its pitch, made pervasive by its wealth of
           overtones, give to this primitive instrument a weird hold on
           the emotions.

[Illustration:
BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY
BULLETIN 98 PLATE XVI
PU-NIU, A DRUM]

           This combination of qualities we find well illustrated in the
           pahu and the ipu, the tones of which range in the lower
           registers of the human voice. The tone-character of the
           pu-niu, on the other hand, is more subdued, yet lively and
           cheerful, by reason in part of the very sharpness of its
           pitch, and thus affords an agreeable offset to the solemnity
           of the other two.

           Ethnologically the pahu is of more world-wide interest than
           any other member of its class, being one of many varieties of
           the kettle-drum that are to be found scattered among the
           tribes of the Pacific, all of them, perhaps, harking back to
           Asiatic forbears, such as the tom-tom of the Hindus.

           The sound of the pahu carries one back in imagination to the
           dread sacrificial drum of the Aztec teocallis and the wild
           kettles of the Tartar hordes. The drum has cruel and bloody
           associations. When listening to its tones one can hardly put
           away a thought of the many times they have been used to drown
           the screams of some agonized creature.

           For more purely local interest, inventive originality, and
           simplicity, the round-bellied ipu takes the palm, a
           contrivance of strictly Hawaiian, or at least Polynesian,
           ingenuity. It is an instrument of fascinating interest, and
           when its crisp rind puts forth its volume of sound one finds
           his imagination winging itself back to the mysterious caverns
           of Hawaiian mythology.

           The gourd, of which the ipu is made, is a clean vegetable
           product of the fields and the garden, the gift of
           Lono-wahine--unrecognized daughter of mother Ceres--and is
           free from all cruel alliances. Fo bleating lamb was
           sacrificed to furnish parchment for its drumhead. Its
           associations are as innocent as the pipes of Pan.

           4. The _ka-eke-eke_, though not drumlike in form, must be
           classed as an instrument of percussion from the manner of
           eliciting its note. It was a simple joint of bamboo, open at
           one end, the other end being left closed with the diaphragm
           provided by nature. The tone is produced by striking the
           closed end of the cylinder, while held in a vertical
           position, with a sharp blow against some solid, nonresonant
           body, such as the matted earth floor of the old Hawaiian
[Page 144] house. In the author's experiments with the kaekeeke an
           excellent substitute was found in a bag filled with sand or
           earth.

           In choosing bamboo for the kaekeeke it is best to use a
           variety which is thin-walled and long-jointed, like the
           indigenous Hawaiian varieties, in preference to such as come
           from the Orient, all of which are thick-walled and
           short-jointed, and therefore less resonant than the Hawaiian.

           The performer held a joint in each hand, the two being of
           different sizes and lengths, thus producing tones of diverse
           pitch. By making a proper selection of joints it would be
           possible to obtain a set capable of producing a perfect
           musical scale. The tone of the kaekeeke is of the utmost
           purity and lacks only sustained force and carrying power to
           be capable of the best effects.

           An old Hawaiian once informed the writer that about the year
           1850, in the reign of Kamehameha III, he was present at a
           hula kaekeeke given in the royal palace in Honolulu. The
           instrumentalists numbered six, each one of whom held two
           bamboo joints. The old man became enthusiastic as he
           described the effect produced by their performance, declaring
           it to have been the most charming hula he ever witnessed.

           5. The _uli-uli_ (pl. XI) consisted of a small gourd of the
           size of one's two fists, into which were introduced shotlike
           seeds, such as those of the canna. In character it was a
           rattle, a noise-instrument pure and simple, but of a tone by
           no means disagreeable to the ear, even as the note produced
           by a woodpecker drumming on a log is not without its
           pleasurable effect on the imagination.

           The illustration of the uliuli faithfully pictured by the
           artist reproduces a specimen that retains the original
           simplicity of the instrument before the meretricious taste of
           modern times tricked it out with silks and feathers. (For a
           further description of this instrument, see p. 107.)

           6. The _pu-ili_ was also a variety of the rattle, made by
           splitting a long joint of bamboo for half its length into
           slivers, every alternate sliver being removed to give the
           remaining ones greater freedom and to make their play the one
           upon the other more lively. The tone is a murmurous breezy
           rustle that resembles the notes of twigs, leaves, or reeds
           struck against one another by the wind--not at all an
           unworthy imitation of nature-tones familiar to the Hawaiian
           ear.

           The performers sat in two rows facing each other, a position
           that favored mutual action, in which each row of actors
           struck their instruments against those of the other side, or
           tossed them back and forth. (For further account of the
           manner in which the puili was used in the hula of the same
           name, see p. 113.)

           7. The _laau_ was one of the noise-instruments used in the
           hula. It consisted of two sticks of hard resonant wood, the
[Page 145] smaller of which was struck against the larger, producing a
           clear xylophonic note. While the pitch of this instrument is
           capable of exact determination, it does not seem that there
           was any attempt made at adjustment. A laau in the author's
           collection, when struck, emits tones the predominant one of
           which is [=d] (below the staff).

           8. The _ohe_, or _ohe-hano-ihu_ (fig. 3), is an instrument of
           undoubted antiquity. In every instance that has come under
           the author's observation the material has been, as its
           name--_ohe_--signifies, a simple joint of bamboo, with an
           embouchure placed about half an inch from the closed end,
           thus enabling the player to supply the instrument with air
           from his right nostril. In every nose-flute examined there
           have been two holes, one 2 or 3 inches away from the
           embouchure, the older about a third of the distance from the
           open end of the flute.

           [Illustration: FIG. 3.--Ohe-hano-ihu, nose-flute.]

           The musician with his left hand holds the end of the pipe
           squarely against his lip, so that the right nostril slightly
           overlaps the edge of the embouchure. The breath is projected
           into the embouchure with modulated force. A nose-flute in the
           author's collection with the lower hole open produces the
           sound of [=f]#; with both holes unstopped it emits the sound
           [==a]; and when both holes are stopped it produces the sound
           of [==c]#, a series of notes which are the tonic, mediant,
           and dominant of the chord of F# minor.

           An ohe played by an old Hawaiian named Keaonaloa, an inmate
           of the Lunalilo Home, when both holes were stopped sounded
           [=f]; with the lower hole open it sounded [==a], and when
           both holes were open it sounded [===c].

           The music made by Keaonaloa with his ohe was curious, but not
           soul-filling. We must bear in mind, however, that it was
           intended only as an accompaniment to a poetical recitation.

           Some fifty or sixty years ago it was not uncommon to see
           bamboo flutes of native manufacture in the hands of Hawaiian
           musicians of the younger generation. These instruments were
           avowedly imitations of the D-flute imported from abroad. The
           idea of using bamboo for this purpose must have been
           suggested by its previous use in the nose-flute.

           "The tonal capacity of the Hawaiian nose-flute," says Miss
           Jennie Elsner, "which has nothing harsh and strident about
           it, embraces five tones, [=f] and [==g] in the middle
[Page 146] register, and [==f], [=g], and [==a] an octave above. These
           flutes are not always pitched to the same key, varying half a
           tone or so." On inquiring of the native who kindly furnished
           the following illustrations, he stated that he had bored the
           holes of his ohe without much measurement, trusting to his
           intuitions and judgment.

                            I--Range of the Nose-flute

[Music]

           The player began with a slow, strongly accented, rhythmical
           movement, which continued to grow more and more intricate.
           Rhythmical diminution continued in a most astounding manner
           until a frenzied climax was reached; in other words, until
           the player's breath-capacity was exhausted.

           A peculiar effect, as of several instruments being used at
           the same time, was produced by the two lower tones being
           thrown in wild profusion, often apparently simultaneously
           with one of the upper tones. As the tempo in any one of these
           increased, the rhythm was lost sight of and a peculiar
           syncopated effect resulted.[306]

           [Footnote 306: The writer is indebted to Miss Elsner not only
           for the above comments but for the following score which she
           has cleverly arranged as a sample of nose-flute music
           produced by Keaonaloa.]

                          II--Music from the Nose-flute
                            Arranged by JENNIE ELSNER
                                    [Music]

           9. The _pu-a_ was a whistle-like instrument. It was made from
           a gourd of the size of a lemon, and was pierced with three
           holes, or sometimes only two, one for the nose, by which it
[Page 147] was blown, while the others were controlled by the fingers.
           This instrument has been compared to the Italian ocarina.

           10. The _ili-ili_ was a noise-instrument pure and simple. It
           consisted of two pebbles that were held in the hand and
           smitten together, after the manner of castanets, in time to
           the music of the voices. (See p. 120.)

           11. The _niau-kani_--singing splinter--was a reed-instrument
           of a rude sort, made by holding a reed of thin bamboo against
           a slit cut out in a larger piece of bamboo. This was applied
           to the mouth, and the voice being projected against it
           produced an effect similar to that of the Jew's harp. (See p.
           132.)

           12. Even still more extemporaneous and rustic than any of
           these is a modest contrivance called by the Hawaiians
           _pu-la-i_. It is nothing more than a ribbon torn from the
           green leaf of the _ti_ plant, say three-quarters of an inch
           to an inch in width by 5 or 6 inches long, and rolled up
           somewhat after the manner of a lamplighter, so as to form a
           squat cylinder an inch or more in length. This was compressed
           to flatten it. Placed between the lips and blown into with
           proper force, it emits a tone of pure reedlike quality, that
           varies in pitch, according to the size of the whistle, from G
           in the middle register to a shrill piping note more than an
           octave above.

           The hula girl who showed this simple device offered it in
           answer to reiterated inquiries as to what other instruments,
           besides those of more formal make already described, the
           Hawaiians were wont to use in connection with their informal
           rustic dances. "This," said she, "was sometimes used as an
           accompaniment to such informal dancing as was indulged in
           outside the halau." This little rustic pipe, quickly
           improvised from the leaf that every Hawaiian garden supplies,
           would at once convert any skeptic to a belief in the pipes of
           god Pan.

           13. The _ukeke_, the one Hawaiian instrument of its class, is
           a mere strip of wood bent into the shape of a bow that its
           elastic force may keep tense the strings that are stretched
           upon it. These strings, three in number, were originally of
           sinnet, later after the arrival of the white man, of
           horsehair. At the present time it is the fashion to use the
           ordinary gut designed for the violin or the taro-patch
           guitar. Every ukeke seen followed closely a conventional
           pattern, which, argues for the instrument a historic age
           sufficient to have gathered about itself some degree of
           traditional reverence. One end of the stick is notched or
           provided with holes to hold the strings, while the other end
           is wrought into a conventional figure resembling the tail of
           a fish and serves as an attachment about which to wind the
           free ends of the strings.

           No ukeke seen by the author was furnished with pins, pegs, or
           any similar device to facilitate tuning. Nevertheless, the
[Page 148] musician does tune his ukeke, as the writer can testify from
           his own observation. This Hawaiian musician was the one whose
           performances on the nose-flute are elsewhere spoken of. When
           asked to give a sample of his playing on the ukeke, he first
           gave heed to his instrument as if testing whether it was in
           tune. He was evidently dissatisfied and pulled at one string
           as if to loosen it; then, pressing one end of the bow against
           his lips, he talked to it in a singing tone, at the same time
           plucking the strings with a delicate rib of grass. The effect
           was most pleasing. The open cavity of the mouth, acting as a
           resonator, reenforced the sounds and gave them a volume and
           dignity that was a revelation. The lifeless strings allied
           themselves to a human voice and became animated by a living
           soul.

           With the assistance of a musical friend it was found that the
           old Hawaiian tuned his strings with approximate correctness
           to the tonic, the third and the fifth. We may surmise that
           this self-trained musician had instinctively followed the
           principle or rule proposed by Aristoxenus, who directed a
           singer to sing his most convenient note, and then, taking
           this as a starting point, to tune the remainder of his
           strings--the Greek kithara, no doubt--in the usual manner
           from this one.

           While the ukeke was used to accompany the mele and the oli,
           its chief employment was in serenading and serving the young
           folk in breathing their extemporized songs and uttering their
           love-talk--_hoipoipo_. By using a peculiar lingo or secret
           talk of their own invention, two lovers could hold private
           conversation in public and pour their loves and longings into
           each other's ears without fear of detection--a thing most
           reprehensible in savages. This display of ingenuity has been
           the occasion for outpouring many vials of wrath upon the
           sinful ukeke.

           Experiment with the ukeke impresses one with the wonderful
           change in the tone of the instrument that takes place when
           its lifeless strings are brought into close relation with the
           cavity of the mouth. Let anyone having normal organs of
           speech contract his lips into the shape of an O, make his
           cheeks tense, and then, with the pulp of his finger as a
           plectrum, slap the center of his cheek and mark the tone that
           is produced. Practice will soon enable him to render a full
           octave with fair accuracy and to perform a simple melody that
           shall be recognizable at a short distance. The power and
           range thus acquired will, of course, be limited by the skill
           of the operator. One secret of the performance lies in a
           proper management of the tongue. This function of the mouth
[Page 149] familiarly illustrated in the jew's-harp. The author is again
           indebted to Miss Elsner for the following comments on the
           ukeke:

           "The strings of this ukeke, the Hawaiian fiddle, are tuned to
           [=e]; to [=b] and to [=d]. These three strings are struck
           nearly simultaneously, but the sound being very feeble, it is
           only the first which, receiving the sharp impact of the blow,
           gives out enough volume to make a decided impression."


                      III--The Ukeke (as played by Keaonaloa)
                           Arranged by JENNIE ELSNER
                                     [Music]

           The early visitors to these islands, as a rule, either held
           the music of the savages in contempt or they were unqualified
           to report on its character and to make record of it.

           We know that in ancient times the voices of the men as well
           as of the women were heard at the same time in the songs of
           the hula. One of the first questions that naturally arises
           is, Did the men and the women sing in parts or merely in
           unison?

           It is highly gratifying to find clear historical testimony on
           this point from a competent authority. The quotation that
           follows is from the pen of Capt. James King, who was with
           Capt. James Cook on the latter's last voyage, in which he
           discovered the Hawaiian islands (January 18, 1778). The words
           were evidently penned after the death of Captain Cook, when
           the writer of them, it is inferred, must have succeeded to
           the command of the expedition. The fact that Captain King
