    Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the breasts which thou
    didst suck. 28 But he said, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear
    the word of God, and keep it.


    29 And when the multitudes were gathering together unto him, he
    began to say, This generation is an evil generation: it seeketh
    after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it but the sign
    of Jonah. 30 For even as Jonah became a sign unto the Ninevites,
    so shall also the Son of man be to this generation. 31 The queen
    of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this
    generation, and shall condemn them: for she came from the ends of
    the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, a greater
    than Solomon is here. 32 The men of Nineveh shall stand up in the
    judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they
    repented at the preaching of Jonah; and behold, a greater than
    Jonah is here.


    33 No man, when he hath lighted a lamp, putteth it in a cellar,
    neither under the bushel, but on the stand, that they which enter
    in may see the light. 34 The lamp of thy body is thine eye: when
    thine eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light; but
    when it is evil, thy body also is full of darkness. 35 Look
    therefore whether the light that is in thee be not darkness. 36 If
    therefore thy whole body be full of light, having no part dark, it
    shall be wholly full of light, as when the lamp with its bright
    shining doth give thee light.


The first of these two discourses, vs. 14-26, was given by Jesus in reply
to the charge that he wrought his miracles by Satanic power, v. 15; the
second, vs. 29-36, was an answer to the demand that he should compel his
enemies to believe in him by giving them "a sign from heaven," v. 16.

Jesus had just cast out a demon. His enemies did not attempt to deny that
a miracle had been performed; but, in order to discredit him with the
people, they explained the miracle on the ground that Jesus must be in
league with the Devil. He replied by showing the absurdity of suggesting
that the Devil was casting out devils, or "demons," for in that case his
power would be like a kingdom "divided against itself" and so certain to
be "brought to desolation," or like a house thus divided and sure to fall.
Vs. 17, 18. He then turned the charge against themselves: some of their
countrymen claimed the power to cast out demons; Jesus did not discuss the
reality of these reputed cures but pointedly asked by what power they were
effected; is it also demonic power? v. 19. Jesus then declared definitely
that his miracles were being wrought by divine power and that their
character was a certain proof that he was representing not the kingdom of
the Devil but "the kingdom of God." V. 20. Instead of aiding the Devil, he
was despoiling him. He described the Devil as though a strong man, fully
armed and guarding his goods, but Jesus himself was a "stronger than he,"
and was taking away his armor and delivering his captives by miracles of
grace. Vs. 21, 22. In this conflict there can be no neutrality; one must
be on the side either of the Devil or of Christ. V. 23.

Jesus then rebuked his enemies by the parable of the Unclean Spirit. The
demon of unbelief had once possessed the Jews, and had been manifested in
the form of idolatry; it had been cast out, but it had returned with more
terrible manifestations of hypocrisy, covetousness, hatred, fanaticism,
and pride. Such had been the fate of the nation; and such is the
experience of an individual who turns from sin and rebels against Satan
but fails to accept the Lordship of Christ. The empty heart is in peril.
Reformation is not regeneration. One must beware of the demon of unbelief.
Vs. 24-26.

At this juncture a "woman out of the multitude" interrupted with an
expression of congratulation for the mother of Jesus. In reply Jesus
intimated that his mother might rightly be called "blessed," but that the
woman had missed the real point; it was a privilege to sustain to Christ
such a close human and natural relationship, but better far to possess
that spiritual kinship which is indicated by faith and by obedience to
God. Vs. 27, 28.

Jesus continued to rebuke the unbelief of the Jews as he now turned to
answer directly the demand for "a sign from heaven." He declared that such
a sign would be given, in his resurrection from the dead. This miracle
would be wrought without any human intervention; it would be a direct act
of God and would fulfill the conditions of "a sign from heaven;" it would
be the counterpart of the miraculous deliverance of Jonah from the sea.
However, the very demand for such a sign was an impertinence and an
insult; it reflected discredit upon the divine character of the miracles
which Jesus had already wrought. It failed to recognize the nature of his
teachings, which surpassed the wisdom of Solomon and the startling message
of Jonah. The eagerness of the heathen queen to hear, the willingness of
the Ninevites to repent, rebuked the stubborn unbelief of the Jews who
refused to accept "a greater than Solomon," "a greater than Jonah." Vs.
29-32.

Finally Jesus showed that their guilty unbelief was not due to lack of
evidence or to the need of a new "sign," but to their indifference and
their impenitence. As a lamp is designed to light a house, and as the eye
is intended to illumine the body, so the soul which is right with God
possesses the faculty of spiritual sight. This sight is dimmed and
destroyed by sin. The inability of the Jews to believe was not due to lack
of "signs" and proofs, but to lack of sight. No amount of light will help
a blind man. Those who turn to Christ in repentance and faith and love
will find him to be the Light of the world, and their whole souls will
become radiant with divine splendor. Vs. 33-36.



8. Pharisaism Exposed and Denounced. Ch. 11:37-54


    37 Now as he spake, a Pharisee asketh him to dine with him: and he
    went in, and sat down to meat. 38 And when the Pharisee saw it, he
    marvelled that he had not first bathed himself before dinner. 39
    And the Lord said unto him, Now ye the Pharisees cleanse the
    outside of the cup and of the platter; but your inward part is
    full of extortion and wickedness. 40 Ye foolish ones, did not he
    that made the outside make the inside also? 41 But give for alms
    those things which are within; and behold, all things are clean
    unto you.


    42 But woe unto you Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and every
    herb, and pass over justice and the love of God: but these ought
    ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. 43 Woe unto
    you Pharisees! for ye love the chief seats in the synagogues, and
    the salutations in the marketplaces. 44 Woe unto you! for ye are
    as the tombs which appear not, and the men that walk over _them_
    know it not.


    45 And one of the lawyers answering saith unto him, Teacher, in
    saying this thou reproachest us also. 46 And he said, Woe unto you
    lawyers also! for ye load men with burdens grievous to be borne,
    and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
    47 Woe unto you! for ye build the tombs of the prophets, and your
    fathers killed them. 48 So ye are witnesses and consent unto the
    works of your fathers: for they killed them, and ye build _their
    tombs_. 49 Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send unto
    them prophets and apostles; and _some_ of them they shall kill and
    persecute; 50 that the blood of all the prophets, which was shed
    from the foundation of the world, may be required of this
    generation; 51 from the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zachariah,
    who perished between the altar and the sanctuary: yea, I say unto
    you, it shall be required of this generation. 52 Woe unto you
    lawyers! for ye took away the key of knowledge: ye entered not in
    yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered.


    53 And when he was come out from thence, the scribes and the
    Pharisees began to press upon _him_ vehemently, and to provoke him
    to speak of many things; 54 laying wait for him, to catch
    something out of his mouth.


The conflict between Jesus and his enemies here reached its climax. He
rebuked their hypocrisy, and pronounced upon them six solemn woes. His
words are full of warning for his followers in all ages; religion ever
tends to become a matter of form and ritual; hypocrisy is often
unconscious; its practice is almost universal.

A Pharisee whose heart was foul with sinful thoughts wondered that Jesus
had sat down to eat without first washing his hands according to the
Jewish ritual. No such ceremony was required by the Law, but only by the
traditions upon which the Pharisees laid such stress. Jesus declared that
to wash the body while the heart is impure is as absurd as to cleanse the
outside of an unclean cup or platter. He declared that God who made the
body created the soul also, and that God is more concerned with the latter
than with the former. He insisted that while it may be well to wash the
hands, a better preparation for a meal would consist in filling the heart
with love, which might be expressed in gifts to the poor. It was much more
important that the Pharisee should take the hatred from his heart, than
that Jesus should wash his hands. Vs. 37-41.

Hypocrisy, however, is ever concerned with external forms while
disregarding realities. Therefore Jesus pronounced a woe upon the
Pharisees for tithing the small garden herbs while neglecting justice
toward men and love toward God, for observing some minute religious rite
while breaking all the Ten Commandments. Yet he did not condemn them for
caring for these trifles, but for neglecting things essential. "These
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." V. 42. Jesus
further rebuked the vanity and the desire for prominence and public
recognition which is at once a mark and a cloak of hypocrisy. V. 43. He
further compared the evil influence of hypocrites to the defiling contact
with a grave, which is level with the ground, upon which one may
unconsciously tread and so become ceremonially unclean. Men are not on
their guard against those who make loud boasts of religion. V. 44.

At this juncture a lawyer interrupted Jesus with the statement that these
severe denunciations seemed to include him and his associates. It was true
that most lawyers were Pharisees, but they were the professional teachers
of this sect, the recognized leaders of the party; and in denouncing all
Pharisees Jesus seemed to include even these proud expounders of the Law.
Jesus replied that religious teachers who are insincere, or who allow
their religion to become a mere matter of form, are most of all to be
rebuked. He pronounced upon them three woes: the first, for extracting
from the Law minute and burdensome requirements which they were not
careful to observe themselves. It is a grievous fault for students and
scholars to make religion a matter of weariness and distaste, instead of a
delight to the common people. Vs. 45, 46.

Secondly, Jesus rebuked their heartless cruelty and fanaticism. Teachers
of religion are ever tempted to become bitter partisans, and even to have
a share in killing the very prophets and apostles of God. The hatred of
Jesus shown by his enemies was like that of their fathers who had killed
the divine messengers of old. The blood of these martyrs, from the first
to the last mentioned in the Hebrew Bible was yet to be required of the
nation, and those who rejected Jesus would partake in the judgment as they
were partakers of the crime, vs. 47-51.

Lastly, the lawyers were rebuked for keeping back the knowledge of God, by
their false interpretations of Scripture and their disregard of the real
spiritual needs of the people. Such teachers of religion are like men who
hold the key to a sacred temple; they themselves will not enter and they
keep back all who would. It is a solemn responsibility to be a professed
teacher of divine truth; and to be at once a "lawyer" and a "hypocrite,"
is to merit these solemn woes which fell from the lips of Christ. So
enraged were his hearers that they threatened him with physical violence.
Hypocrites hate to be exposed. Wise men are glad to be warned and to
repent before it is too late. He who spoke these bitter words of rebuke is
ready to pardon and to purify and to lead his followers in the paths of
service and of peace. Vs. 52-54.



9. Faithful Testimony Encouraged. Ch. 12:1-12


    1 In the mean time, when the many thousands of the multitude were
    gathered together, insomuch that they trod one upon another, he
    began to say unto his disciples first of all, Beware ye of the
    leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. 2 But there is
    nothing covered up, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that
    shall not be known. 3 Wherefore whatsoever ye have said in the
    darkness shall be heard in the light; and what ye have spoken in
    the ear in the inner chambers shall be proclaimed upon the
    housetops. 4 And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them
    that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.
    5 But I will warn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, who after he
    hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you,
    Fear him. 6 Are not five sparrows sold for two pence? and not one
    of them is forgotten in the sight of God. 7 But the very hairs of
    your head are all numbered. Fear not: ye are of more value than
    many sparrows. 8 And I say unto you, Every one who shall confess
    me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the
    angels of God: but he that denieth me in the presence of men shall
    be denied in the presence of the angels of God. 10 And every one
    who shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be
    forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy
    Spirit it shall not be forgiven. 11 And when they bring you before
    the synagogues, and the rulers, and the authorities, be not
    anxious how or what ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: 12 for
    the Holy Spirit shall teach you in that very hour what ye ought to
    say.


When Jesus had bitterly rebuked the public religious teachers of his day
he turned to his disciples and spoke words of cheer which have
strengthened his followers in all days. Such encouragement was needed; the
bitter hatred of his enemies now threatened the life of Jesus, and made it
evident that his disciples could expect no kinder treatment than their
Lord. Then, too, Jesus had shown the special guilt of those who professed
to be guides in matters of religion; his disciples therefore needed
courage to continue their public witness both because of the great
responsibility involved and because it would bring upon them the hatred of
men. He encouraged them, first, by the assurance that the corrupting
influence of the Pharisees would come to an end; their hypocrisy would be
mercilessly unmasked; their power would cease; while on the other hand the
witness of the disciples would not always be confined to places of
obscurity but would be heard in all the world. Vs. 1-3. How truly has this
prophecy been fulfilled! Compare the present influence of Hillel or
Gamaliel with that of Peter or John. No one can measure the power for good
possessed by the humblest witness for Christ.

Jesus further encouraged his disciples by assuring them of the loving care
of God. They should look to him in reverent trust; this would give
confidence and strength and free them from the fear of man. Their enemies
could harm only the body; God controls the eternal destiny of souls, and
to him even the body is precious, and he is concerned with the most minute
details of our lives. If he notes the fall of a sparrow, he must know the
peril and need of every one who is testifying for his Son. Vs. 4-7.

Then again for faithful witnesses there remain great rewards, in spite of
what they now may suffer from men. As they now acknowledge Jesus Christ as
Saviour and Lord, so in the glories of heaven he will acknowledge them as
his true and loyal warriors who merit and will share the blessedness of
his triumphant reign. Vs. 8, 9. On the other hand, those who blaspheme his
name by ascribing his power to a Satanic source, ch. 11:15, will be
regarded as guilty of an unpardonable sin. This would not apply to such as
in ignorance rejected Jesus, but to those who had full opportunity of
knowing him, and who then scoffed at his claims and maliciously insulted
his divine Person, and made of him an impostor and associated him with the
powers of evil. V. 10.

Last of all, in spite of opposition and threats of all the earthly powers,
and in the presence of the most imposing tribunals, the witnesses of Jesus
never need fear, and must never allow themselves to be silenced. The Holy
Spirit, whom their enemies opposed and blasphemed, would speak through
them; he would teach them both how and what to say, vs. 11, 12. This
promise was not designed to encourage indolence or lack of possible
preparation, but to assure the Christian witness that a divine Presence
would ever give him needed wisdom and strength and grace.

It is a grave responsibility to testify for Christ, but it is the duty of
everyone who bears his name; and in this service he can be assured that
the influence will be measureless, the protection unfailing, the reward
heavenly, the sustaining grace divine.



10. A Warning Against Covetousness. Ch. 12:13-21


    13 And one out of the multitude said unto him, Teacher, bid my
    brother divide the inheritance with me. 14 But he said unto him,
