        all satisfaction in error and sin in order to part with
296:18  them.

        Whether mortals will learn this sooner or later, and
        how long they will suffer the pangs of destruction, de-
296:21  pends upon the tenacity of error.

                             Mixed testimony

        The knowledge obtained from the corporeal senses
        leads to sin and death. When the evidence of Spirit
296:24  and matter, Truth and error, seems to com-
        mingle, it rests upon foundations which time
        is wearing away. Mortal mind judges by the testimony
296:27  of the material senses, until Science obliterates this false
        testimony. An improved belief is one step out of error,
        and aids in taking the next step and in understanding
296:30  the situation in Christian Science.

                           Belief an autocrat

        Mortal belief is a liar from the beginning, not deserving
        power. It says to mortals, "You are wretched!" and they
297:1   think they are so; and nothing can change this state, until
        the belief changes. Mortal belief says, "You are happy!"
297:3   and mortals are so; and no circumstance can
        alter the situation, until the belief on this sub-
        ject changes. Human belief says to mortals, "You are
297:6   sick!" and this testimony manifests itself on the body as
        sickness. It is as necessary for a health-illusion, as for
        an illusion of sickness, to be instructed out of itself into
297:9   the understanding of what constitutes health; for a change
        in either a health-belief or a belief in sickness affects the
        physical condition.

                            Self-improvement

297:12  Erroneous belief is destroyed by truth. Change the
        evidence, and that disappears which before seemed real
        to this false belief, and the human conscious-
297:15  ness rises higher. Thus the reality of being
        is attained and man found to be immortal. The only
        fact concerning any material concept is, that it is neither
297:18  scientific nor eternal, but subject to change and dis-
        solution.

                        Faith higher than belief

        Faith is higher and more spiritual than belief. It is
297:21  a chrysalis state of human thought, in which spiritual
        evidence, contradicting the testimony of mate-
        rial sense, begins to appear, and Truth, the
297:24  ever-present, is becoming understood. Human thoughts
        have their degrees of comparison. Some thoughts are
        better than others. A belief in Truth is better than a
297:27  belief in error, but no mortal testimony is founded on the
        divine rock. Mortal testimony can be shaken. Until
        belief becomes faith, and faith becomes spiritual under-
297:30  standing, human thought has little relation to the actual
        or divine.

        A mortal belief fulfils its own conditions. Sickness,
298:1   sin, and death are the vague realities of human conclu-
        sions. Life, Truth, and Love are the realities of divine
298:3   Science. They dawn in faith and glow full-orbed in
        spiritual understanding. As a cloud hides the sun it
        cannot extinguish, so false belief silences for a while the
298:6   voice of immutable harmony, but false belief cannot de-
        stroy Science armed with faith, hope, and fruition.

                             Truth's witness

        What is termed material sense can report only a mor-
298:9   tal temporary sense of things, whereas spiritual sense can
        bear witness only to Truth. To material sense,
        the unreal is the real until this sense is corrected
298:12  by Christian Science.

        Spiritual sense, contradicting the material senses, in-
        volves intuition, hope, faith, understanding, fruition, real-
298:15  ity. Material sense expresses the belief that mind is in
        matter. This human belief, alternating between a sense
        of pleasure and pain, hope and fear, life and death, never
298:18  reaches beyond the boundary of the mortal or the unreal.
        When the real is attained, which is announced by Science,
        joy is no longer a trembler, nor is hope a cheat. Spirit-
298:21  ual ideas, like numbers and notes, start from Principle,
        and admit no materialistic beliefs. Spiritual ideas lead
        up to their divine origin, God, and to the spiritual sense
298:24  of being.

                             Thought-angels

        Angels are not etherealized human beings, evolving
        animal qualities in their wings; but they are celestial
298:27  visitants, flying on spiritual, not material,
        pinions. Angels are pure thoughts from God,
        winged with Truth and Love, no matter what their indi-
298:30  vidualism may be. Human conjecture confers upon angels
        its own forms of thought, marked with superstitious out-
        lines, making them human creatures with suggestive
299:1   feathers; but this is only fancy. It has behind it no more
        reality than has the sculptor's thought when he carves
299:3   his "Statue of Liberty," which embodies his concep-
        tion of an unseen quality or condition, but which has
        no physical antecedent reality save in the artist's own ob-
299:6   servation and "chambers of imagery."

                         Our Angelic messengers

        My angels are exalted thoughts, appearing at the door
        of some sepulchre, in which human belief has buried
299:9   its fondest earthly hopes. With white fin-
        gers they point upward to a new and glo-
        rified trust, to higher ideals of life and its joys. Angels
299:12  are God's representatives. These upward-soaring beings
        never lead towards self, sin, or materiality, but guide to
        the divine Principle of all good, whither every real indi-
299:15  viduality, image, or likeness of God, gathers. By giving
        earnest heed to these spiritual guides they tarry with us,
        and we entertain "angels unawares."

                           Knowledge and Truth

299:18  Knowledge gained from material sense is figuratively
        represented in Scripture as a tree, bearing the fruits of
        sin, sickness, and death. Ought we not then
299:21  to judge the knowledge thus obtained to be
        untrue and dangerous, since "the tree is known by his
        fruit"?

299:24  Truth never destroys God's idea. Truth is spiritual,
        eternal substance, which cannot destroy the right reflec-
        tion. Corporeal sense, or error, may seem to hide Truth,
299:27  health, harmony, and Science, as the mist obscures the
        sun or the mountain; but Science, the sunshine of Truth,
        will melt away the shadow and reveal the celestial
299:30  peaks.

                             Old and new man

        If man were solely a creature of the material senses,
        he would have no eternal Principle and would be mutable
300:1   and mortal. Human logic is awry when it attempts
        to draw correct spiritual conclusions regarding life from
300:3   matter. Finite sense has no true apprecia-
        tion of infinite Principle, God, or of His infi-
        nite image or reflection, man. The mirage, which makes
300:6   trees and cities seem to be where they are not, illustrates
        the illusion of material man, who cannot be the image
        of God.

300:9   So far as the scientific statement as to man is under-
        stood, it can be proved and will bring to light the true
        reflection of God - the real man, or the /new/ man (as
300:12  St. Paul has it).

                           The tares and wheat

        The temporal and unreal never touch the eternal and
        real. The mutable and imperfect never touch the im-
300:15  mutable and perfect. The inharmonious and
        self-destructive never touch the harmonious
        and self-existent. These opposite qualities are the tares
300:18  and wheat, which never really mingle, though (to mortal
        sight) they grow side by side until the harvest; then, Sci-
        ence separates the wheat from the tares, through the real-
300:21  ization of God as ever present and of man as reflecting
        the divine likeness.

                          The divine reflection

        Spirit is God, Soul; therefore Soul is not in matter. If
300:24  Spirit were in matter, God would have no representative,
        and matter would be identical with God.
        The theory that soul, spirit, intelligence, in-
300:27  habits matter is taught by the schools. This theory is
        unscientific. The universe reflects and expresses the di-
        vine substance or Mind; therefore God is seen only in the
300:30  spiritual universe and spiritual man, as the sun is seen in
        the ray of light which goes out from it. God is re-
        vealed only in that which reflects Life, Truth, Love, -
301:1   yea, which manifests God's attributes and power, even
        as the human likeness thrown upon the mirror, repeats
301:3   the color, form, and action of the person in front of the
        mirror.

        Few persons comprehend what Christian Science
301:6   means by the word /reflection. /To himself, mortal and
        material man seems to be substance, but his sense of
        substance involves error and therefore is material,
301:9   temporal.

        On the other hand, the immortal, spiritual man is really
        substantial, and reflects the eternal substance, or Spirit,
301:12  which mortals hope for. He reflects the divine, which
        constitutes the only real and eternal entity. This reflection
        seems to mortal sense transcendental, because the spiritual
301:15  man's substantiality transcends mortal vision and is re-
        vealed only through divine Science.

                        Inverted images and ideas

        As God is substance and man is the divine image and
301:18  likeness, man should wish for, and in reality has, only
        the substance of good, the substance of Spirit,
        not matter. The belief that man has any other
301:21  substance, or mind, is not spiritual and breaks
        the First Commandment, Thou shalt have one God, one
        Mind. Mortal man seems to himself to be material sub-
301:24  stance, while man is "image" (idea). Delusion, sin, dis-
        ease, and death arise from the false testimony of material
        sense, which, from a supposed standpoint outside the
301:27  focal distance of infinite Spirit, presents an inverted image
        of Mind and substance with everything turned upside
        down.

301:30  This falsity presupposes soul to be an unsubstantial
        dweller in material forms, and man to be material instead
        of spiritual. Immortality is not bounded by mortality.
302:1   Soul is not compassed by finiteness. Principle is not to
        be found in fragmentary ideas.

                            Identity not lost

302:3   The material body and mind are temporal, but the
        real man is spiritual and eternal. The identity of the
        real man is not lost, but found through this
302:6   explanation; for the conscious infinitude of
        existence and of all identity is thereby discerned and re-
        mains unchanged. It is impossible that man should lose
302:9   aught that is real, when God is all and eternally his. The
        notion that mind is in matter, and that the so-called pleas-
        ures and pains, the birth, sin, sickness, and death of
302:12  matter, are real, is a mortal belief; and this belief is all
        that will ever be lost.

                            Definition of man

        Continuing our definition of/ man/, let us remember that
302:15  harmonious and immortal man has existed forever, and
        is always beyond and above the mortal illu-
        sion of any life, substance and intelligence
302:18  as existent in matter. This statement is based on fact,
        not fable. The Science of being reveals man as perfect,
        even as the Father is perfect, because the Soul, or Mind,
302:21  of the spiritual man is God, the divine Principle of all
        being, and because this real man is governed by Soul
        instead of sense, by the law of Spirit, not by the so-called
302:24  laws of matter.

        God is Love. He is therefore the divine, infinite Prin-
        ciple, called Person or God. Man's true consciousness
302:27  is in the mental, not in any bodily or personal likeness
        to Spirit. Indeed, the body presents no proper likeness
        of divinity, though mortal sense would fain have us so
302:30  believe.

                           Mental propagation

        Even in Christian Science, reproduction by Spirit's
        individual ideas is but the reflection of the creative power
303:1   of the divine Principle of those ideas. The reflection,
        through mental manifestation, of the multitudinous
303:3   forms of Mind which people the realm of
        the real is controlled by Mind, the Principle
        governing the reflection. Multiplication of God's chil-
303:6   dren comes from no power of propagation in matter, it
        is the reflection of Spirit.

        The minutiae of lesser individualities reflect the one di-
303:9   vine individuality and are comprehended in and formed
        by Spirit, not by material sensation. Whatever reflects
        Mind, Life, Truth, and Love, is spiritually conceived and
303:12  brought forth; but the statement that man is conceived
        and evolved both spiritually and materially, or by both
        God and man, contradicts this eternal truth. All the
303:15  vanity of the ages can never make both these contraries
        true. Divine Science lays the axe at the root of the illu-
        sion that life, or mind, is formed by or is in the material
303:18  body, and Science will eventually destroy this illusion
        through the self-destruction of all error and the beatified
        understanding of the Science of Life.

                              Error defined

303:21  The belief that pain and pleasure, life and death, holi-
        ness and unholiness, mingle in man, - that
        mortal, material man is the likeness of God
303:24  and is himself a creator, - is a fatal error.

                         Man's entity spiritual

        God, without the image and likeness of Himself, would
        be a nonentity, or Mind unexpressed. He would be
303:27  without a witness or proof of His own na-
        ture. Spiritual man is the image or idea of
        God, an idea which cannot be lost nor sep-
303:30  arated from its divine Principle. When the evidence
        before the material senses yielded to spiritual sense, the
        apostle declared that nothing could alienate him from
304:1   God, from the sweet sense and presence of Life and
        Truth.

                        Man inseparable from Love

304:3   It is ignorance and false belief, based on a material
        sense of things, which hide spiritual beauty and good-
        ness. Understanding this, Paul said: "Nei-
304:6   ther death, nor life, . . . nor things present,
        nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
        any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
304:9   the love of God." This is the doctrine of Christian
        Science: that divine Love cannot be deprived of its
        manifestation, or object; that joy cannot be turned into
304:12  sorrow, for sorrow is not the master of joy; that good can
        never produce evil; that matter can never produce mind
        nor life result in death. The perfect man - governed
304:15  by God, his perfect Principle - is sinless and eternal.

                             Harmony natural

        Harmony is produced by its Principle, is controlled
        by it and abides with it. Divine Principle is the Life
304:18  of man. Man's happiness is not, therefore, at
        the disposal of physical sense. Truth is not
        contaminated by error. Harmony in man is as beautiful
304:21  as in music, and discord is unnatural, unreal.

        The science of music governs tones. If mortals caught
        harmony through material sense, they would lose har-
304:24  mony, if time or accident robbed them of material sense.
        To be master of chords and discords, the science of
        music must be understood. Left to the decisions
304:27  of material sense, music is liable to be misappre-
        hended and lost in confusion. Controlled by belief,
        instead of understanding, music is, must be, imper-
304:30  fectly expressed. So man, not understanding the Sci-
        ence of being, - thrusting aside his divine Principle as
        incomprehensible, - is abandoned to conjectures, left in
305:1   the hands of ignorance, placed at the disposal of illusions,
        subjected to material sense which is discord. A discon-
305:3   tented, discordant mortal is no more a /man/ than discord
        is music.

                            Human reflection

        A picture in the camera or a face reflected in the mirror
305:6   is not the original, though resembling it. Man, in the
        likeness of his Maker, reflects the central light
        of being, the invisible God. As there is no cor-
305:9   poreality in the mirrored form, which is but a reflection,
        so man, like all things real, reflects God, his divine Prin-
        ciple, not in a mortal body.

305:12  Gender also is a quality, not of God, but a character-
        istic of mortal mind. The verity that God's image is not
        a creator, though he reflects the creation of Mind, God,
305:15  constitutes the underlying reality of reflection. "Then
        answered Jesus and said unto them: Verily, verily I say
        unto you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he
305:18  seeth the Father do: for what things soever He doeth,
        these also doeth the Son likewise."

                             Inverted images

        The inverted images presented by the senses, the de-
305:21  flections of matter as opposed to the Science of spirit-
        ual reflection, are all unlike Spirit, God. In
        the illusion of life that is here to-day and
305:24  gone to-morrow, man would be wholly mortal, were
        it not that Love, the divine Principle that obtains in
        divine Science, destroys all error and brings immor-
305:27  tality to light. Because man is the reflection of his
        Maker, he is not subject to birth, growth, maturity, de-
        cay. These mortal dreams are of human origin, not
305:30  divine.

                            Jewish traditions

        The Sadducees reasoned falsely about the resurrec-
        tion, but not so blindly as the Pharisees, who believed
306:1   error to be as immortal as Truth. The Pharisees thought
        that they could raise the spiritual from the material. They
306:3   would first make life result in death, and then
        resort to death to reproduce spiritual life.
        Jesus taught them how death was to be overcome by
306:6   spiritual Life, and demonstrated this beyond cavil.

                         Divinity not childless

        Life demonstrates Life. The immortality of Soul makes
        man immortal. If God, who is Life, were parted for a
306:9   moment from His reflection, man, during that
        moment there would be no divinity reflected.
        The Ego would be unexpressed, and the Father would be
306:12  childless, - no Father.

        If Life or Soul and its representative, man, unite for
        a period and then are separated as by a law of divorce to
306:15  be brought together again at some uncertain future time
        and in a manner unknown, - and this is the general
        religious opinion of mankind, - we are left without a
306:18  rational proof of immortality. But man cannot be sep-
        arated for an instant from God, if man reflects God.
        Thus Science proves man's existence to be intact.

                              Thought-forms

306:21  The myriad forms of mortal thought, made manifest
        as matter, are not more distinct nor real to the mate-
        rial senses than are the Soul-created forms
306:24  to spiritual sense, which cognizes Life as per-
        manent. Undisturbed amid the jarring testimony of the
        material senses, Science, still enthroned, is unfolding
306:27  to mortals the immutable, harmonious, divine Principle,
        - is unfolding Life and the universe, ever present and
        eternal.

306:30  God's man, spiritually created, is not material and
        mortal.

                          The serpent's whisper

        The parent of all human discord was the Adam-dream,
307:1   the deep sleep, in which originated the delusion that life
        and intelligence proceeded from and passed into matter.
307:3   This pantheistic error, or so-called /serpent/, in-
        sists still upon the opposite of Truth, saying,
        "Ye shall be as gods;" that is, I will make error as real
307:6   and eternal as Truth.

        Evil still affirms itself to be mind, and declares that
        there is more than one intelligence or God. It says:
307:9   "There shall be lords and gods many. I declare that God
        makes evil minds and evil spirits, and that I aid Him.
        Truth shall change sides and be unlike Spirit. I will
307:12  put spirit into what I call matter, and matter shall seem
        to have life as much as God, Spirit, who /is/ the only life."

                         Bad results from error

        This error has proved itself to be error. Its life is found
307:15  to be not Life, but only a transient, false sense of an ex-
        istence which ends in death. Error charges
        its lie to Truth and says: "The Lord knows
307:18  it. He has made man immortal and material, out of mat-
        ter instead of Spirit." Thus error partakes of its own
        nature and utters its own falsities. If we regard matter
307:21  as intelligent, and Mind as both good and evil, every sin
        or supposed material pain and pleasure seems normal,
        a part of God's creation, and so weighs against our course
307:24  Spiritward.

                             Higher statutes

        Truth has no beginning. The divine Mind is the Soul
        of man, and gives man dominion over all things. Man
307:27  was not created from a material basis, nor
        bidden to obey material laws which Spirit never
        made; his province is in spiritual statutes, in the higher
307:30  law of Mind.

                           The great question

        Above error's awful din, blackness, and chaos, the voice
        of Truth still calls: "Adam, where art thou? Conscious-
308:1   ness, where art thou? Art thou dwelling in the belief
        that mind is in matter, and that evil is mind, or art thou
308:3   in the living faith that there is and can be but
        one God, and keeping His commandment?"
        Until the lesson is learned that God is the only Mind gov-
308:6   erning man, mortal belief will be afraid as it was in the
        beginning, and will hide from the demand, "Where art
        thou?" This awful demand, "Adam, where art thou?"
308:9   is met by the admission from the head, heart, stomach,
        blood, nerves, etc.: "Lo, here I am, looking for happiness
        and life in the body, but finding only an illusion, a blend-
308:12  ing of false claims, false pleasure, pain, sin, sickness, and
        death."

        The Soul-inspired patriarchs heard the voice of Truth,
308:15  and talked with God as consciously as man talks with man.

                           Wrestling of Jacob

        Jacob was /alone/, wrestling with error, - struggling
        with a mortal sense of life, substance, and intelligence
308:18  as existent in matter with its false pleasures
        and pains, - when an angel, a message from
        Truth and Love, appeared to him and smote the sinew,
308:21  or strength, of his error, till he saw its unreality; and
        Truth, being thereby understood, gave him spiritual
        strength in this Peniel of divine Science. Then said
308:24  the spiritual evangel: "Let me go, for the day breaketh;"
        that is, the light of Truth and Love dawns upon thee.
        But the patriarch, perceiving his error and his need
308:27  of help, did not loosen his hold upon this glorious light
        until his nature was transformed. When Jacob was
        asked, "What is thy name?" he straightway answered;
308:30  and then his name was changed to Israel, for "as a prince"
        had he prevailed and had "power with God and with
        men." Then Jacob questioned his deliverer, "Tell me,
309:1   I pray thee, /thy/ name;" but this appellation was withheld,
        for the messenger was not a corporeal being, but a name-
309:3   less, incorporeal impartation of divine Love to man, which,
        to use the word of the Psalmist, /restored /his Soul, - gave
        him the spiritual sense of being and rebuked his material
309:6   sense.

                           Israel the new name

        The result of Jacob's struggle thus appeared. He had
        conquered material error with the understanding of Spirit
309:9   and of spiritual power. This changed the man.
        He was no longer called Jacob, but Israel, -
        a prince of God, or a soldier of God, who had fought
309:12  a good fight. He was to become the father of those, who
        through earnest striving followed his demonstration of the
        power of Spirit over the material senses; and the children
309:15  of earth who followed his example were to be called the
        children of Israel, until the Messiah should rename them.
        If these children should go astray, and forget that Life
309:18  is God, good, and that good is not in elements which are
        not spiritual, - thus losing the divine power which heals
        the sick and sinning, - they were to be brought back
309:21  through great tribulation, to be renamed in Christian
        Science and led to deny material sense, or mind in matter,
        even as the gospel teaches.

                          Life never structural

309:24  The Science of being shows it to be impossible for in-
        finite Spirit or Soul to be in a finite body or for man to
        have an intelligence separate from his Maker.
309:27  It is a self-evident error to suppose that there
        can be such a reality as organic animal or vegetable life,
        when such so-called life always ends in death. Life is
309:30  never for a moment extinct. Therefore it is never struc-
        tural nor organic, and is never absorbed nor limited by its
        own formations.

                        Thought seen as substance

310:1   The artist is not in his painting. The picture is the
        artist's thought objectified. The human belief fancies
310:3   that it delineates thought on matter, but what
        is matter? Did it exist prior to thought?
        Matter is made up of supposititious mortal mind-force;
310:6   but all might is divine Mind. Thought will finally be
        understood and seen in all form, substance, and color, but
        without material accompaniments. The potter is not in
310:9   the clay; else the clay would have power over the potter.
        God is His own infinite Mind, and expresses all.

                        The central intelligence

        Day may decline and shadows fall, but darkness flees
310:12  when the earth has again turned upon its axis. The sun
        is not affected by the revolution of the earth.
        So Science reveals Soul as God, untouched
310:15  by sin and death, - as the central life and intelligence
        around which circle harmoniously all things in the sys-
        tems of Mind.

                            Soul imperishable

310:18  Soul changeth not. We are commonly taught that there
        is a human soul which sins and is spiritually lost, - that
        soul may be lost, and yet be immortal. If
310:21  Soul could sin, Spirit, Soul, would be flesh in-
        stead of Spirit. It is the belief of the flesh and of mate-
        rial sense which sins. If Soul sinned, Soul would die.
310:24  Sin is the element of self-destruction, and spiritual death
        is oblivion. If there was sin in Soul, the annihilation of
        Spirit would be inevitable. The only Life is Spirit, and
310:27  if Spirit should lose Life as God, good, then Spirit, which
        has no other existence, would be annihilated.

        Mind is God, and God is not seen by material sense,
310:30  because Mind is Spirit, which material sense cannot dis-
        cern. There is neither growth, maturity, nor decay in
        Soul. These changes are the mutations of material sense,
311:1   the varying clouds of mortal belief, which hide the truth
        of being.

311:3   What we term mortal mind or carnal mind, dependent
        on matter for manifestation, is not Mind. God is Mind:
        all that Mind, God, is, or hath made, is good, and He
311:6   made all. Hence evil is not made and is not real.

                          Sin only of the flesh

        Soul is immortal because it is Spirit, which has no ele-
        ment of self-destruction. is man lost spiritually? No,
311:9   he can only lose a sense material. All sin is
        of the flesh. It cannot be spiritual. Sin exists
        here or hereafter only so long as the illusion of mind in
311:12  matter remains. It is a sense of sin, and not a sinful soul,
        which is lost. Evil is destroyed by the sense of good.

                             Soul impeccable

        Through false estimates of soul as dwelling in sense
311:15  and of mind as dwelling in matter, belief strays into a
        sense of temporary loss or absence of soul, spir-
        itual truth. This state of error is the mortal
311:18  dream of life and substance as existent in matter, and is
        directly opposite to the immortal reality of being. So long
        as we believe that soul can sin or that immortal Soul is in
311:21  mortal body, we can never understand the Science of be-
        ing. When humanity does understand this Science, it
        will become the law of Life to man, - even the higher law
311:24  of Soul, which prevails over material sense through har-
        mony and immortality.

        The objects cognized by the physical senses have not
311:27  the reality of substance. They are only what mortal
        belief calls them. Matter, sin, and mortality lose all
        supposed consciousness or claim to life or existence, as
311:30  mortals lay off a false sense of life, substance, and intelli-
        gence. but the spiritual, eternal man is not touched by
        these phases of mortality.

                              Sense-dreams

312:1   How true it is that whatever is learned through material
        sense must be lost because such so-called knowledge is
312:3   reversed by the spiritual facts of being in
        Science. That which material sense calls
        intangible, is found to be substance. What to material
312:6   sense seems substance, becomes nothingness, as the sense-
        dream vanishes and reality appears.

        The senses regard a corpse, not as man, but simply as
312:9   matter. People say, "Man is dead;" but this death is
        the departure of a mortal's mind, not of matter. The
        matter is still there. The belief of that mortal that he
312:12  must die occasioned his departure; yet you say that
        matter has caused his death.

                             Vain ecstasies

        People go into ecstasies over the sense of a corporeal
312:15  Jehovah, though with scarcely a spark of love in their
        hearts; yet God /is/ love, and without Love,
        God, immortality cannot appear. Mortals try
312:18  to believe without understanding Truth; yet God /is/
        Truth. Mortals claim that death is inevitable; but man's
        eternal Principle is ever-present life. Mortals believe in
312:21  a finite personal God; while God is infinite Love, which
        must be unlimited.

                            Man-made theories

        Our theories are based on finite premises, which can-
312:24  not penetrate beyond matter. A personal sense of God
        and of man's capabilities necessarily limits
        faith and hinders spiritual understanding. It
312:27  divides faith and understanding between matter and Spirit,
        the finite and the infinite, and so turns away from the
        intelligent and divine healing Principle to the inanimate
312:30  drug.

                            The one anointed

        Jesus' spiritual origin and his demonstration of divine
        Principle richly endowed him and entitled him to sonship
313:1   in Science. He was the son of a virgin. The term
        Christ Jesus, or Jesus the Christ (to give the full and
313:3   proper translation of the Greek), may be ren-
        dered "Jesus the anointed," Jesus the God-
        crowned or the divinely royal man, as it is said of him in
313:6   the first chapter of Hebrews: -
             Therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee
             With the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

313:9   With this agrees another passage in the same chapter,
        which refers to the Son as "the brightness of His [God's]
        glory, and the express [expressed] image of His person
313:12  [infinite Mind]." It is noteworthy that the phrase "ex-
        press image" in the Common Version is, in the Greek
        Testament, /character/. Using this word in its higher mean-
313:15  ing, we may assume that the author of this remarkable
        epistle regarded Christ as the Son of God, the royal
        reflection of the infinite; and the cause given for the ex-
313:18  altation of Jesus, Mary's son, was that he "loved right-
        eousness and hated iniquity." The passage is made
        even clearer in the translation of the late George R.
313:21  Noyes, D.D.: "Who, being a brightness from His glory,
        and an image of His being."

                           Jesus the Scientist

        Jesus of Nazareth was the most scientific man that
313:24  ever trod the globe. He plunged beneath the material
        surface of things, and found the spiritual
        cause. To accommodate himself to imma-
313:27  ture ideas of spiritual power, - for spirituality was pos
        sessed only in a limited degree even by his disciples, -
        Jesus called the body, which by spiritual power he
313:30  raised from the grave, "flesh and bones." To show
        that the substance of himself was Spirit and the body
314:1   no more perfect because of death and no less material
        until the ascension (his further spiritual exaltation),
314:3   Jesus waited until the mortal or fleshly sense had re-
        linquished the belief of substance-matter, and spiritual
        sense had quenched all earthly yearnings. Thus he found
314:6   the eternal Ego, and proved that he and the Father were
        inseparable as God and His reflection or spiritual man.
        Our Master gained the solution of being, demonstrating
314:9   the existence of but one Mind without a second or equal.

                         The bodily resurrection

        The Jews, who sought to kill this man of God, showed
        plainly that their material views were the parents of their
314:12  wicked deeds. When Jesus spoke of repro-
        ducing his body, - knowing, as he did, that
        Mind was the builder, - and said, "Destroy this temple,
314:15  and in three days I will raise it up," they thought that he
        meant their material temple instead of his body. To such
        materialists, the real man seemed a spectre, unseen and
314:18  unfamiliar, and the body, which they laid in a sepulchre,
        seemed to be substance. This materialism lost sight of
        the true Jesus; but the faithful Mary saw him, and he
314:21  presented to her, more than ever before, the true idea of
        Life and substance.

                       Opposition of materialists

        Because of mortals' material and sinful belief, the
314:24  spiritual Jesus was imperceptible to them. The higher
        his demonstration of divine Science carried
        the problem of being, and the more dis-
314:27  tinctly he uttered the demands of its divine Principle,
        Truth and Love, the more odious he became to sinners
        and to those who, depending on doctrines and material
314:30  laws to save them from sin and sickness, were submis-
        sive to death as being in supposed accord with the
        inevitable law of life. Jesus proved them wrong by
315:1   his resurrection, and said: "Whosoever liveth and be-
        lieveth in me shall never die."

                             Hebrew theology

315:3   That saying of our Master, "I and my Father are one,"
        separated him from the scholastic theology of the rabbis.
        His better understanding of God was a rebuke
315:6   to them. He knew of but one Mind and laid
        no claim to any other. He knew that the Ego was Mind
        instead of body and that matter, sin, and evil were not
315:9   Mind; and his understanding of this divine Science
        brought upon him the anathemas of the age.

                            The true sonship

        The opposite and false views of the people hid from
315:12  their sense Christ's sonship with God. They could not
        discern his spiritual existence. Their carnal
        minds were at enmity with it. Their thoughts
315:15  were filled with mortal error, instead of with God's spirit-
        ual idea as presented by Christ Jesus. The likeness of
        God we lose sight of through sin, which beclouds the spir-
315:18  itual sense of Truth; and we realize this likeness only
        when we subdue sin and prove man's heritage, the liberty
        of the sons of God.

                          Immaculate conception

315:21  Jesus' spiritual origin and understanding enabled him
        to demonstrate the facts of being, - to prove irrefutably
        how spiritual Truth destroys material error,
315:24  heals sickness, and overcomes death. The
        divine conception of Jesus pointed to this truth and pre-
        sented an illustration of creation. The history of Jesus
315:27  shows him to have been more spiritual than all other
        earthly personalities.

                            Jesus as mediator

        Wearing in part a human form (that is, as it seemed
315:30  to mortal view), being conceived by a human mother,
        Jesus was the mediator between Spirit and the flesh,
        between Truth and error. Explaining and demonstrat-
316:1   ing the way of divine Science, he became the way of
        salvation to all who accepted his word. From him mor-
316:3   tals may learn how to escape from evil. The
        real man being linked by Science to his Maker,
        mortals need only turn from sin and lose sight of mortal
316:6   selfhood to find Christ, the real man and his relation to
        God, and to recognize the divine sonship. Christ, Truth,
        was demonstrated through Jesus to prove the power of
316:9   Spirit over the flesh, - to show that Truth is made
        manifest by its effects upon the human mind and body,
        healing sickness and destroying sin.

                          Spiritual government

316:12  Jesus represented Christ, the true idea of God. Hence
        the warfare between this spiritual idea and perfunctory
        religion, between spiritual clear-sightedness
316:15  and the blindness of popular belief, which led
        to the conclusion that the spiritual idea could be killed
        by crucifying the flesh. The Christ-idea, or the Christ-
316:18  man, rose higher to human view because of the crucifixion,
        and thus proved that truth was the master of death.
        Christ presents the indestructible man, whom Spirit cre-
316:21  ates, constitutes, and governs. Christ illustrates that
        blending with God, his divine Principle, which gives man
        dominion over all the earth.

                             Deadness in sin

316:24  The spiritual idea of God, as presented by Jesus, was
        scourged in person, and its Principle was rejected. That
        man was accounted a criminal who could
316:27  prove God's divine power by healing the
        sick, casting out evils, spiritualizing materialistic beliefs,
        and raising the dead, - those dead in trespasses and
316:30  sins, satisfied with the flesh, resting on the basis of mat-
        ter, blind to the possibilities of Spirit and its correla-
        tive truth.
317:1   Jesus uttered things which had been "secret from the
        foundation of the world," - since material knowledge
317:3   usurped the throne of the creative divine Principle, insisted
        on the might of matter, the force of falsity, the insignifi-
        cance of spirit, and proclaimed an anthropomorphic God.

                            The cup of Jesus

317:6   Whosoever lives most the life of Jesus in this age
        and declares best the power of Christian Science, will
        drink of his Master's cup. Resistance to
317:9   Truth will haunt his steps, and he will in-
        cur the hatred of sinners, till "wisdom is justified of
        her children." These blessed benedictions rest upon
317:12  Jesus' followers: "If the world hate you, ye know that
        it hated me before it hated you;" "Lo, I am with you
        alway," - that is, not only in all time, but in /all ways/
317:15  and conditions.

        The individuality of man is no less tangible because
        it is spiritual and because his life is not at the mercy of
317:18  matter. The understanding of his spiritual individuality
        makes man more real, more formidable in truth, and en-
        ables him to conquer sin, disease, and death. Our Lord
317:21  and Master presented himself to his disciples after his
        resurrection from the grave, as the self-same Jesus whom
        they had loved before the tragedy on Calvary.

                           Material skepticism

317:24  To the materialistic Thomas, looking for the ideal
        Saviour in matter instead of in Spirit and to the testi-
        mony of the material senses and the body,
317:27  more than to Soul, for an earnest of immor-
        tality, - to him Jesus furnished the proof that he was
        unchanged by the crucifixion. To this dull and doubt-
317:30  ing disciple Jesus remained a fleshly reality, so long as
        the Master remained an inhabitant of the earth. Noth-
        ing but a display of matter could make existence real
318:1   to Thomas. For him to believe in matter was no task,
        but for him to conceive of the substantiality of Spirit -
318:3   to know that nothing can efface Mind and immortality, in
        which Spirit reigns - was more difficult.

                        What the senses originate

        Corporeal senses define diseases as realities; but the
318:6   Scriptures declare that God made all, even while the cor-
        poreal senses are saying that matter causes
        disease and the divine Mind cannot or will
318:9   not heal it. The material senses originate and
        support all that is material, untrue, selfish, or debased.
        They would put soul into soil, life into limbo, and doom
318:12  all things to decay. We must silence this lie of material
        sense with the truth of spiritual sense. We must cause
        the error to cease that brought the belief of sin and death
318:15  and would efface the pure sense of omnipotence.

                           Sickness as discord

        Is the sick man sinful above all others? No! but
        so far as he is discordant, he is not the image of God.
318:18  Weary of their material beliefs, from which
        comes so much suffering, invalids grow more
        spiritual, as the error - or belief that life is in matter -
318:21  yields to the reality of spiritual Life.

        The Science of Mind denies the error of sensation in
        matter, and heals with Truth. Medical science treats
318:24  disease as though disease were real, therefore right, and
        attempts to heal it with matter. If disease is right it is
        wrong to heal it. Material methods are temporary, and
318:27  are not adapted to elevate mankind.

        The governor is not subjected to the governed. In
        Science man is governed by God, divine Principle, as
318:30  numbers are controlled and proved by His laws. Intelli-
        gence does not originate in numbers, but is manifested
        through them. The body does not include soul, but man-
319:1   ifests mortality, a false sense of soul. The delusion that
        there is life in matter has no kinship with the Life supernal.

                       Unscientific introspection

319:3   Science depicts disease as error, as matter /versus/
        Mind, and error reversed as subserving the facts of
        health. To calculate one's life-prospects
