this: Following the ancient Targums, which spoke the universally
received doctrines of the _Hebrew_ Church, they perceived, like the
authors of those Targums, that the Messiah was the same person as the
anthropomorphic Word, or Angel of Jehovah. But they knew that the Angel
of Jehovah was the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob. And they
were assured that their pious forefathers did not idolatrously worship a
creature, but that they venerated the self-existent God, Jehovah. Hence
they rightly determined that _Jehovah_ was _the name of the Messiah_.
This will appear very distinctly, if we attend to their doctrine
respecting the great angel whom they cabalistically denominated
Metraton." (Vol. 2, sec. 1, chap. iii.)

The reader will observe that this author construes the formulas Melach
Jehovah, Memra Jehovah, &c., in the same way as our translation, Angel
_of_ the Lord, Word _of_ the Lord, &c.; and while correctly holding that
the Angel or Messenger, and the Logos, Memra, or Word, are personally
identical with Jehovah, still indicates a distinction, as though the
former persons were sent by the latter. This is undoubtedly inconsistent
and unauthorized. Had he in his construction left out the preposition
_of_, as the original does, all would have been clear.

The following extracts are corrected from Dr. J. P. Smith's work, The
Scripture Testimony to the Messiah.

Onkelos renders Jacob's prediction of Shiloh, Gen. xlix., "_The Messiah
whose is the kingdom_." The Jerusalem Targum, "_The King Messiah whose
is the kingdom_." Jonathan on Sam. xxiii. 1-7: "The God of Israel spoke
with respect to me; the Rock of Israel, the Sovereign of the sons of
men, the true Judge, hath spoken to appoint me King; for _He is the
Messiah_ that shall be, who shall arise and rule in the fear of the
Lord." The Chaldee and other Targums generally refer the 2d Psalm to the
Messiah. Also the 45th Psalm, v. 2: "Thy beauty, O King Messiah, is
preeminent above the sons of men." Jonathan renders Isaiah xxiii. 5:
"Behold, the days are coming, saith the Lord, when I will raise up to
David the Messiah of the Righteous, and he shall reign," &c. And xxxiii.
15: "In those days and in that time, I will raise up to David the
Messiah of righteousness," &c. And Micah v. 1: "And thou, Bethlehem, out
of thee shall proceed in my presence the Messiah to exercise sovereignty
over Israel, whose name has been called from eternity, from the days of
the everlasting period." Zech. iii. 8: "Behold, I bring forth my servant
the Messiah, and he shall be revealed." And vi. 12: "Behold a man,
Messiah is his name, ready that he may be revealed and may spring forth,
and may build the temple of Jah."

The Jerusalem Targum, referring to Abraham when Jehovah appeared to him
as a man, says: "The Word of Jehovah [Memra Jehovah] appeared to him in
the Valley of Vision." Jonathan on Isaiah xlviii. 12: "Obey my Word;"
and 13: "Even by my Word I have founded the earth;" xlix. 16: "My Word
will not reject thee." Jer. xxix. 23: "Before me it is unveiled, and my
Word is witness;" xxxi. 4: "For my Word is to Israel as a Father;"
xxxii. 40: "My Word shall not turn away from following them to do them
good, and my Word shall rejoice over them to do them good." Ezek. xx.
12: "I gave them my Sabbath days, to be for a sign between my Word and
them, that they may know that I am Jah who sanctify them." The
Targumists generally substitute the word Jah for Jehovah. Jonathan on
Gen. v. 26: "That was the generation in whose days they began to
apostatize, and made to themselves falsehoods, [or idols,] and named
their falsehoods by the name of the Word of Jah." Jer. Tar. on Exodus
vi. 2: "And Jah was revealed by his Word to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob." Var. Tar. Isaiah xliii. 2: "In ancient time, when ye passed
through the Red Sea, my Word was for your help;" xlv. 17: "Israel shall
be delivered by the Word of Jah, with an everlasting deliverance;" v.
25: "By the Word of Jah shall all the seed of Israel be declared
righteous, and shall glory;" lxiii. 8: "My people are they, sons who
will not deal falsely; and his Word was their Redeemer;" v. 13: "He led
them through the deep: the Word of Jah led them." Jer. vi. 8: "Be
admonished, O Jerusalem, lest my Word cast thee off." Hosea xiv. 9: "I
by my Word will accept the prayer of Israel." Zach. vi. 7: "Not by
force, nor by power, but by my Word, saith Jah of hosts. And he will
reveal the Messiah whose name is spoken from eternity, and he shall
reign over all kingdoms."

The author quotes the following from Dr. Ryland and the Prolegomena to
Walton's Polyglot: "There are many passages of the Chaldee Paraphrasts
which could have been derived only from the remains of the expositions
and doctrines delivered by the prophets. They have many things
concerning the Word of God, by whom the universe was created, &c., and
which admirably confirm the declarations of St. John upon the Logos, and
prove that in so designating the Messiah or Son of God, the Evangelist
employed a name already in familiar use among the Jews, as received from
their ancestors, though not perfectly understood by all among them. To
this Word the Jerusalem Targum on Gen. i. 27 attributes _creation_: 'The
Word of the Lord created man.' And xxxii. 22: 'And the Word of the Lord
said, Behold Adam whom I have created.' Jonathan on Deut. xxxii. 39,
says: 'When will the Word of the Lord be manifested to redeem his
people?' The same Targum on Gen. xix. 24, ascribes to the Word of the
Lord the sending down of sulphur and fire on Sodom and Gomorrah:
'Sulphur and fire were sent down upon it from the Word of the Lord out
of heaven.' So likewise Onkelos: 'And the Word of the Lord returned.'
And on Gen. v. 24: 'Enoch was taken away by the Word before the Lord.'
So the Jerusalem, Deut. xviii. 19: 'My Word will take vengeance upon
him.' So Onkelos and Jonathan. The passages are innumerable in which
actions and properties are attributed to the Word of God, as a distinct
Person."

Again, quoting Owen as referred to by Ryland: "The Chaldee Paraphrast,
observing that some especial presence of God is expressed in the words,
Gen. iii. 8, renders them, 'And they heard the voice of the Word of the
Lord God walking in the garden.' So all the Targums. And that of
Jerusalem begins the next verse accordingly: 'And the Word of the Lord
God called unto Adam.' And this expression they afterwards make use of
in places innumerable; and that in such a way as plainly to denote a
distinct Person in the Deity. That this was their intention in it, is
hence manifest; because about the time of the writing of the first of
those Targums which gave the rule of speaking unto them that followed,
it was usual amongst them to express their conceptions of the Son of God
by the name of the Logos, or Word of God." (_Owen on Epist. Heb. Vol.
1._)

"At this time, there was nothing more common among the Hebrews than to
denote the second subsistence of the Deity by the name of the Word of
God. They were now divided into two great parts: first the inhabitants
of Canaan, with the regions adjoining, and many old remnants in the
East, who used the Syro-Chaldean language, being but one dialect of the
Hebrew; and secondly, the dispersions under the Greek empire, who are
commonly called Hellenists, and also used the Greek tongue. And both
these sorts did usually, in their several languages, describe the second
Person in the Trinity by the name of the _Word of God_. For the former
sort, or those who used the Syro-Chaldean dialect, we have an eminent
proof of it in the translation of the Scripture which, at least some
part of it, was made about this time amongst them, commonly called the
Chaldee Paraphrase; in the whole whereof the second Person is mentioned
under the name of Memra dejeja, or the Word of God. Hereunto are all
personal properties and all divine works in that translation assigned;
with an illustrious testimony to the faith of the old Church concerning
the distinct subsistence of a plurality of Persons in the Divine nature.
And for the Hellenists who wrote and expressed themselves in the Greek
tongue, they used the name _Logos, the Word_ of God, to the same
purpose: as I have elsewhere manifested out of the writings of Philo,
who lived about this time, between the death of our Saviour and the
destruction of Jerusalem." (_Owen, Vol. 2._)

It will be observed that in all the translations of the Targums, and in
the comments of Ryland and Owen, the same usage is exhibited as in our
translation, of making the _Jehovah_ the genitive of the official
appellative which precedes it. Hence the mystery and confusion which
have so generally been thought to attend the official designations of
the Old Testament. But if it be considered that in the use of the terms
Logos, Dabar, and Memra, where a personal reference is intended, the
abstract is put for the concrete, as _Word_ for _Revealer_, so that
where these words are coupled with _Jehovah_ the reading should be _The
Revealer_, or _The Revealing Jehovah_,--as in the case of _Melach
Jehovah_, the reading should be, _The Messenger_, or _The Sent_ or
_delegated Jehovah_, or the Messenger _who is_ Jehovah,--the use of
those terms as personal designations will suggest no difficulty.




CHAPTER XV.

    Reasons of the Failure of the modern versions of the Scriptures
    to exhibit clearly the Hebrew designations of the Messiah--The
    Masoretic Punctuation--Reference to the term Melach and the
    formula Melach Jehovah.


But if, in the ancient dispensations, the Messenger Jehovah, the
delegated official Person, Messiah, was, in all relations, the actor,
administrator, and revealer; if Moses and the prophets wrote
intelligibly of Him; if they recognized and acknowledged him under all
the Divine designations, why, it may naturally be asked, did not the
authors of the English and other modern versions so understand, and in
their translations construe and represent them? An answer to this
question, in all its bearings, probably no one now would be inclined to
undertake. But in certain, and perhaps the most important respects, it
admits of a satisfactory answer. The translators, from the prescribed or
customary and popular course of theological study and opinion, which
aimed to avoid, with the arrogant assumptions and pretensions of
Romanism, the gentile heresies of the whole Papal history, were led to
entertain an overweening and ill-founded confidence in the modern Jews
as interpreters of their own Scriptures; that is, of the Jewish authors
who flourished, and whose works were published, after the establishment
of Papal domination and intolerance, and of Mohammedan ravage and
proscription. That school of Jewish authors was not only more modern,
but widely different in respect to their theological doctrines from the
Chaldee paraphrasts, especially in regard to the Messiah; and may be
comprehensively described as including the Talmudists, the Masoretic
doctors, and their rabbinical disciples and followers of various names.
The productions of these Jewish authors were numerous and readily
accessible at the period of the revival of learning in Europe, and in
the sixteenth century were brought into notice and favor especially by
the elder Buxtorf, in connection with his edition of the Hebrew Bible,
and his lexicons, grammar, and various works relating to Masoretic and
rabbinical literature. He seems to have entered with enthusiasm into the
study of this school of Jewish writers; and, with respect at least to
the later and best known portion of them, as the clue to their
sentiments was furnished by their use of the Masoretic points, he
embraced their system in that respect, and inculcated and defended the
application of it to the text of the Hebrew Scriptures with earnestness,
perseverance, and success. His example was followed. The use of the
points facilitated the study of the language; and for that reason, as
well as because they were supposed to be safe guides in respect to the
reference and meaning of words, they became popular with the learned and
with students. Instead of being regarded as having the effect of a
translation and commentary, and thereby fastening on the text the
constructions and opinions of their authors, whether erroneous or
otherwise, they were regarded primarily in a grammatical point of view,
and as indicating the vowels supposed to be proper to Hebrew words, in
addition to the letters originally composing them.

But this system of punctuation has unavoidably the effect of a version
or comment. Its office is essentially that of an exponent of the
constructions and opinions of its authors, and as such it can be no
further correct and reliable than their theological, exegetical, and
religious doctrines, theories and sentiments were in accordance with the
real meaning of the original text. It may often, and perhaps generally
where no doctrine or doubtful construction is concerned, have the effect
to express that real meaning, and to that extent it might be harmless,
and, if not wholly useless, might be of equal value with a paraphrase to
the same effect. But if the student adopts this system as a guide, he
naturally relies on it as equally applicable to every portion of the
sacred oracles, and, with as much confidence in one case as in another,
adopts the construction which it indicates.

An attempt to reform the reigning fashion of Hebrew study in relation to
this subject would probably be as hopeful a task as an attempt to
disabuse the minds of theologians and religious teachers of the
empirical, fanciful, and puerile system of figurative exposition which
was rendered popular by Origen, and has reigned triumphant from his to
the present time; being propagated from age to age by education, and by
the example and influence of the learned. But, regarded in a merely
historical point of view, there appears to be no room for doubt but that
the Hebrew vowel points--closely and even bigotedly adhered to, as they
are understood to have been, by the translators of the Scriptures into
our own and other modern languages--had, extensively, a very ill effect
upon the versions which they furnished. And to whatever extent this was
true, it would naturally prevail, especially in relation to those
passages concerning which the authors held erroneous opinions, and as to
which, under the more than hereditary Jewish prejudices occasioned by
the persecutions and proscriptions to which they were subjected, they
aimed to counteract the tendency of the Chaldee versions, as well as
"to root out," in the language of McCaul, the Christian interpretations
of the Hebrew text. "The violent persecutions of the Crusaders," says
that writer, "the jealousy excited by the Christian attempt upon the
Holy Land, and the influence of the doctrine of the Mahometans, amongst
whom they lived, produced a sensible change in Jewish opinions and
interpretations, which is plainly marked in Kimchi and other writers of
the day, and without a knowledge of which the phenomena of modern
Judaism cannot be fully understood. Rashi, Aben-Ezra, and Kimchi
endeavored to get rid of the Christian interpretations, and Maimonides
to root out the Christian doctrines _which had descended from the
ancient Jewish Church_." (_Introduction to Kimchi._) Yet this laborious
student of those authors and of the Talmud adhered as pertinaciously as
they to the Masoretic points, and apparently without over suspecting
that their highest office and their necessary and principal effect was
that of being the vehicle of a comment. Such is the force of education,
literary discipline, example, and habit in generating fixed opinions.

But let one deemed competent to judge and to speak upon this subject be
referred to:

"The Masoretic punctuation," says Bishop Lowth, "by which the
pronunciation of the language is given, the forms of the several parts
of speech, the construction of the words, the distribution and limits of
the sentences, and the connection of the several members, _are fixed_,
is in effect _an interpretation_ of the Hebrew text made by the Jews _of
late ages_, probably not earlier than the eighth century, and may be
considered as their translation of the Old Testament. Where the words,
_unpointed_, are capable of various meanings, accordingly as they are
variously pronounced and constructed, the Jews, _by their pointing_,
have determined them to one _meaning and construction_, and the sense
which they thus give is _their sense_ of the passage, just as the
rendering of a translator into another language is _his sense_; that is,
the sense in which in his opinion the original words are to be taken;
and it has no other authority than what arises from its being agreeable
to the rules of just interpretation. But because in the languages of
Europe the vowels are essential parts of written words, a notion was too
hastily taken up by the learned at the revival of letters, when the
original Scriptures began to be more carefully examined, that the vowel
points were necessary appendages of the Hebrew letters, and therefore
_coeval with them;_ at least that they became absolutely necessary when
the Hebrew was become a dead language, and must have been added by Ezra,
who collected and formed the canon of the Old Testament, in regard to
all the books of it in his time extant. On this supposition the points
have been considered as part of the Hebrew text, and as giving the
meaning of it on no less than Divine authority. Accordingly, our public
translations in the modern tongues for the use of the Church among
Protestants, and so likewise the modern Latin translations, are for the
most part close copies of the Hebrew pointed text, and are in reality
only versions at second-hand, translations of the Jews' interpretation
of the Old Testament."

After conceding to this interpretation what he supposes it may justly
claim, he adds that the modern translators "would have made a much
better use of it, and a greater progress in the explication of the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, had they consulted it without
absolutely submitting to its authority; had they considered it as an
assistant, not as an infallible guide." Finally he compares the effect
of this course to that of the Act of the Council of Trent in pronouncing
the Vulgate to be of equal authority with the original Scriptures.
(_Dissertation preliminary to his Version of Isaiah._)

Now to apply these observations to the case in hand. Our translators
having been educated in the Jewish sense of the Hebrew Scriptures, and
having studied the original with the points under the received and
general impression that they were of equal authority with the text, of
course proceeded with their translations under the influence of whatever
erroneous constructions and opinions the Massorites and their disciples
entertained. Those errors, therefore, which were predominant in the
Jewish mind when the points were added to the text, and when the causes
of prejudice and hostility against the Christian doctrines were
universally and most violently in operation, were perpetuated, both
among Jews and Christians, by the use of those ingenious and plausible
appendages; and from that day to this, translators and expositors have
fallen back upon them, and upon the awful petrifactions of Talmudical
and rabbinical jargon, as guides to the meaning of the words of
Inspiration.

The Jewish people, after their total defection to idolatry, their exile
in Babylon, and the cessation of prophetic gifts, having renounced idols
and incurred the hatred and contempt of idolaters, were, from their
restless state of mind, their internal divisions, feuds, and rivalships,
and the exposures and vicissitudes of their external condition
peculiarly exposed to cardinal and sectarian errors. They had forsaken
Jehovah, and no longer received any tokens of his presence and favor.
Both priests and people, a faithful remnant always excepted, had
rejected him as their mediatorial prophet, priest, and king, and
renounced their allegiance to him as their lawgiver and providential
ruler and protector; and holding no longer the belief of a Divine
