Him in all things Which is the Head, even Christ"; growth upon and
in "the chief Corner-stone, in Whom all the building fitly framed
together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord." And such growth
does--it must--lead on directly to the gathering in of souls into
the Lord's kingdom; it must arouse that which we call the
missionary spirit in the Church, which was illustrated, as never
before nor since, in the life and example of Him Who came "to seek
and to save that which was lost"; which was inculcated by Him when
He bade the Twelve to "disciple all nations"; which was the burden
of the last words, "unto the uttermost part of the earth," that
fell on the ears of the adoring Apostles as He entered into the
bright cloud of the Ascension; and to which the miracle of
Pentecost had such direct and solemn reference. [Footnote: Baton's
Bampton Lectures, 1872, p. 363.]

When this normal law becomes a living conviction in the minds and
hearts of the Church's members, and, therefore, in the mind and
heart of the Church herself, then those two things follow which
the first part of my text (though, indeed, it is the illation from
the latter portion) brings before us, when it says that because of
the conversion of "the abundance of the sea," and because of the
incoming of "the Gentiles," "thou shalt see, and flow together,
and thine heart shall fear and be enlarged."

First, "thou shalt see, and flow together"; or, as it might better
read, "thou shalt see and be enlightened." As the mind takes in
those latest words of the Lord, "unto the uttermost part of the
earth," as the eye beholds the Church spreading outward from its
one centre in Jerusalem, "the vision and the faculty divine," if
not created, are at least sharpened and strengthened. We learn how
God "hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in the ages to come He might
show the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness toward us
through Christ Jesus." We understand, as never before, "what is
the fellowship of the mystery which from the beginning of

[Footnote: Eaton's _Bampton Lectures_ 1872, p. 363] the world
hath been hid in God, Who created all things by Jesus Christ."

So it fared with St. Peter, after that vision of the great sheet
coming down from heaven had fully opened to him the universality
of the Church of God. Then his "delusive dream of temporal
deliverance became a real assurance of eternal redemption." Then
his "narrow estimate of the Divine Covenant with his own nation
expanded, under the guidance of the Holy Ghost, into the sublime
conception of the 'Israel of God.'" [Footnote: Lee _On Inspiration_,
p. 249 (American edition).]

"Thine heart shall fear and be enlarged." The fear surely is not
that of shivering dread or slavish terror. But it is that subduing
awe which always accompanies great joyfulness, and enters into it
in such a mysterious and perplexing way; even as God says, by
Jeremiah, that when all the nations of the earth shall hear of the
good which He will do unto Israel, "they shall fear and tremble
for all the goodness and all the prosperity that I procure unto
it." So when Jacob, awaking from the sleep in which he learned of
the new Covenant with God through the Incarnation of Christ,
exclaimed: "How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the
House of God, and this is the gate of Heaven!" And then, as the
unbounded love and mercy of the Father of all spirits comes to be
understood, the heart is in very deed "enlarged," as St. Paul's
heart was toward his Corinthian children; and it goes along, in
loving, active sympathy with the great purpose of God, "that in
the dispensation of the fulness of times, He might gather together
in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which
are on earth, even in Him."

Thus as the "Vision of peace, the blessed city Jerusalem" has
dawned upon our sight; as we have watched, its ever-spreading
walls and rising towers; as we have seen it builded up with living
stones, which are human souls redeemed and sanctified; we have
entered with a keener insight into, we have come to comprehend
more truly and more fully, "the length and breadth and depth and
height" of that "manifold wisdom of God" which is made "known by
the Church" even to "the principalities and powers in heavenly
places"; and our hearts have kindled into that constraining love
of Christ, in which we rejoice, with joy unspeakable, to work
together with Him in bringing men to the knowledge of the one way
of salvation, while, in the same deep love, we also endeavor to
"keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace."

Fathers and brethren, honored and beloved in the Lord! as I stand
here, this day, with a full heart but with trembling lips, the
unworthy successor of him who, in this city of old renown,
received a century ago the sacred deposit which he bore to the
Western world; as I look on this truly august gathering which
tells, as no words can tell, how God has blessed the vine planted
in early, possibly in Apostolic, days in "Britain divided from the
world," enabling her "to stretch out her branches unto the sea,
and her boughs unto the river"; as I think of all that has come
and gone in those hundred years in the marvellous growth and the
awakened inner life, acting and reacting on each other, of the
mother and the daughter Churches--for we all spring from one and
the same noble stock--I can find no better words in which to sum
up memories, thoughts, forecastings, than those which I have
endeavored somewhat to unfold: "Then thou shalt see, and be
enlightened, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because
the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces
of the Gentiles shall come unto thee."

And yet, one cannot but remember how far beyond all possible
anticipations of those brave hearts that once made such a venture
for Christ and His Church, are the things which our eyes look
upon, and which are a part of our everyday life and experience.

When those ten presbyters, whose priesthood had not been gained
without trials and perils which only the deepest convictions could
have nerved them to bear, met in that secluded unknown New England
town, on the Festival of the Annunciation, in 1783, and laid the
burden of seeking for the Episcopate on Seabury, what could they
have seen about them but the disorganized elements of an
apparently decaying life? When, on the 14th of November, 1784, in
that upper room in this good city, those venerable prelates (whose
names are to-day household words through all the length and
breadth of what has been called "The Greater Britain of the
Western World") handed on the high commission they had received in
trust, what could their eyes have looked upon but scattered flocks
under their few shepherds, which must meet, if they met at all, in
uncertainty and peril, to worship God as their fathers had
worshipped before them? Still, if they saw little around them to
encourage and support, theirs (we may well believe) was the eye of
faith that is strengthened to pierce the future. If they heard few
words of cheer from men, there came upon their ears, from a
Greater than man, words of strong hope and glorious promise. In
that Transatlantic gathering, small and unnoticed as it was, the
ten who came together heard, in the Gospel of the Annunciation,
that "with God nothing is impossible," and in the song of the
Blessed Virgin they were bidden to bethink themselves how "God
remembered His mercy and truth toward the House of Israel,"
exalting "the humble and meek," filling "the hungry with good
things," and helping "His servant Israel." Here in Aberdeen, on
that memorable day of November, they said in the morning Psalter:
"O what great troubles and adversities hast Thou showed me! and
yet didst Thou turn and refresh me; yea, and broughtest me from
the deep of the earth again"; and then, as the strain of praise
swelled higher, higher still, while the vision of the City of God
in all its grandeur broke on the eye of faith, there came the
inspiring words--how their hearts must have thrilled as they
uttered them!--"He shall deliver the poor when he crieth, the
needy also, and him that hath no helper... He shall be favourable
to the simple and needy, and shall preserve the souls of the
poor.... There shall be an heap of corn in the earth, high upon
the hills; his fruit shall shake like Libanus, and shall be green
in the city like grass upon the earth."

Words like these carry with them unwonted power on occasions like
those of which I have been speaking. To us they come like special
prophecies of what we look on as a century now closing. To those
others they came freighted with hope for an indefinite and unknown
future. And what an inspiration they must have given to the
venture they were making; a venture so entirely one of faith, that
it is not too much to say of those who made it that they take
their places in that long line of faithful ones, mentioned with
such distinguished honor in the Epistle to the Hebrews, who,
though they only saw "the promises afar off," still "were
persuaded of them and embraced them," and therefore "obtained a
good report." Can we imagine, dear brethren, a more striking
illustration of the different aspect which things wear to the eye
of sense on the one hand, and the eye of faith on the other, than
that which the election and consecration of the first bishop for
America present to us? All honor, then, to those brave hearts that
accomplished them! Men may have counted "their lives madness and
their end to be without honor." We know, blessed be the God of all
grace and power! that they are "numbered among the children of
God, and their lot is among the saints."

The temptation is strong to linger on the simple but impressive
scene of the consecration: to try to picture that secluded oratory
in the house of the Coadjutor-Bishop of this faithful diocese; to
endeavor to bring back the congregation gathered in it, and the
ministering prelates; to recall the form of the youthful priest
who held the book from which the awful words of ordination were
recited, Alexander Jolly, afterwards the sainted Bishop of Moray;
to speak of this ancient city of Aberdeen, associated for all time
in the memories of Churchmen with the names of John Forbes of
Corse and Henry Scougal and the remembrance of its orthodox and
learned doctors; but time forbids more than this briefest mention.

We behold--and it is a sight to stir the heart with "thoughts too
deep for words"--we behold a suffering and a witnessing Church, in
the depth of a long and wasting depression, reaching out the hand
of love to a Church suffering and witnessing also, and trembling,
to human seeming, on the verge of utter extinction. Perhaps--is it
too much to say it?--it was because of this patient suffering and
faithful witness that God gave to this Church the distinguished
privilege of sending its first Apostle to the new world beyond the
ocean. I cannot refrain from quoting here the admirable words of
one of your own Scottish bishops. Speaking of the act which we
commemorate, he says: "Mark, my brethren, how for the accomplishment
of this work--according to the full measure of the gifts
of the Spirit and of Apostolic order--it pleased God, as at
the first, to choose the weak things of the world, and things that
were despised, yea, and things which in the eye of man had ceased
to be. To our Scottish Church with its hierarchy, which had
formerly consisted of two Archbishops and twelve Bishops, then
reduced to four; with its pastoral charge, which had once
comprehended the care of every parish in the land, then shrunk to
little mere than a score or two of scattered congregations--yea,
and at the very time when an act of the civil legislature had
declared all ecclesiastical orders conferred by her to be null and
void; at such a time, to the poor persecuted remnant of the Church
in Scotland was this grace given, that she should impart to the
United States, now no longer dependent upon England, the first
seed of the Episcopate which England had withheld. Yes, the first
bishop who set foot on the continent of North America, the first
bishop who went forth to a foreign land bearing the full blessings
of our reformed Church, was consecrated to his Apostolic office,
not amid the solemn pomp and august ceremonial of an English
minister, no, nor in the privacy of an episcopal palace, but in
the obscurity of an upper chamber in a common dwelling-house in
Aberdeen." [Footnote: Bishop of St. Andrews; _Mending of the
Nets,_ p.17 (ed. 1884).] If, as has sometimes been generously
said, this noble act of faith and charity has afforded a new and
signal illustration of our Lord's own words, "It is more blessed
to give than to receive," that does not make the act a whit less
noble, nor diminish by one jot the obligation of undying gratitude
on the part of those who received the gift it gave.

If we look at its immediate results, besides what has just been
named, it assuredly gave an impulse to that action of the State in
England, in consequence of which, within five years, three bishops
of the English line were given to as many dioceses in the United
States. It was the means, also, of joining in the American
Episcopate the Scottish and the English lines of succession in a
union that will endure while the world shall last. For though the
prelate consecrated here ministered in only one consecration of a
bishop after his return--that of the first Bishop of Maryland--
yet, since that day, there has not been (and there can never be in
time to come) a bishop in our American Episcopate, who, as he
traces back his lineage through the network--for I surely need not
say, here and now, that the succession is a network and not a
chain of single links--will not find in it the name of that Bishop
of Maryland, by whom he is connected with Seabury, and then, by
him, with "the Catholic remainder of the Church of Scotland." Nor
need one ask, nor could he have, if he did ask it, a nobler
spiritual lineage than he has received in that double succession,
which indeed becomes single again if we go back for a little more
than another century.

Then, again, this deed of Christian charity did, no doubt, bring
out from its obscurity into the light of day, the witnessing
remnant of the ancient Church of Scotland, and was, perhaps, the
first step towards the removal of those civil disabilities which
had pressed her into the dust. How must the iron of suffering have
entered into the soul of many a faithful priest in those dark days
of trial, when, we are told, the clergy had given up the hope that
any successors would come after them, and on the monument of one
of them were written the despairing words, "Ultime Scotorum!"
[Footnote: Epitaph by the Rev. J. Skinner on the tombstone
of the Rev. Mr. Keith, Presbyter at Cruden: "Ultime Scotorum
in Crudenanis, Keithe, Sacerdos."]

How strangely similar were the conditions of those who sought the
Episcopate and those who courageously gave it in those days of
doubt and darkness! How fitting it seems that, in the ordering of
God's providence, one suffering Church, stripped of its worldly
honors and its earthly wealth, should give to another, "scattered
and peeled" and apparently on the verge of extinction, that
deposit which it had maintained in the face of dangers that might
well seem worse than death itself! They who have lived together
under the shadows and in the sharing of life's tragedies and woes,
know full well that there is no bond of union half so strong as
the bond of common suffering; know full well that they whose
hearts have touched each other only in hours of joy and gladness,
can never be so bound together as those who have wept beside beds
of death, or clasped each other's hands over open graves. Why
should it not so be with bodies of men as with individuals? Above
all, why should it not so be with sister Churches, bound together
in the highest of all bonds? Was it not so here a century ago?
When the kindly hand was outstretched here to help, when the
loving word, carrying the very life of love, went across the ocean
to those who were indeed "minished and brought low," was not the
channel of Christian sympathy deepened, was not its flow made
fuller and more strong by the conditions of which I have just
spoken? And if it has pleased God, in His great mercy, to send
brighter days, greater peace, better hopes to each of us, shall
not the bond, once welded by suffering, still keep its strength?
God grant it may! God grant that, till the Lord shall come to give
His universal Church its final triumph, these Churches, so
marvellously united, "may stand fast in one spirit, with one mind
striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, and in nothing
terrified by adversaries."

It would be more than ungrateful, it would be inexcusable, to omit
here the recognition of the agency by which, under God, it came to
pass that there were in what had been the colonies of Great
Britain, and were now independent States, those who sought the
Episcopate as essential to the full organization of an autonomous
Church. That agency is found in the Venerable Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts--a society to which
American Churchmen must always look with undying gratitude, for to
its noble labors they largely owe all that they were when Seabury
was sent upon his mission of faith, and much of what they enjoy
to-day.

It was no fault of that Society that there was not, in America, an
Episcopate before the war of the Revolution. Had the godly
counsels and the strong appeals of the bishops, clergy, and
faithful laity who shared in its plans and operations, been
listened to, American Churchmen would have had no need to seek the
Apostolic office outside the limits of their own country. This is
not the time nor is this the place to consider, in detail, the
reasons--if reasons in any proper sense of the word there were--
why the Episcopate, so strongly desired, had not been given. But
it is worthy of notice that where the labors of the Society had
been the most abundant and its missionaries most numerous, there
the need of the Episcopate was most deeply felt and the call for
