From what teaching or saying of Jesus does he infer his respect for
the rights of posterity? Indeed, how could a teacher who said, "He
that believeth not shall be damned," he described as recognizing the
rights of future generations? To menace with damnation the future
inquirer or doubter is to seek to enslave as well as to insult the
generations yet to be born, instead of "recognizing his obligations"
to them. The Jesus Mr. Jones is writing about is not in the gospels.

"Do you ask me if I am a 'Christian'?" writes Mr. Jones, and he
answers the question thus: "I do not know. Are you? If anyone is
inclined to give me that high name, with the spiritual and ethical
connotation in mind, I am complimented and will try to merit it." As
our excellent neighbor is still in the dark, and does not know whether
or not, or in what sense he is a Christian--unless he is allowed to
define the word himself,--and as he also intimates that he would like
to be a _Jesus_ Christian, but not a Church Christian, we humbly
beg to express this opinion: The American churches of today,
notwithstanding all their shortcomings, are, on every question of
ethics and science, of charity and the humanities, far in advance of
Jesus, and that in these churches there are men and women who in
breadth of mind and nobility of spirit are as good, and even better
than Jesus.

Does our neighbor grasp our meaning? Charging all the bad in a
religion to the account of man, and attributing all the good to God,
or to a demi-god, is, after all, only a dodge. Had not the disciples
of Jesus been braver than their master, his religion would not have
come down to us. And had the Christian church lived up to the letter
of this Semitic teacher, Europe would never have embraced
Christianity. By modernizing Jesus, by selecting his more essential
teachings, and relegating his eccentricities to the background, by
making his name synonymous with the best aspirations of humanity, by
idealizing his character and enclosing it with a human halo, the
churches have saved Jesus from oblivion. Jesus was a tribal teacher,
the church universalized him; Jesus had no gospel for women, the
church has after much hesitation and wavering converted him to the
European attitude toward women; Jesus was silent on the question of
slavery, the churches have urged him with success to champion the
cause of the bondsman; Jesus denounced liberty of conscience when he
threatened with hell-fire the unbeliever; but the churches have won
him over to the modern secular principle of religious tolerance; Jesus
believed only in the salvation of the elect, but the church to a
certain extent has succeeded in reconciling him to the larger hope;
Jesus was an ascetic, preferring the single life to the joys of the
home, and fasting and praying to the duty and privilege of labor, but
the church in America and Protestant Europe at least has made Jesus a
lover and a seeker of wealth and knowledge, the two great forces of
civilization. No longer does Jesus say, "hate your father and mother;"
no longer does he cry in our great thoroughfares, "blessed are the
poor;" no longer is his voice heard denouncing this world as belonging
to the devil. The modern church, modernized by science, has in turn
modernized the gospels. And yet Mr. Jones prefers to be a Christian
such as Jesus was. He is repeating one of those phrases which
apologists use when they give God all the praise and man all the
blame.

In conclusion: Mr. Jones admits that Christianity is not unique, that
Buddha conquered greater tyrannies than Christ; that "humility and
self-sacrifice...have world-wide foundations;" but he draws no
conclusions from these important facts, but returns in a hurry to say
that Jesus is the "finest and dearest stream swelling the mighty tide
of history." The only objection we have to Mr. Jones' Jesus is that he
is not real.




ANOTHER RHETORICAL JESUS



The Rev. W. H. H. Boyle, of St. Paul, improves even on Mr. Jones'
superlative tribute to Jesus. He says:

"Can you imagine such a thing as a black sun, or the reversal of
creation or the annihilation of primal light? Then, give rest to
imagination and soberly think what it would mean to have the spiritual
processes of two millenniums reversed, to have the light of life in
the unique personally of Jesus forever eclipsed."

Here is an idolator, indeed. To make an idol of his Jesus he takes a
sponge, and without a twinge of conscience, wipes out all the beauty
and grandeur of the ancient world. Has this gentleman never heard of
Greece? During a short existence, in only two centuries and a half,
that little land of Greece achieved triumphs in the life of the mind
so unparalleled as to bring all the subsequent centuries upon their
knees before it. In philosophy, in poetry,--lyrical, epical,
dramatic,--in sculpture, in statesmanship, in ethics, in literature,
in civilization,--where is there another Greece?

Oh, land of Sophocles! whose poetry is the most perfect flower the
earth has ever borne,--of Phidias and Praxiteles! whose immortal
children time cannot destroy, though the gods are dead--whose
masterpieces the earth wears as the best gem upon her brow,--of
Aristotle! the intellect of the world,--of Socrates! the _parens
philosophiae_, and its first martyr!--of Aristides! the Just--of
Phocion and Epaminondas!--of Chillon and Anarcharchis! whose devotion
to duty and beauty have perfumed the centuries! O, Athens, the bloom
of the world! Hear this sectarian clergyman, in his black Sunday
robes, closing his eyes upon all thine immortal contributions, pulling
down like a vandal, as did the early Christians, the libraries and
temples, the culture and civilization of the ancient world--the
monuments of thy unfading glory--to build therewith a pedestal for his
mythical Christ!

I can imagine the reverend advocate saying: "But there was slavery in
Greece, and immorality, too,"--of course, and is the Christian world
free from them? Has Christ after two thousand years abolished war?
Indeed, he came to bring, as he says, "not peace, but a sword!" Has
Jesus healed the world of the maladies for which we blame the Pagan
world? Has he made humanity free? Has he saved the world from the fear
of hell? Has he redeemed man from the blight of ignorance? Has he
broken the yoke of superstition and priest-craft? Has he even
succeeded in uniting into one loving fold his own disciples? How,
then, can this clergyman, with any conscience for truth, compare a
world deprived of the god of his sect, to a tomb--to a blind man
groping under a blackened sun? Must a man rob the long past in order
to provide clothing for his idol? Must he close his eyes upon all
history before he can behold the beauty of his own cult?

But let us quote again:

"To efface from the statute books of Christendom every law which has
its basal principle in Christian ethics; to abolish every institution
which ministers to human need and misfortune in the name of Him whose
sympathy is the heart of the divine; to lower every sense of moral
obligation between man and man to the old level of Paganism to silence
the great oratorios which have made music the echo of the divine; to
take down from the galleries of the world the sacred canvases with
which genius has sanctified them; to obliterate from memorial
symbolism the cross of sublime renunciation which has been the rebuke
of human selfishness; to disband every organization which makes
prayer, through the merit of one great name, the hand of man upon the
arm of God--you may be able to think of an ocean without a harbor, of
a sky without a sun, of a garden without a flower, of a face without a
smile, of a home without a mother; but, can you think of a world with
holiness and happiness in it and Jesus gone out of it? You cannot,
'Then, come, let us adore him,'" etc., etc.

Observe how this special pleader avoids breathing so much as a word
about any of the many evils which may be laid at the door of his
religion with as much show of reason as the benefits he enumerates.

What about the dark ages which held all Europe for the space of a
thousand years in the clutches of an ignorance the like of which no
other religion in the world had known?

What about the atrocious inquisition to which no other religion in the
world had ever been able to give the swing that Christianity did?

What about the persecution and burning of helpless women as witches?
Is there anything as infamous as that in any religion outside of ours?

What about the wholesale massacres in the name of the true faith?

What about the centuries of religious wars, the most imbecile as well
as the most bloody, from the effects of which Germany, France, Italy
and England are still suffering today?

And need we also call attention to that obstinate resistance to
science and progress, which rewarded every discoverer of a new power
for man, with the halter or the stake, which filled the dungeons with
the _elite_ of Europe,--which even dug open graves to punish the
bones of the dead savants and illuminators of man?

The Pagans, in their gladitorial games, sacrificed the lives of
slaves: Christianity made a holocaust of the noblest intellects of
Europe.

And shall we speak of the bigotry, the fanaticism, the bitter
sectarian prejudices which to this day embitter the life of the world?
Are not these, too, the fruits of Christianity?

We know the answer which the reverend gentleman would make to this:
"All the evils you speak of are chargeable, not to Christianity, but
to its abuse." But we have already shown that that argument won't do.
We might as well say that all the evil of Paganism was due to its
abuse. The mere fact that Christianity lent itself to such fearful
distortions, and was capable of arousing the worst passions in man on
such a fearful scale, is condemnation enough. It shows that there was
in it a potentiality for evil beyond compare. Moreover, wherein does a
"divine" religion differ from a man-made cult, if it is equally
powerless to protect itself against perversion? In what sense is Jesus
a god, while all his rivals were "mere men," if he is as helpless to
prevent the abuse of his teachings as they were? But it would not be
difficult to show that the characteristic crimes we have scheduled are
the direct inspiration of a religion claiming exclusiveness and
infallibility. Such texts as, "there is no other named given under
heaven by which men can be saved;" "Let such an one (the man who will
not be converted) be like a heathen and a publican to you;" John's
advice to refrain from saying "God speed" to the alien in faith; the
bible command not to "suffer a witch to live;" and many of the dogmas
which might be cited,--corrupted the sympathies, perverted the
judgment of the noblest, while at the same time they stung the evil-
minded into something like madness. The world knew nothing of the
tyranny of dogma, or religious oppression and persecution,
comparatively speaking, until the advent of the Jewish-Christian
Church.

"Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom and of Gomorrah, in the day of judgment, than for that city,"
said Jesus, speaking of the people who might not accept his teachings.
How can Christianity be a religion of love, and how can it believe in
tolerance, when it threatens the unbeliever with a fate worse than
that of Sodom and Gomorrah?

The benefits which the Rev. Boyle parades as the direct fruit of his
cult, did not appear until after the Renaissance, that is to say,--the
return to Pagan culture and ideals. The art and science and the
humanities which he praises, followed upon the gradual decline of the
Jewish-Christian religion which had already destroyed two
civilizations.

But Greece and Rome triumphed. To this day, if we need models in
poetry, in art, in philosophy, in literature, in politics, in
patriotism, in service to the public, in heroism and devotion to
ideals--we must go to the Greeks and the Romans. Not that these
nations were by any means perfect, but because they have not been
surpassed. In our colleges and schools, when we wish to bring up our
children in the ways of wisdom and beauty, we do not give them the
Christian fathers to read, we give them the Pagan classics.

We ask this St. Paul clergyman to read Gibbons' tribute to Pagan Rome:
"If a man was called upon to fix a period in the history of the world
during which the condition of the human race was most happy and
prosperous, he would without hesitation name that which elapsed from
the death of Domitian to the accession of Commodus." This period
included such men and rulers as Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus Pius,
and above all, the greatest of them all--the greatest ruler our earth
has ever owned--Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. Let the Rev. W. H. H. Boyle
look over the names of the kings of Israel and of Christian France,
Spain, Italy and England, and find among them any one that can come up
to the stature of these Pagan monarchs.




"WE OWE EVERYTHING TO JESUS"



But, behold! another clergyman with the claim that the modern world
owes all its joy and cheer, during the Christmas season, "to the babe
in Bethlehem." "What was it that brought about such a condition that
crowds the stores, that overflows the mails, and loads the express
with packages of every description? The little babe in Bethlehem set
all this in motion,--the wreath, the holly, are all from him."

When we read the above and more to the same effect, we wrote to the
Rev. W. A. Bartlett, [Footnote: Pastor First Congregational Church,
Chicago.] the author of the words quoted, asking him if he was
correctly reported. We reproduce herewith a copy of our letter:

DEC, 20, 1904.
_Rev. W. A. Bartlett,
Washington Boul. and Ann St., Chicago_

DEAR MR. BARTLETT: In the report of your sermon of last Sunday you are
represented as claiming that it is to the "babe in Bethlehem" we owe
the Christmas festival, the giving of presents, etc., etc. I write to
ascertain whether this report has stated your position correctly? I am
sure you know that Christmas is only a recomposition of an old Pagan
festival, and that "giving presents" at this season is a much older
practice than Christianity. Of course, you do not believe that
Christmas is celebrated in December and on the 25th of the month
because Jesus was born on that day. You know as well as I do of the
Pagan festivals celebrated in the month of December throughout the
Roman Empire--celebrations which were accompanied with the giving and
receiving of presents. Moreover, you know also, as every student does,
that in the Latin countries of Europe it is not on Christmas day, but
on New Year's day, that presents are exchanged. Surely you would not
claim that for New Year's day, too, the world is indebted to the
Bethlehem babe. You must also have known that the use of the evergreen
and the holy was in vogue among the Druids of Pagan times. Be kind
enough, therefore, to give me, if I am not asking too much, the facts
which led you to make the statement to which I have called your
attention, and believe me, with great respect, etc.

To this neighborly letter the reverend gentleman did not condescend to
send an acknowledgment. We knocked at his door, as it were, and he, a
minister of the Gospel, declined to open it unto us. Clergymen, as a
rule, say that they are happy when people will let them preach the
gospel to them. In our case, we saved the clergyman from calling upon
us, we called upon him--that is to say, we wrote and gave him an
opportunity to enlighten us, to bring his influence to bear upon us,
to open our eyes to the error of our ways,--and he would have nothing
to do with us. Was not our soul worth saving? Did the Rev. W. A.
Bartlett consider us beyond hope? We ask this clergyman to place his
hand upon his conscience and ask himself whether he did the brotherly
thing in not returning a friendly and kindly answer to our honest
inquiry for truth. But he did not answer us, because he had no real
faith in his gospel. It was not good enough for an inquirer.

But the clergyman, according to reports, made an attempt on the Sunday
following the receipt of our letter, before his congregation, to
answer indirectly our question. He denied that "Christmas was a
recomposition of an old Pagan festival," and said that the early
Christians "fasted and wept" because of these Pagan festivals, and
that as early as the second century, the birth of Jesus was
commemorated. In short, he pronounced it "a distortion of history" to
assign to the Christmas festival a Pagan origin. In his great work on
the _History of Civilization,_ Buckle says this, to which we call
Dr. Bartlett's attention: "As soon as eminent men grown unwilling to
enter any profession, the luster of that profession will be tarnished;
first its reputation will be lessened, then its power abridged." We
fear this is true of Mr. Bartlett's profession.

How can Christian ministers hope to engage the interest of the reading
public if they themselves abstain from reading? Ask a secular
newspaper about the origin of the Christmas celebration, and _it_
will tell you the truth. On the very Sunday that Dr. Bartlett was
denouncing, in his church, our claim that the Pagans gave us the
December season of joy and merry-making, as "a distortion of history,"
and editorial in the _Chicago Tribune_ said this:
