THE CONSECRATION OF JOY (Lev. xxiii. 33-44)

SOJOURNERS WITH GOD (Lev. xxv. 23)

GOD'S SLAVES (Lev. xxv. 42)

THE KINSMAN REDEEMER (Lev. xxv. 48)

THE OLD STORE AND THE NEW (Lev. xxvi. 10)

EMANCIPATED SLAVES (Lev. xxvi. 13)




THE BOOK OF NUMBERS


THE WARFARE OF CHRISTIAN SERVICE (Num. iv. 23)

THE GUIDING PILLAR (Num. ix. 16)

HOBAB (Num. x. 29)

THE HALLOWING OF WORK AND OF REST (Num. x. 35, 36)

MOSES DESPONDENT (Num. xi. 14)

AFRAID OF GIANTS (Num. xiii. 17-33)

WEIGHED, AND FOUND WANTING (Num. xiv. 1-10)

MOSES THE INTERCESSOR (Num. xiv. 19)

SERVICE A GIFT (Num. xviii. 7)

THE WATERS OF MERIBAH (Num. xx. 1-13)

THE POISON AND THE ANTIDOTE (Num. xxi. 4-9)

BALAAM (Num. xxii. 5)

AN UNFULFILLED DESIRE (Num. xxiii. 10; xxxi. 8)




THE BOOK OF EXODUS




FOUR SHAPING CENTURIES


    'Now these are the names of the children of Israel,
    which came into Egypt: every man and his household
    came with Jacob. 2. Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
    3. Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, 4. Dan and Naphtali,
    Gad and Asher. 5. And all the souls that came out of
    the loins of Jacob were seventy souls: for Joseph was
    in Egypt already. 6. And Joseph died, and all his
    brethren, and all that generation. 7, And the children
    of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and
    multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land
    was filled with them. 8. Now there arose up a new king
    over Egypt, which knew not Joseph. 9. And he said unto
    his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel
    are more and mightier than we: 10. Come on, let us deal
    wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to
    pass, that, when there falleth out any war, they join
    also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get
    them up out of the land. 11. Therefore they did set over
    them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And
    they built for Pharaoh treasure-cities, Pithom and
    Raamses. 12. But the more they afflicted them, the more
    they multiplied and grew. And they were grieved because
    of the children of Israel. 13. And the Egyptians made
    the children of Israel to serve with rigour: 14. And
    they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in
    mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service in
    the field: all their service, wherein they made them
    serve, was with rigour.'--EXODUS i. 1-14.

The four hundred years of Israel's stay in Egypt were divided into two
unequal periods, in the former and longer of which they were prosperous
and favoured, while in the latter they were oppressed. Both periods had
their uses and place in the shaping of the nation and its preparation
for the Exodus. Both carry permanent lessons.

I. The long days of unclouded prosperity. These extended over
centuries, the whole history of which is summed up in two words: death
and growth. The calm years glided on, and the shepherds in Goshen had
the happiness of having no annals. All that needed to be recorded was
that, one by one, the first generation died off, and that the new
generations 'were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied,
and waxed exceeding mighty.' The emphatic repetitions recall the
original promises in Genesis xii. 2, xvii. 4,5, xviii. 18. The
preceding specification of the number of the original settlers
(repeated from Genesis xlvi. 27) brings into impressive contrast the
small beginnings and the rapid increase. We may note that eloquent
setting side by side of the two processes which are ever going on
simultaneously, death and birth.

One by one men pass out of the warmth and light into the darkness, and
so gradually does the withdrawal proceed that we scarcely are aware of
its going on, but at last 'all that generation' has vanished. The old
trees are all cleared off the ground, and everywhere their place is
taken by the young saplings. The web is ever being woven at one end,
and run down at the other. 'The individual withers, but the race is
more and more.' How solemn that continual play of opposing movements
is, and how blind we are to its solemnity!

That long period of growth may be regarded in two lights. It effected
the conversion of a horde into a nation by numerical increase, and so
was a link in the chain of the divine working. The great increase, of
which the writer speaks so strongly, was, no doubt, due to the
favourable circumstances of the life in Goshen, but was none the less
regarded by him, and rightly so, as God's doing. As the Psalmist sings,
'_He_ increased His people greatly.' 'Natural processes' are the
implements of a supernatural will. So Israel was being multiplied, and
the end for which it was peacefully growing into a multitude was hidden
from all but God. But there was another end, in reference to which the
years of peaceful prosperity may be regarded; namely, the schooling of
the people to patient trust in the long-delayed fulfilment of the
promise. That hope had burned bright in Joseph when he died, and he
being dead yet spake of it from his coffin to the successive
generations. Delay is fitted and intended to strengthen faith and make
hope more eager. But that part of the divine purpose, alas! was not
effected as the former was. In the moral region every circumstance has
two opposite results possible. Each condition has, as it were, two
handles, and we can take it by either, and generally take it by the
wrong one. Whatever is meant to better us may be so used by us as to
worsen us. And the history of Israel in Egypt and in the desert shows
only too plainly that ease weakened, if it did not kill, faith, and
that Goshen was so pleasant that it drove the hope and the wish for
Canaan out of mind. 'While the bridegroom tarried they all slumbered
and slept.' Is not Israel in Egypt, slackening hold of the promise
because it tarried, a mirror in which the Church may see itself? and do
_we_ not know the enervating influence of Goshen, making us reluctant
to shoulder our packs and turn out for the pilgrimage? The desert
repels more strongly than Canaan attracts.

II. The shorter period of oppression. Probably the rise of a 'new king'
means a revolution in which a native dynasty expelled foreign monarchs.
The Pharaoh of the oppression was, perhaps, the great Rameses II.,
whose long reign of sixty-seven years gives ample room for protracted
and grinding oppression of Israel. The policy adopted was
characteristic of these early despotisms, in its utter disregard of
humanity and of everything but making the kingdom safe. It was not
intentionally cruel, it was merely indifferent to the suffering it
occasioned. 'Let us deal _wisely_ with them'--never mind about justice,
not to say kindness. Pharaoh's 'politics,' like those of some other
rulers who divorce them from morality, turned out to be impolitic, and
his 'wisdom' proved to be roundabout folly. He was afraid that the
Israelites, if they were allowed to grow, might find out their strength
and seek to emigrate; and so he set to work to weaken them with hard
bondage, not seeing that that was sure to make them wish the very thing
that he was blunderingly trying to prevent. The only way to make men
glad to remain in a community is to make them at home there. The sense
of injustice is the strongest disintegrating force. If there is a
'dangerous class' the surest way to make them more dangerous is to
treat them harshly. It was a blunder to make 'lives bitter,' for hearts
also were embittered. So the people were ripened for revolt, and Goshen
became less attractive.

God used Pharaoh's foolish wisdom, as He had used natural laws, to
prepare for the Exodus. The long years of ease had multiplied the
nation. The period of oppression was to stir them up out of their
comfortable nest, and make them willing to risk the bold dash for
freedom. Is not that the explanation, too, of the similar times in our
lives? It needs that we should experience life's sorrows and burdens,
and find how hard the world's service is, and how quickly our Goshens
may become places of grievous toil, in order that the weak hearts,
which cling so tightly to earth, may be detached from it, and taught to
reach upwards to God. 'Blessed is the man ... in whose heart are thy
ways,' and happy is he who so profits by his sorrows that they stir in
him the pilgrim's spirit, and make him yearn after Canaan, and not
grudge to leave Goshen. Our ease and our troubles, opposite though they
seem and are, are meant to further the same end,--to make us fit for
the journey which leads to rest and home. We often misuse them both,
letting the one sink us in earthly delights and oblivion of the great
hope, and the other embitter our spirits without impelling them to seek
the things that are above. Let us use the one for thankfulness, growth,
and patient hope, and the other for writing deep the conviction that
this is not our rest, and making firm the resolve that we will gird our
loins and, staff in hand, go forth on the pilgrim road, not shrinking
from the wilderness, because we see the mountains of Canaan across its
sandy flats.




DEATH AND GROWTH


    'And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that
    generation. 7. And the children of Israel were fruitful,
    and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed
    exceeding mighty....'--EXODUS i. 6, 7.

These remarkable words occur in a short section which makes the link
between the Books of Genesis and of Exodus. The writer recapitulates
the list of the immigrants into Egypt, in the household of Jacob, and
then, as it were, having got them there, he clears the stage to prepare
for a new set of actors. These few words are all that he cares to tell
us about a period somewhat longer than that which separates us from the
great Protestant Reformation. He notes but two processes--silent
dropping away and silent growth. 'Joseph died, and all his brethren,
and all that generation.' Plant by plant the leaves drop, and the stem
rots and its place is empty. Seed by seed the tender green spikelets
pierce the mould, and the field waves luxuriant in the breeze and the
sunshine. 'The children of Israel were fruitful, and increased
abundantly.'

I. Now, then, let us look at this twofold process which is always at
work--silent dropping away and silent growth.

It seems to me that the writer, probably unconsciously, being
profoundly impressed with certain features of that dropping away,
reproduces them most strikingly in the very structure of his sentence:
'Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.' The
uniformity of the fate, and the separate times at which it befell
individuals, are strongly set forth in the clauses, which sound like
the threefold falls of earth on a coffin. They all died, but not all at
the same time. They went one by one, one by one, till, at the end, they
were all gone. The two things that appeal to our imagination, and ought
to appeal to our consciences and wills, in reference to the succession
of the generations of men, are given very strikingly, I think, in the
language of my text--namely, the stealthy assaults of death upon the
individuals, and its final complete victory.

If any of you were ever out at sea, and looked over a somewhat stormy
water, you will have noticed, I dare say, how strangely the white
crests of the breakers disappear, as if some force, acting from
beneath, had plucked them under, and over the spot where they gleamed
for a moment runs the blue sea. So the waves break over the great ocean
of time; I might say, like swimmers pulled under by sharks, man after
man, man after man, gets twitched down, till at the end--'Joseph died,
and all his brethren, and _all_ that generation.'

There is another process going on side by side with this. In the
vegetable world, spring and autumn are two different seasons: May
rejoices in green leaves and opening buds, and nests with their young
broods; but winter days are coming when the greenery drops and the
nests are empty, and the birds flown. But the singular and impressive
thing (which we should see if we were not so foolish and blind) which
the writer of our text lays his finger upon is that at the same time
the two opposite processes of death and renewal are going on, so that
if you look at the facts from the one side it seems nothing but a
charnel-house and a Golgotha that we live in, while, seen from the
other side, it is a scene of rejoicing, budding young life, and growth.

You get these two processes in the closest juxtaposition in ordinary
life. There is many a house where there is a coffin upstairs and a
cradle downstairs. The churchyard is often the children's playground.
The web is being run down at the one end and woven at the other.
Wherever we look--

  'Every moment dies a man,
   Every moment one is born.'

'Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation. And the
children of Israel ... multiplied ... exceedingly.'

But there is another thought here than that of the contemporaneousness
of the two processes, and that is, as it is written on John Wesley's
monument in Westminster Abbey, 'God buries the workmen and carries on
the work.' The great Vizier who seemed to be the only protection of
Israel is lying in 'a coffin in Egypt.' And all these truculent
brothers of his that had tormented him, they are gone, and the whole
generation is swept away. What of that? They were the depositories of
God's purposes for a little while. Are God's purposes dead because the
instruments that in part wrought them are gone? By no means. If I might
use a very vulgar proverb, 'There are as good fish in the sea as ever
came out of it,' especially if God casts the net. So when the one
generation has passed away there is the other to take up the work. Thus
the text is a fitting introduction to the continuance of the history of
the further unfolding of God's plan which occupies the Book of Exodus.

II. Such being the twofold process suggested by this text, let us next
note the lessons which it enforces.

In the first place, let us be quite sure that we give it its due weight
in our thoughts and lives. Let us be quite sure that we never give an
undue weight to the one half of the whole truth. There are plenty of
people who are far too much, constitutionally and (perhaps by reason of
a mistaken notion of religion) religiously, inclined to the
contemplation of the more melancholy side of these truths; and there
are a great many people who are far too exclusively disposed to the
contemplation of the other. But the bulk of us never trouble our heads
about either the one or the other, but go on, forgetting altogether
that swift, sudden, stealthy, skinny hand that, if I might go back to
my former metaphor, is put out to lay hold of the swimmer and then pull
him underneath the water, and which will clasp us by the ankles one day
and drag us down. Do you ever think about it? If not, surely, surely
you are leaving out of sight one of what ought to be the formative
elements in our lives.

And then, on the other hand, when our hearts are faint, or when the
pressure of human mortality--our own, that of our dear ones, or that of
others--seems to weigh us down, or when it looks to us as if God's work
was failing for want of people to do it, let us remember the other
side--'And the children of Israel ... increased ... and waxed exceeding
mighty; ... and the land was filled with them.' So we shall keep the
middle path, which is the path of safety, and so avoid the folly of
extremes.

But then, more particularly, let me say that this double contemplation
of the two processes under which we live ought to stimulate us to
service. It ought to say to us, 'Do you cast in your lot with that work
which is going to be carried on through the ages. Do you see to it that
your little task is in the same line of direction as the great purpose
which God is working out--the increasing purpose which runs through the
ages.' An individual life is a mere little backwater, as it were, in
the great ocean. But its minuteness does not matter, if only the great
tidal wave which rolls away out there, in the depths and the distance
amongst the fathomless abysses, tells also on the tiny pool far inland
and yet connected with the sea by some narrow, long fiord.

If my little life is part of that great ocean, then the ebb and flow
will alike act on it and make it wholesome. If my work is done in and
for God, I shall never have to look back and say, as we certainly shall
say one day, either here or yonder, unless our lives be thus part of
the divine plan, 'What a fool I was! Seventy years of toiling and
moiling and effort and sweat, and it has all come to nothing; like a
long algebraic sum that covers pages of intricate calculations, and the
_pluses_ and _minuses_ just balance each other; and the net result is a
great round nought.' So let us remember the twofold process, and let it
stir us to make sure that 'in our embers' shall be 'something that doth
live,' and that not 'Nature,' but something better--God--'remembers
what was so fugitive.' It is not fugitive if it is a part of the mighty
whole.

But further, let this double contemplation make us very content with
doing insignificant and unfinished work.

Joseph might have said, when he lay dying: 'Well! perhaps I made a
mistake after all. I should not have brought this people down here,
even if I have been led hither. I do not see that I have helped them
one step towards the possession of the land.' Do you remember the old
proverb about certain people who should not see half-finished work? All
our work in this world has to be only what the physiologists call
functional. God has a great scheme running on through ages. Joseph
gives it a helping hand for a time, and then somebody else takes up the
running, and carries the purpose forward a little further. A great many
hands are placed on the ropes that draw the car of the Ruler of the
world. And one after another they get stiffened in death; but the car
goes on. We should be contented to do our little bit of the work. Never
mind whether it is complete and smooth and rounded or not. Never mind
whether it can be isolated from the rest and held up, and people can
say, 'He did that entire thing unaided.' That is not the way for most
of us. A great many threads go to make the piece of cloth, and a great
many throws of the shuttle to weave the web. A great many bits of glass
make up the mosaic pattern; and there is no reason for the red bit to
pride itself on its fiery glow, or the grey bit to boast of its silvery
coolness. They are all parts of the pattern, and as long as they keep
their right places they complete the artist's design. Thus, if we think
of how 'one soweth and another reapeth,' we may be content to receive
half-done works from our fathers, and to hand on unfinished tasks to
them that come after us. It is not a great trial of a man's modesty, if
he lives near Jesus Christ, to be content to do but a very small bit of
the Master's work.

And the last thing that I would say is, let this double process going
on all round us lift our thoughts to Him who lives for ever. Moses
dies; Joshua catches the torch from his hand. And the reason why he
catches the torch from his hand is because God said, 'As I was with
Moses so I will be with thee.' Therefore we have to turn away in our
contemplations from the mortality that has swallowed up so much wisdom
and strength, eloquence and power, which the Church or our own hearts
seem so sorely to want: and, whilst we do, we have to look up to Jesus
Christ and say, 'He lives! He lives! No man is indispensable for public
work or for private affection and solace so long at there is a living
Christ for us to hold by.'

Dear brethren, we need that conviction for ourselves often. When life
seems empty and hope dead, and nothing is able to fill the vacuity or
still the pain, we have to look to the vision of the Lord sitting on
the empty throne, high and lifted up, and yet very near the aching and
void heart. Christ lives, and that is enough.

So the separated workers in all the generations, who did their little
bit of service, like the many generations of builders who laboured
through centuries upon the completion of some great cathedral, will be
united at the last; 'and he that soweth, and he that reapeth, shall
rejoice together' in the harvest which was produced by neither the
sower nor the reaper, but by Him who blessed the toils of both.

'Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation'; but Jesus
lives, and therefore His people 'grow and multiply,' and His servants'
work is blessed; and at the end they shall be knit together in the
common joy of the great harvest, and of the day when the headstone is
brought forth with shoutings of 'Grace! grace unto it.'




THE ARK AMONG THE FLAGS


    'And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to
    wife a daughter of Levi. 2. And the woman conceived, and
    bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly
    child, she hid him three months. 3. And when she could
    not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes,
    and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the
    child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's
    brink. 4. And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would
    be done to him. 5. And the daughter of Pharaoh came down
    to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked
    along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among
    the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it. 6. And when
    she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the
    babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This
    is one of the Hebrews' children. 7. Then said his sister
    to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse
    of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for
    thee? 8. And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the
    maid went and called the child's mother. 9. And Pharaoh's
    daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse
    it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman
    took the child, and nursed it. 10. And the child grew,
    and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he
    became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she
    said, Because I drew him out of the water.'--EXODUS ii. 1-10.

I. It is remarkable that all the persons in this narrative are
anonymous. We know that the names of 'the man of the house of Levi' and
his wife were Amram and Jochebed. Miriam was probably the anxious
sister who watched what became of the little coffer. The daughter of
Pharaoh has two names in Jewish tradition, one of which corresponds to
that which Brugsch has found to have been borne by one of Rameses' very
numerous daughters. One likes to think that the name of the
gentle-hearted woman has come down to us; but, whether she was called
'Meri' or not, she and the others have no name here. The reason can
scarcely have been ignorance. But they are, as it were, kept in shadow,
because the historian saw, and wished us to see, that a higher Hand was
at work, and that over all the events recorded in these verses there
brooded the informing, guiding Spirit of God Himself, the sole actor.

 'Each only as God wills
  Can work--God's puppets, best and worst,
  Are we: there is no last nor first.'

II. The mother's motive in braving the danger to herself involved in
keeping the child is remarkably put. 'When she saw that he was a goodly
child, she hid him.' It was not only a mother's love that emboldened
her, as it does all weak creatures, to shelter her offspring at her own
peril, but something in the look of the infant, as it lay on her bosom,
touched her with a dim hope. According to the Septuagint translation,
both parents shared in this. And so the Epistle to the Hebrews unites
them in that which is here attributed to the mother only. Stephen, too,
speaks of Moses as 'fair in God's sight.' As if the prescient eyes of
the parents were not blinded by love, but rather cleared to see some
token of divine benediction resting on him. The writer of the _Hebrews_
lifts the deed out of the category of instinctive maternal affection up
to the higher level of faith. So we may believe that the aspect of her
child woke some prophetic vision in the mother's soul, and that she and
her husband were of those who cherished the hopes naturally born from
the promise to Abraham, nurtured by Jacob's and Joseph's dying wish to
be buried in Canaan, and matured by the tyranny of Pharaoh. Their
faith, at all events, grasped the unseen God as their helper, and made
Jochebed bold to break the terrible law, as a hen will fly in the face
of a mastiff to shield her brood. Their faith perhaps also grasped the
future deliverance, and linked it in some way with their child. We may
learn how transfiguring and ennobling to the gentlest and weakest is
faith in God, especially when it is allied with unselfish human love.
These two are the strongest powers. If they are at war, the struggle is
terrible: if they are united, 'the weakest is as David, and David as an
angel of God.' Let us seek ever to blend their united strength in our
own lives.

Will it be thought too fanciful if we suggest that we are taught
another lesson,--namely, that the faith which surrenders its earthly
treasures to God, in confidence of His care, is generally rewarded and
vindicated by receiving them back again, glorified and sanctified by
the altar on which they have been laid? Jochebed clasped her recovered
darling to her bosom with a deeper gladness, and held him by a surer
title, when Miriam brought him back as the princess's charge, than ever
before. We never feel the preciousness of dear ones so much, nor are so
calm in the joy of possession, as when we have laid them in God's
hands, and have learned how wise and wonderful His care is.

III. How much of the world's history that tiny coffer among the reeds
held! How different that history would have been if, as might easily
have happened, it had floated away, or if the feeble life within it had
wailed itself dead unheard! The solemn possibilities folded and
slumbering in an infant are always awful to a thoughtful mind. But,
except the manger at Bethlehem, did ever cradle hold the seed of so
much as did that papyrus chest? The set of opinion at present minimises
the importance of the individual, and exalts the spirit of the period,
as a factor in history. Standing beside Miriam, we may learn a truer
view, and see that great epochs require great men, and that, without
such for leaders, no solid advance in the world's progress is achieved.
Think of the strange cradle floating on the Nile; then think of the
strange grave among the mountains of Moab, and of all between, and
ponder the same lesson as is taught in yet higher fashion by Bethlehem
and Calvary, that God's way of blessing the world is to fill men with
His message, and let others draw from them. Whether it be 'law,' or
'grace and truth,' a man is needed through whom it may fructify to all.

IV. The sweet picture of womanly compassion in Pharaoh's daughter is
full of suggestions. We have already noticed that her name is handed
down by one tradition as 'Merris,' and that 'Meri' has been found as
the appellation of a princess of the period. A rabbinical authority
calls her 'Bithiah,' that is, 'Daughter of Jehovah'; by which was, no
doubt, intended to imply that she became in some sense a proselyte.
This may have been only an inference from her protection of Moses.
There is a singular and very obscure passage in I Chronicles iv. 17,
18, relating the genealogy of a certain Mered, who seems to have had
two wives, one 'the Jewess,' the other 'Bithiah, the daughter of
Pharaoh.' We know no more about him or her, but Keil thinks that Mered
probably 'lived before the exodus'; but it can scarcely be that the
'daughter of Pharaoh,' his wife, is our princess, and that she actually
became a 'daughter of Jehovah,' and, like her adopted child, refused
royal dignity and preferred reproach. In any case, the legend of her
name is a tender and beautiful way of putting the belief that in her
'there was some good thing towards the God of Israel.'

But, passing from that, how the true woman's heart changes languid
curiosity into tenderness, and how compassion conquers pride of race
and station, as well as regard for her father's edict, as soon as the
infant's cry, which touches every good woman's feelings, falls on her
ear! 'One touch of nature makes the whole world kin.' All the centuries
are as nothing; the strange garb and the stranger mental and spiritual
dress fade, and we have here a mere woman, affected, as every true
sister of hers to-day would be, by the helpless wailing. God has put
that instinct there. Alas that it ever should be choked by frivolity or
pride, and frozen by indifference and self-indulgence! Gentle souls
spring up in unfavourable soil. Rameses was a strange father for such a
daughter. How came this dove in the vulture's cage? Her sweet pity
beside his cold craft and cruelty is like the lamb couching by the
lion. Note, too, that gentlest pity makes the gentlest brave. She sees
the child is a Hebrew. Her quick wit understands why it has been
exposed, and she takes its part, and the part of the poor weeping
parents, whom she can fancy, against the savage law. No doubt, as
Egyptologists tell us, the princesses of the royal house had separate
households and abundant liberty of action. Still, it was bold to
override the strict commands of such a monarch. But it was not a
self-willed sense of power, but the beautiful daring of a compassionate
woman, to which God committed the execution of His purposes.

And that is a force which has much like work trusted to it in modern
society too. Our great cities swarm with children exposed to a worse
fate than the baby among the flags. Legislation and official charity
have far too rough hands and too clumsy ways to lift the little life
out of the coffer, and to dry the tears. We must look to Christian
women to take a leaf out of 'Bithiah's' book. First, they should use
their eyes to see the facts, and not be so busy about their own luxury
and comfort that they pass the poor pitch-covered box unnoticed. Then
they should let the pitiful call touch their heart, and not steel
themselves in indifference or ease. Then they should conquer prejudices
of race, pride of station, fear of lowering themselves, loathing, or
contempt. And then they should yield to the impulses of their
compassion, and never mind what difficulties or opponents may stand in
the way of their saving the children. If Christian women knew their
obligations and their power, and lived up to them as bravely as this
Egyptian princess, there would be fewer little ones flung out to be
eaten by crocodiles, and many a poor child, who is now abandoned from
infancy to the Devil, would be rescued to grow up a servant of God.
She, there by the Nile waters, in her gracious pity and prompt wisdom,
is the type of what Christian womanhood, and, indeed, the whole
Christian community, should be in relation to child life.

V. The great lesson of this incident, as of so much before, is the
presence of God's wonderful providence, working out its designs by all
the play of human motives. In accordance with a law, often seen in His
dealings, it was needful that the deliverer should come from the heart
of the system from which he was to set his brethren free. The same
principle which sent Saul of Tarsus to be trained at the feet of
Gamaliel, and made Luther a monk in the Augustinian convent at Erfurt,
planted Moses in Pharaoh's palace and taught him the wisdom of Egypt,
against which he was to contend. It was a strange irony of Providence
that put him so close to the throne which he was to shake. For his
future work he needed to be lifted above his people, and to be familiar
with the Egyptian court as well as with Egyptian learning. If he was to
hate and to war against idolatry, and to rescue an unwilling people
from it, he must know the rottenness of the system, and must have lived
close enough to it to know what went on behind the scenes, and how
foully it smelled when near. He would gain influence over his
countrymen by his connection with Pharaoh, whilst his very separation
from them would at once prevent his spirit from being broken by
oppression, and would give him a keener sympathy with his people than
if he had himself been crushed by slavery. His culture, heathen as it
was, supplied the material on which the divine Spirit worked. God
fashioned the vessel, and then filled it. Education is not the
antagonist of inspiration. For the most part, the men whom God has used
for His highest service have been trained in all the wisdom of their
age. When it has been piled up into an altar, then 'the fire of the
Lord' falls.

Our story teaches us that God's chosen instruments are immortal till
their work is done. No matter how forlorn may seem their outlook, how
small the probabilities in their favour, how divergent from the goal
may seem the road He leads them, He watches them. Around that frail
ark, half lost among the reeds, is cast the impregnable shield of His
purpose. All things serve that Will. The current in the full river, the
lie of the flags that stop it from being borne down, the hour of the
princess's bath, the direction of her idle glance, the cry of the child
at the right moment, the impulse welling up in her heart, the swift
resolve, the innocent diplomacy of the sister, the shelter of the happy
mother's breast, the safety of the palace,--all these and a hundred
more trivial and unrelated things are spun into the strong cable
wherewith God draws slowly but surely His secret purpose into act. So
ever His children are secure as long as He has work for them, and His
mighty plan strides on to its accomplishment over all the barriers that
men can raise.

How deeply this story had impressed on devout minds the truth of the
divine protection for all who serve Him, is shown by the fact that the
word employed in the last verse of our lesson, and there translated
'drawn,' of which the name 'Moses' is a form, is used on the only
occasion of its occurrence in the Old Testament (namely Psalm xviii.
16, and in the duplicate in 2 Sam. xxii. 17) with plain reference to
our narrative. The Psalmist describes his own deliverance, in answer to
his cry, by a grand manifestation of God's majesty; and this is the
climax and the purpose of the earthquake and the lightning, the
darkness and the storm: 'He sent from above, He took me, He drew me out
of many waters.' So that scene by the margin of the Nile, so many years
ago, is but one transient instance of the working of the power which
secures deliverance from encompassing perils, and for strenuous, though
it may be undistinguished, service to all who call upon Him. God, who
put the compassion into the heart of Pharaoh's dusky daughter, is not
less tender of heart than she, and when He hears us, though our cry be
but as of an infant, 'with no language but a cry,' He will come in His
majesty and draw us from encompassing dangers and impending death. We
cannot all be lawgivers and deliverers; but we may all appeal to His
great pity, and partake of deliverance like that of Moses and of David.




THE BUSH THAT BURNED, AND DID NOT BURN OUT


    'And, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush
    was not consumed.' EXODUS iii. 1

It was a very sharp descent from Pharaoh's palace to the wilderness,
and forty years of a shepherd's life were a strange contrast to the
brilliant future that once seemed likely for Moses. But God tests His
weapons before He uses them, and great men are generally prepared for
great deeds by great sorrows. Solitude is 'the mother-country of the
strong,' and the wilderness, with its savage crags, its awful silence,
and the unbroken round of its blue heaven, was a better place to meet
God than in the heavy air of a palace, or the profitless splendours of
a court.

So as this lonely shepherd is passing slowly in front of his flock, he
sees a strange light that asserted itself, even in the brightness of
the desert sunshine. 'The bush' does not mean one single shrub. Rather,
it implies some little group, or cluster, or copse, of the dry thorny
acacias, which are characteristic of the country, and over which any
ordinary fire would have passed like a flash, leaving them all in grey
ashes. But this steady light persists long enough to draw the attention
of the shepherd, and to admit of his travelling some distance to reach
it. And then--and then--the Lord speaks.

The significance of this bush, burning but not consumed, is my main
subject now, for I think it carries great and blessed lessons for us.

Now, first, I do not think that the bush burning but not consumed,
stands as it is ordinarily understood to stand, for the symbolical
representation of the preservation of Israel, even in the midst of the
fiery furnace of persecution and sorrow.

Beautiful as that idea is, I do not think it is the true explanation;
because if so, this symbol is altogether out of keeping with the law
that applies to all the rest of the symbolical accompaniments of divine
appearances, all of which, without exception, set forth in symbol some
truth about God, and not about His Church; and all of which, without
exception, are a representation in visible and symbolical form of the
same truth which was proclaimed in articulate words along with them.
The symbol and the accompanying voice of God in all other cases have
one and the same meaning.

That, I think, is the case here also; and we learn from the Bush, not
something about God's Church, however precious that may be, but what is
a great deal more important, something about God Himself; namely, the
same thing that immediately afterwards was spoken in articulate words.

In the next place, let me observe that the fire is distinctly a divine
symbol, a symbol of God not of affliction, as the ordinary explanation
implies. I need not do more than remind you of the stream of emblem
which runs all through Scripture, as confirming this point. There are
the smoking lamp and the blazing furnace in the early vision granted to
Abraham. There is the pillar of fire by night, that lay over the desert
camp of the wandering Israelites. There is Isaiah's word, 'The light of
Israel shall be a flaming fire.' There is the whole of the New
Testament teaching, turning on the manifestation of God through His
Spirit. There are John the Baptist's words, 'He shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost and with fire.' There is the day of Pentecost, when the
'tongues of fire sat upon each of them.' And what is meant by the great
word of the Epistle to the Hebrews, 'Our God is a consuming fire'?

Not Israel only, but many other lands--it would scarcely be an
exaggeration to say, all other lands--have used the same emblem with
the same meaning. In almost every religion on the face of the earth,
you will find a sacred significance attached to fire. That significance
is not primarily destruction, as we sometimes suppose, an error which
has led to ghastly misunderstandings of some Scriptures, and of the God
whom they reveal. When, for instance, Isaiah (xxxiii. 14) asks, 'Who
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell
with everlasting burnings?' he has been supposed to be asking what
human soul is there that can endure the terrors of God's consuming and
unending wrath. But a little attention to the words would have shown
that 'the devouring fire' and the 'everlasting burnings' mean God and
not hell, and that the divine nature is by them not represented as too
fierce to be approached, but as the true dwelling-place of men, which
indeed only the holy can inhabit, but which for them is life. Precisely
parallel is the Psalmist's question, 'Who shall ascend into the hill of
the Lord, and who shall stand in His holy place?'

Fire is the source of warmth, and so, in a sense, of life. It is full
of quick energy, it transmutes all kinds of dead matter into its own
ruddy likeness, sending up the fat of the sacrifices in wreathes of
smoke that aspire heavenward; and changing all the gross, heavy,
earthly dullness into flame, more akin to the heaven into which it
rises.

Therefore, as cleansing, as the source of life, light, warmth, change,
as glorifying, transmuting, purifying, refining, fire is the fitting
symbol of the mightiest of all creative energy. And the Bible has
consecrated the symbolism, and bade us think of the Lord Himself as the
central fiery Spirit of the whole universe, a spark from whom
irradiates and vitalises everything that lives.

Nor should we forget, on the other side, that the very felicity of this
emblem is, that along with all these blessed thoughts of life-giving
and purifying, there does come likewise the more solemn teaching of
God's destructive power. 'What maketh heaven, that maketh hell'; and
the same God is the fire to quicken, to sanctify, to bless; and
resisted, rejected, neglected, is the fire that consumes; the savour of
life unto life, or the savour of death unto death.

And then, still further, notice that this flame is undying--steady,
unflickering. What does that mean? Adopting the principle which I have
already taken as our guide, that the symbol and the following oral
revelation teach the same truth, there can be no question as to that
answer. 'I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacob. 'I AM THAT I AM.'

That is to say, the fire that burns and does not burn out, which has no
tendency to destruction in its very energy, and is not consumed by its
own activity, is surely a symbol of the one Being whose being derives
its law and its source from Himself, who only can say--'I AM THAT I
AM'--the law of His nature, the foundation of His being, the only
conditions of His existence being, as it were, enclosed within the
limits of His own nature. You and I have to say, 'I am that which I
have become,' or 'I am that which I was born,' or 'I am that which
circumstances have made me.' He says, 'I AM THAT I AM.' All other
