cotton.

"I am averse to ceremonies," Sri Yukteswar remarked. "I will make
you a swami in the BIDWAT (non-ceremonious) manner."

The BIBIDISA or elaborate initiation into swamiship includes a fire
ceremony, during which symbolical funeral rites are performed. The
physical body of the disciple is represented as dead, cremated in
the flame of wisdom. The newly-made swami is then given a chant,
such as: "This ATMA is Brahma" {FN24-2} or "Thou art That" or "I am
He." Sri Yukteswar, however, with his love of simplicity, dispensed
with all formal rites and merely asked me to select a new name.

"I will give you the privilege of choosing it yourself," he said,
smiling.

"Yogananda," I replied, after a moment's thought. The name literally
means "Bliss (ANANDA) through divine union (YOGA)."

"Be it so. Forsaking your family name of Mukunda Lal Ghosh,
henceforth you shall be called Yogananda of the Giri branch of the
Swami Order."

As I knelt before Sri Yukteswar, and for the first time heard him
pronounce my new name, my heart overflowed with gratitude. How
lovingly and tirelessly had he labored, that the boy Mukunda be
someday transformed into the monk Yogananda! I joyfully sang a few
verses from the long Sanskrit chant of Lord Shankara:

  "Mind, nor intellect, nor ego, feeling;
  Sky nor earth nor metals am I.
  I am He, I am He, Blessed Spirit, I am He!
  No birth, no death, no caste have I;
  Father, mother, have I none.
  I am He, I am He, Blessed Spirit, I am He!
  Beyond the flights of fancy, formless am I,
  Permeating the limbs of all life;
  Bondage I do not fear; I am free, ever free,
  I am He, I am He, Blessed Spirit, I am He!"

Every swami belongs to the ancient monastic order which was organized
in its present form by Shankara. {FN24-3} Because it is a formal
order, with an unbroken line of saintly representatives serving
as active leaders, no man can give himself the title of swami.
He rightfully receives it only from another swami; all monks thus
trace their spiritual lineage to one common guru, Lord Shankara. By
vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience to the spiritual teacher,
many Catholic Christian monastic orders resemble the Order of
Swamis.

In addition to his new name, usually ending in ANANDA, the swami
takes a title which indicates his formal connection with one of
the ten subdivisions of the Swami Order. These DASANAMIS or ten
agnomens include the GIRI (mountain), to which Sri Yukteswar, and
hence myself, belong. Among the other branches are the SAGAR (sea),
BHARATI (land), ARANYA (forest), PURI (tract), TIRTHA (place of
pilgrimage), and SARASWATI (wisdom of nature).

The new name received by a swami thus has a twofold significance,
and represents the attainment of supreme bliss (ANANDA) through some
divine quality or state-love, wisdom, devotion, service, yoga-and
through a harmony with nature, as expressed in her infinite vastness
of oceans, mountains, skies.

The ideal of selfless service to all mankind, and of renunciation
of personal ties and ambitions, leads the majority of swamis to
engage actively in humanitarian and educational work in India, or
occasionally in foreign lands. Ignoring all prejudices of caste,
creed, class, color, sex, or race, a swami follows the precepts of
human brotherhood. His goal is absolute unity with Spirit. Imbuing
his waking and sleeping consciousness with the thought, "I am He,"
he roams contentedly, in the world but not of it. Thus only may
he justify his title of swami-one who seeks to achieve union with
the SWA or Self. It is needless to add that not all formally titled
swamis are equally successful in reaching their high goal.

Sri Yukteswar was both a swami and a yogi. A swami, formally a monk
by virtue of his connection with the ancient order, is not always
a yogi.  Anyone who practices a scientific technique of God-contact
is a yogi; he may be either married or unmarried, either a worldly
man or one of formal religious ties. A swami may conceivably follow
only the path of dry reasoning, of cold renunciation; but a yogi
engages himself in a definite, step-by-step procedure by which
the body and mind are disciplined, and the soul liberated. Taking
nothing for granted on emotional grounds, or by faith, a yogi
practices a thoroughly tested series of exercises which were first
mapped out by the early rishis.  Yoga has produced, in every age
of India, men who became truly free, truly Yogi-Christs.

Like any other science, yoga is applicable to people of every clime
and time. The theory advanced by certain ignorant writers that yoga
is "unsuitable for Westerners" is wholly false, and has lamentably
prevented many sincere students from seeking its manifold blessings.
Yoga is a method for restraining the natural turbulence of thoughts,
which otherwise impartially prevent all men, of all lands, from
glimpsing their true nature of Spirit. Yoga cannot know a barrier
of East and West any more than does the healing and equitable
light of the sun. So long as man possesses a mind with its restless
thoughts, so long will there be a universal need for yoga or control.

[Illustration: THE LORD IN HIS ASPECT AS SHIVA, Not a historical
personage like Krishna, Shiva is the name given to God in the last
aspect of His threefold nature (Creator-Preserver-Destroyer). Shiva,
the Annihilator of maya or delusion, is symbolically represented
in the scriptures as the Lord of Renunciates, the King of Yogis.
In Hindu art He is always shown with the new moon in His hair, and
wearing a garland of hooded snakes, ancient emblem of evil overcome
and perfect wisdom. The "single" eye of omniscience is open on His
forehead.--see shiva.jpg]

The ancient rishi Patanjali defines "yoga" as "control of the
fluctuations of the mind-stuff." {FN24-4} His very short and masterly
expositions, the YOGA SUTRAS, form one of the six systems of Hindu
philosophy. {FN24-5} In contradistinction to Western philosophies,
all six Hindu systems embody not only theoretical but practical
teachings.  In addition to every conceivable ontological inquiry,
the six systems formulate six definite disciplines aimed at the
permanent removal of suffering and the attainment of timeless bliss.

The common thread linking all six systems is the declaration that
no true freedom for man is possible without knowledge of the ultimate
Reality. The later UPANISHADS uphold the YOGA SUTRAS, among the six
systems, as containing the most efficacious methods for achieving
direct perception of truth. Through the practical techniques of
yoga, man leaves behind forever the barren realms of speculation
and cognizes in experience the veritable Essence.

The YOGA system as outlined by Patanjali is known as the Eightfold
Path. The first steps, (1) YAMA and (2) NIYAMA, require observance
of ten negative and positive moralities-avoidance of injury to others,
of untruthfulness, of stealing, of incontinence, of gift-receiving
(which brings obligations); and purity of body and mind, contentment,
self-discipline, study, and devotion to God.

The next steps are (3) ASANA (right posture); the spinal column
must be held straight, and the body firm in a comfortable position
for meditation; (4) PRANAYAMA (control of PRANA, subtle life currents);
and (5) PRATYAHARA (withdrawal of the senses from external objects).

The last steps are forms of yoga proper: (6) DHARANA (concentration);
holding the mind to one thought; (7) DHYANA (meditation), and (8)
SAMADHI (superconscious perception). This is the Eightfold Path
of Yoga {FN24-6} which leads one to the final goal of KAIVALYA
(Absoluteness), a term which might be more comprehensibly put as
"realization of the Truth beyond all intellectual apprehension."

"Which is greater," one may ask, "a swami or a yogi?" If and when
final oneness with God is achieved, the distinctions of the various
paths disappear. The BHAGAVAD GITA, however, points out that the
methods of yoga are all-embracive. Its techniques are not meant only
for certain types and temperaments, such as those few who incline
toward the monastic life; yoga requires no formal allegiance.
Because the yogic science satisfies a universal need, it has a
natural universal applicability.

A true yogi may remain dutifully in the world; there he is like
butter on water, and not like the easily-diluted milk of unchurned
and undisciplined humanity. To fulfill one's earthly responsibilities
is indeed the higher path, provided the yogi, maintaining a mental
uninvolvement with egotistical desires, plays his part as a willing
instrument of God.

There are a number of great souls, living in American or European
or other non-Hindu bodies today who, though they may never have
heard the words YOGI and SWAMI, are yet true exemplars of those
terms. Through their disinterested service to mankind, or through
their mastery over passions and thoughts, or through their single
hearted love of God, or through their great powers of concentration,
they are, in a sense, yogis; they have set themselves the goal of
yoga-self-control. These men could rise to even greater heights if
they were taught the definite science of yoga, which makes possible
a more conscious direction of one's mind and life.

Yoga has been superficially misunderstood by certain Western
writers, but its critics have never been its practitioners. Among
many thoughtful tributes to yoga may be mentioned one by Dr. C. G.
Jung, the famous Swiss psychologist.

"When a religious method recommends itself as 'scientific,' it can
be certain of its public in the West. Yoga fulfills this expectation,"
Dr. Jung writes. {FN24-7} "Quite apart from the charm of the new,
and the fascination of the half-understood, there is good cause
for Yoga to have many adherents. It offers the possibility of
controllable experience, and thus satisfies the scientific need
of 'facts,' and besides this, by reason of its breadth and depth,
its venerable age, its doctrine and method, which include every
phase of life, it promises undreamed-of possibilities.

"Every religious or philosophical practice means a psychological
discipline, that is, a method of mental hygiene. The manifold,
purely bodily procedures of Yoga {FN24-8} also mean a physiological
hygiene which is superior to ordinary gymnastics and breathing
exercises, inasmuch as it is not merely mechanistic and scientific,
but also philosophical; in its training of the parts of the body,
it unites them with the whole of the spirit, as is quite clear,
for instance, in the PRANAYAMA exercises where PRANA is both the
breath and the universal dynamics of the cosmos.

"When the thing which the individual is doing is also a cosmic event,
the effect experienced in the body (the innervation), unites with
the emotion of the spirit (the universal idea), and out of this there
develops a lively unity which no technique, however scientific, can
produce. Yoga practice is unthinkable, and would also be ineffectual,
without the concepts on which Yoga is based. It combines the bodily
and the spiritual with each other in an extraordinarily complete
way.

"In the East, where these ideas and practices have developed, and
where for several thousand years an unbroken tradition has created
the necessary spiritual foundations, Yoga is, as I can readily
believe, the perfect and appropriate method of fusing body and
mind together so that they form a unity which is scarcely to be
questioned. This unity creates a psychological disposition which
makes possible intuitions that transcend consciousness."

The Western day is indeed nearing when the inner science of self-control
will be found as necessary as the outer conquest of nature.  This
new Atomic Age will see men's minds sobered and broadened by the
now scientifically indisputable truth that matter is in reality a
concentrate of energy. Finer forces of the human mind can and must
liberate energies greater than those within stones and metals, lest
the material atomic giant, newly unleashed, turn on the world in
mindless destruction. {FN24-9}

{FN24-1} I CORINTHIANS 7:32-33.

{FN24-2} Literally, "This soul is Spirit." The Supreme Spirit,
the Uncreated, is wholly unconditioned (NETI, NETI, not this, not
that) but is often referred to in VEDANTA as SAT-CHIT-ANANDA, that
is, Being-Intelligence-Bliss.

{FN24-3} Sometimes called Shankaracharya. ACHARYA means "religious
teacher." Shankara's date is a center of the usual scholastic dispute.
A few records indicate that the peerless monist lived from 510 to
478 B.C.; Western historians assign him to the late eighth century
A.D.  Readers who are interested in Shankara's famous exposition
of the BRAHMA SUTRAS will find a careful English translation in Dr.
Paul Deussen's SYSTEM OF THE VEDANTA (Chicago: Open Court Publishing
Company, 1912). Short extracts from his writings will be found in
SELECTED WORKS OF SRI SHANKARACHARYA (Natesan & Co., Madras).

{FN24-4} "CHITTA VRITTI NIRODHA"-YOGA SUTRA I:2. Patanjali's date
is unknown, though a number of scholars place him in the second
century B.C. The rishis gave forth treatises on all subjects with
such insight that ages have been powerless to outmode them; yet,
to the subsequent consternation of historians, the sages made no
effort to attach their own dates and personalities to their literary
works. They knew their lives were only temporarily important as
flashes of the great infinite Life; and that truth is timeless,
impossible to trademark, and no private possession of their own.

{FN24-5} The six orthodox systems (SADDARSANA) are SANKHYA, YOGA,
VEDANTA, MIMAMSA, NYAYA, and VAISESIKA. Readers of a scholarly bent
will delight in the subtleties and broad scope of these ancient
formulations as summarized, in English, in HISTORY OF INDIAN
PHILOSOPHY, Vol. I, by Prof. Surendranath DasGupta (Cambridge
University Press, 1922).

{FN24-6} Not to be confused with the "Noble Eightfold Path" of
Buddhism, a guide to man's conduct of life, as follows (1) Right
Ideals, (2) Right Motive, (3) Right Speech, (4) Right Action, (5)
Right Means of Livelihood, (6) Right Effort, (7) Right Remembrance
(of the Self), (8) Right Realization (SAMADHI).

{FN24-7} Dr. Jung attended the Indian Science Congress in 1937 and
received an honorary degree from the University of Calcutta.

{FN24-8} Dr. Jung is here referring to HATHA YOGA, a specialized
branch of bodily postures and techniques for health and longevity.
HATHA is useful, and produces spectacular physical results, but this
branch of yoga is little used by yogis bent on spiritual liberation.

{FN24-9} In Plato's TIMAEUS story of Atlantis, he tells of
the inhabitants' advanced state of scientific knowledge. The lost
continent is believed to have vanished about 9500 B.C. through a
cataclysm of nature; certain metaphysical writers, however, state
that the Atlanteans were destroyed as a result of their misuse of
atomic power. Two French writers have recently compiled a BIBLIOGRAPHY
OF ATLANTIS, listing over 1700 historical and other references.



CHAPTER: 25

BROTHER ANANTA AND SISTER NALINI

"Ananta cannot live; the sands of his karma for this life have run
out."

These inexorable words reached my inner consciousness as I sat one
morning in deep meditation. Shortly after I had entered the Swami
Order, I paid a visit to my birthplace, Gorakhpur, as a guest of
my elder brother Ananta. A sudden illness confined him to his bed;
I nursed him lovingly.

The solemn inward pronouncement filled me with grief. I felt that
I could not bear to remain longer in Gorakhpur, only to see my
brother removed before my helpless gaze. Amidst uncomprehending
criticism from my relatives, I left India on the first available
boat. It cruised along Burma and the China Sea to Japan. I disembarked
at Kobe, where I spent only a few days. My heart was too heavy for
sightseeing.

On the return trip to India, the boat touched at Shanghai. There
Dr.  Misra, the ship's physician, guided me to several curio shops,
where I selected various presents for Sri Yukteswar and my family
and friends.  For Ananta I purchased a large carved bamboo piece.
No sooner had the Chinese salesman handed me the bamboo souvenir
than I dropped it on the floor, crying out, "I have bought this
for my dear dead brother!"

A clear realization had swept over me that his soul was just being
freed in the Infinite. The souvenir was sharply and symbolically
cracked by its fall; amidst sobs, I wrote on the bamboo surface:
"For my beloved Ananta, now gone."

My companion, the doctor, was observing these proceedings with a
sardonic smile.

"Save your tears," he remarked. "Why shed them until you are sure
he is dead?"

When our boat reached Calcutta, Dr. Misra again accompanied me. My
youngest brother Bishnu was waiting to greet me at the dock.

"I know Ananta has departed this life," I said to Bishnu, before he
had had time to speak. "Please tell me, and the doctor here, when
Ananta died."

Bishnu named the date, which was the very day that I had bought
the souvenirs in Shanghai.

"Look here!" Dr. Misra ejaculated. "Don't let any word of this
get around! The professors will be adding a year's study of mental
telepathy to the medical course, which is already long enough!"

Father embraced me warmly as I entered our Gurpar Road home. "You
have come," he said tenderly. Two large tears dropped from his
eyes.  Ordinarily undemonstrative, he had never before shown me
these signs of affection. Outwardly the grave father, inwardly he
possessed the melting heart of a mother. In all his dealings with
the family, his dual parental role was distinctly manifest.

Soon after Ananta's passing, my younger sister Nalini was brought
back from death's door by a divine healing. Before relating the
story, I will refer to a few phases of her earlier life.

The childhood relationship between Nalini and myself had not been
of the happiest nature. I was very thin; she was thinner still.
Through an unconscious motive or "complex" which psychiatrists will
have no difficulty in identifying, I often used to tease my sister
about her cadaverous appearance. Her retorts were equally permeated
with the callous frankness of extreme youth. Sometimes Mother
intervened, ending the childish quarrels, temporarily, by a gentle
box on my ear, as the elder ear.

Time passed; Nalini was betrothed to a young Calcutta physician,
Panchanon Bose. He received a generous dowry from Father, presumably
(as I remarked to Sister) to compensate the bridegroom-to-be for
his fate in allying himself with a human bean-pole.

Elaborate marriage rites were celebrated in due time. On the wedding
night, I joined the large and jovial group of relatives in the
living room of our Calcutta home. The bridegroom was leaning on an
immense gold-brocaded pillow, with Nalini at his side. A gorgeous
purple silk SARI {FN25-1} could not, alas, wholly hide her angularity.
I sheltered myself behind the pillow of my new brother-in-law and
grinned at him in friendly fashion. He had never seen Nalini until
the day of the nuptial ceremony, when he finally learned what he
was getting in the matrimonial lottery.

Feeling my sympathy, Dr. Bose pointed unobtrusively to Nalini, and
whispered in my ear, "Say, what's this?"

"Why, Doctor," I replied, "it is a skeleton for your observation!"

Convulsed with mirth, my brother-in-law and I were hard put to it
to maintain the proper decorum before our assembled relatives.

As the years went on, Dr. Bose endeared himself to our family, who
called on him whenever illness arose. He and I became fast friends,
often joking together, usually with Nalini as our target.

"It is a medical curiosity," my brother-in-law remarked to me one
day.  "I have tried everything on your lean sister-cod liver oil,
butter, malt, honey, fish, meat, eggs, tonics. Still she fails to
bulge even one-hundredth of an inch." We both chuckled.

A few days later I visited the Bose home. My errand there took only
a few minutes; I was leaving, unnoticed, I thought, by Nalini. As
I reached the front door, I heard her voice, cordial but commanding.

"Brother, come here. You are not going to give me the slip this
time.  I want to talk to you."

I mounted the stairs to her room. To my surprise, she was in tears.

"Dear brother," she said, "let us bury the old hatchet. I see that
your feet are now firmly set on the spiritual path. I want to become
like you in every way." She added hopefully, "You are now robust
in appearance; can you help me? My husband does not come near me,
and I love him so dearly! But still more I want to progress in
God-realization, even if I must remain thin {FN25-2} and unattractive."

My heart was deeply touched at her plea. Our new friendship steadily
progressed; one day she asked to become my disciple.

"Train me in any way you like. I put my trust in God instead of
tonics." She gathered together an armful of medicines and poured
them down the roof drain.

As a test of her faith, I asked her to omit from her diet all fish,
meat, and eggs.

After several months, during which Nalini had strictly followed
the various rules I had outlined, and had adhered to her vegetarian
diet in spite of numerous difficulties, I paid her a visit.

"Sis, you have been conscientiously observing the spiritual
injunctions; your reward is near." I smiled mischievously. "How
plump do you want to be-as fat as our aunt who hasn't seen her feet
in years?"

"No! But I long to be as stout as you are."

I replied solemnly. "By the grace of God, as I have spoken truth
always, I speak truly now. {FN25-3} Through the divine blessings,
your body shall verily change from today; in one month it shall
have the same weight as mine."

These words from my heart found fulfillment. In thirty days, Nalini's
weight equalled mine. The new roundness gave her beauty; her husband
fell deeply in love. Their marriage, begun so inauspiciously, turned
out to be ideally happy.

On my return from Japan, I learned that during my absence Nalini
had been stricken with typhoid fever. I rushed to her home, and was
aghast to find her reduced to a mere skeleton. She was in a coma.

"Before her mind became confused by illness," my brother-in-law
told me, "she often said: 'If brother Mukunda were here, I would
not be faring thus.'" He added despairingly, "The other doctors
and myself see no hope. Blood dysentery has set in, after her long
bout with typhoid."

I began to move heaven and earth with my prayers. Engaging
an Anglo-Indian nurse, who gave me full cooperation, I applied to
my sister various yoga techniques of healing. The blood dysentery
disappeared.

But Dr. Bose shook his head mournfully. "She simply has no more
blood left to shed."

"She will recover," I replied stoutly. "In seven days her fever
will be gone."

A week later I was thrilled to see Nalini open her eyes and gaze at
me with loving recognition. From that day her recovery was swift.
Although she regained her usual weight, she bore one sad scar of her
nearly fatal illness: her legs were paralyzed. Indian and English
specialists pronounced her a hopeless cripple.

The incessant war for her life which I had waged by prayer had
exhausted me. I went to Serampore to ask Sri Yukteswar's help. His
eyes expressed deep sympathy as I told him of Nalini's plight.

"Your sister's legs will be normal at the end of one month." He
added, "Let her wear, next to her skin, a band with an unperforated
two-carat pearl, held on by a clasp."

I prostrated myself at his feet with joyful relief.

"Sir, you are a master; your word of her recovery is enough But if
you insist I shall immediately get her a pearl."

My guru nodded. "Yes, do that." He went on to correctly describe
the physical and mental characteristics of Nalini, whom he had
never seen.

"Sir," I inquired, "is this an astrological analysis? You do not
know her birth day or hour."

Sri Yukteswar smiled. "There is a deeper astrology, not dependent
on the testimony of calendars and clocks. Each man is a part of
the Creator, or Cosmic Man; he has a heavenly body as well as one
of earth. The human eye sees the physical form, but the inward eye
penetrates more profoundly, even to the universal pattern of which
each man is an integral and individual part."

I returned to Calcutta and purchased a pearl for Nalini. A month
later, her paralyzed legs were completely healed.

Sister asked me to convey her heartfelt gratitude to my guru. He
listened to her message in silence. But as I was taking my leave,
he made a pregnant comment.

"Your sister has been told by many doctors that she can never bear
children. Assure her that in a few years she will give birth to
two daughters."

Some years later, to Nalini's joy, she bore a girl, followed in a
few years by another daughter.

"Your master has blessed our home, our entire family," my sister
said.  "The presence of such a man is a sanctification on the whole
of India.  Dear brother, please tell Sri Yukteswarji that, through
you, I humbly count myself as one of his KRIYA YOGA disciples."

{FN25-1} The gracefully draped dress of Indian women.

{FN25-2} Because most persons in India are thin, reasonable plumpness
is considered very desirable.

{FN25-3} The Hindu scriptures declare that those who habitually
speak the truth will develop the power of materializing their words.
What commands they utter from the heart will come true in life.



CHAPTER: 26

THE SCIENCE OF KRIYA YOGA

The science of KRIYA YOGA, mentioned so often in these pages, became
widely known in modern India through the instrumentality of Lahiri
Mahasaya, my guru's guru. The Sanskrit root of KRIYA is KRI, to
do, to act and react; the same root is found in the word KARMA, the
natural principle of cause and effect. KRIYA YOGA is thus "union
(yoga) with the Infinite through a certain action or rite." A yogi
who faithfully follows its technique is gradually freed from karma
or the universal chain of causation.

Because of certain ancient yogic injunctions, I cannot give a full
explanation of KRIYA YOGA in the pages of a book intended for the
general public. The actual technique must be learned from a KRIYABAN
or KRIYA YOGI; here a broad reference must suffice.

KRIYA YOGA is a simple, psychophysiological method by which the
human blood is decarbonized and recharged with oxygen. The atoms
of this extra oxygen are transmuted into life current to rejuvenate
the brain and spinal centers. {FN26-1} By stopping the accumulation
of venous blood, the yogi is able to lessen or prevent the decay of
tissues; the advanced yogi transmutes his cells into pure energy.
Elijah, Jesus, Kabir and other prophets were past masters in the
use of KRIYA or a similar technique, by which they caused their
bodies to dematerialize at will.

KRIYA is an ancient science. Lahiri Mahasaya received it from his
guru, Babaji, who rediscovered and clarified the technique after
it had been lost in the Dark Ages.

"The KRIYA YOGA which I am giving to the world through you in this
nineteenth century," Babaji told Lahiri Mahasaya, "is a revival of
the same science which Krishna gave, millenniums ago, to Arjuna,
and which was later known to Patanjali, and to Christ, St. John,
St. Paul, and other disciples."

KRIYA YOGA is referred to by Krishna, India's greatest prophet, in
a stanza of the BHAGAVAD GITA: "Offering inhaling breath into the
outgoing breath, and offering the outgoing breath into the inhaling
breath, the yogi neutralizes both these breaths; he thus releases
the life force from the heart and brings it under his control."
{FN26-2} The interpretation is: "The yogi arrests decay in the body
by an addition of life force, and arrests the mutations of growth
in the body by APAN (eliminating current). Thus neutralizing decay
and growth, by quieting the heart, the yogi learns life control."

Krishna also relates {FN26-3} that it was he, in a former incarnation,
who communicated the indestructible yoga to an ancient illuminato,
Vivasvat, who gave it to Manu, the great legislator. {FN26-4} He,
in turn, instructed Ikshwaku, the father of India's solar warrior
dynasty. Passing thus from one to another, the royal yoga was
guarded by the rishis until the coming of the materialistic ages.
{FN26-5} Then, due to priestly secrecy and man's indifference, the
sacred knowledge gradually became inaccessible.

KRIYA YOGA is mentioned twice by the ancient sage Patanjali, foremost
exponent of yoga, who wrote: "KRIYA YOGA consists of body discipline,
mental control, and meditating on AUM." {FN26-6} Patanjali speaks
of God as the actual Cosmic Sound of AUM heard in meditation. {FN26-7}
AUM is the Creative Word, {FN26-8} the sound of the Vibratory Motor.
Even the yoga-beginner soon inwardly hears the wondrous sound of
AUM. Receiving this blissful spiritual encouragement, the devotee
becomes assured that he is in actual touch with divine realms.

Patanjali refers a second time to the life-control or KRIYA technique
thus: "Liberation can be accomplished by that PRANAYAMA which is
attained by disjoining the course of inspiration and expiration."
{FN26-9}

St. Paul knew KRIYA YOGA, or a technique very similar to it, by
which he could switch life currents to and from the senses. He was
therefore able to say: "Verily, I protest by our rejoicing which
I have in Christ, I DIE DAILY." {FN26-10} By daily withdrawing his
bodily life force, he united it by yoga union with the rejoicing
(eternal bliss) of the Christ consciousness. In that felicitous
state, he was consciously aware of being dead to the delusive
sensory world of MAYA.

In the initial states of God-contact (SABIKALPA SAMADHI) the
devotee's consciousness merges with the Cosmic Spirit; his life
force is withdrawn from the body, which appears "dead," or motionless
and rigid. The yogi is fully aware of his bodily condition of
suspended animation. As he progresses to higher spiritual states
(NIRBIKALPA SAMADHI), however, he communes with God without bodily
fixation, and in his ordinary waking consciousness, even in the
midst of exacting worldly duties. {FN26-11}

"KRIYA YOGA is an instrument through which human evolution can be
quickened," Sri Yukteswar explained to his students. "The ancient
yogis discovered that the secret of cosmic consciousness is
intimately linked with breath mastery. This is India's unique and
deathless contribution to the world's treasury of knowledge. The life
force, which is ordinarily absorbed in maintaining the heart-pump,
must be freed for higher activities by a method of calming and
stilling the ceaseless demands of the breath."

The KRIYA YOGI mentally directs his life energy to revolve, upward
and downward, around the six spinal centers (medullary, cervical,
dorsal, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal plexuses) which correspond
to the twelve astral signs of the zodiac, the symbolic Cosmic
Man. One-half minute of revolution of energy around the sensitive
spinal cord of man effects subtle progress in his evolution; that
half-minute of KRIYA equals one year of natural spiritual unfoldment.

The astral system of a human being, with six (twelve by polarity)
inner constellations revolving around the sun of the omniscient
spiritual eye, is interrelated with the physical sun and the twelve
zodiacal signs. All men are thus affected by an inner and an outer
universe. The ancient rishis discovered that man's earthly and
heavenly environment, in twelve-year cycles, push him forward on
his natural path. The scriptures aver that man requires a million
years of normal, diseaseless evolution to perfect his human brain
sufficiently to express cosmic consciousness.


One thousand KRIYA practiced in eight hours gives the yogi, in one
day, the equivalent of one thousand years of natural evolution:
365,000 years of evolution in one year. In three years, a KRIYA
YOGI can thus accomplish by intelligent self-effort the same result
which nature brings to pass in a million years. The KRIYA short
cut, of course, can be taken only by deeply developed yogis. With
the guidance of a guru, such yogis have carefully prepared their
bodies and brains to receive the power created by intensive practice.

The KRIYA beginner employs his yogic exercise only fourteen to
twenty-eight times, twice daily. A number of yogis achieve emancipation
in six or twelve or twenty-four or forty-eight years. A yogi who
dies before achieving full realization carries with him the good
karma of his past KRIYA effort; in his new life he is harmoniously
propelled toward his Infinite Goal.

The body of the average man is like a fifty-watt lamp, which cannot
accommodate the billion watts of power roused by an excessive practice
of KRIYA. Through gradual and regular increase of the simple and
"foolproof" methods of KRIYA, man's body becomes astrally transformed
day by day, and is finally fitted to express the infinite potentials
of cosmic energy-the first materially active expression of Spirit.

KRIYA YOGA has nothing in common with the unscientific breathing
exercises taught by a number of misguided zealots. Their attempts
to forcibly hold breath in the lungs is not only unnatural but
decidedly unpleasant. KRIYA, on the other hand, is accompanied
from the very beginning by an accession of peace, and by soothing
sensations of regenerative effect in the spine.

The ancient yogic technique converts the breath into mind. By
