
"'Santanu, after the disappearance of his wife, returned to his capital
with a sorrowful heart. I shall now recount to thee the many virtues and
the great good fortune of the illustrious king Santanu of the Bharata race.
Indeed, it is this splendid history that is called the Mahabharata.'"


SECTION C

(Sambhava Parva continued )

"Vaisampayana said, 'The monarch Santanu, the most adored of the gods and
royal sages, was known in all the worlds for his wisdom, virtues, and
truthfulness (of speech). The qualities of self-control, liberality,
forgiveness, intelligence, modesty, patience and superior energy ever
dwelt in that bull among men, viz., Santanu, that great being endued with
these accomplishments and conversant with both religion and profit, the
monarch was at once the protector of the Bharata race and all human beings.
His neck was marked with (three) lines, like a conch-shell; his shoulders
were broad, and he resembled in prowess an infuriated elephant. It would
seem that all the auspicious signs of royalty dwelt in his person,
considering that to be their fittest abode. Men, seeing the behaviour of
that monarch of great achievements came to know that virtue was ever
superior to pleasure and profit. These were the attributes that dwelt in
that great being--that bull among men--Santanu. And truly there was never
a king like Santanu. All the kings of the earth, beholding him devoted to
virtue, bestowed upon that foremost of virtuous men the title of King of
kings. And all the kings of the earth during the time of that lord-
protector of the Bharata race, were without woe and fear and anxiety of
any kind. And they all slept in peace, rising from bed every morning after
happy dreams. And owing to that monarch of splendid achievements
resembling Indra himself in energy, all the kings of the earth became
virtuous and devoted to liberality, religious acts and sacrifices. And
when the earth was ruled by Santanu and other monarchs like him, the
religious merits of every order increased very greatly. The Kshatriyas
served the Brahmanas; the Vaisyas waited upon the Kshatriyas, and the
Sudras adoring the Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas, waited upon the Vaisyas.
And Santanu residing in Hastinapura, the delightful capital of the Kurus,
ruled the whole earth bounded by seas. He was truthful and guileless, and
like the king of the celestials himself conversant with the dictates of
virtue. And from the combination in him of liberality, religion and
asceticism, he acquired a great good fortune. He was free from anger and
malice, and was handsome in person like Soma himself. In splendour he was
like the Sun and in impetuosity of valour like Vayu. In wrath he was like
Yama, and in patience like the Earth. And, O king, while Santanu ruled the
earth, no deer, boars, birds, or other animals were needlessly slain. In
his dominions the great virtue of kindness to all creatures prevailed, and
the king himself, with the soul of mercy, and void of desire and wrath,
extended equal protection unto all creatures. Then sacrifices in honour of
the gods, the Rishis, and Pitris commenced, and no creature was deprived
of life sinfully. And Santanu was the king and father of all--of those
that were miserable and those that had no protectors, of birds and beasts,
in fact, of every created thing. And during the rule of the best of Kurus--
of that king of kings--speech became united with truth, and the minds of
men were directed towards liberality and virtue. And Santanu, having
enjoyed domestic felicity for six and thirty years, retired into the woods.

"'And Santanu's son, the Vasu born of Ganga, named Devavrata resembled
Santanu himself in personal beauty, in habits and behaviour, and in
learning. And in all branches of knowledge worldly or spiritual his skill
was very great. His strength and energy were extraordinary. He became a
mighty car-warrior. In fact he was a great king.

"'One day, while pursuing along the banks of the Ganges a deer that he had
struck with his arrow, king Santanu observed that the river had become
shallow. On observing this, that bull among men, viz., Santanu, began to
reflect upon this strange phenomenon. He mentally asked why that first of
rivers ran out so quickly as before. And while seeking for a cause, the
illustrious monarch beheld that a youth of great comeliness, well-built
and amiable person, like Indra himself, had, by his keen celestial weapon,
checked the flow of the river. And the king, beholding this extraordinary
feat of the river Ganga having been checked in her course near where that
youth stood, became very much surprised. This youth was no other than
Santanu's son himself. But as Santanu had seen his son only once a few
moments after his birth, he had not sufficient recollection to identify
that infant with the youth before his eyes. The youth, however, seeing his
father, knew him at once, but instead of disclosing himself, he clouded
the king's perception by his celestial powers of illusion and disappeared
in his very sight.

"'King Santanu, wondering much at what he saw and imagining the youth to be
his own son then addressed Ganga and said, "Show me that child." Ganga
thus addressed, assuming a beautiful form, and holding the boy decked with
ornaments in her right arm, showed him to Santanu. And Santanu did not
recognise that beautiful female bedecked with ornaments and attired in
fine robes of white, although he had known her before. And Ganga said, "O
tiger among men, that eighth son whom thou hadst some time before begat
upon me is this. Know that this excellent child is conversant with all
weapons. O monarch, take him now. I have reared him with care. And go home,
O tiger among men, taking him with thee. Endued with superior intelligence,
he has studied with Vasishtha the entire Vedas with their branches.
Skilled in all weapons and a mighty bowman, he is like Indra in battle.
And, O Bharata, both the gods and the Asuras look upon him with favour.
Whatever branches of knowledge are known to Usanas, this one knoweth
completely. And so is he the master of all those Sastras that the son of
Angiras (Vrihaspati) adored by the gods and the Asuras, knoweth. And all
the weapons known to the powerful and invincible Rama, the son of
Jamadagni are known to this thy son of mighty arms. O king of superior
courage, take this thy own heroic child given unto thee by me. He is a
mighty bowman and conversant with the interpretation of all treatises on
the duties of a king." Thus commanded by Ganga, Santanu took his child
resembling the Sun himself in glory and returned to his capital. And
having reached his city that was like unto the celestial capital, that
monarch of Puru's line regarded himself greatly fortunate. And having
summoned all the Pauravas together, for the protection of his kingdom he
installed his son as his heir-apparent. And O bull of Bharata's race, the
prince soon gratified by his behaviour his father and the other members of
the Paurava race: in fact, all the subjects of the kingdom. And the king
of incomparable prowess lived happily with that son of his.

"'Four years had thus passed away, when the king one day went into the
woods on the bank of the Yamuna. And while the king was rambling there, he
perceived a sweet scent coming from an unknown direction. And the monarch,
impelled by the desire of ascertaining the cause, wandered hither and
thither. And in course of his ramble, he beheld a black-eyed maiden of
celestial beauty, the daughter of a fisherman. The king addressing her,
said, "Who art thou, and whose daughter? What dost thou do here, O timid
one?" She answered, "Blest be thou! I am the daughter of the chief of the
fishermen. At his command, I am engaged for religious merit, in rowing
passengers across this river in my boat." And Santanu, beholding that
maiden of celestial form endued with beauty, amiableness, and such
fragrance, desired her for his wife. And repairing unto her father, the
king solicited his consent to the proposed match. But the chief of the
fishermen replied to the monarch, saying, "O king, as soon as my daughter
of superior complexion was born, it was of course, understood that she
should be bestowed upon a husband. But listen to the desire I have
cherished all along in my heart. O sinless one, thou art truthful: if thou
desirest to obtain this maiden as a gift from me, give me then this
pledge. If, indeed, thou givest the pledge, I will of course bestow my
daughter upon thee for truly I can never obtain a husband for her equal to
thee."

"'Santanu, hearing this, replied, "When I have heard of the pledge thou
askest, I shall then say whether I would be able to grant it. If it is
capable of being granted, I shall certainly grant it. Otherwise how shall
I grant it." The fisherman said, "O king, what I ask of thee is this: the
son born of this maiden shall be installed by thee on thy throne and none
else shall thou make thy successor."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'O Bharata, when Santanu heard this, he felt no
inclination to grant such a boon, though the fire of desire sorely burnt
him within. The king with his heart afflicted by desire returned to
Hastinapura, thinking all the way of the fisherman's daughter. And having
returned home, the monarch passed his time in sorrowful meditation. One
day, Devavrata approaching his afflicted father said, "All is prosperity
with thee; all chiefs obey thee; then how is it that thou grievest thus?
Absorbed in thy own thoughts, thou speakest not a word to me in reply.
Thou goest not out on horse-back now; thou lookest pale and emaciated,
having lost all animation. I wish to know the disease thou sufferest from,
so that I may endeavour to apply a remedy." Thus addressed by his son,
Santanu answered, "Thou sayest truly, O son, that I have become melancholy.
I will also tell thee why I am so. O thou of Bharata's line, thou art the
only scion of this our large race. Thou art always engaged in sports of
arms and achievements of prowess. But, O son, I am always thinking of the
instability of human life. If any danger overtake thee, O child of Ganga,
the result is that we become sonless. Truly thou alone art to me as a
century of sons. I do not, therefore, desire to wed again. I only desire
and pray that prosperity may ever attend thee so that our dynasty may be
perpetuated. The wise say that he that hath one son hath no son.
Sacrifices before fire and the knowledge of the three Vedas yield, it is
true, everlasting religious merit, but all these, in point of religious
merit, do not come up to a sixteenth part of the religious merit
attainable on the birth of a son. Indeed, in this respect, there is hardly
any difference between men and the lower animals. O wise one, I do not
entertain a shadow of doubt that one attains to heaven in consequence of
his having begotten a son. The Vedas which constitute the root of the
Puranas and are regarded as authoritative even by the gods, contain
numerous proof of this. O thou of Bharata's race, thou art a hero of
excitable temper, who is always engaged in the exercise of arms. It is
very probable that thou wilt be slain on the field of battle. If it so
happen, what then will be the state of the Bharata dynasty? It is this
thought that hath made me so melancholy. I have now told thee fully the
causes of my sorrow."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Devavrata who was endued with great intelligence,
having ascertained all this from the king, reflected within himself for a
while. He then went to the old minister devoted to his father's welfare
and asked him about the cause of the king's grief. O bull of Bharata's
race, when the prince questioned the minister, the latter told him about
the boon that was demanded by the chief of the fishermen in respect of his
daughter Gandhavati. Then Devavrata, accompanied by many Kshatriya chiefs
of venerable age, personally repaired to the chief of the fishermen and
begged of him his daughter on behalf of the king. The chief of the
fishermen received him with due adorations, and, O thou of Bharata's race,
when the prince took his seat in the court of the chief, the latter
addressed him and said, "O bull among the Bharatas, thou art the first of
all wielders of weapons and the only son of Santanu. Thy power is great.
But I have something to tell thee. If the bride's father was Indra himself,
even then he would have to repent of rejecting such an exceedingly
honourable and desirable proposal of marriage. The great man of whose seed
this celebrated maiden named Satyavati was born, is, indeed, equal to you
in virtue. He hath spoken to me on many occasions of the virtues of thy
father and told me that, the king alone is worthy of (marrying) Satyavati.
Let me tell you that I have even rejected the solicitations of that best
of Brahmarshis--the celestial sage Asita--who, too, had often asked for
Satyavati's hand in marriage. I have only one word to say on the part of
this maiden. In the matter of the proposed marriage there is one great
objection founded on the fact of a rival in the person of a co-wife's son.
O oppressor of all foes, he hath no security, even if he be an Asura or a
Gandharva, who hath a rival in thee. There is this only objection to the
proposed marriage, and nothing else. Blest be thou! But this is all I have
to say in the matter of the bestowal or otherwise, of Satyavati."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'O thou of Bharata's race, Devavrata, having
heard these words, and moved by the desire of benefiting his father thus
answered in the hearing of the assembled chiefs, "O foremost of truthful
men, listen to the vow I utter! The man has not been or will not be born,
who will have the courage to take such a vow! I shall accomplish all that
thou demandest! The son that may be born of this maiden shall be our
king." Thus addressed, the chief of the fishermen, impelled by desire of
sovereignty (for his daughter's son), to achieve the almost impossible,
then said, "O thou of virtuous soul, thou art come hither as full agent on
behalf of thy father Santanu of immeasurable glory; be thou also the sole
manager on my behalf in the matter of the bestowal of this my daughter.
But, O amiable one, there is something else to be said, something else to
be reflected upon by thee. O suppressor of foes, those that have daughters,
from the very nature of their obligations, must say what I say. O thou
that art devoted to truth, the promise thou hast given in the presence of
these chiefs for the benefit of Satyavati, hath, indeed, been worthy of
thee. O thou of mighty arms, I have not the least doubt of its ever being
violated by thee. But I have my doubts in respect of the children thou
mayst beget."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'O king, the son of Ganga, devoted to truth,
having ascertained the scruples of the chief of the fishermen, then said,
moved thereto by the desire of benefiting his father, "Chief of fishermen,
thou best of men, listen to what I say in the presence of these assembled
kings. Ye kings, I have already relinquished my right to the throne, I
shall now settle the matter of my children. O fisherman, from this day I
adopt the vow of Brahmacharya (study and meditation in celibacy). If I die
sonless, I shall yet attain to regions of perennial bliss in heaven!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Upon these words of the son of Ganga, the hair
on the fisherman's body stood on end from glee, and he replied, "I bestow
my daughter!" Immediately after, the Apsaras and the gods with diverse
tribes of Rishis began to rain down flowers from the firmament upon the
head of Devavrata and exclaimed, "This one is Bhishma (the terrible)."
Bhishma then, to serve his father, addressed the illustrious damsel and
said, "O mother, ascend this chariot, and let us go unto our house."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said this, Bhishma helped the beautiful
maiden into his chariot. On arriving with her at Hastinapura, he told
Santanu everything as it had happened. And the assembled kings, jointly
and individually, applauded his extraordinary act and said, "He is really
Bhishma (the terrible)!" And Santanu also, hearing of the extraordinary
achievements of his son, became highly gratified and bestowed upon the
high-souled prince the boon of death at will, saying, "Death shall never
come to thee as long as thou desirest to live. Truly death shall approach
thee, O sinless one, having first obtained thy command."'"


SECTION CI

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'O monarch, after the nuptials were over, king Santanu
established his beautiful bride in his household. Soon after was born of
Satyavati an intelligent and heroic son of Santanu named Chitrangada. He
was endued with great energy and became an eminent man. The lord Santanu
of great prowess also begat upon Satyavati another son named Vichitravirya,
who became a mighty bowman and who became king after his father. And
before that bull among men, viz., Vichitravirya, attained to majority, the
wise king Santanu realised the inevitable influence of Time. And after
Santanu had ascended to heaven, Bhishma, placing himself under the command
of Satyavati, installed that suppressor of foes, viz., Chitrangada, on the
throne, who, having soon vanquished by his prowess all monarchs,
considered not any man as his equal. And beholding that he could vanquish
men, Asuras, and the very gods, his namesake, the powerful king of the
Gandharvas, approached him for an encounter. Between that Gandharva and
that foremost one of the Kurus, who were both very powerful, there
occurred on the field of Kurukshetra a fierce combat which lasted full
three years on the banks of the Saraswati. In that terrible encounter
characterised by thick showers of weapons and in which the combatants
ground each other fiercely, the Gandharva, who had greater prowess or
strategic deception, slew the Kuru prince. Having slain Chitrangada--that
first of men and oppressor of foes--the Gandharva ascended to heaven. When
that tiger among men endued with great prowess was slain, Bhishma, the son
of Santanu, performed, O king, all his obsequies. He then installed the
boy Vichitravirya of mighty arms, still in his minority, on the throne of
the Kurus. And Vichitravirya, placing himself under the command of Bhishma,
ruled the ancestral kingdom. And he adored Santanu's son Bhishma who was
conversant with all the rules of religion and law; so, indeed, Bhishma
also protected him that was so obedient to the dictates of duty.'"


SECTION CII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'O thou of Kuru's race, after Chitrangada was slain,
his successor Vichitravirya being a minor, Bhishma ruled the kingdom,
placing himself under the command of Satyavati. When he saw that his
brother, who was the foremost of intelligent men, attained to majority,
Bhishma set his heart upon marrying Vichitravirya. At this time he heard
that the three daughters of the king of Kasi, all equal in beauty to the
Apsaras themselves, would be married on the same occasion, selecting their
husbands at a self-choice ceremony. Then that foremost of car-warriors,
that vanquisher of all foes, at the command of his mother, went to the
city of Varanasi in a single chariot. There Bhishma, the son of Santanu,
saw that innumerable monarchs had come from all directions; and there he
also saw those three maidens that would select their own husbands. And
when the (assembled) kings were each being mentioned by name, Bhishma
chose those maidens (on behalf of his brother). And taking them upon his
chariot, Bhishma, that first of smiters in battle, addressed the kings, O
monarch, and said in a voice deep as the roar of the clouds, "The wise
have directed that when an accomplished person has been invited, a maiden
may be bestowed on him, decked with ornaments and along with many valuable
presents. Others again may bestow their daughters by accepting a couple of
kine. Some again bestow their daughters by taking a fixed sum, and some
take away maidens by force. Some wed with the consent of the maidens, some
by drugging them into consent, and some by going unto the maidens' parents
and obtaining their sanction. Some again obtain wives as presents for
assisting at sacrifices. Of these, the learned always applaud the eighth
form of marriage. Kings, however, speak highly of the Swyamvara (the fifth
form as above) and themselves wed according to it. But the sages have said
that, that wife is dearly to be prized who is taken away by force, after
the slaughter of opponents, from amidst the concourse of princes and kings
invited to a self-choice ceremony. Therefore, ye monarchs, I bear away
these maidens hence by force. Strive ye, to the best of your might, to
vanquish me or to be vanquished. Ye monarchs, I stand here resolved to
fight!" The Kuru prince, endued with great energy, thus addressing the
assembled monarchs and the king of Kasi, took upon his car those maidens.
And having taken them up, he sped his chariot away, challenging the
invited kings to a fight.

"'The challenged monarchs then all stood up, slapping their arms and biting
their nether lips in wrath. And loud was the din produced, as, in a great
hurry, they began to cast off their ornaments and put on their armour. And
the motion of their ornaments and armour, O Janamejaya, brilliant as these
were, resembled meteoric flashes in the sky. And with brows contracted and
eyes red with rage, the monarchs moved in impatience, their armour and
ornaments dazzling or waving with their agitated steps. The charioteers
soon brought handsome cars with fine horses harnessed thereto. Those
splendid warriors then, equipped with all kinds of weapons, rode on those
cars, and with uplifted weapons pursued the retreating chief of the Kurus.
Then, O Bharata, occurred the terrible encounter between those innumerable
monarchs on one side and the Kuru warrior alone on the other. And the
assembled monarchs threw at their foe ten thousand arrows at the same time.
Bhishma, however speedily checked those numberless arrows before they
could come at him by means of a shower of his own arrows as innumerable as
the down on the body. Then those kings surrounded him from all sides and
rained arrows on him like masses of clouds showering on the mountain-
breast. But Bhishma, arresting with his shafts the course of that arrowy
downpour, pierced each of the monarchs with three shafts. The latter, in
their turn pierced Bhishma, each with five shafts. But, O king, Bhishma
checked those by his prowess and pierced each of the contending kings with
two shafts. The combat became so fierce with that dense shower of arrows
and other missiles that it looked very much like the encounter between the
celestials and the Asuras of old, and men of courage who took no part in
it were struck with fear even to look at the scene. Bhishma cut off, with
his arrows, on the field of battle, bows, and flagstaffs, and coats of
mail, and human heads by hundreds and thousands. And such was his terrible
prowess and extraordinary lightness of hand, and such the skill with which
he protected himself, that the contending car-warriors, though his enemies,
began to applaud him loudly. Then that foremost of all wielders of weapons
having vanquished in battle all those monarchs, pursued his way towards
the capital of the Bharatas, taking those maidens with him.

"'It was then, O king, that mighty car-warrior, king Salya of immeasurable
prowess, from behind summoned Bhishma, the son of Santanu, to an encounter.
And desirous of obtaining the maidens, he came upon Bhishma like a mighty
leader of a herd of elephants rushing upon another of his kind, and
tearing with his tusks the latter's hips at the sight of a female elephant
in heat. And Salya of mighty arms, moved by wrath addressed Bhishma and
said, "Stay, Stay." Then Bhishma, that tiger among men, that grinder of
hostile armies, provoked by these words, flamed up in wrath like a blazing
fire. Bow in hand, and brow furrowed into wrinkles, he stayed on his car,
in obedience to Kshatriya usage having checked its course in expectation
of the enemy. All the monarchs seeing him stop, stood there to become
spectators of the coming encounter between him and Salya. The two then
began to exhibit their prowess (upon each other) like roaring bulls of
great strength at the sight of a cow in rut. Then that foremost of men,
king Salya covered Bhishma, the son of Santanu with hundreds and thousands
of swift-winged shafts. And those monarchs seeing Salya thus covering
Bhishma at the outset with innumerable shafts, wondered much and uttered
shouts of applause. Beholding his lightness of hand in combat, the crowd
of regal spectators became very glad and applauded Salya greatly. That
subjugator of hostile towns, Bhishma, then, on hearing those shouts of the
Kshatriyas, became very angry and said, "Stay, Stay." In wrath, he
commanded his charioteer, saying, "Lead thou my car to where Salya is, so
that I may slay him instantly as Garuda slays a serpent." Then the Kuru
chief fixed the Varuna weapon on his bow-string, and with it afflicted the
four steeds of king Salya. And, O tiger among kings, the Kuru chief, then,
warding off with his weapons those of his foe, slew Salya's charioteer.
Then that first of men, Bhishma, the son of Santanu, fighting for the sake
of those damsels, slew with the Aindra weapon the noble steeds of his
adversary. He then vanquished that best of monarchs but left him with his
life. O bull of Bharata's race, Salya, after his defeat, returned to his
kingdom and continued to rule it virtuously. And O conqueror of hostile
towns, the other kings also, who had come to witness the self-choice
ceremony returned to their own kingdoms.

"'That foremost of smiters, viz., Bhishma, after defeating those monarchs,
set out with those damsels, for Hastinapura whence the virtuous Kuru
prince Vichitravirya ruled the earth like that best of monarchs, viz., his
father Santanu. And, O king, passing through many forests, rivers, hills,
and woods abounding with trees, he arrived (at the capital) in no time. Of
immeasurable prowess in battle, the son of the ocean-going Ganga, having
slain numberless foes in battle without a scratch on his own person,
brought the daughters of the king of Kasi unto the Kurus as tenderly if
they were his daughters-in-law, or younger sisters, or daughters. And
Bhishma of mighty arms, impelled by the desire of benefiting his brother,
having by his prowess brought them thus, then offered those maidens
possessing every accomplishment unto Vichitravirya. Conversant with the
dictates of virtue, the son of Santanu, having achieved such an
extraordinary feat according to (kingly) custom, then began to make
preparations for his brother's wedding. And when everything about the
wedding had been settled by Bhishma in consultation with Satyavati, the
eldest daughter of the king of Kasi, with a soft smile, told him these
words, "At heart I had chosen the king of Saubha for my husband. He had,
in his heart, accepted me for his wife. This was also approved by my
father. At the self-choice ceremony also I would have chosen him as my
lord. Thou art conversant with all the dictates of virtue, knowing all
this, do as thou likest." Thus addressed by that maiden in the presence of
the Brahmanas, the heroic Bhishma began to reflect as to what should be
done. As he was conversant with the rules of virtue, he consulted with the
Brahmanas who had mastered the Vedas, and permitted Amba, the eldest
daughter of the ruler of Kasi to do as she liked. But he bestowed with due
rites the two other daughters, Ambika and Ambalika on his younger brother
Vichitravirya. And though Vichitravirya was virtuous and abstemious, yet,
proud of youth and beauty, he soon became lustful after his marriage. And
both Ambika and Ambalika were of tall stature, and of the complexion of
molten gold. And their heads were covered with black curly hair, and their
finger-nails were high and red; their hips were fat and round, and their
breasts full and deep. And endued with every auspicious mark, the amiable
young ladies considered themselves to be wedded to a husband who was every
way worthy of themselves, and extremely loved and respected Vichitravirya.
And Vichitravirya also, endued with the prowess of the celestials and the
beauty of the twin Aswins, could steal the heart of any beautiful woman.
And the prince passed seven years uninterruptedly in the company of his
wives. He was attacked while yet in the prime of youth, with phthisis.
Friends and relatives in consultation with one another tried to effect a
cure. But in spite of all efforts, the Kuru prince died, setting like the
evening sun. The virtuous Bhishma then became plunged into anxiety and
grief, and in consultation with Satyavati caused the obsequial rites of
the deceased to be performed by learned priests and the several of the
Kuru race.'"


SECTION CIII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'The unfortunate Satyavati then became plunged in
grief on account of her son. And after performing with her daughters-in-
law the funeral rites of the deceased, consoled, as best she could, her
weeping daughters-in-law and Bhishma, that foremost of all wielders of
weapons. And turning her eyes to religion, and to the paternal and
maternal lines (of the Kurus), she addressed Bhishma and said "The funeral
cake, the achievements, and the perpetuation of the line of the virtuous
and celebrated Santanu of Kuru's race, all now depend on thee. As the
attainment of heaven is inseparable from good deeds, as long life is
inseparable from truth and faith, so is virtue inseparable from thee. O
virtuous one, thou art well-acquainted, in detail and in the abstract,
with the dictates of virtue, with various Srutis, and with all the
branches of the Vedas; know very well that thou art equal unto Sukra and
Angiras as regards firmness in virtue, knowledge of the particular customs
of families, and readiness of inventions under difficulties. Therefore, O
foremost of virtuous men, relying on thee greatly, I shall appoint thee in
a certain matter. Hearing me, it behoveth thee to do my bidding. O bull
among men, my son and thy brother, endued with energy and dear unto thee,
hath gone childless to heaven while still a boy. These wives of thy
brother, the amiable daughters of the ruler of Kasi, possessing beauty and
youth, have become desirous of children. Therefore, O thou of mighty arms,
at my command, raise offspring on them for the perpetuation of our line.
It behoveth thee to guard virtue against loss. Install thyself on the
throne and rule the kingdom of the Bharatas. Wed thou duly a wife. Plunge
not thy ancestors into hell."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by his mother and friends and
relatives, that oppressor of foes, the virtuous Bhishma, gave this reply
conformable to the dictates of virtue, "O mother, what thou sayest is
certainly sanctioned by virtue. But thou knowest what my vow is in the
matter of begetting children. Thou knowest also all that transpired in
connection with thy dower. O Satyavati, I repeat the pledge I once gave,
viz., I would renounce three worlds, the empire of heaven, anything that
may be greater than that, but truth I would never renounce. The earth may
renounce its scent, water may renounce its moisture, light may renounce
its attribute of exhibiting forms, air may renounce its attribute of touch,
the sun may renounce his glory, fire, its heat, the moon, his cooling rays,
space, its capacity of generating sound, the slayer of Vritra, his prowess,
the god of justice, his impartiality; but I cannot renounce truth." Thus
addressed by her son endued wealth of energy, Satyavati said unto Bhishma,
"O thou whose prowess is truth, I know of thy firmness in truth. Thou
canst, if so minded, create, by the help of thy energy, three worlds other
than those that exist. I know what thy vow was on my account. But
considering this emergency, bear thou the burden of the duty that one
oweth to his ancestors. O punisher of foes, act in such a way that the
lineal link may not be broken and our friends and relatives may not
grieve." Thus urged by the miserable and weeping Satyavati speaking such
words inconsistent with virtue from grief at the loss of her son, Bhishma
addressed her again and said, "O Queen, turn not thy eyes away from virtue.
O, destroy us not. Breach of truth by a Kshatriya is never applauded in
our treatises on religion. I shall soon tell thee, O Queen, what the
established Kshatriya usage is to which recourse may be had to prevent
Santanu's line becoming extinct on earth. Hearing me, reflect on what
should be done in consultation with learned priests and those that are
acquainted with practices allowable in times of emergency and distress,
forgetting not at the same time what the ordinary course of social conduct
is."'"


SECTION CIV

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'Bhishma continued, "In olden days, Rama, the son of Jamadagni, in anger
at the death of his father, slew with his battle axe the king of the
Haihayas. And Rama, by cutting off the thousand arms of Arjuna (the
Haihaya king), achieved a most difficult feat in the world. Not content
with this, he set out on his chariot for the conquest of the world, and
taking up his bow he cast around his mighty weapons to exterminate the
Kshatriyas. And the illustrious scion of Bhrigu's race, by means of his
swift arrows annihilated the Kshatriya tribe one and twenty times.

"'"And when the earth was thus deprived of Kshatriyas by the great Rishi,
the Kshatriya ladies all over the land had offspring raised by Brahmanas
skilled in the Vedas. It has been said in the Vedas that the sons so
raised belongeth to him that had married the mother. And the Kshatriya
ladies went in unto the Brahamanas not lustfully but from motives of
virtue. Indeed, it was thus that the Kshatriya race was revived.

"'"In this connection there is another old history that I will recite to
you. There was in olden days a wise Rishi of the name of Utathya. He had a
wife of the name Mamata whom he dearly loved. One day Utathya's younger
brother Vrihaspati, the priest of the celestials, endued with great energy,
approached Mamata. The latter, however, told her husband's younger
brother--that foremost of eloquent men--that she had conceived from her
connection with his elder brother and that, therefore, he should not then
seek for the consummation of his wishes. She continued, 'O illustrious
Vrihaspati, the child that I have conceived hath studied in his mother's
womb the Vedas with the six Angas, Semen tuum frustra perdi non potest. How
can then this womb of mine afford room for two children at a time?
Therefore, it behoveth thee not to seek for the consummation of thy desire
at such a time.' Thus addressed by her, Vrihaspati, though possessed of
great wisdom, succeeded not in suppressing his desire. Quum auten jam cum
illa coiturus esset, the child in the womb then addressed him and said, 'O
father, cease from thy attempt. There is no space here for two. O
illustrious one, the room is small. I have occupied it first. Semen tuum
perdi non potest. It behoveth thee not to afflict me.' But Vrihaspati
without listening to what that child in the womb said, sought the embraces
of Mamata possessing the most beautiful pair of eyes. Ille tamen Muni qui
in venture erat punctum temporis quo humor vitalis jam emissum iret
providens, viam per quam semen intrare posset pedibus obstruxit. Semen ita
exhisum, excidit et in terram projectumest. And the illustrious
Vrihaspati, beholding this, became indignant, and reproached Utathya's
child and cursed him, saying, 'Because thou hast spoken to me in the way
thou hast at a time of pleasure that is sought after by all creatures,
perpetual darkness shall overtake thee.' And from this curse of the
illustrious Vrishaspati Utathya's child who was equal unto Vrihaspati in
energy, was born blind and came to be called Dirghatamas (enveloped in
perpetual darkness). And the wise Dirghatamas, possessed of a knowledge
of the Vedas, though born blind, succeeded yet by virtue of his learning,
in obtaining for a wife a young and handsome Brahmana maiden of the name
of Pradweshi. And having married her, the illustrious Dirghatamas, for the
expansion of Utathya's race, begat upon her several children with Gautama
as their eldest. These children, however, were all given to covetousness
and folly. The virtuous and illustrious Dirghatamas possessing complete
mastery over the Vedas, soon after learnt from Surabhi's son the practices
of their order and fearlessly betook himself to those practices, regarding
them with reverence. (For shame is the creature of sin and can never be
where there is purity of intention). Then those best of Munis that dwelt
in the same asylum, beholding him transgress the limits of propriety
became indignant, seeing sin where sin was not. And they said, 'O, this
man, transgresseth the limit of propriety. No longer doth he deserve a
place amongst us. Therefore, shall we all cast this sinful wretch off.'
And they said many other things regarding the Muni Dirghatamas. And his
wife, too, having obtained children, became indignant with him.

"'"The husband then addressing his wife Pradweshi, said, 'Why is it that
thou also hast been dissatisfied with me?' His wife answered, 'The husband
is called the Bhartri because he supporteth the wife. He is called Pati
because he protecteth her. But thou art neither, to me! O thou of great
ascetic merit, on the other hand, thou hast been blind from birth, it is I
who have supported thee and thy children. I shall not do so in future.'

"'"Hearing these words of his wife, the Rishi became indignant and said
unto her and her children, 'Take me unto the Kshatriyas and thou shalt then
be rich.' His wife replied (by saying), 'I desire not wealth that may be
procured by thee, for that can never bring me happiness. O best of
Brahmanas, do as thou likest. I shall not be able to maintain thee as
before.' At these words of his wife, Dirghatamas said, 'I lay down from
this day as a rule that every woman shall have to adhere to one husband
for her life. Be the husband dead or alive, it shall not be lawful for a
woman to have connection with another. And she who may have such
connection shall certainly be regarded as fallen. A woman without husband
shall always be liable to be sinful. And even if she be wealthy she shall
not be able to enjoy that wealth truly. Calumny and evil report shall ever
dog her.' Hearing these words of her husband Pradweshi became very angry,
and commanded her sons, saying, 'Throw him into the waters of Ganga!' And
at the command of their mother, the wicked Gautama and his brothers, those
slaves of covetousness and folly, exclaiming, 'Indeed, why should we
support this old man?' tied the Muni to a raft and committing him to the
mercy of the stream returned home without compunction. The blind old man
drifting along the stream on that raft, passed through the territories of
many kings. One day a king named Vali conversant with every duty went to
the Ganges to perform his ablutions. And as the monarch was thus engaged,
the raft to which the Rishi was tied, approached him. And as it came, the
king took the old man. The virtuous Vali, ever devoted to truth, then
learning who the man was that was thus saved by him, chose him for raising
up offspring. And Vali said, 'O illustrious one, it behoveth thee to raise
upon my wife a few sons that shall be virtuous and wise.' Thus addressed,
the Rishi endued with great energy, expressed his willingness. Thereupon
king Vali sent his wife Sudeshna unto him. But the queen knowing that the
latter was blind and old went not unto him, she sent unto him her nurse.
And upon that Sudra woman the virtuous Rishi of passions under full
control begat eleven children of whom Kakshivat was the eldest. And
beholding those eleven sons with Kakshivat as the eldest, who had studied
all the Vedas and who like Rishis were utterers of Brahma and were
possessed of great power, king Vali one day asked the Rishi saying, 'Are
these children mine?' The Rishi replied, 'No, they are mine. Kakshivat and
others have been begotten by me upon a Sudra woman. Thy unfortunate queen
Sudeshna, seeing me blind and old, insulted me by not coming herself but
sending unto me, instead, her nurse.' The king then pacified that best of
Rishis and sent unto him his queen Sudeshna. The Rishi by merely touching
her person said to her, 'Thou shalt have five children named Anga, Vanga,
Kalinga, Pundra and Suhma, who shall be like unto Surya (Sun) himself in
glory. And after their names as many countries shall be known on earth. It
is after their names that their dominions have come to be called Anga,
Vanga, Kalinga, Pundra and Suhma.'

"'"It was thus that the line of Vali was perpetuated, in days of old, by a
great Rishi. And it was thus also that many mighty bowmen and great car-
warriors wedded to virtue, sprung in the Kshatriya race from the seed of
Brahmanas. Hearing this, O mother, do as thou likest, as regards the
matter in hand."'"


SECTION CV

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"'Bhishma continued, "Listen, O mother, to me as I indicate the means by
which the Bharata line may be perpetuated. Let an accomplished Brahmana be
invited by an offer of wealth, and let him raise offspring upon the wives
of Vichitravirya."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Satyavati, then, smiling softly and in voice
broken in bashfulness, addressed Bhishma saying, "O Bharata of mighty arms,
what thou sayest is true. From my confidence in thee I shall now indicate
the means of perpetuating our line. Thou shall not be able to reject it,
being conversant, as thou art, with the practices permitted in seasons of
distress. In our race, thou art Virtue, and thou art Truth, and thou art,
too, our sole refuge. Therefore hearing what I say truly, do what may be
proper.

"'"My father was a virtuous man. For virtue's sake he had kept a (ferry)
boat. One day, in the prime of my youth, I went to ply that boat. It so
happened that the great and wise Rishi Parasara, that foremost of all
virtuous men, came, and betook himself to my boat for crossing the Yamuna.
As I was rowing him across the river, the Rishi became excited with desire
and began to address me in soft words. The fear of my father was uppermost
in my mind. But the terror of the Rishi's curse at last prevailed. And
having obtained from him a precious boon, I could not refuse his
solicitations. The Rishi by his energy brought me under his complete
control, and gratified his desire then and there, having first enveloped
the region in a thick fog. Before this there was a revolting fishy odour
in my body; but the Rishi dispelled it and gave me my present fragrance.
The Rishi also told me that by bringing forth his child in an island of
the river, I would still continue (to be) a virgin. And the child of
Parasara so born of me in my maidenhood hath become a great Rishi endued
with large ascetic powers and known by the name of Dwaipayana (the island-
born). That illustrious Rishi having by his ascetic power divided the
Vedas into four parts hath come to be called on earth by the name of Vyasa
(the divider or arranger), and for his dark colour, Krishna (the dark).
Truthful in speech, free from passion, a mighty ascetic who hath burnt all
his sins, he went away with his father immediately after his birth.
Appointed by me and thee also, that Rishi of incomparable splendour will
certainly beget good children upon the wives of thy brother. He told me
when he went away, 'Mother, think of me when thou art in difficulty.' I
will now call him up, if thou, O Bhishma of mighty arms so desirest. If
thou art willing, O Bhishma, I am sure that great ascetic will beget
children upon Vichitravirya's field."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Mention being made of the great Rishi, Bhishma
with joined palms said, "That man is truly intelligent who fixes his eyes
judiciously on virtue, profit, and pleasure, and who after reflecting with
patience, acteth in such a way that virtue may lead to future virtue,
profit to future profit and pleasure to future pleasure. Therefore, that
which hath been said by thee and which, besides being beneficial to us, is
consistent with virtue, is certainly the best advice and hath my full
approval." And when Bhishma had said this, O thou of Kuru's race, Kali
(Satyavati) thought of the Muni Dwaipayana and Dwaipayana who was then
engaged in interpreting the Vedas, learning that he was being called up by
his mother, came instantly unto her without anybody's knowing it.
Satayavati then duly greeted her son and embraced him with arms, bathing
him in her tears, for the daughter of the fisherman wept bitterly at the
sight of her son after so long a time. And her first son, the great Vyasa,
beholding her weeping, washed her with cool water, and bowing unto her,
said, "I have come, O mother, to fulfil thy wishes. Therefore, O virtuous
one, command me without delay. I shall accomplish thy desire." The family
priest of the Bharatas then worshipped the great Rishi duly, and the
latter accepted the offerings of worship, uttering the usual mantras. And
gratified with the worship he received, he took his seat. Satyavati,
beholding him seated at his ease, after the usual inquiries, addressed him
and said, "O learned one, sons derive their birth both from the father and
the mother. They are, therefore, the common property of both parents.
There cannot be the least doubt about it that the mother hath as much
power over them as the father. As thou art, indeed, my eldest son
according to the ordinance, O Brahmarshi, so is Vichitravirya my youngest
son. And as Bhishma is Vichitravirya's brother on the father's side, so
art thou his brother on the same mother's side. I do not know what you may
think, but this is what, O son, I think. This Bhishma, the son of Santanu,
devoted to truth, doth not, for the sake of truth, entertain the desire
of either begetting children or ruling the kingdom. Therefore, from
affection for thy brother Vichitravirya, for the perpetuation of our
dynasty, for the sake of this Bhishma's request and my command, for
kindness to all creatures, for the protection of the people and from the
liberality of thy heart, O sinless one, it behoveth thee to do what I say.
Thy younger brother hath left two widows like unto the daughters of the
celestials themselves, endued with youth and great beauty. For the sake of
virtue and religion, they have become desirous of offspring. Thou art the
fittest person to be appointed. Therefore beget upon them children worthy
of our race and for the continuance of our line."

"'Vyasa, hearing this, said, "O Satyavati, thou knowest what virtue is both
in respect of this life and the other. O thou of great wisdom, thy
affections also are set on virtue. Therefore, at thy command, making
virtue my motive, I shall do what thou desirest. Indeed, this practice
that is conformable to the true and eternal religion is known to me. I
shall give unto my brother children that shall be like unto Mitra and
Varuna. Let the ladies then duly observe for one full year the vow I
indicate. They shall then be purified. No women shall ever approach me
without having observed a rigid vow."

"'Satyavati then said, "O sinless one, it must be as thou sayest. Take such
steps that the ladies may conceive immediately. In a kingdom where there
is no king, the people perish from want of protection; sacrifices and
other holy acts are suspended; the clouds send no showers; and the gods
disappear. How can a kingdom be protected that hath no king? Therefore,
see thou that the ladies conceive. Bhishma will watch over the children as
long as they are in their mother's wombs."
