
As I have already said, our Lord gives utterance here to the very
common, in fact, universal human consciousness. The contrast between
the intense little spot of light and the great ring of darkness round
about it; between 'the warm precincts of the cheerful day' and the
cold solitudes of the inactive night has been the commonplace and
stock-in-trade of moralists and thoughtful men from the beginning; has
given pathos to poetry, solemnity to our days; and has been the ally
of base as well as of noble things. For to say to a man, 'there are
twelve hours in the day of life, and then comes darkness, the
blackness that swallows up all activity,' may either be made into a
support of all lofty and noble thoughts, or, by the baser sort, may
be, and has been, made into a philosophy of the 'Let us eat and drink,
for to-morrow we die' kind; 'Gather ye roses while ye may'; 'A short
life and a merry one.' The thought stimulates to diligence, but it
does nothing to direct the diligence. It makes men work furiously, but
it never will prevent them from working basely. 'Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do it with thy might,' is a conclusion from the
consideration that 'there is neither wisdom nor knowledge nor device
in the grave whither we go,' but what the hand should find to do must
be settled from altogether different considerations.

Our Lord here takes the common human point of view, and says, 'Life is
the time for activity, and it must be the more diligent because it is
ringed by the darkness of the night.' What precisely does our Lord
intend by His use of that metaphor of the night? No figures, we know,
run upon all-fours. The point of comparison may be simply in some one
feature common to the two things compared, and so all sorts of
mischief may be done by trying to extend the analogy to other
features. Now, there are a great many points in which day and night
may respectively be taken as analogues of Life and Death and the state
beyond death. There is a 'night of weeping'; there is a 'night of
ignorance.' But our Lord Himself tells us what is the one point of
comparison which alone is in His mind, when He says, 'The night
cometh, when no man can work.' It is simply the night as a season of
compulsory inactivity that suggests the comparison in our text. And so
we have here the presentation of that dear Lord as influenced by the
common human motive, and feeling that there was work to be done which
must be crowded into a definite space, because when that space was
past, there would be no more opportunity for the work to be done.

Look at how, in the words of my first text, we have, as I said, a
glimpse into His inmost heart. He lets us see that all His life was
under the solemn compulsion of that great _must_ which was so often
upon His lips, that He felt that He was here to do the Father's will,
and that that obligation lay upon Him with a pressure which He neither
could, nor would if He could, have got rid of.

There are two kinds of 'musts' in our lives. There is the unwelcome
necessity which grips us with iron and sharpened fangs; the needs-be
which crushes down hopes and dreams and inclinations, and forces the
slave to his reluctant task. And there is the 'must' which has passed
into the will, into the heart, and has moulded the inmost desire to
conformity with the obligation which no more stands over against us as
a taskmaster with whip and chain, but has passed within us and is
there an inspiration and a joy. He that can say, as Jesus Christ in
His humanity could, and did say: 'My meat'--the refreshment of my
nature, the necessary sustenance of my being--'is to do the will of my
Father'; that man, and that man alone, feels no pressure that is pain
from the incumbency of the necessity that blessedly rules His life.
When 'I will' and 'I choose' coincide, like two of Euclid's triangles
atop of one another, line for line and angle for angle, then comes
liberty into the life. He that can say, not with a knitted brow and an
unwilling ducking of his head to the yoke, 'I must do it,' but can
say, 'Thy law is within my heart,' that is the Christlike, the free,
the happy man.

Further, our Lord here, in His thoughts of the present and the future,
lets us see what He thought that the work of God in the world was. The
disciples looked at the blind man sitting by the wayside, and what he
suggested to them was a curious, half theological, half metaphysical
question, in which Rabbinical subtlety delighted. 'Who did sin, this
man or his parents?' They only thought of talking over the theological
problem involved in the fact that, before he had done anything in this
world to account for the calamity, he was _born_ blind. Jesus Christ
looked at the man, and He did not think about theological cobwebs.
What was suggested to Him was to fight against the evil and abolish
it. It is sometimes necessary to discuss the origin of an evil thing,
of a sorrow or a sin, in order to understand how to deal with and get
rid of it. But unless that is the case, our first business is not to
say, 'How comes this about?' but our business is to take steps to make
it cease to come about. Cure the man first and then argue to your
heart's content about what made him blind, but cure him first. And so
Jesus Christ taught us that the meaning of the day of life was that we
should set ourselves to abolish the works of the devil, and that the
work of God was that we should fight against sin and sorrow, and in so
far as it was in our power, abolish these, in all the variety of their
forms, in all the vigour of their abundant growth. Sorrow and sin are
God's call to every one of His sons and daughters to set themselves to
cast them out of His fair creation; and 'the day' is the opportunity
for doing that.

Our Lord here, as I have already suggested, shows us very touchingly
and beautifully, how entirely He bore our human nature, and had
entered into our conditions, in that He, too, felt that common human
emotion, and was spurred to unhasting and yet unresting diligence by
the thought of the coming of the night. I suppose that although we
have few chronological data in this Gospel of John, the hour of our
Lord's death was really very near at that time. He had just escaped
from a formidable attempt upon His life. 'They took up stones to stone
Him, but He, passing through the midst of them, went His way,' is the
statement which immediately precedes the account of His meeting with
this blind man. And so under the pressure, perhaps, of that immediate
experience which revealed the depths of hatred that was ready for
anything against Him, He gives utterance to this expression: 'If it be
the case that the time is at hand, then the more need that, Sabbath
day as it is, I should pause here.' Though the multitude were armed
with stones to stone Him, He stopped in His flight because there was a
poor blind man there whom He felt that He needed to cure. Beautiful it
is, and drawing Him very near to us,--and it should draw us very near
to Him--that thus He shared in that essentially human consciousness of
the limitation of the power to work, by the ring of blackness that
encircled the little spot of illuminated light.

But some will say, 'How is it possible that such a consciousness as
this should really have been in the mind of Jesus Christ?' 'Did He not
know that His death was not to be the end of His work? Did He not
know, and say over and over again, in varying forms, that when He
passed from earth, it was not into inactivity? Is it not the very
characteristic of His mission that it is different from that of all
other helpers and benefactors and teachers of the world, in that His
death stands in the very middle of His work, and that on the one side
of it there is activity, and on the other side of it there is still,
and in some sense loftier and greater, activity?' Yes; all that is
perfectly true, and I do not for a moment believe that our Lord was
forgetting that the life on the earth was but the first volume of His
biography, and of the records of His deeds, and that He contemplated
them, as He contemplated always, the life beyond, as working in and on
and over and through His servants, even unto the end of the world.

But you have only to remember the difference between the earthly and
the heavenly life of the Lord fully to understand the point of view
that He takes here. The one is the basis of the other; the one is the
seedtime, the other is the harvest. The one has only the limited years
of the earthly life, in which it can be done; the other has the
endless years of Eternity, through which it is to be continued. And if
any part of that earthly life of the Lord had been void of its duty,
and of its discharge of the Father's will, not even He, amidst the
blaze of the heavenly glory, could have thereafter filled up the tiny
gap. All the earthly years were needed to be filled with service, up
to the great service and sacrifice of the Cross, in order that upon
them might be reared the second stage and phase of His heavenly life.
With regard to the one, He said on the Cross, 'It is finished.' But
when He died He passed not into the night of inactivity, but into the
day of greater service. And that higher and heavenly form of His work
continues, and not until 'the kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our God and of His Christ,' and the whole benefit and
effect of His earthly life are imparted to the whole race of man, will
it be said, 'It is done,' and the angels of heaven proclaim the
completion of His work for man. But seeing that that work has its
twofold forms, Jesus, like us, had to be conscious of the limitations
of life, and of the night that followed the day.

II. And now turn, in the second place, to the servant's thought.

As I have already pointed out, it is the precise reversal of the
other. What to Christ is 'day' to Paul is 'night.' What to Christ is
'night' to Paul is 'day.' Now the first point that I would make is
this, that the future would never have been 'day' to Paul if Jesus had
not gone down into the darkness of the 'night.' I have said that there
was only one point of comparison in our Lord's mind between night and
death. But we may venture to extend the figure a little, and to say
that the Light went into the 'valley of the shadow of Death,' and lit
it up from end to end. The Life went into the palace of Death, and
breathed life into all there. There is a great picture by one of the
old monkish masters, on the walls of a Florentine convent, which
represents the descent of Jesus to that dim region of the dead. Around
Him there is a halo of light that shines into the gloomy corridor, up
which the thronging patriarchs and saints of the Old Dispensation are
coming, with outstretched hands of eager welcome and acceptance, to
receive the blessing. Ah! it is true, 'the people that walked in
darkness have seen a great Light; and to them that dwelt in the region
of the shadow of death, unto them hath the Light shined.' Christ the
Light has gone down into the darkness, and what to Him was night He
has made for us day. Just as Scripture all but confines the name of
_death_ to Christ's experience upon the Cross, and by virtue of that
experience softens it down for the rest of us into the blessed image
of _sleep_, so the Master has turned the night of death into the
dawning of the day.

Further, to the servant the brightness of that future day dimmed all
earth's garish glories into darkness. It was because Paul saw the
Beyond flaming with such lustre that the nearer distance to him seemed
to have sunk into gloom. Just as a man or other object between you and
the western sky when the sun is there will be all dark, so earth with
heaven behind it becomes a mere shadowy outline. The day that is
beyond outshines all the lustres and radiances of earth, and turns
them into darkness. You go into a room out of blazing tropical
sunshine, and it is all gloom and obscurity. He whose eyes are fixed
on the day that is to come will find that here he walks as one in the
night.

And the brightness of that day, as well as the darkness of the present
night, directed the servant as to what he should be diligent in. Since
it is true that 'the day is at hand,' let us put on the armour of
light, and dress ourselves in garb fitting for it. Since it is true
that 'the night is far spent' let us put off the works of darkness.

III. And so that brings me to the last point, and that is the
combination of the Master's and the servant's thought, and the effect
that it should produce upon us.

It is not enough either for our hearts or our minds that we should say
'the night cometh when no man can work.' Life is day, but it is night
also. Death is night but it is dawning as well. We cannot understand
either the present or the future unless we link them together. That
death which is the cessation of activity in one aspect, is, for
Christ's servants, as truly as for Christ, the beginning of an
activity in a higher and nobler form. I do not believe in a heaven of
rest, meaning by that, inaction; I still less believe in a death which
puts an end to the activity of the human spirit. I believe that this
world is our school, our apprenticeship, the place where we learn our
trade and exercise our faculties, where we paint the picture, as it
were, which we offer when we desire to be admitted to the great guild
of artists, and according to the result of which, in the eye of the
Judge, is our place hereafter. What the Germans call 'proof
pieces'--that is the meaning of life. And though 'the night cometh
when no man can work,' the day cometh when the characters we have made
ourselves here, the habits we have cultivated and indulged in, the
capacities we have exercised, and the set and drift of all our
activity upon earth, will determine the work that we get to do there.

So then, stereoscoping these two thoughts, we get the solid image that
results from them both. And it teaches us not only diligence, and thus
supplies stimulus, but it determines the direction of our diligence,
and thus supplies guidance. We ought to be misers of our time and
opportunities. Jesus Christ said, 'I must work the work of Him that
sent Me while it is day; the night cometh.' How much more ought you
and I to say so? And some of us ought very specially to say it, and to
feel it, because the hour when we shall have to lay down our tools is
getting very near, and the shadows are lengthening. If you had been in
the fields in these summer evenings during the last few days, you
would have seen the haymakers at work with more and more diligence as
the evening drew on darker and darker. Dear friends, some of us are at
the eleventh hour. Let us fill it with diligent work. The night
cometh.

But my texts not only stimulate to diligence, but they direct the
diligence. If it be that there is a day beyond, and that Christ's folk
are 'the children of the day,' then 'let us not sleep as do others,
but let us watch and be sober.' We have to cast ourselves on Him as
our Saviour, to love Him as our Lord and Friend, to take Him as our
Pattern and our Guide, our Help, our Light, and our Life. And then we
shall neither be deceived by life's garish splendours nor oppressed by
its gloom and its sorrow; we shall neither shrink from that last
moment, as a night of inaction, nor be too eager to cast off the
burden of our present work, but we shall cheerfully toil at what will
prepare us for 'the day,' and the bell at night that rings us out of
mill and factory will not be unwelcome, for it will ring us in to
higher work and nobler service. The transition will be like one of
those summer nights in the Arctic circle, when the sun does not dip.
Through a little thin film of less light we shall pass into the
perfect day, where 'the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the light
thereof,' and 'there shall be no more night.'




THE SIXTH MIRACLE IN JOHN'S GOSPEL--THE BLIND MADE TO SEE, AND THE
SEEING MADE BLIND

'When Jesus had thus spoken, He spat on the ground, and made clay of
the spittle, and He anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay,
7. And said unto him, Go, wash in the Pool of Siloam, (which is by
interpretation, Sent). He went his way, therefore, and washed, and
came seeing.'--JOHN ix. 6, 7.

The proportionate length at which this miracle and its accompanying
effects are recorded, indicates very clearly the Evangelist's idea of
their relative importance. Two verses are given to the story of the
miracle; all the rest of the chapter to its preface and its issues. It
was a great thing to heal a man that was blind from his birth, but the
story of the gradual illumination of his spirit until it came to the
full light of the perception of Christ as the Son of God, was far more
to the Evangelist, and ought to be far more to us than giving the
outward eye power to discern the outward light.

The narrative has a prologue and an epilogue, and the true point of
view from which to look at it is found in the solemn words with which
our Lord closes the incident. 'For judgment am I come into this world,
that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be
made blind.'

So then the mere sign, important as it is, is the least thing that we
have to look at in our contemplations now.

I. We have here our Lord unveiling His deepest motives for bestowing
an unsought blessing.

It is remarkable, I think, that out of the eight miracles recorded in
this Gospel, there is only one in which our Lord responds to a request
to manifest His miraculous power; the others are all spontaneous.

In the other Gospels He heals sometimes because of the pleading of the
sufferer; sometimes because of the request of compassionate friends or
bystanders; sometimes unasked, because His own heart went out to those
that were in pain and sickness. But in John's Gospel, predominantly we
have the Son of God, who acts throughout as moved by His own deep
heart. That view of Christ reaches its climax in His own profound
words about His own laying down of His life: 'I came forth from the
Father, and am come into the world. Again, I leave the world and go
unto the Father.' So, not so much influenced by others as deriving
motive and impulse and law from Himself, He moves upon earth a
fountain and not a reservoir, the Originator and the Beginner of the
blessings that He bears.

And that is the point of view from which most strikingly the prologue
of our narrative sets forth His action in the miracle here. 'As Jesus
passed by,' says the story, 'He saw a man which was blind from his
birth.' He fixes His eye upon him. No cry from the blind man's lips
draws Him. He sits there unconscious of the kind eyes that were
fastened upon him. The disciples stand at Christ's side, and have no
share in His feelings. They ask Him to do nothing. To them the blind
man is--what? A theological problem. No trace of pity touches their
hearts. They do not even seem to have reckoned upon or expected
Christ's miraculous intervention. And that is a very remarkable
feature in the Gospels. At all events, they evidently do not expect it
here; but all that the sight of this lifelong sufferer does in them is
to raise a question, 'Who did sin; he or his parents?' Perhaps they do
not quite see to the bottom of the alternative that they are
suggesting; and we need not trouble ourselves to ask whether there was
a full-blown notion of the pre-existence of the man's soul in their
minds as they ask the question. Perhaps they remembered the impotent
man to whom our Lord said, 'Go and sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto thee.' And they may have thought that they had His sanction to
the doctrine--as old as Job's friends--that wherever there was great
suffering there must first have been great sin.

That is all that the sight of sorrow does for some people. It leads to
censorious judgments, or to mere idle and curious speculations. Christ
lets us see what it did for Him, and what it is meant to do for us.
'Neither hath this man sinned nor his parents, but he is born blind
that the works of God may be made manifest in him.' That is to say,
human sorrow is to be looked at by us as an opportunity for the
manifestation through us of God's mercy in relieving and stanching the
wounds through which the lifeblood is ebbing away. Do not stand coldly
curious or uncharitably censorious. Do not make miserable men
theological problems, but see in them a call for service. See in them
an opportunity for letting the light of God, so much of it as is in
you, shine from you, and your hands move in works of mercy.

And then the Master goes on to state still more distinctly the law
which dominated His life, and which ought to dominate ours: 'I must
work the works of Him that sent Me while it is day; the night cometh
when no man can work.' Then poor men's misery is an occasion for the
love of God manifesting itself. Yes. But the love of God manifests
itself through human media, through persons; and if we adopt the
reading of these words which you will find in the Revised Version, and
instead of saying '_I_ must work,' read '_We_ must work,' then we have
Christ extending the law which ruled over His own life to all His
followers, and making it supremely obligatory and binding upon each of
us. He for His part, as I have said, moves through this Gospel as the
Son of God, whose mercy, and all whose doings are self-originated. But
the other side of that is that He moves through this Gospel in the
humble attitude of filial obedience, ever recognising that the
Father's will is supreme in His life; and that He is bound, with an
obligation in which He rejoices, to do the will of Him that sent Him.
The consciousness of a mission, the sense of filial obedience, the
joyful surrender and harmonising of the will of the Son with the will
of the Father; these things were the secret of the Master's life.

And coupled with them, even in Him there was the consciousness that
time was short; and although beyond the Cross and the grave there
stretched for Him an eternity in which He would work for the blessing
of the world, yet the special work which He had to do, while wearing
the veil and weakness of flesh, had but few days and hours in which it
could be done. Therefore, as we ought to do, He worked under the
limitations of mortality, and recognised in the brevity of life
another call to eager and continuous service.

These were His motives which, in common with Him, we may share. But He
adds another in which we have no share; and declares the unique
consciousness which ever stirred Him to His self-manifesting and
God-manifesting acts: 'As long as I am in the world I am the Light of
the world.'

Thus, moved by sorrow, recognising in man's misery the dumb cry for
help, seeing in it the opportunity for the manifestation of the higher
mercy of God; taking all evil to be the occasion for a brighter
display of the love and the good which are divine; feeling that His
one purpose upon earth was to crowd the moments with obedience to the
will, and with the doing of the works of Him that sent Him; and
possessing the sole and strange consciousness that from His person
streams out all the light which illuminates the world--the Christ
pauses before the unconscious blind man, and looking upon the poor,
useless eyeballs, unaware how near light and sight stood, obeys the
impulse that shapes His whole life, 'and when He had spoken _thus_,'
proceeds to the strange cure.

II. So we come, in the next place, to consider Christ as veiling His
power under material means.

There is only one other instance in the Gospels where a miracle is
wrought in the singular fashion which is here employed, namely, the
healing of the deaf-mute recorded in Mark's Gospel, where, in like
manner, our Lord makes clay of the spittle, and anoints the ears of
the deaf man with the clay. The variety of method in our Lord's
miracles serves important purposes, as teaching us that the methods
are nothing, and that He moved freely amongst them all, the real cause
in every case being one and the same, the bare forth-putting of His
will; and teaching us further that in each specific case there were
reasons in the moral and religious condition of the persons operated
upon for the adoption of the specific means employed, which we of
course have no means of discovering. There is here, first then,
healing by material means. The clay had no power of healing; the water
of Siloam had no power of healing. The thing that healed was Christ's
will, but He uses these externals to help the poor blind man to
believe that he is going to be healed. He condescends to drape and
veil His power in order that the dim eye, unaccustomed to the light,
may look upon that shadowed representation of it when it could not
gaze upon the pure brightness; as an eye may look upon a shaded lamp
which could not bear its brilliance unsoftened and naked.

This healing by material means in order to accommodate Himself to the
weak faith which He seeks to evoke, and to strengthen thereby, is
parallel, in principle, to His own Incarnation, and to His appointment
of external rites and ordinances. Baptism, the Lord's Supper, a
visible Church, outward means of worship, and so on, all these come
under that same category. There is no life nor power in them except
His will works through them, but they are crutches and helps for a
weak and sense-bound faith to climb to the apprehension of the
spiritual reality. It is not the clay, it is not the water, it is not
the Church, the ordinances, the outward worship, the form of prayer,
the sacrament--it is none of these things that have the healing and
the grace in them. They are only ladders by which we may ascend to
Him. So let us neither presumptuously antedate the time when we shall
be able to do without them--the Heaven in 'which there is no
Temple'--nor grovellingly and superstitiously elevate them to a place
of importance and of power in the Christian life which Christ never
meant them to fill. He heals through material means; the true source
of healing is His own loving will.

Further, He heals at a distance. We have here a parallel with the
story of the nobleman's son at Capernaum, which we have already
considered. There, too, we have the same phenomenon, the healing power
sent forth from the Master, and operating far away from His corporeal
personal presence. This was a test of faith, as the use of the clay
had been a help to faith. Still He works His healing from afar,
because to Him there is neither near nor far. In His divine ubiquity,
that Son of Man, who in His glorified manhood is at the right hand of
God the Father Almighty, is here and everywhere where there are
weakness and suffering that turn to Him; ready to help, ready to bless
and heal. 'Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.'

Our Evangelist sees in the very name of that fountain in which the man
washed, a symbol which is not to be passed by. 'Go, wash in the Pool
of Siloam,' which, says John, 'is by interpretation, _Sent._' We have
heard already about the Pool of Siloam in this section of the Gospel.
In Chapter vii. we read, 'In the last day, that great day of the
Feast, Jesus stood and said, "If any man thirst let him come to Me and
drink."' These words were probably spoken on the last day of the Feast
of Tabernacles, on which one part of the ceremonial was the drawing,
with exuberant rejoicing, of water from the Pool of Siloam, and
bearing it up to the Temple. In these words Christ pointed to that
fountain which rises 'fast by the oracles of God,' and wells up from
beneath the hill, that on which the Temple is built, as being a symbol
of Himself.

And here the Evangelist would have us suppose that, in like manner,
the very name which the fountain bore (whether as being an outgush
from beneath the Temple rock, or whether as being the gift of God) as
applicable to Himself. The lesson to be learned is that the fountain
in which we have to be cleansed 'from sin and from uncleanness,' whose
waters are the lotion that will give eyesight to the blind, the true
'fountain of perpetual youth,' which men have sought for in every
land, is Christ Himself. In Him we have the welling forth of the heart
of God, the water of life, the water of gladness, the immortal stream
of which 'whoso drinketh shall never thirst,' and which, touching the
blind eyeballs, washes away obscuration and gives new power of vision.

III. Then, still further, we have here our Lord suspending healing on
obedience.

'Go and wash.' As He said to the impotent man: 'Stretch forth thine
hand'; as He said to the paralytic in this Gospel: 'Take up thy bed
and walk'; so here He says, 'Go and wash.' And some friendly hand
being stretched out to the blind man, or he himself feeling his way
over the familiar path, he comes to the pool and washes, and returns
seeing.

There is a double lesson there, on which I have no need to dwell.
There is, first, the general truth that healing is suspended by Christ
on compliance with His conditions. He does not simply say to any man,
Be whole. He could and did say so sometimes in regard to bodily
healing. But He cannot do so as regards the cure of our blind souls.
To the sin-sick and sin-blinded man He says, 'Thou shalt be whole,
if'--or 'I will make thee whole, provided that'--what?--provided that
thou goest to the fountain where He has lodged the healing power. The
condition on which sight comes to the blind is compliance with
Christ's invitation, 'Come to Me; trust in Me; and thou shalt be
whole.'

Then there is a special lesson here, and that is, Obedience brings
sight. 'If any man will do His will he shall know of the doctrine.'
Are there any of you groping in darkness, compassed about with
theological perplexities and religious doubts? Obey what you know. Do
what you see clearly you ought to do. Bow your wills to the recognised
truth. He who has turned all his knowledge into action will get more
knowledge as soon as he needs it. 'Go and wash; and he went, and came
seeing.'

IV. And now, lastly, we have here our Lord shadowing His highest work
as the Healer of blind souls.

It is impossible for me to enter upon that wonderfully dramatic and
instructive narrative which follows the account of the miracle, and
describe the controversies between the sturdy, quick-witted, candid,
blind man, and the narrow, bitter Pharisees. But just notice one or
two points.

The two parties are evidently represented as types of two contrasted
classes. The blind man stands for an example of honest ignorance,
knowing itself ignorant, and not to be coaxed or frightened or in any
way provoked to pretending to knowledge which it does not possess;
firmly holding by what it does know, and because conscious of its
little knowledge, therefore waiting for light and willing to be led.
Hence he is at once humble and sturdy, docile and independent, ready
to listen to any voice which can really teach, and formidably quick to
prick with wholesome sarcasm the inflated claims of mere official
pretenders. The Pharisees, on the other hand, are sure that they know
everything that can be known about anything in the region of religion
and morality, and in their absolute confidence of their absolute
possession of the truth, in their blank unconsciousness that it was
more than their official property and stock-in-trade, in their
complete incapacity to discern the glory of a miracle which
contravened ecclesiastical proprieties and conventionalities, in their
contempt for the ignorance which they were responsible for and never
thought of enlightening, in their cruel taunt directed against the
man's calamity, and in their swift resort to the weapon of
excommunication of one whom it was much easier to cast out than to
answer, are but too plain a type of a character which is as ready to
corrupt the teachers of the Church as of the synagogue.

One cannot but notice how constantly the phrase 'We know' occurs. The
parents of the man use it thrice. The Pharisees have it on their lips
in their first interview with him: 'We know that this man is a
sinner.' He answers, declining to affirm anything about the character
of the Man Jesus, because he, for his part, 'knows not,' but standing
firmly by the solid reality which he 'knows,' in a very solid fashion,
that his eyes have been opened. So we have the first encounter between
knowledge which is ignorant, and ignorance which knows, to the
manifest victory of the latter. Again, in the second round, they try
to overbear the man's cool sarcasm with their vehement assertion of
knowledge that God spake to Moses, but by the admission that even
their knowledge did not reach to the determination of the question of
the origin of Jesus' mission, lay themselves open to the sudden thrust
of keen-eyed, honest humility's sharp rapier-like retort. 'Herein is a
marvellous thing,' that you _Know-alls_, whose business it is to know
where a professed miracle-worker comes from, 'know not from whence He
is, and yet He hath opened mine eyes.' 'Now we know' (to use your own
words) 'that God heareth not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper
of God, and doeth His will, him He heareth.'

Then observe how, on both sides, a process is going on. The man is
getting more and more light at each step. He begins with 'a Man which
is called Jesus.' Then he gets to a 'prophet,' then he comes to 'a
worshipper of God, and one that does His will.' Then he comes to, 'If
this man were not of God,' in some very special sense, 'He could do
nothing.' These are his own reflections, the working out of the
impression made by the fact on an honest mind; and because he had so
used the light which he had, therefore Jesus gives him more, and finds
him with the question, 'Dost thou believe on the Son of God?' Then the
man who had shown himself so strong in his own convictions, so
independent, and hard to cajole or coerce, shows himself now all
docile and submissive, and ready to accept whatever Jesus says: 'Lord,
who is He, that I might believe on Him?' That was not credulity. He
already knew enough of Christ to know that he ought to trust Him. And
to his docility there is given the full revelation; and he hears the
words which Pharisees and unrighteous men were not worthy to hear:
'Thou hast both _seen_ it is He that talketh with thee.' Then
intellectual conviction, moral reliance, and the utter prostration and
devotion of the whole man bow him at Christ's feet. 'Lord, I believe;
and He worshipped Him.'

There is the story of the progress of an honest, ignorant soul that
knew itself blind, into the illumination of perfect vision.

And as he went upwards, so steadily and tragically, downwards went the
others. For they had light and they would not look at it; and it
blasted and blinded them. They had the manifestation of Christ, and
they scoffed and jeered at it, and turned their backs upon it, and it
became a curse to them; falling not like dew but like vitriol on their
spirits, blistering, not refreshing.

Therefore Christ pronounces their fate, and sums up the story in the
solemn two-edged sentence: 'For judgment am I come into the world,
that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be
made blind.'

The purpose of His coming is not to judge, but to save. But if men
will not let Him save, the effect of His coming will be to harm.
Therefore, His coming will separate men into two parts, as a magnet
will draw all the iron filings out of a heap and leave the brass. He
comes not to judge, but His coming does judge. He is set for the rise
or for the fall of men, and is 'a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart.'

Light has a twofold effect. It is torture to the diseased eye; it is
gladdening to the sound one. Christ is the light, as He is also both
the power of seeing and the thing seen. Therefore, it cannot but be
that His shining upon men's hearts shall judge them, and shall either
enlighten or darken.

We all have eyes--the organs by which we may see 'the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God.' We have all blinded ourselves by our
sin. Christ is come to show us God, to be the light by which we see
God, and to strengthen and restore our faculty of seeing Him. If you
welcome Him, and take Him into your hearts, He will be at once light
and eyesight to you. But if you turn away from Him He will be
blindness and darkness to you. He comes to pour eyesight on the blind,
but He comes therefore also, most assuredly, to make still blinder
those who do not know themselves to be blind, and conceit themselves
to be clear-sighted. 'I thank Thee, Father, that Thou hast hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.'

They who see themselves to be blind, who know themselves to be
ignorant, the lowly who recognise their sinfulness and misery and
helplessness, and turn in their sore need to Christ, will be led by
paths of growing knowledge and blessedness to the perfect day where
their strengthened vision will be able to see light in the blaze which
to us now is darkness. They who say 'I see,' and know not that they
are miserable and blind, nor hearken to His counsel to 'anoint their
eyes with eye salve that they may see,' will have yet another film
drawn over their eyes by the shining of the light which they reject,
and will pass into darkness where only enough of light and of eyesight
remain to make guilt. Jesus Christ is for us light and vision. Trust
to Him, and your eyes will be blessed because they see God. Turn from
Him and Egyptian darkness will settle on your soul. 'To him that hath
shall be given, and from him that hath not, even that which he hath
shall be taken away.'




THE GIFTS TO THE FLOCK

'... By Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and
out, and find pasture.'--JOHN x. 9.

One does not know whether the width or the depth of this marvellous
promise is the more noteworthy. Jesus Christ presents Himself before
the whole race of man, and declares Himself able to deal with the
needs of every individual in the tremendous whole. 'If _any man_'--no
matter who, where, when.

For all noble and happy life there are at least three things needed:
security, sustenance, and a field for the exercise of activity. To
provide these is the end of all human society and government. Jesus
Christ here says that He can give all these to every one.

The imagery of the sheep and the fold is still, of course, in His
mind, and colours the form of the representation. But the substance is
the declaration that, to any and every soul, no matter how ringed
about with danger, no matter how hampered and hindered in work, no
matter how barren of all supply earth may be, He will give these, the
primal requisites of life. 'He shall be saved, and shall go in and
out, and find pasture.'

Now I only wish to deal with these three aspects of the blessedness of
a true Christian life which our Lord holds forth here as accessible to
us all: security, the unhindered exercise of activity, and sustenance
or provision.

I. First, then, in and through Christ any man may be saved.

I take it that the word 'saved' here is rather used with reference to
the imagery of the parable than in its full Christian sense of
ultimate and everlasting salvation, and that its meaning in its
present connection might perhaps better be set forth by the rendering
'safe' than 'saved.' At the same time, the two ideas pass into one
another; and the declaration of my text is that because, step by step,
conflict by conflict, in passing danger after danger, external and
internal, Jesus Christ, through our union with Him, will keep us safe,
at the last we shall reach eternal and everlasting salvation. 'He will
save us' by the continual exercise of His protecting power, 'into His
everlasting kingdom.' There is none other shelter for men's
defenceless heads and naked, soft, unarmed bodies except only the
shelter that is found in Him. There are creatures of low grade in the
animal world which have the instinct, because their own bodies are so
undefended and impotent to resist contact with sharp and penetrating
substances, that they take refuge in the abandoned shells of other
creatures. You and I have to betake ourselves behind the defences of
that strong love and mighty Hand if ever we are to pass through life
without fatal harm.

For consider that, even in regard to outward dangers, union with Jesus
Christ defends and delivers us. Suppose two men, two Manchester
merchants, made bankrupt by the same commercial crisis; or two
shipwrecked sailors lashed upon a raft; or two men sitting side by
side in a railway carriage and smashed by the same collision. One is a
Christian and the other is not. The same blow is altogether different
in aspect and actual effect upon the two men. They endure the same
thing externally, in body or in fortune. The outward man is similarly
affected, but the man is differently affected. The one is crushed, or
embittered, or driven to despair, or to drink, or to something or
other to soothe the bitterness; the other bows himself with 'It is the
Lord! Let Him do what seemeth Him good.'

So the two disasters are utterly different, though in form they may be
the same, and he that has entered into the fold by Jesus Christ is
safe, not _from_ outward disaster--that would be but a poor thing--but
_in_ it. For to the true heart that lives in fellowship with Jesus
Christ, Sorrow, though it be dark-robed, is bright-faced, soft-handed,
gentle-hearted, an angel of God. 'By Me if any man enter in, he shall
be safe.'

And further, in our union with Jesus Christ, by simple faith in Him
and loyal submission and obedience, we do receive an impenetrable
defence against the true evils, and the only things worth calling
dangers. For the only real evil is the peril that we shall lose our
confidence and be untrue to our best selves, and depart from the
living God. Nothing is evil except that which tempts, and succeeds in
tempting, us away from Him. And in regard to all such danger, to
cleave to Christ, to realise His presence, to think of Him, to wear
His name as an amulet on our hearts, to put the thought of Him between
us and temptation as a filter through which the poisonous air shall
pass, and be deprived of its virus, is the one secret of safety and
victory.

Real gift of power from Jesus Christ, the influx of His strength into
our weakness, of some portion of the Spirit of life that was in Him
into our deadness, is promised, and the promise is abundantly
fulfilled to all men who trust Him when their hour of temptation
comes. As the dying martyr, when he looked up into heaven, saw Jesus
Christ 'standing at the right hand of God' ready to help, and, as it
were, having started from His eternal seat on the Throne in the
eagerness of His desire to succour His servant, so we may all see, if
we will, that dear Lord ready to succour us, and close by our sides to
deliver us from the evil in the evil, its power to tempt. If we could
carry that vision into our daily life, and walk in its light, when
temptation rings us round, how poor all the inducements to go away
from Him would look!

There is a power in the remembrance of Jesus to slay every wicked
thought; and the things that tempt us most, that most directly appeal
to our worst sides, to our sense, our ambition, our pride, our
distrust, our self-will, all these lose their power upon us, and are
discovered in their emptiness and insignificance, when once this
thought flashes across the mind--Jesus Christ is my Defence, and Jesus
Christ is my Pattern and my Companion.

Oh, brother! do not trust yourself out amongst the pitfalls and snares
of life without Him. If you do, the real evil of all evils will seize
you for its own; but keep close to that dear Lord, and then 'there
shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.' The hidden temptation thou wilt pass by without being
harmed; the manifest temptation thou wilt trample under foot. 'Thou
shalt not be afraid for the pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor
for the destruction that wasteth at noonday.' Hidden known temptations
will be equally powerless; and in the fold into which all pass by
faith in Christ thou shalt be safe. And so, kept safe from each danger
and in each moment of temptation, the aggregate and sum of the several
deliverances will amount to the everlasting salvation which shall be
