But all that, remember, is only half the story. Our Lord here is not
giving us a complete view of the retributions of the heavens, He is
only telling us one aspect of them. Repose, society, gladness,
satisfaction, these things are all true. But heaven is not lying
upon couches and eating of a feast. There is another use of this
metaphor in this same Gospel, which, at first sight, strikes one as
being contradictory to this. Our Lord said: 'Which of you, having a
servant ploughing or feeding cattle, will say unto him by and by,
when he is come from the field, go and sit down to meat, and will
not rather say unto him, make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird
thyself, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterward
thou shalt eat and drink.' These two representations are not
contradictory. Put the two halves together like the two pictures in
a stereoscope and, as you look, they will go together into one solid
image, of which the one part is the resting at the table of the
feast, and the other part is that entrance into heaven is not
cessation, but variation, of service. It was dirty, cold, muddy work
out there in the field ploughing, and when the man comes back with
his soiled, wet raiment and his weary limbs a change of occupation
is rest. It is better for him to be set to 'make ready wherewith I
may eat and drink,' than to be told to sit down and do nothing.

So the servants are served, and the servants serve. And these two
representations are not contradictory, but they fill up the
conception of perfect blessedness. For remember, if we may venture
to say so, that the very same reason which makes Christ the Lord
serve His servants makes the servants serve Christ the Lord. For love,
which underlies their relationship, has for its very life-breath doing
kindnesses and good to its objects, and we know not whether it is more
blessed to the loving heart to minister to, or to be ministered to by,
the heart which it loves. So the Servant-Lord and the servants,
serving and served, are swayed in both by the same motive and rejoice
in the interchange of offices and tokens of love.

III. Mark the earthly service which leads to the heavenly rest.

I have already spoken about Christ's earthly service, and reminded
you that there is needed, first of all, that we should partake in
His purifying work through His blood and His Spirit that dwells in
us, ere we can share in His highest ministrations to His servants in
the heavens. But there is also service of ours here on earth, which
must precede our receiving our share in the wonderful things
promised here. And the nature of that service is clearly stated in
the preceding words, 'Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when
He cometh shall find'--doing what? Trying to make themselves better?
Seeking after conformity to His commandments? No! 'Whom the Lord
when He cometh shall find _watching_.' It is character rather
than conduct, and conduct only as an index of character--disposition
rather than deeds--that makes it possible for Christ to be hereafter
our Servant-Lord. And the character is more definitely described in
the former words. Loins girded, lights burning, and a waiting which
is born of love. The concentration and detachment from earth, which
are expressed by the girded loins, the purity and holiness of
character and life, which are symbolised by the burning lights, and
the expectation which desires, and does not shrink from, His coming
in His Kingdom to be the Judge of all the earth--these things, being
built upon the acceptance of Christ's ministry of washing, fit us
for participation in Christ's ministry of the feast, and make it
possible that even we shall be of those to whom the Lord, in that
day, will come with gladness and with gifts. 'Blessed are the
servants whom the Lord shall find so watching.'




SERVANTS AND STEWARDS HERE AND HEREAFTER


    'Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when He
    cometh, shall find watching: Verily I shall say unto
    you, that He shall gird Himself, and make them to sit
    down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.

    Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when He cometh,
    shall find so doing. 44. Of a truth I say unto you,
    that He will make him ruler over all that he hath.
    --LUKE xii. 37, 43, and 44.

You will, of course, observe that these two passages are strictly
parallel in form. Our Lord evidently intends them to run side by
side, and to be taken together. The divergences are as significant
and instructive as the similarities, and the force of these will be
best brought out by just recalling, in a sentence or two, the
occasion for the utterance of the second of the two passages which I
have taken for my text. When our Lord had finished His previous
address and exhortations, Peter characteristically pushed his oar in
with the question, 'Do these commandments refer to us, the Apostles,
or to all,' the whole body of disciples? Our Lord admits the
distinction, recognises in His answer that the 'us,' the Twelve,
were nearer Christ than the general mass of His followers, and
answers Peter's question by reiterating what He has been saying in a
slightly different form. He had spoken before about servants. Now He
speaks about 'stewards,' because the Apostles did stand in that
relation to the other disciples, as being slaves indeed, like the
rest of the household, but slaves in a certain position of
authority, by the Master's appointment, and charged with providing
the nourishment which, of course, means the religious instruction,
of their fellow-servants.

So, notice that the first benediction is upon the 'servants,' the
second is upon the servants who are 'stewards.' The first
exhortation requires that when the Master comes He shall find the
servants watching; the second demands that when He comes He shall
find the stewards doing their work. The first promise of reward
gives the assurance that the watching servants shall be welcomed
into the house, and be waited on by the Master himself; the second
gives the assurance that the faithful steward shall be promoted to
higher work. We are all servants, and we are all, if we are
Christian men, stewards of the manifold grace of God.

So, then, out of these two passages thus brought together, as our
Lord intended that they should be, we gather two things: the twofold
aspect of life on earth--watchfulness and work; and the twofold hope
of life in heaven--rest and rule. 'Blessed is that servant whom his
Lord, when He cometh, shall find watching.' 'Blessed is that steward
whom his Lord, when He cometh, shall find'--not merely watching,
but--'so doing.'

I. The twofold attitude here enjoined.

The first idea in watchfulness is keeping awake; and the second is
looking out for something that is coming. Both these conceptions are
intertwined in both our Lord's use of the metaphor of the watching
servant, and in the echoes of it which we find abundantly in the
Apostolic letters. The first thing is to keep ourselves awake all
through the soporific night, when everything tempts to slumber. Even
the wise virgins, with trimmed lamps and girt loins, do in some degree
succumb to the drowsy influences around them, and like the foolish
ones, slumber, though the slumbers of the two classes be unlike.
Christian people live in the midst of an order of things which tempts
them to close the eyes of their hearts and minds to all the real and
unseen glories above and around them, and that might be within them,
and to live for the comparatively contemptible and trivial things of
this present. Just as when a man sleeps, he loses his consciousness
of solid external realities, and passes into a fantastic world of his
own imaginations, which have no correspondence in external facts, and
will vanish like

  'The baseless fabric of a dream,
  If but a cock shall crow,'

so the men who are conscious only of this present life and of the
things that are seen, though they pride themselves on being wide
awake, are, in the deepest of their being, fast asleep, and are
dealing with illusions which will pass and leave nought behind, as
really as are men who lie dreaming upon couches, and fancy
themselves hard at work. Keep awake; that is the first thing; which,
being translated into plain English, points just to this, that
unless we make a dead lift of continuous effort to keep firm grasp
of God and Christ, and of all the unseen magnificences that are
included in these two names, as surely as we live we shall lose our
hold upon them, and fall into the drugged and diseased sleep in
which so many men around us are plunged. It sometimes seems to one
as if the sky above us were raining down narcotics upon us, so
profoundly are the bulk of men unconscious of realities, and
befooled by the illusions of a dream.

Keep yourselves awake first, and then let the waking, wide-opened
eye, be looking forward. It is the very _differentia_, so to
speak, the characteristic mark and distinction of the Christian
notion of life, that it shifts the centre of gravity from the
present into the future, and makes that which is to come of far more
importance than that which is, or which has been. No man is living
up to the height of his Christian responsibilities or privileges
unless there stands out before him, as the very goal and aim of his
whole life, what can never be realised until he has passed within
the veil, and is at rest in the 'secret place of the Most High.' To
live for the future is, in one aspect, the very definition of a
Christian.

But the text reminds us of the specific form which that future
anticipation is to take. It is not for us, as it is for men in the
world, to fix our hopes for the future on abstract laws of the
progress of humanity, or the evolution of the species, or the
gradual betterment of the world, and the like. All these may be
true: I say nothing about them. But what we have to fill our future
with is that 'that same Jesus shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen Him go.' It is much to be lamented that curious
chronological speculations have so often discredited that great
central hope of the Church, which is properly altogether independent
of them; and that, because people have got befogged in interpreting
such symbols as beasts, and horses, and trumpets, and seals, and the
like, the Christian Church as a whole should so feebly be holding by
that great truth, without which, as it seems to me, the truth which
many of us are tempted to make the exclusive one, loses half its
significance. No man can rightly understand the whole contents of
the blessed proclamation, 'Christ has come,' unless he ends the
sentence with 'and Christ will come.' Blessed is 'that servant whom
the Lord, when He cometh, shall find watching.'

Of course I need not remind you that much for which that second
coming of the Lord is precious, and an object of hope to the world
and the Church, is realised by the individual in the article of
death. Whether Christ comes to the world or I go to Christ, the
important thing is that there result union and communion, the reign
of righteousness and peace, the felicities of the heavenly state.
And so, dear brethren, just because of the uncertainty that drapes
the future, and which we are often tempted to make a reason for
dismissing the anticipation of it from our minds, we ought the more
earnestly to give heed that we keep that end ever before us, and
whether it is reached by His coming to us, or our going to Him,
anticipate, by the power of realising faith grasping the firm words
of Revelation, the unimaginable, and--until it is experienced--the
incommunicable blessedness revealed in these great, simple words,
'So shall we ever be with the Lord.'

But, then, look at the second of the aspects of Christian duty which
is presented here, that watchfulness is to lead on to diligent work.

The temptation for any one who is much occupied with the hope of
some great change and betterment in the near future is to be
restless and unable to settle down to his work, and to yield to
distaste of the humdrum duties of every day. If some man that kept a
little chandler's shop in a back street was expecting to be made a
king to-morrow, he would not be likely to look after his poor trade
with great diligence. So we find in the Apostle Paul's second
letter--that to the Thessalonians--that he had to encounter, as well
as he could, the tendency of hope to make men restless, and to
insist upon the thought--which is the same lesson as is taught us by
the second of our texts--that if a man hoped, then he had with
quietness to work and eat his own bread, and not be shaken in mind.

'Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when He cometh, shall find
so doing.' It may seem humble work to serve out hunches of bread and
pots of black broth to the family of slaves, when the steward is
expecting the coming of the master of the house, and his every nerve
is tingling with anticipation. But it is steadying work, and it is
blessed work. It is better that a man should be found doing the
homeliest duty as the outcome of his great expectations of the
coming of his Master, than that he should be fidgeting and restless
and looking only at that thought till it unfits him for his common
tasks. Who was it who, sitting playing a game of chess, and being
addressed by some scandalised disciple with the question, 'What
would you do if Jesus Christ came, and you were playing your game?'
answered, 'I would finish it'? The best way for a steward to be
ready for the Master, and to show that he is watching, is that he
should be 'found so doing' the humble task of his stewardship. The
two women that were squatting on either side of the millstone, and
helping each other to whirl the handle round in that night were in
the right place, and the one that was taken had no cause to regret
that she was not more religiously employed. The watchful servant
should be a working servant.

II. And now I have spent too much time on this first part of my
discourse; so I must condense the second. Here are two aspects of
the heavenly state, rest and rule.

'Verily I say unto you, He shall gird Himself, and make them to sit
down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.' I do not know
that there is a more wonderful promise, with more light lying in its
darkness, in all Scripture than that. Jesus Christ continues in the
heavens to be found in 'the form of a servant.' As here He girded
Himself with the towel of humiliation in the upper room, so there He
girds Himself with the robes of His imperial majesty, and uses all
His powers for the nourishment and blessedness of His servants. His
everlasting motto is, 'I am among you as one that serveth.' On earth
His service was to wash His disciples' feet; in heaven the pure foot
contracts no stain, and needs no basin: but in heaven He still
serves, and serves by spreading a table, and, as a King might do at
some ceremonial feasts, waiting on the astonished guests.

I say nothing about all the wonderful ideas that gather round that
familiar but never-to-be-worn-into-commonplace emblem of the feast.
Repose, in contrast with the girded loins and the weary waiting of
the midnight watch; nourishment, and the satisfaction of all
desires; joy, society--all these things, and who knows how much
more, that we shall have to get there to understand, lie in that
metaphor, 'Blessed is that servant' who is served by the Master, and
nourished by His presence?

But modern popular presentations of the future life have far too
predominantly dwelt upon that side of it. It is a wonderful
confession of 'the weariness, the fever, and the fret,' the hunger
and loneliness of earthly experience, that the thought of heaven as
the opposite of all these things should have almost swallowed up the
other thought with which our Lord associates it here. He would not
have us think only of repose. He unites with that representation, so
fascinating to us weary and heavy-laden, the other of administrative
authority. He will set him 'over all that he hath.'

The steward gets promotion. 'On twelve thrones judging the twelve
tribes of Israel'--these are to be the seats, and that is to be the
occupation of the Twelve. 'Thou hast been faithful over a few
things; I will make thee ruler over many things.' The relation
between earthly faithfulness and heavenly service is the same in
essence as that between the various stages of our work here. The
reward for work here is more work; a wider field, greater
capacities. And what depths of authority, of new dignity, of royal
supremacy, lie in those solemn and mysterious words, I know not--'He
will set him over all that he hath.' My union with Christ is to be
so close as that all His is mine and I am master of it. But at all
events this we can say, that faithfulness here leads to larger
service yonder; and that none of the aptitudes and capacities which
have been developed in us here on earth will want a sphere when we
pass yonder.

So let watchfulness lead to faithfulness, and watchful faithfulness
and faithful watchfulness will lead to repose which is activity, and
rule which is rest.




FIRE ON EARTH


    'I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I,
    if it be already kindled!'--LUKE xii. 49.

We have here one of the rare glimpses which our Lord gives us into
His inmost heart, His thought of His mission, and His feelings about
it. If familiarity had not weakened the impression, and dulled the
edge, of these words, how startling they would seem to us! 'I am
come'--then, He was, before He came, and He came by His own
voluntary act. A Jewish peasant says that He is going to set the
world on fire-and He did it. But the triumphant certitude and
consciousness of a large world-wide mission is all shadowed in the
next clause. I need not trouble you with questions as to the precise
translation of the words that follow. There may be differences of
opinion about that, but I content myself with simply suggesting that
a fair representation of the meaning would be, 'How I wish that it
was already kindled!' There is a longing to fulfil the purpose of
His coming and a sense that something has to be done first, and what
that something if, our Lord goes on to say in the next verse. This
desirable end can only be reached through a preliminary painful
ordeal, 'but I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I
straitened till it be accomplished.' If I might use such an
incongruous figure, the fire that is to flash and flame through the
world emerges from the dark waters of that baptism. Our Lord goes on
still further to dwell upon the consequence of His mission and of
His sufferings. And that, too, shadows the first triumphant thought
of the fire that He was to send on earth. For, the baptism being
accomplished, and the fire therefore being set at liberty to flame
through the world, what follows? Glad reception? Yes, and angry
rejection.  Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell
you, nay! but rather division.' The fire, the baptism, and the
sword; these three may sum up our Lord's vision of the purpose,
means, and mingled result of His mission. But it is only with regard
to the first of these that I wish to speak now.

I. The fire which Christ longed to cast upon the earth.

Now, opinions differ as to what is meant by this fire Some would
have, it to mean the glow of love kindled in believing hearts, and
others explain it by other human emotions or by the transformation
effected in the world by Christ's coming. But while these things are
the results of the fire kindled on earth, that fire itself means not
these effects, but the cause of them. It is _brought_ before it
kindles a flame on earth.

He does not kindle it simply in humanity, but He launches it into
the midst of humanity. It is something from above that He flings
down upon the earth. So it is not merely a quickened intelligence, a
higher moral life, or any other of the spiritual and religious
transformations which are effected in the world by the mission of
Christ that is primarily to be kept in view here, but it is the
Heaven-sent cause of these transformations and that flame. If we
catch the celestial fire, we shall flash and blaze, but the fire
which we catch is not originated on earth. In a word it is God's
Divine Spirit which Christ came to communicate to the world.

I need not remind you, I suppose, how such an interpretation of the
words before us is in entire correspondence with the symbolism both
of the Old and New Testament. I do not dwell upon the former at all,
and with regard to the latter I need only remind you of the great
words by which the Forerunner of the Lord set forth His mighty work,
in contrast with the superficial cleansing which John himself had to
proclaim. 'I indeed baptize you with water, but He shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost and with fire.'  I need only point to the
Pentecost, and the symbol there, of which the central point was the
cloven tongues, which symbolised not only the speech which follows
from all deep conviction, but the descent from above of the Spirit
of God, who is the Spirit of burning, on each bowed and willing
head. With these analogies to guide us, I think we shall not go far
wrong if we see in the words of my text our Lord's great symbolical
promise that the issue of His mission shall be to bring into the
heart of the world, so to speak, and to lodge in the midst of
humanity which is one great whole, a new divine influence that shall
flame and burn through the world.

So, then, my text opens out into thoughts of the many-sided
applications of this symbol. What hopes for the world and ourselves
are suggested by that fire? Let us stick to the symbol closely, and
we shall then best understand the many-sided blessings that flash
and coruscate in the gift of the Spirit.

It is the gift of life. No doubt, here and there in Scripture, fire
stands for a symbol of destroying power. But that is a less frequent
use than that in which it stands as a symbol of life. In a very real
sense life is warmth and death is cold. Is not respiration a kind of
combustion? Do not physiologists tell us that? Is not the centre of
the system and the father of all physical life that great blazing
sun which radiates heat? And is not this promise, 'I will send fire
on the earth,' the assurance that into the midst of our death there
shall come the quick energy of a living Spirit which shall give us
to possess some shadow of the immortal Being from which itself
flows?

But, beyond that, there is another great promise here, of a
quickening energy. I use the word 'quickening,' not in the sense of
life-giving, but in the sense of stimulating. We talk about 'the
flame of genius,' the 'fervour of conviction,' about 'fiery zeal,'
about 'burning earnestness,' and the like; and, conversely, we speak
of 'cold caution,' and 'chill indifference,' and so on. Fire means
love, zeal, swift energy. This, then, is another side of this great
promise, that into the torpor of our sluggish lives He is waiting to
infuse a swift Spirit that shall make us glow and flame with
earnestness, burn with love, aspire with desire, cleave to Him with
the fervour of conviction, and be, in some measure, like those
mighty spirits that stand before the Throne, the seraphim that burn
with adoration and glow with rapture. A fire that shall destroy all
our sluggishness, and change it into swift energy of glad obedience,
may be kindled in our spirits by the Holy Spirit whom Christ gives.

Still farther, the promise of my text sets forth, not only life-giving
and stimulating energy, but purifying power. Fire cleanses, as many
an ancient ritual recognised. For instance, the thought that underlay
even that savage 'passing the children through the fire to Moloch' was,
that thus passed, humanity was cleansed from its stains. And that is
true. Every man must be cleansed, if he is cleansed at all, by the
touch of fire. If you take a piece of foul clay, and push it into a
furnace, as it warms it whitens, and you can see the stains melting
off it as the fire exercises its beneficent and purifying mastery. So
the promise to us is of a great Spirit that will come, and by
communicating His warmth will dissipate our foulness, and the sins
that are enwrought into the substance of our natures will exhale from
the heated surface, and disappear. The ore is flung into the blast
furnace, and the scum rises to the surface, and may be ladled off,
and the pure stream, cleansed because it is heated, flows out
without scoriae or ash. All that was 'fuel for the fire' is burned;
and what remains is more truly itself and more precious. And so,
brother, you and I have, for our hope of cleansing, that we shall be
passed through the fire, and dwell in the everlasting burnings of a
Divine Spirit and a changeless love.

The last thought suggested by the metaphor is that it promises not
only life-giving, stimulating, purifying, but also transforming and
assimilating energy. For every lump of coal in your scuttles may be
a parable; black and heavy, it is cast into the fire, and there it
is turned into the likeness of the flame which it catches and itself
begins to glow, and redden, and crackle, and break into a blaze.
That is like what you and I may experience if we will. The incense
rises in smoke to the heavens when it is heated: and our souls
aspire and ascend, an odour of a sweet smell, acceptable to God,
when the fire of that Divine Spirit has loosed them from the bonds
that bind them to earth, and changed them into His own likeness, We
all are 'changed from glory to glory even as by the Spirit of the
Lord.'

So I think if you take these plain teachings of this symbol you
learn something of the operations of that Divine Spirit to which our
Lord pointed in the great words of my text.

II. And now I have a second thought to suggest--viz., what Christ
had to do before His longing could be satisfied.

He longed, but the longing wish was not able to bring that on which
it was fixed. He had come to send this divine fire upon the earth;
but there was something that stood in the way; and something needed
to be done as a preliminary before the ultimate purpose of His
coming could be accomplished. What that was, as I have already tried
to point out, the subsequent verse tells us. I do not need, nor
would it be congruous with my present purpose, to comment upon it at
any length. We all know what He meant by the 'baptism,' that He had
to be baptized with, and what were the dark waters into which He had
to pass, and beneath which His sacred head had to be plunged. We all
know that by the 'baptism' He meant His passion and His Cross. I do
not dwell, either, upon the words of pathetic human shrinking with
which His vision of the Cross is here accompanied, but I simply wish
to signalise one thing, that in the estimation of Jesus Christ
Himself it was not in His power to kindle this holy fire in humanity
until He had died for men's sins. That must come first; the Cross
must precede Pentecost. There can be no Divine Spirit in His full
and loftiest powers poured out upon humanity until the Sacrifice has
been offered on the Cross for the sins of the world. We cannot read
all the deep reasons in the divine nature, and in human receptivity,
which make that sequence absolutely necessary, and that preliminary
indispensable. But this, at least, we know, that the Divine Spirit
whom Christ gives uses as His instrument and sword the completed
revelation which Christ completed in His Cross, Resurrection, and
Ascension, and that, until His weapon was fashioned, He could not
come.

That thought is distinctly laid down in many places in Scripture, to
which I need not refer in more than a word. For instance, the
Apostle John tells us that, when our Lord spoke in a cognate figure
about the rivers of water which should flow from them who believed
on Him, He spake of that Holy Spirit who 'was not given because that
Jesus was not yet glorified.' We remember the words in the upper
chamber, 'If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you,
but if I depart I will send Him unto you.' But enough for us that He
recognised the necessity, and that here His baptism of suffering
comes into view, not so much for what it was itself, the sacrifice
for the world's sin, as for that to which it was the necessary
preliminary and introduction, the bestowment on humanity of the gift
of the Divine Spirit. The old Greek legend of the Titan that stole
fire from heaven tells us that he brought it to earth in a reed. Our
Christ brings the heavenly fire in the fragile, hollow reed of His
humanity, and the reed has to be broken in order that the fire may
blaze out. 'How I wish that it were kindled! but I have a baptism to
be baptized with.'

III. Lastly, what the world has to do to receive the fire.

Take these triumphant words of our Lord about what He was to do
after His Cross, and contrast with them the world as it is to-day,
ay! and the Church as it is to-day. What has become of the fire? Has
it died down into grey ashes, choked with the cold results of its
own former flaming power? Was Jesus Christ deceiving Himself? was He
cherishing an illusion as to the significance and permanence of the
results of His work in the world? No! There is a difference between
B.C. and A.D. which can only be accounted for by the fulfilment of
the promise in my text, that He did bring fire and set the world
aflame. But the condition on which that fire will burn either
through communities, society, humanity, or in an individual life, is
trust in Him that gives it, and cleaving to Him, and the appropriate
discipline. 'This spake He of the Holy Spirit which they that
believe on Him should receive.'

And they that do _not_ believe upon Him--what of them? The fire
is of no advantage to them. Some of you do as people in Swiss
villages do where there is a conflagration--you cover over your
houses with incombustible felts or other materials, and deluge them
with water, in the hope that no spark may light on you. There is no
way by which the fire can do its work on us except our opening our
hearts for the Firebringer. When He comes He brings the vital spark
with Him, and He plants it on the hearth of our hearts. Trust in
Him, believe far more intensely than the most of Christian people of
this day do in the reality of the gift of supernatural divine life
from Jesus Christ. I do believe that hosts of professing Christians
have no firm grip of this truth, and, alas! very little verification
of it in their lives. Your heavenly Father gives the Holy Spirit to
them that ask Him. 'Covet earnestly the best gifts'; and take care
that you do not put the fire out--'quench not the Holy Spirit,' as
you will do if you 'fulfil the lusts of the flesh.' I remember once
being down in the engine-room of an ocean-going steamer. There were
the furnaces, large enough to drive an engine of five or six
thousand horsepower. A few yards off there were the refrigerators,
with ice hanging round the spigots that were put in to test the
temperature. Ah! that is like many a Christian community, and many
an individual Christian. Here is the fire; there is the frost.
Brethren, let us seek to be baptized with fire, lest we should be
cast into it, and be consumed by it.


END OP VOL. I.






VOLUME II: ST. LUKE _Chaps. XIII to XXIV_




CONTENTS


TRUE SABBATH OBSERVANCE (Luke xiii. 10-17)

THE STRAIT GATE (Luke xiii. 22-30).

CHRIST'S MESSAGE TO HEROD (Luke xiii. 32, 33)

THE LESSONS OF A FEAST (Luke xiv. 1-14)

EXCUSES NOT REASONS (Luke xiv. 18)

THE RASH BUILDER (Luke xiv. 28)

THAT WHICH WAS LOST (Luke xv. 4, 8, 11)

THE PRODIGAL AND HIS FATHER (Luke xv. 11-24)

GIFTS TO THE PRODIGAL (Luke xv. 22, 23)

THE FOLLIES OF THE WISE (Luke xvi. 8)

TWO KINDS OF RICHES (Luke xvi. 10-12)

THE GAINS OF THE FAITHFUL STEWARD (Luke xvi. 12)

DIVES AND LAZARUS (Luke xvi. 19-31)

MEMORY IN ANOTHER WORLD (Luke xvi 25)

GOD'S SLAVES (Luke xvii. 9-10)

WHERE ABE THE NINE? (Luke xvii. 11-19)

THREE KINDS OF PRAYING (Luke xviii. 1-14)

ENTERING THE KINGDOM (Luke xviii. 15-30)

THE MAN THAT STOPPED JESUS (Luke xviii. 40-41)

MELTED BY KINDNESS (Luke xix. 5)

THE TRADING SERVANTS (Luke xix. 16, 18)

THE REWARDS OF THE TRADING SERVANTS (Luke xix. 17,19)

A NEW KIND OP KING (Luke xix. 37-48)

TENANTS WHO WANTED TO BE OWNERS (Luke xx. 9-19)

WHOSE IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION? (Luke xx. 24)

WHEN SHALL THESE THINGS BE? (Luke xxi. 20-36)

THE LORD'S SUPPER (Luke xxii. 7-20)

PARTING PROMISES AND WARNINGS (Luke xxii. 24-37)

CHRIST'S IDEAL OF A MONARCH (Luke xxii. 25, 26)

THE LONELY CHRIST (Luke xxii. 28)

A GREAT FALL AND A GREAT RECOVERY (Luke xxii. 32)

GETHSEMANY (Luke xxii. 39-58)

THE CROSS THE VICTORY AND DEFEAT OF DARKNESS (Luke xxii. 53)

IN THE HIGH PRIEST'S PALACE (Luke xxii. 54-71)

CHRIST'S LOOK (Luke xxii. 61)

'THE RULERS TAKE COUNSEL TOGETHER' (Luke xxiii. 1-12)

A SOUL'S TRAGEDY (Luke xxiii. 9)

JESUS AND PILATE (Luke xxiii. 13-26)

WORDS FROM THE CROSS (Luke xxiii. 33-46)

THE DYING THIEF (Luke xxiii. 42)

THE FIRST EASTER SUNRISE (Luke xxiv. 1-12)

THE LIVING DEAD (Luke xxiv. 5-6)

THE RISEN LORD'S SELF-REVELATION TO WAVERING DISCIPLES (Luke xxiv.
13-32)

DETAINING CHRIST (Luke xxiv. 28, 29)

THE MEAL AT EMMAUS (Luke xxiv, 30, 31)

PETER ALONE WITH JESUS (Luke xxiv. 34)

THE TRIUMPHANT END (Luke xxiv. 36-53)

CHRIST'S WITNESSES (Luke xxiv. 48,49)

THE ASCENSION (Luke xxiv. 50, 51; Acts i. 9)




TRUE SABBATH OBSERVANCE


    'And He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the
    Sabbath. 11. And, behold, there was a woman which had
    a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed
    together, and could in no wise lift up herself.
    12. And when Jesus saw her, He called her to Him, and
    said unto her, Woman, thou art loosed from thine
    infirmity. 13. And He laid His hands on her: and
    immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.
    14. And the ruler of the synagogue answered with
    indignation, because that Jesus had healed on the
    Sabbath day, and said unto the people, There are six
    days in which men ought to work: in them therefore
    come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day.
    15. The Lord then answered him, and said, Thou
    hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the Sabbath
    loose his ox or his ass from the stall and lead him
    away to watering! 16. And ought not this woman, being
    a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo,
    these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the
    Sabbath day? 17. And when He had said these things, all
    His adversaries were ashamed: and all the people
    rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by
    Him.'--LUKE xiii. 10-17.

This miracle was wrought, unasked, on a woman, in a synagogue, and
by all these characteristics was specially interesting to Luke. He
alone records it. The narrative falls into two parts--the miracle,
and the covert attack of the ruler of the synagogue, with our Lord's
defence.

What better place than the synagogue could there be for a miracle of
mercy? The service of man is best built on the service of God, and
the service of God is as truly accomplished in deeds of human
kindness done for His sake as in oral worship. The religious basis
of beneficence and the beneficent manifestation of religion are
commonplaces of Christian practice and thought from the beginning,
and are both set forth in our Lord's life. He did not substitute
doing good to men for worshipping God, as a once much-belauded
but now all-but-forgotten anti-Christian writer has done; but He
showed us both in their true relations. We have Christ's authority
for regarding the woman's infirmity as the result of demoniacal
possession, but the case presents some singular features. There
seems to have been no other consequence than her incapacity to stand
straight. Apparently the evil power had not touched her moral
nature, for she had somehow managed to drag herself to the synagogue
to pray; she 'glorified God' for her cure, and Christ called her 'a
daughter of Abraham,' which surely means more than simply that she
was a Jewess. It would seem to have been a case of physical
infirmity only, and perhaps rather of evil inflicted eighteen years
before than of continuous demoniacal possession.

But be that as it may, there is surely no getting over our Lord's
express testimony here, that purely physical ills, not distinguishable
from natural infirmity, were then, in some instances, the work of a
malignant, personal power. Jesus knew the duration of the woman's
'bond' and the cause of it, by the same supernatural knowledge. That
sad, bowed figure, with eyes fixed on the ground, and unable to look
into His face, which yet had crawled to the synagogue, may teach us
lessons of patience and of devout submission. She might have found
good excuses for staying at home, but she, no doubt, found solace in
worship; and she would not have so swiftly 'glorified God' for her
cure, if she had not often sought Him in her infirmity. They who wait
on Him often find more than they expect in His house.

Note the flow of Christ's unasked sympathy and help. We have already
seen several instances of the same thing in this Gospel. The sight
of misery ever set the chords of that gentle, unselfish heart
vibrating, as surely as the wind draws music from the Aeolian harp
strings. So it should be with us, and so would it be, if we had in
us 'the law of the Spirit of life in Christ' making us 'free from
the law of' self. But His spontaneous sympathy is not merely the
perfection of manhood; it is the revelation of God. Unasked, the
divine love pours itself on men, and gives all that it can give to
those who do not seek, that they may be drawn to seek the better
gifts which cannot be given unasked. God 'tarrieth not for man, nor
waiteth for the sons of men,' in giving His greatest gift. No
prayers besought Heaven for a Saviour. God's love is its own motive,
and wells up by its inherent diffusiveness. Before we call, He
answers.

Note the manner of the cure. It is twofold--a word and a touch. The
former is remarkable, as not being, like most of the cures of
demoniacs, a command to the evil spirit to go forth, but an
assurance to the sufferer, fitted to inspire her with hope, and to
encourage her to throw off the alien tyranny. The touch was the
symbol to her of communicated power--not that Jesus needed a vehicle
for His delivering strength, but that the poor victim, crushed in
spirit, needed the outward sign to help her in realising the new
energy that ran in her veins, and strengthened her muscles.
Unquestionably the cure was miraculous, and its cause was Christ's
will.

But apparently the manner of cure gave more place to the faith of
the sufferer, and to the effort which her faith in Christ's word and
touch heartened her to put forth, than we find in other miracles.
She 'could in no wise lift herself up,' not because of any
malformation or deficiency in physical power, but because that
malign influence laid a heavy hand on her will and body, and crushed
her down. Only supernatural power could deliver from supernatural
evil, but that power wrought through as well us OB her; and when she
believed that she was loosed from her infirmity, and had received
strength from Jesus, she was loosed.

This makes the miracle no less, but it makes it a mirror in which
the manner of our deliverance from a worse dominion of Satan is
shadowed. Christ is come to loose us all from the yoke of bondage,
which bows our faces to the ground, and makes us unfit to look up.
He only can loose us, and His way of doing it is to assure us that
we are free, and to give us power to fling off the oppression in the
strength of faith in Him.

Note the immediate cure and its immediate result. The 'back bowed
down always' for eighteen weary years is not too stiff to be made
straight at once. The Christ-given power obliterates all traces of
the past evil. Where He is the physician, there is no period of
gradual convalescence, but 'the thing is done suddenly'; and, though
in the spiritual realm, there still hang about pardoned men remains
of forgiven sin, they are 'sanctified' in their inward selves, and
have but to see to it that they work out in character and conduct
that 'righteousness and holiness of truth' which they have received
in the new nature given them through faith.

How rapturous was the gratitude from the woman's lips, which broke
in upon the formal, proper, and heartless worship of the synagogue!
The immediate hallowing of her joy into praise surely augurs a
previously devout heart. Thanksgiving generally comes thus swiftly
after mercies, when prayer has habitually preceded them. The
sweetest sweetness of all our blessings is only enjoyed when we
glorify God for them. Incense must be kindled, to be fragrant, and
our joys must be fired by devotion, to give their rarest perfume.

The cavils of the ruler and Christ's defence are the second part of
this incident. Note the blindness and cold-heartedness born of
religious formalism. This synagogue official has no eye for the
beauty of Christ's pity, no heart to rejoice in the woman's
deliverance, no ear for the music of her praise. All that he sees is
a violation of ecclesiastical order. That is the sin of sins in his
eyes. He admits the reality of Christ's healing power, but that does
not lead him to recognition of His mission. What a strange state of
mind it was that acknowledged the miracle, and then took offence at
its being done on the Sabbath!

Note, too, his disingenuous cowardice in attacking the people when
he meant Christ. He blunders, too, in his scolding; for nobody had
come to be healed. They had come to worship; and even if they had
come for healing, the coming was no breach of Sabbath regulations,
whatever the healing might be. There are plenty of people like this
stickler for propriety and form, and if you want to find men blind
as bats to the manifest tokens of a divine hand, and hard as
millstones towards misery, and utterly incapable of glowing with
enthusiasm or of recognising it, you will find them among
ecclesiastical martinets, who are all for having 'things done
decently and in order,' and would rather that a hundred poor
sufferers should continue bowed down than that one of their
regulations should be broken in lifting them up. The more men are
filled with the spirit of worship, the less importance will they
attach to the pedantic adherence to its forms, which is the most
part of some people's religion.

Mark the severity, which is loving severity, of Christ's answer. He
speaks to all who shared the ruler's thoughts, of whom there were
several present (v. 17, 'adversaries'). Piercing words which
disclose hidden and probably unconscious sins, are quite in place on
the lips into which grace was poured. Well for those who let Him
tell them their faults now, and do not wait for the light of
judgment to show themselves to themselves for the first time.

Wherein lay these men's hypocrisy? They were pretending zeal for the
Sabbath, while they were really moved by anger at the miracle, which
would have been equally unwelcome on any day of the week. They were
