thee not, O blessed one, to suspect any fault in me. O ruler of the
Nishadhas, passing over the celestials themselves, I choose thee as my
lord. It was to bring thee hither that the Brahmanas had gone out in all
directions, even to all the sides of the horizon, singing my words, in
the form of ballads. At last, O king, a learned Brahmana named Parnada
had found thee in Kosala in the palace of Rituparna. When thou hadst
returned a fit answer to those words of his, it was then, O Naishadha,
that I devised this scheme to recover thee. Except thee, O lord of
earth, there is no one in this world, who in one day can clear, O King,
a hundred _yojanas_ with horses. O monarch, touching thy feet I can
swear truly that I have not, even in thought, committed any sin. May the
all-witnessing Air that courseth through this world, take my life, if I
have committed any sin. May the Sun that ever courseth through the sky
take my life, if I have committed any sin. May the Moon, that dwelleth
within every creature as a witness, take my life, if I have committed
any sin. Let the three gods that sustain the triple worlds in their
entirety, declare truly, or let them forsake me today." And thus
addressed by her, the Wind-god said from the sky, "O Nala, I tell thee
truly that she hath done no wrong. O king, Damayanti, well guarding the
honour of thy family, hath enhanced it. Of this we are the witnesses, as
we have been her protectors for these three years. It is for thy good
that she hath devised this unrivalled scheme, for, except thee, none on
earth is capable of travelling in a single day a hundred _yojanas_. O
monarch, thou hast obtained Bhima's daughter, and she hath also obtained
thee. Thou needst not entertain any suspicion but be united with thy
partner." And after the Wind-god had said this, a floral shower fell
there and the celestial kettle-drum began to play, and auspicious
breezes began to blow. And beholding those wonders, O Bharata, king
Nala, the represser of foes, cast away all his doubts in respect of
Damayanti. And then that lord of earth, remembering the king of
serpents, wore that pure garment and regained his native form. And
beholding her righteous lord in his own form, Bhima's daughter of
faultless limbs embraced him, and began to weep aloud. And king Nala
also embraced Bhima's daughter devoted to him, as before, and also his
children, and experienced great delight. And burying her face in his
bosom, the beauteous Damayanti of large eyes began to sigh heavily,
remembering her griefs. And overwhelmed with sorrow, that tiger among
men stood for some time, clasping the dust-covered Damayanti of sweet
smiles. And, O king, the queen-mother then, with a glad heart, told
Bhima all that had passed between Nala and Damayanti. And the mighty
monarch answered, "Let Nala pass this day in peace, to-morrow I shall
see him after his bath and prayers, with Damayanti by his side." And, O
king, they passed that night pleasantly, in relating to each other the
past incidents of their life in the forest. And with hearts filled with
joy, the princess of Vidarbha and Nala began to pass their days in the
palace of king Bhima, intent upon making each other happy. And it was in
the fourth year (after the loss of his kingdom) that Nala was re-united
with his wife, and all his desires gratified, once more experienced the
highest bliss. And Damayanti rejoiced exceedingly in having recovered
her lord even as fields of tender plants on receiving a shower. And
Bhima's daughter, thus recovering her lord, obtained her wish, and
blazed forth in beauty, her weariness gone, her anxieties dispelled and
herself swelling with joy, ever like a night that is lit by the bright
disc of the moon!'"


SECTION LXXVII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'Having passed that night, king Nala decked in
ornaments and with Damayanti by his side, presented himself in due time
before the king. And Nala saluted his father-in-law with becoming
humility and after him the fair Damayanti paid her respects to her
father. And the exalted Bhima, with great joy, received him as a son,
and honouring him duly along with his devoted wife, comforted them in
proper words. And duly accepting the homage rendered unto him, king Nala
offered his father-in-law his services as became him. And seeing Nala
arrived, the citizens were in great joy. And there arose in the city a
loud uproar of delight. And the citizens decorated the city with flags
and standards and garlands of flowers. And the streets were watered and
decked in floral wreaths and other ornaments. And at their gates
citizens piled flowers, and their temples and shrines were all adorned
with flowers. And Rituparna heard that Vahuka had already been united
with Damayanti. And the king was glad to hear of all this. And calling
unto him king Nala, he asked his forgiveness. And the intelligent Nala
also asked Rituparna's forgiveness, showing diverse reasons. And that
foremost of speakers versed in the truth, king Rituparna, after being
thus honoured by Nala, said, with a countenance expressive of wonder,
these words unto the ruler of the Nishadhas. "By good fortune it is that
regaining the company of thy own wife, thou hast obtained happiness. O
Naishadha, while dwelling in disguise at my house, I hope I did not
wrong thee in any way, O lord of the earth! If knowingly I have done
thee any wrong, it behoveth thee to forgive me." Hearing this, Nala
replied, "Thou hast not, O monarch, done me ever so little an injury.
And if thou hast, it hath not awakened my ire, for surely thou shouldst
be forgiven by me. Thou wert formerly my friend, and, O ruler of men,
thou art also related to me. Henceforth I shall find greater delight in
thee. O king, with all my desires gratified, I lived happily in thy
abode, in fact more happily there than in my own house. This thy
horse-lore is in my keeping. If thou wishest, O king, I will make it
over to thee." Saying this, Naishadha gave unto Rituparna that science
and the latter took it with the ordained rites. And, O monarch, the
royal son of Bhangasura, having obtained the mysteries of equestrian
science and having given unto the ruler of the Naishadhas the mysteries
of dice, went to his own city, employing another person for his
charioteer. And, O king, after Rituparna had gone, king Nala did not
stay long in the city of Kundina!'"


SECTION LXXVIII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'O son of Kunti, the ruler of the Nishadhas having
dwelt there for a month, set out from that city with Bhima's permission
and accompanied by only a few (followers) for the country of the
Nishadhas. With a single car white in hue, sixteen elephants, fifty
horses, and six hundred infantry, that illustrious king, causing the
earth itself to tremble, entered (the country of the Nishadhas) without
loss of a moment and swelling with rage. And the mighty son of Virasena,
approaching his brother Pushkara said unto him, "We will play again, for
I have earned vast wealth. Let Damayanti and all else that I have be my
stake, let, O Pushkara, thy kingdom be thy stake. Let the play begin
again. This is my certain determination. Blessed be thou, let us stake
all we have along with our lives. Having won over and acquired another's
wealth or kingdom, it is a high duty, says the ordinance, to stake it
when the owner demands. Or, if thou dost not relish play with dice, let
the play with weapons begin. O king, let me or thyself have peace by a
single combat. That this ancestral kingdom should, under all
circumstances and by any means, be recovered, there is the authority of
sages for holding. And, O Pushkara, choose thou one of these two
things--gambling with dice or bending the bow in battle!" Thus addressed
by Nishadha, Pushkara, sure of his own success, laughingly answered that
monarch, saying, "O Naishadha, it is by good fortune that thou hast
earned wealth again to stake. It is by good fortune also that
Damayanti's ill-luck hath at last come to an end. And O king, it is by
good fortune that thou art still alive with thy wife, O thou of mighty
arms! It is evident that Damayanti, adorned with this wealth of thine
that I will win, will wait upon me like an Apsara in heaven upon Indra.
O Naishadha, I daily recollect thee and am even waiting for thee, since
I derive no pleasure from gambling with those that are not connected
with me by blood. Winning over to-day the beauteous Damayanti of
faultless features, I shall regard myself fortunate, indeed, since she
it is that hath ever dwelt in my heart." Hearing these words of that
incoherent braggart, Nala in anger desired to cut off his head with a
scimitar. With a smile, however, though his eyes were red in anger, king
Nala said, "Let us play. Why do you speak so now? Having vanquished me,
you can say anything you like." Then the play commenced between Pushkara
and Nala. And blessed be Nala who at a single throw won his wealth and
treasures back along with the life of his brother that also had been
staked. And the king, having won, smilingly said unto Pushkara, "This
whole kingdom without a thorn in its side is now undisturbedly mine.
And, O worst of kings, thou canst not now even look at the princess of
Vidarbha. With all thy family, thou art now, O fool, reduced to the
position of her slave. But my former defeat at thy hands was not due to
any act of thine. Thou knowest it not, O fool, that it was Kali who did
it all. I shall not, therefore, impute to thee the faults of others.
Live happily as thou choosest, I grant thee thy life. I also grant thee
thy portion (in the paternal kingdom) along with all necessaries. And, O
hero, without doubt, my affection towards thee is now the same as
before. My fraternal love also for thee will never know any diminution.
O Pushkara, thou art my brother, live thou for a hundred years!"

"'And Nala of unbaffled prowess, having comforted his brother thus gave
him permission to go to his own town, having embraced him repeatedly.
And Pushkara himself, thus comforted by the ruler of the Nishadhas
saluted that righteous king, and addressed him, O monarch, saying these
words with joined hands, "Let thy fame be immortal and live thou happily
for ten thousand years, thou who grantest me, O king, both life and
refuge." And entertained by the king, Pushkara dwelt there for a month
and then went to his own town accompanied by large force and many
obedient servants and his own kindred, his heart filled with joy. And
that bull among men all the while blazed forth in beauty of person like
a second Sun. And the blessed ruler of the Nishadhas, having established
Pushkara and made him wealthy and freed him from troubles, entered his
richly decorated palace. And the ruler of the Nishadhas, having entered
his palace, comforted the citizens. And all the citizens and the
subjects from the country horripilated in joy. And the people headed by
the officers of state said with joined hands, "O king, we are truly glad
to-day throughout the city and the country. We have obtained to-day our
ruler, like the gods their chief of a hundred sacrifice!"'"


SECTION LXXIX

"Vrihadaswa said, 'After the festivities had commenced in the city that
was full of joy and without anxiety of any kind, the king with a large
force brought Damayanti (from her father's home). And her father, too,
that slayer of hostile heroes, Bhima of terrible prowess and
immeasurable soul, sent his daughter, having honoured her duly. And upon
the arrival of the princess of Vidarbha accompanied by her son and
daughter, king Nala began to pass his days in joy like the chief of the
celestials in the gardens of Nandana. And the king of undying fame,
having regained his kingdom and becoming illustrious among monarchs of
the island of Jamvu, began once more to rule it. And he duly performed
numerous sacrifices with abundant gifts to Brahmanas. O great king, thou
also wilt with thy kindred and relatives, so blaze forth in effulgence
soon. For, O foremost of men, it was thus that subjugator of hostile
cities, king Nala, had fallen into distress along with his wife, in
consequence, O bull of Bharata race, of dice. And, O lord of the earth,
Nala suffered such dire woe all alone and recovered his prosperity,
whereas thou, O son of Pandu, with heart fixed on virtue, art sporting
in joy in this great forest, accompanied by thy brothers and Krishna.
When thou art also, O monarch, mixing daily with blessed Brahmanas
versed in the Vedas and their branches, thou hast little cause for
sorrow. This history, besides, of the Naga Karkotaka, of Damayanti, of
Nala and of that royal sage Rituparna, is destructive of evil. And, O
thou of unfading glory, this history, destructive of the influence of
Kali, is capable, O king, of comforting persons like thee when they
listen to it. And reflecting upon the uncertainty (of success) of human
exertion, it behoveth thee not to joy or grieve at prosperity or
adversity. Having listened to this history, be comforted, O king, and
yield not to grief. It behoveth thee not, O great king, to pine under
calamity. Indeed, men of self-possession, reflecting upon the caprice of
destiny and the fruitlessness of exertion, never suffer themselves to be
depressed. They that will repeatedly recite this noble history of Nala,
and that will hear it recited, will never be touched by adversity. He
that listeneth to this old and excellent history hath all his purposes
crowned with success and, without doubt, obtaineth fame, besides sons
and grandsons and animals, a high position among men, and health, and
joy. And, O king, the fear also that thou entertainest, _viz_., (_Some
one skilled in dice will summon me_), I will for once dispel. O thou of
invincible prowess, I know the science of dice in its entirety. I am
gratified with thee; take this lore, O son of Kunti, I will tell unto
thee.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "King Yudhishthira then, with a glad heart, said
unto Vrihadaswa, 'O illustrious one, I desire to learn the science of
dice from thee.' The Rishi then gave his dice-lore unto the high-souled
son of Pandu, and having given it unto him, that great ascetic went to
the sacred waters of Hayasirsha for a bath.

"And after Vrihadaswa had gone away, Yudhishthira of firm vows heard
from Brahmanas and ascetics that came to him from various directions and
from places of pilgrimage and mountains and forests that Arjuna of high
intelligence and capable of drawing the bow with his left hand, was
still engaged in the austerest of ascetic penances, living upon air
alone. And he heard that the mighty-armed Partha was engaged in such
fierce asceticism that none else before him had ever been engaged in
such penances. And Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, engaged in ascetic
austerities with regulated vows and fixed mind and observing the vow of
perfect silence, was, he heard, like the blazing god of justice himself
in his embodied form. And, O king, (Yudhishthira) the son of Pandu
hearing that his dear brother Jaya, the son of Kunti, was engaged in
such asceticism in the great forest, began to grieve for him. And with a
heart burning in grief, the eldest son of Pandu, seeking consolation in
that mighty forest held converse with the Brahmanas possessed of various
knowledge who were living with him there."


SECTION LXXX

(Tirtha-yatra Parva)

Janamejaya said, "O holy one, after my great-grandfather Partha had gone
away from the woods of Kamyaka, what did the sons of Pandu do in the
absence of that hero capable of drawing the bow with his left hand? It
seemeth to me that mighty bowman and vanquisher of armies was their
refuge, as Vishnu of the celestials. How did my heroic grandsires pass
their time in the forest, deprived of the company of that hero, who
resembled Indra himself in prowess and never turned his back in battle?"

Vaisampayana said, "After Arjuna of unbaffled prowess had gone away from
Kamyaka, the sons of Pandu, O son, were filled with sorrow and grief.
And the Pandavas with cheerless hearts very much resembled pearls
unstrung from a wreath, or birds shorn of their wings. And without that
hero of white steeds that forest looked like the _Chaitraratha_ woods
when deprived of the presence of Kuvera. And, O Janamejaya, those tigers
among men--the sons of Pandu--deprived of the company of Arjuna,
continued to live in Kamyaka in perfect cheerlessness. And, O chief of
the Bharata race, those mighty warriors endowed with great prowess slew
with pure arrows various kinds of sacrificial animals for the Brahmanas.
And those tigers among men and repressers of foes, daily slaying those
wild animals and sanctifying them properly, offered them unto the
Brahmanas. And it was thus, O king, that those bulls among men afflicted
with sorrow lived there with cheerless hearts after Dhananjaya's
departure. The princess of Panchala in particular, remembering her third
lord, addressed the anxious Yudhishthira and said, 'That Arjuna who with
two hands rivals the thousand-armed Arjuna (of old), alas, without that
foremost of the sons of Pandu, this forest doth not seem at all
beautiful in my eyes. Without him, whenever I cast my eyes, this earth
seems to be forlorn. Even this forest with its blossoming trees and so
full of wonders, without Arjuna seems not so delightful as before.
Without him who is like a mass of blue clouds (in hue), who hath the
prowess of an infuriated elephant, and whose eyes are like the leaves of
the lotus, this Kamyaka forest doth not seem beautiful to me.
Remembering that hero capable of drawing the bow with his left hand, and
the twang of whose bow sounds like the roar of thunder, I cannot feel
any happiness, O king!' And, O monarch, hearing her lament in this
strain, that slayer of hostile heroes, Bhimasena, addressed Draupadi in
these words, 'O blessed lady of slender waist, the agreeable words thou
utterest delight my heart like the quaffing of nectar. Without him whose
arms are long and symmetrical, and stout and like unto a couple of iron
maces and round and marked by the scars of the bow-strings and graced
with the bow and sword and other weapons and encircled with golden
bracelets and like unto a couple of five-headed snakes, without that
tiger among men the sky itself seemeth to be without the sun. Without
that mighty-armed one relying upon whom the Panchalas and the Kauravas
fear not the sternly-exerting ranks of the celestials themselves,
without that illustrious hero relying upon whose arms we all regard our
foes as already vanquished and the earth itself as already conquered,
without that Phalguna I cannot obtain any peace in the woods of Kamyaka.
The different directions also, wherever I cast my eyes, appear to be
empty!'

"After Bhima had concluded, Nakula the son of Pandu, with voice choked
with tears, said, 'Without him whose extraordinary deeds on the field of
battle constitute the talk of even the gods, without that foremost of
warriors, what pleasure can we have in the woods? Without him who having
gone towards the north had vanquished mighty Gandharva chiefs by
hundreds, and who having obtained numberless handsome horses of the
Tittiri and Kalmasha species all endowed with the speed of the wind,
presented them from affection unto his brother the king, on the occasion
of the great Rajasuya sacrifice, without that dear and illustrious one,
without that terrible warrior born after Bhima, without that hero equal
unto a god I do not desire to live in the Kamyaka woods any longer.'

"After Nakula's lamentations, Sahadeva said, 'He who having vanquished
mighty warriors in battle won wealth and virgins and brought them unto
the king on the occasion of the great _Rajasuya_ sacrifice, that hero of
immeasurable splendour who having vanquished single-handed the assembled
Yadavas in battle, ravished Subhadra with the consent of Vasudeva, he,
who having invaded the dominion of the illustrious Drupada gave, O
Bharata, unto the preceptor Drona his tuition fee--beholding, O king,
that Jishnu's bed of grass empty in our asylum, my heart refuses
consolation. A migration from this forest is what, O represser of foes,
I would prefer for without that hero this forest cannot be delightful.'"


SECTION LXXXI

Vaisampayana said, "Hearing these words of his brothers as also of
Krishna, all of whom were anxious on account of Dhananjaya, king
Yudhishthira, the just, became melancholy. And at that time he saw
(before him) the celestial Rishi Narada blazing with _Brahmi_ beauty and
like unto a fire flaming up in consequence of sacrificial libation. And
beholding him come, king Yudhishthira with his brothers stood up and
duly worshipped the illustrious one. And endued with blazing energy, the
handsome chief of the Kuru race, surrounded by his brothers, shone like
the god of a hundred sacrifices encircled by the celestials. And
Yajnaseni in obedience to the dictates of morality adhered to her lords,
the sons of Pritha, like Savitri to the Vedas or the rays of the Sun to
the peak of Meru. And the illustrious Rishi Narada, accepting that
worship, comforted the son of Dharma in proper terms. And, O sinless
one, addressing the high-souled king Yudhishthira, the just, the Rishi
said, 'Tell me, O foremost of virtuous men, what it is that thou seekest
and what I can do for thee.' At this, the royal son of Dharma bowing
with his brothers unto Narada, who was the revered of the celestials,
told him with joined hands, 'O thou that art highly blessed and
worshipped by all the worlds when thou art gratified with me, I regard
all my wishes in consequence of thy grace, as already fulfilled, O thou
of excellent vows! If, O sinless one, I with my brothers deserve thy
favour, it behoveth thee, O best of Munis, to dispel the doubt that is
in my mind. It behoveth thee to tell me in detail what merit is his that
goeth round the worlds, desirous of beholding the sacred waters and
shrines that are on it.'

"Narada said, 'Listen, O king, with attention, to what the intelligent
Bhishma had heard before from Pulastya! Once, O blessed one, that
foremost of virtuous men, Bhishma, while in the observance of the
_Pitrya_ vow, lived, O king, in the company of Munis in a delightful and
sacred region, near the source of the Ganga, that is resorted to by the
celestial Rishis and Gandharvas and the celestials themselves. And while
living there, the resplendent one gratified with his oblations the
_Pitris_, the gods and the Rishis, according to the rites inculcated in
the scriptures. And once on a time while the illustrious one was engaged
in his silent recitations, he beheld Pulastya--that best of Rishis, of
wonderful appearance. And beholding that austere ascetic blazing with
beauty, he was filled with great delight and exceeding wonder. And, O
Bharata, that foremost of virtuous men, Bhishma, then worshipped that
blessed Rishi according to the rites of the ordinance. And purifying
himself and with rapt attention, he approached that best of Brahmarshis,
with the _Arghya_ on his head. And uttering aloud his name, he said, "O
thou of excellent vow, blessed be thou, I am Bhishma, thy slave. At
sight of thee, I am freed from all my sins." And saying this, that
foremost of virtuous men, Bhishma, restraining speeches stood, O
Yudhishthira, in silence and with joined hands. And beholding Bhishma
that foremost of the Kurus, reduced and emaciated by the observance of
vows and the study of the Vedas, the Muni became filled with joy.'"


SECTION LXXXII

"'Pulastya said, "O thou of excellent vows, I have been much gratified
with thy humility, thy self-control, and thy truth, thou blessed one
versed in morality! O sinless one, it is for this virtue of thine which
thou hast acquired from regard to thy ancestors, that I have been
gratified with thee and thou hast, O son, obtained a sight of my person.
O Bhishma, my eyes can penetrate into everything. Tell me what I may do
for thee. O sinless one, O thou foremost of the Kuru race, I will grant
thee whatever thou mayst ask me."

"'Bhishma said, "O highly blessed one, when thou who art worshipped by
the three worlds hast been gratified with me and when I have obtained a
sight of thy exalted self, I regard myself as already crowned with
success. But, O thou foremost of virtuous persons, if I have deserved
thy favour, I will tell thee my doubts and it behoveth thee to dispel
them. O holy one, I have some religious doubts in respect of _tirthas_.
Speak of those to me in detail, I desire to hear thee. O thou that
resemblest a celestial himself, what is his merit, O regenerate Rishi,
who goeth round the whole earth (visiting shrines). O tell me this with
certainty."

"'Pulastya said, "O son, listen with attention. I will tell thee of the
merit which attacheth to _tirthas_ and which constituteth the refuge of
the Rishis. He whose hands and feet and mind and knowledge and
asceticism and acts are under wholesome control, enjoyeth the fruits of
_tirthas_. He who has ceased to accept gifts, he that is contented, he
that is free from pride enjoys the fruits of _tirthas_. He that is
without sin, he that acts without purpose, he that eats light, he that
has his senses under control, he that is free from every sin, enjoys the
fruits of _tirthas_. O king, he that is free from anger, he that
adhereth to truth, he that is firm in vows, he that regardeth all
creatures as his own self, enjoyeth the fruits of _tirthas_. In the
Vedas the Rishis have declared in due order the sacrifices and also
their fruits here and hereafter truly. O lord of earth, those sacrifices
cannot be accomplished by him that is poor, for those sacrifices require
various materials and diverse things in large measures. These, therefore
can be performed by kings or sometimes by other men of prosperity and
wealth. O lord of men, that rite, however, which men without wealth,
without allies, singly, without wife and children, and destitute of
means, are capable of accomplishing and the merit of which is equal unto
the sacred fruits of sacrifices, I will now declare unto thee, thou best
of warriors! O thou best of the Bharata race, sojourns in _tirthas_
which are meritorious and which constitute one of the high mysteries of
the Rishis, are even superior to sacrifices. He is a poor man who having
gone to a _tirtha_ hath not fasted for three nights, who hath not given
away gold, and who hath not distributed kine. Indeed, one acquireth not,
by the performance of the _Agnishtoma_ and other sacrifices
distinguished by large gifts, that merit which one requireth by a
sojourn to a _tirtha_. In the world of men, there is that _tirtha_ of
the God of gods, celebrated over the three worlds by the name of
_Pushkara_. One that sojourneth there becometh equal unto that deity. O
high-souled son of the Kuru race, during the two twilights and mid-day
there is the presence of hundred thousand millions of _tirthas_ in
_Pushkara_. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Maruts,
the Gandharvas, and the Apsaras are ever present, O exalted one, in
_Pushkara_. It was there, O king, that the gods, the Daityas and
_Brahmarshis_, having performed ascetic devotions there, obtained great
merit and finally attained to god-hood.

"'"Men of self-control, by even thinking mentally of Pushkara, are
cleansed from their sins, and regarded in heaven. O king, the
illustrious grand-sire having the lotus for his seat, had dwelt with
great pleasure in this _tirtha_. O blessed one, it was in Pushkara that
the gods with the Rishis having acquired of old great merit, finally
obtained the highest success. The person who, devoted to the worship of
the gods and the _Pitris_, batheth in this _tirtha_, obtaineth, it hath
been said by the wise, merit that is equal to ten times that of the
horse-sacrifice. Having gone to the Pushkara woods, he that feedeth even
one Brahmana, becometh happy here and hereafter, O Bhishma, for that
act. He that supporteth himself on vegetables and roots and fruits, may
with pious regard and without disrespect, give even such fare to a
Brahmana. And, O best of kings, the man of wisdom, even by such a gift,
will acquire the merit of a horse-sacrifice. Those illustrious persons
among Brahmanas or Kshatriyas or Vaisyas or Sudras that bathe in
Pushkara are freed from the obligation of rebirth. That man in special
who visits Pushkara on the full moon of the month of _Karttika_,
acquireth ever-lasting regions in the abode of Brahma. He that thinketh
with joined hands morning and evening, of the Pushkara, practically
batheth, O Bharata, in every _tirtha_. Whether a male or a female,
whatever sins one may commit since birth, are all destroyed as soon as
one batheth in Pushkara. As the slayer of Madhu is the foremost of all
the celestials, so is Pushkara, O king, the foremost of all _tirthas_. A
man by residing with purity and regulated vows for twelve years in
Pushkara, acquireth the merit of all the sacrifices, and goeth to the
abode of Brahma. The merit of one who performeth the _Agnihotra_ for
full one hundred years, is equal to that of him who resideth for the
single month of _Karttika_ in Pushkara. There are three white hillocks
and three springs known from the remotest times, we do not know why, by
the name of the Pushkara. It is difficult to go to Pushkara; it is
difficult to undergo ascetic austerities at Pushkara; it is difficult to
give away at Pushkara; and it is difficult to live at Pushkara.

"'"Having dwelt for twelve nights at Pushkara with regulated diet and
vows, and having walked round (the place), one must go to _Jamvu-marga_.
One that goeth to _Jamvu-marga_ which is resorted to by the celestials,
the Rishis, and the _Pitris_, acquireth the merit of the horse-sacrifice
and the fruition of all his wishes. The man that resideth there for five
nights, hath his soul cleansed from all sins. He never sinketh into
hell, but acquireth high success. Leaving Jamvu-marga one must go to
_Tandulikasrama_. He that goeth there never sinketh into hell but
ascendeth to the abode of Brahma. He that goeth to the lake of Agastya
