then hear me how thou canst gratify thy desire of serving me. Do thou, O
mighty being, take the leadership of the celestial forces accordingly."

"'Skanda replied, "Do thou anoint me as leader, for the destruction of
the Danavas, for the good of the celestials, and for the well-being of
cows and Brahmanas."'

"Markandeya continued, 'Thus anointed by Indra and all other gods, and
honoured by the _Maharshis_, he looked grand at the moment. The golden
umbrella[37] held (over his head) looked like a halo of blazing fire.
That famous god, the Conqueror of Tripura, himself fastened the
celestial wreath of gold, of Viswakarma's manufacture, round his neck.
And, O great man and conqueror of thine enemies, that worshipful god
with the emblem of the bull, had gone there previously with Parvati. He
honoured him with a joyous heart. The Fire-god is called Rudra by
Brahmanas, and from this fact Skanda is called the son of Rudra. The
White Mountain was formed from discharges of Rudra's _semen virile_ and
the sensual indulgences of the Fire-god with the Krittikas took place on
that same White Mountain. And as Rudra was seen by all the dwellers of
heaven to heap honours on the excellent Guha (Skanda), he was for that
reason reputed as the son of Rudra. This child had his being by the
action of Rudra entering into the constitution of the Fire-god, and for
this reason, Skanda came to be known as the son of Rudra. And, O
Bharata, as Rudra, the Fire-god, Swaha, and the six wives (of the seven
Rishis) were instrumental to the birth of the great god Skanda, he was
for that reason reputed as the son of Rudra.'

    [37] One of the ensigns of royalty in Hindustan.

"'That son of Fire-god was clad in a pair of clean red cloths, and thus
he looked grand and resplendent like the Sun peeping forth from behind a
mass of red clouds. And the red cock given to him by the Fire-god,
formed his ensign; and when perched on the top of his chariot, it looked
like the image of the all-destroying fire. And the presiding deity of
the power which conduces to the victory of the god, and which is the
director of the exertions of all creatures, and constitutes their glory,
prop and refuge, advanced before him. And a mysterious charm entered
into his constitution, the charm which manifests its powers on the
battlefield. Beauty, strength, piety, power, might, truthfulness,
rectitude, devotion to Brahmanas, freedom from illusion or perplexity,
protection of followers, destruction of foes, and care of all
creatures,--these, O lord of men, are the inborn virtues of Skanda. Thus
anointed by all the gods, he looked pleased and complacent; and dressed
in his best style, he looked beautiful like the moon at its full. The
much-esteemed incantation of _Vedic_ hymns, the music of the celestial
band, and the songs of gods and _Gandharvas_ then rang on all sides. And
surrounded by all the well-dressed _Apsaras_, and many other gay and
happy-looking _Pisachas_ and hosts of gods, that anointed (by gods) son
of Pavaka disported himself in all his grandeur. To the dwellers of
heaven, the anointed Mahasena appeared like the Sun rising after
extinction of darkness. And then the celestial forces looking upon him
as their leader, surrounded him on all sides in thousands. That adorable
being followed by all creatures then assumed their commands, and praised
and honoured by them, he encouraged them in return.

"'The Performer of a thousand sacrifices then thought of Devasena, whom
he has rescued before. And considering that this being (Skanda) was
undoubtedly destined to be the husband of this lady by Brahma himself,
he had her brought there, dressed her with the best apparel. And the
vanquisher of Vala then said to Skanda, "O foremost of gods, this lady
was, even before thy birth, destined to be thy bride by that
Self-existent Being.[38] Therefore do thou duly accept her lotus-like
beautiful right hand with invocation of the (marital) hymns." Thus told,
he duly married her. And Vrihaspati learned in hymns performed the
necessary prayers and oblations. She who is called Shashthi, Lakshmi,
Asa, Sukhaprada, Sinivali, Kuhu, Saivritti, and Aparajita, is known
among men as Devasena, the wife of Skanda. When Skanda became united to
Devasena in indissoluble bonds of matrimony, then the gods of prosperity
in her own personal embodiment began to serve him with diligence. As
Skanda attained celebrity on the fifth lunar day, that day is called
_Sripanchami_ (or the auspicious fifth day) and as he attained his
object on the sixth, that lunar day is considered to be of great
moment.'"

    [38] Brahma.


SECTION CCXXIX

"Markandeya continued, 'Those six ladies, the wives of the seven
_Rishis_ when they learned that good fortune had smiled on Mahasena and
that he had been made leader of the celestial forces,[39] repaired to
his camp. Those virtuous ladies of high religious merit had been
disowned by the _Rishis_. They lost no time in visiting that leader of
the celestial forces and then addressed him thus, "We, O son, have been
cast out by our god-like husbands, without any cause. Some people spread
the rumour that we gave birth to thee. Believing in the truth of this
story, they became greatly indignant, and banished us from our sacred
places. It behooves thee now to save us from this infamy. We desire to
adopt thee as our son, so that, O mighty being, eternal bliss may be
secured to us by that favour. Do thou thus repay the obligation thou
owest to us."

    [39] Devasenapati is the original. It may mean either the _pati_
    (leader) of the _sena_ (forces) of _devas_ or the _pati_
    (husband) of Devasena.

"'Skanda replied, "O ladies of faultless character, do you accordingly
become my mothers. I am your son and ye shall attain all the objects of
your desire."

"Markandeya continued, 'Then Sakra having expressed a wish to say
something to Skanda, the latter enquired, "What is it?" Being told by
Skanda to speak it out, Vasava said, "The lady Abhijit, the younger
sister of Rohini, being jealous of her seniority, has repaired to the
woods to perform austerities. And I am at a loss to find out a
substitute for the fallen star. May good luck attend on thee, do thou
consult with _Brahma_ (for the purpose of filling up the room) of this
great asterism." Dhanishtha and other asterisms were created by
_Brahma_, and Rohini used to serve the purpose of one such; and
consequently their number was full. And in accordance with Sakra's
advice, Krittika was assigned a place in the heavens, and that star
presided over by _Agni_ shines as if with seven heads. Vinata also said
to Skanda, "Thou art as a son to me, and entitled to offer me the
funeral cakes (at my funeral obsequies). I desire, my son, to live with
thee always."

"'Skanda replied, "Be it so, all honour to thee! Do thou guide me with a
mother's affection, and honoured by thy daughter-in-law, thou shalt
always live with me."'

"Markandeya continued, 'Then the great mothers spoke as follows to
Skanda, "We have been described by the learned as the mothers of all
creatures. But we desire to be thy mothers, do thou honour us."

"'Skanda replied, "Ye are all as mothers to me, and I am your son. Tell
me what I can do to please you."

"'The mothers replied, "The ladies (Brahmi, Maheswari, &c.) were
appointed as mothers of the world in bygone ages. We desire, O great
god, that they be dispossessed of that dignity, and ourselves installed
in their place, and that we, instead of them, be worshipped by the
world. Do thou now restore to us those of our progeny, of whom we have
been deprived, by them on thy account."

"'Skanda replied, "Ye shall not recover those that have been once given
away, but I can give you other offspring if ye like."

"'The mothers replied, "We desire that living with thee and assuming
different shapes we be able to eat up the progeny of those mothers and
their guardians. Do thou grant us this favour."

"'Skanda said, "I can grant you progeny, but this topic on which ye have
just now dilated is a very painful one. May ye be prosperous! All honour
to you, ladies, do ye vouchsafe to them your protecting care."

"'The mothers replied, "We shall protect them, O Skanda, as thou
desirest. Mayst thou be prosperous! But, O mighty being, we desire to
live with thee always."

"'Skanda replied, "So long as children of the human kind do not attain
the youthful state in the sixteenth year of their age, ye shall afflict
them with your various forms, and I too shall confer on you a fierce
inexhaustible spirit. And with that ye shall live happily, worshipped by
all."'

"Markandeya continued, 'And then a fiery powerful being came out of the
body of Skanda for the purpose of devouring the progeny of mortal
beings. He fell down upon the ground, senseless and hungry. And bidden
by Skanda, that genius of evil assumed a terrific form. Skandapasmara is
the name by which it is known among good Brahmanas. Vinata is called the
terrific Sakuni _graha_ (spirit of evil). She who is known as _Putana
Rakshasi_ by the learned is the _graha_ called Putana; that fierce and
terrible looking _Rakshasa_ of a hideous appearance is also called the
_pisacha_, Sita Putana. That fierce-looking spirit is the cause of
abortion in women. Aditi is also known by the name of Revati; her evil
spirit is called Raivata, and that terrible _graha_ also afflicts
children. Diti, the mother of the Daityas (_Asuras_), is also called
Muhkamandika, and that terrible creature is very fond of the flesh of
little children. Those male and female children, O Kaurava, who are said
to have been begotten by Skanda, are spirit of evil and they destroy the
foetus in the womb. They (the _Kumaras_) are known as the husbands of
those very ladies, and children are seized unawares by these cruel
spirits. And, O king, _Surabhi_ who is called the mother of bovine kind
by the wise is best ridden by the evil spirit Sakuni, who in company
with her, devours children on this earth. And Sarama, the mother of
dogs, also habitually kills human beings while still in the womb. She
who is the mother of all trees has her abode in a _karanja_ tree. She
grants boons and has a placid countenance and is always favourably
disposed towards all creatures. Those persons who desire to have
children, bow down to her, who is seated in a _karanja_ tree. These
eighteen evil spirits fond of meat and wine, and others of the same
kind, invariably take up their abode in the lying-in-room for ten days.
Kadru introduces herself in a subtle form into the body of a pregnant
woman and there she causes the destruction of the foetus, and the mother
is made to give birth to a _Naga_ (serpent). And that mother of the
Gandharvas takes away the foetus, and for this reason, conception in
woman turns out to be abortive. The mother of the _Apsaras_ removes the
foetus from the womb, and for this reason such conceptions are said to
be stationary by the learned. The daughter of the Divinity of the Red
Sea is said to have nursed Skanda,--she is worshipped under the name of
Lohitayani on Kadamva trees. Arya acts the same part among female
beings, as Rudra does among male ones. She is the mother of all children
and is distinctly worshipped for their welfare. These that I have
described are the evil spirits presiding over the destinies of young
children, and until children attain their sixteenth year, these spirits
exercise their influence for evil, and after that, for good. The whole
body of male and female spirits that I have now described are always
denominated by men as the spirits of Skanda. They are propitiated with
burnt offerings, ablutions, unguents, sacrifices and other offerings,
and particularly by the worship of Skanda. And, O king, when they are
honoured and worshipped with due reverence, they bestow on men whatever
is good for them, as also valour and long life. And now having bowed
down to Maheswara, I shall describe the nature of those spirits who
influence the destinies of men after they have attained their sixteenth
year.

"'The man who beholds gods while sleeping, or in a wakeful state soon
turns mad, and the spirit under whose influence these hallucinations
take place is called the celestial spirit. When a person beholds his
dead ancestors while he is seated at ease, or lying in his bed, he soon
loses his reason, and the spirit which causes this illusion of sensible
perception, is called the ancestral spirit. The man who shows disrespect
to the _Siddhas_ and who is cursed by them in return, soon runs mad and
the evil influence by which this is brought about, is called the
_Siddha_ spirit. And the spirit by whose influence a man smells sweet
odour, and becomes cognisant of various tastes (when there are no
odoriferous or tasteful substances about him) and soon becomes
tormented, is called the _Rakshasa_ spirit. And the spirit by whose
action celestial musicians (_Gandharvas_) blend their existence into the
constitution of a human being, and make him run mad in no time, is
called the _Gandharva_ spirit. And that evil spirit by whose influence
men are always tormented by _Pisachas_, is called the _Pisacha_ spirit.
When the spirit of _Yakshas_ enters into the system of a human being by
some accident, he loses his reason immediately, and such a spirit is
called the _Yaksha_ spirit. The man who loses his reason on account of
his mind being demoralised with vices, runs mad in no time, and his
illness must be remedied according to methods prescribed in the
_Sastras_. Men also run mad from perplexity, from fear, as also on
beholding hideous sights. The remedy lies in quieting their minds. There
are three classes of spirits, some are frolicsome, some are gluttonous,
and some sensual. Until men attain the age of three score and ten, these
evil influences continue to torment them, and then fever becomes the
only evil spirit that afflicts sentient beings. These evil spirits
always avoid those who have subdued their senses, who are
self-restrained, of cleanly habits, god-fearing and free from laziness
and contamination. I have thus described to thee, O king, the evil
spirits that mould the destinies of men. Thou who art devoted to
Maheswara art never troubled by them.'"


SECTION CCXXX

"Markandeya continued, 'When Skanda had bestowed these powers, Swaha
appeared to him and said, "Thou art my natural son,--I desire that thou
shalt grant exquisite happiness to me."

"'Skanda replied, "What sort of happiness dost thou wish to enjoy?"

"'Swaha replied, "O mighty being, I am the favourite daughter of Daksha,
by name Swaha; and from my youthful days I have been in love with
Hutasana (the Fire-god); but that god, my son, does not understand my
feelings. I desire to live for ever with him (as his wife)."

"'Skanda replied, "From this day, lady, all the oblations that men of
virtuous character, who swerve not from the path of virtue, will offer
to their gods or ancestors with incantation of purifying hymns by
Brahmanas, shall always be offered (through Agni) coupled with the name
of Swaha, and thus, excellent lady, wilt thou always live associated
with Agni, the god of fire."'

"Markandeya continued, 'Thus addressed and honoured by Skanda, Swaha was
greatly pleased; and associated with her husband Pavaka (the Fire-god),
she honoured him in return.

"'Then _Brahma_, the lord of all creatures, said to Mahasena, "Do thou
go and visit thy father Mahadeva, the conqueror of Tripura. Rudra
coalescing with Agni (the Fire-god) and Uma with Swaha have combined to
make thee invincible for the well-being of all creatures. And the semen
of the high-souled Rudra cast into the reproductive organ of Uma was
thrown back upon this hill, and hence the twin Mujika and Minjika came
into being. A portion of it fell into the Blood Sea, another portion,
into the rays of the sun, another upon the earth and thus was it
distributed in five portions. Learned men ought to remember that these
thy various and fierce-looking followers living on the flesh of animals
were produced from the _semen_." "Be it so," so saying, the high-souled
Mahasena with fatherly love, honoured his father Maheswara.'

"Markandeya continued, 'Men who are desirous of acquiring wealth, should
worship those five classes of spirits with the sun flower, and for
alleviation of diseases also worship must be rendered to them. The twin
Mujika and Minjika begotten by Rudra must always be respected by persons
desiring the welfare of little children; and persons who desire to have
children born to them must always worship those female spirits who live
on human flesh and are produced in trees. Thus all _Pisachas_ are said
to be divided into innumerable classes. And now, O king, listen to the
origin of the bells and standards of Skanda. Airavata (Indra's elephant)
is known to have had two bells of the name of Vaijayanti, and the
keen-witted Sakra had them brought to him, and personally gave them to
Guha. Visakha took one of those bells and Skanda the other. The
standards of both Kartikeya and Visakha were of a red colour. That
mighty god Mahasena was pleased with the toys that had been given to him
by the gods. Surrounded by hosts of gods and _Pisachas_ and seated on
the Golden Mountain, he looked splendid in all the grandeur of
prosperity. And that mountain covered with fine forests, also looked
grand in his companionship, just as the Mandara hill abounding with
excellent caves shines with the rays of the sun. The White Mountain was
adorned with whole tracts of wood-land covered with blossoming Santanaka
flowers and with forests of Karavira, Parijata, Jaba and Asoke
trees,--as also with wild tracts overgrown with Kadamva trees; and it
abounded with herds of celestial deer and flocks of celestial birds. And
the rumbling of clouds serving the purpose of musical instruments
sounded like the murmur of an agitated sea, and celestial Gandharvas and
Apsaras began to dance. And there arose a great sound of joy from the
merriment of all creatures. Thus the whole world with Indra himself
seemed to have been transferred to the White Mountain. And all the
people began to observe Skanda with satisfaction in their looks, and
they did not at all feel tired of doing so.'

"Markandeya continued, 'When that adorable son of the Fire-god was
anointed as leader of the celestial army, that grand and happy lord,
Hara (Mahadeva) riding with Parvati in a chariot shining with sunlike
refulgence repaired to a place called Bhadravata. His excellent chariot
was drawn by a thousand lions and managed by _Kala_. They passed through
blank space, and seemed as if they were about to devour the sky; and
striking terror into the heart of all creatures in the mobile divisions
of the worlds, those maned beasts flitted through the air, uttering
fearful growls. And that lord of all animals (Mahadeva) seated in that
chariot with Uma, looked like the sun with flames of lightning
illuminating masses of clouds begirt with Indra's bow (rainbow). He was
preceded by that adorable Lord of riches riding on the backs of human
beings with his attendant Guhyakas riding in his beautiful car Pushpaka.
And Sakra too riding on his elephant Airavata and accompanied by other
gods brought up the rear of Mahadeva, the granter of boons, marching in
this way at the head of the celestial army. And the great _Yaksha
Amogha_ with his attendants--the _Jambhaka Yakshas_ and other
_Rakshasas_ decorated with garlands of flowers--obtained a place in the
right wing of his army; and many gods of wonderful fighting powers in
company with the _Vasus_ and the _Rudras_, also marched with the right
division of his army. And the terrible-looking Yama too in company with
Death marched with him (followed by hundreds of terrible diseases); and
behind him was carried the terrible, sharp-pointed, well-decorated
trident of Siva, called Vijaya. And Varuna, the adorable lord of waters
with his terrible _Pasa_,[40] and surrounded by numerous aquatic
animals, marched slowly with the trident. And the trident Vijaya was
followed by the _Pattisa_[41] of Rudra guarded by maces, balls, clubs
and other excellent weapons. And the _Pattisa_, O king, was followed by
the bright umbrella of Rudra and the Kamandalu served by the
_Maharshis_; and on it progressed in the company of Bhrigu, Angiras and
others. And behind all these rode Rudra in his white chariot,
re-assuring the gods with the exhibition of his powers. And rivers and
lakes and seas, _Apsaras, Rishis_, Celestials, _Gandharvas_ and
serpents, stars, planets, and the children of gods, as also many women,
followed him in his train. These handsome-looking ladies proceeded
scattering flowers all around; and the clouds marched, having made their
obeisance to that god (Mahadeva) armed with the _Pinaka_ bow. And some
of them held a white umbrella over his head, and Agni (the Fire god) and
Vayu (the god of winds) busied themselves with two hairy fans (emblems
of royalty). And, O king, he was followed by the glorious Indra
accompanied by the _Rajarshis_, and singing the praise of that god with
the emblem of the bull. And Gauri, Vidya, Gandhari, Kesini, and the lady
called Mitra in company with Savitri, all proceeded in the train of
Parvati, as also all the Vidyas (presiding deities of all branches of
knowledge) that were created by the learned. The _Rakshasa_ spirit who
delivers to different battalions the commands which are implicitly
obeyed by Indra and other gods, advanced in front of the army as
standard-bearer. And that foremost of _Rakshasas_, by name Pingala, the
friend of Rudra, who is always busy in places where corpses are burnt,
and who is agreeable to all people, marched with them merrily, at one
time going ahead of the army, and falling behind again at another, his
movements being uncertain. Virtuous actions are the offerings with which
the god Rudra is worshipped by mortals. He who is also called Siva, the
omnipotent god, armed with the Pinaka bow, is Maheswara. He is
worshipped in various forms.

    [40] A kind of missile.

    [41] Another kind of weapon.

"'The son of Krittika, the leader of the celestial army, respectful to
Brahmanas, surrounded by the celestial forces, also followed that lord
of the gods. And then Mahadeva said these weighty words to Mahasena, "Do
thou carefully command the seventh army corps of the celestial forces."

"'Skanda replied, "Very well, my lord! I shall command the seventh army
corps. Now tell me quickly if there is anything else to be done."

"'Rudra said, "Thou shall always find me in the field of action. By
looking up to me and by devotion to me shalt thou attain great
welfare."'

"Markandeya continued, 'With these words Maheswara received him in his
embrace, and then dismissed him. And, O great king, after the dismissal
of Skanda, prodigies of various kinds occurred to disturb the equanimity
of the gods.

"'The firmament with the stars was in a blaze, and the whole universe in
a state of utter confusion. The earth quaked and gave forth a rumbling
sound, and darkness overspread the whole world. Then observing this
terrible catastrophy, Sankara with the estimable Uma, and the
celestials with the great _Maharshis_, were much exercised in mind. And
when they had fallen into this state of confusion, there appeared before
them a fierce and mighty host armed with various weapons, and looking
like a mass of clouds and rocks. Those terrible and countless beings,
speaking different languages directed their movements towards the point
where Sankara and the celestials stood. They hurled into the ranks of
the celestial army flights of arrows in all directions, masses of rock,
maces, _sataghnis, prasas_ and _parighas_. The celestial army was thrown
into a state of confusion by a shower of these terrible weapons and
their ranks were seen to waver. The _Danavas_ made a great havoc by
cutting up their soldiers, horses, elephants, chariots and arms. And the
celestial troops then seemed as if they were about to turn their backs
upon the enemy. And numbers of them fell, slain by the _Asuras_, like
large trees in a forest burnt in a conflagration. Those dwellers of
heaven fell with their heads separated from their bodies, and having
none to lead them in that fearful battle, they were slaughtered by the
enemy. And then the god Purandara (Indra), the slayer of Vala, observing
that they were unsteady and hard-pressed by the _Asuras_, tried to rally
them with this speech, "Do not be afraid, ye heroes, may success attend
your efforts! Do ye all take up your arms, and resolve upon manly
conduct, and ye will meet with no more misfortune, and defeat those
wicked and terrible-looking _Danavas_. May ye be successful! Do ye fall
upon the _Danavas_ with me."

"'The dwellers of heaven were re-assured on hearing this speech from
Sakra; and under his leadership, they again rushed against the
_Danavas_. And then the thirty-three crores of gods and all the powerful
_Marutas_ and the _Sadhyas_ with the _Vasus_ returned to the charge. And
the arrows which they angrily discharged against the enemy drew a large
quantity of blood from the bodies of the _Daityas_ and of their horses
and elephants. And those sharp arrows passing through their bodies fell
upon the ground, looking like so many snakes falling from the sides of a
hill. And, O king, the _Daityas_ pierced by those arrows fell fast on
all sides, looking like so many detached masses of clouds. Then the
_Danava_ host, struck with panic at that charge of the celestials on the
field of battle, wavered at that shower of various weapons. Then all the
gods loudly gave vent to their joy, with arms ready to strike; and the
celestial bands too struck up various airs. Thus took place that
encounter, so fearful to both sides: for all the battle-field was
covered with blood and strewn with the bodies of both gods and _Asuras_.
But the gods were soon worsted all on a sudden, and the terrible
_Danavas_ again made a great havoc of the celestial army. Then the
_Asuras_ drums struck up and their shrill bugles were sounded; and the
_Danava_ chiefs yelled their terrific war-cry.

"'Then a powerful _Danava_, taking a huge mass of rock in his hands,
came out of that terrible _Daitya_ army. He looked like the sun peering
forth from against a mass of dark clouds. And, O king, the celestials,
beholding that he was about to hurl that mass of rock at them, fled in
confusion. But they were pursued by Mahisha, who hurled that hillock at
them. And, O lord of the world, by the falling of that mass of rock, ten
thousand warriors of the celestial army were crushed to the ground and
breathed their last. And this act of Mahisha struck terror into the
hearts of the gods, and with his attendant _Danavas_ he fell upon them
like a lion attacking a herd of deer. And when Indra and the other
celestials observed that Mahisha was advancing to the charge, they fled,
leaving behind their arms and colours. And Mahisha was greatly enraged
at this, and he quickly advanced towards the chariot of Rudra; and
reaching near, he seized its pole with his hands. And when Mahisha in a
fit of rage had thus seized the chariot of Rudra, all the Earth began to
groan and the great _Rishis_ lost their senses. And _Daityas_ of huge
proportions, looking like dark clouds, were boisterous with joy,
thinking that victory was assured to them. And although that adorable
god (Rudra) was in that plight, yet he did not think it worth while to
kill Mahisha in battle; he remembered that Skanda would deal the
deathblow to that evil-minded _Asura_. And the fiery Mahisha,
contemplating with satisfaction the prize (the chariot of Rudra) which
he had secured, sounded his war-cry, to the great alarm of the gods and
the joy of the _Daityas_. And when the gods were in that fearful
predicament, the mighty Mahasena, burning with anger, and looking grand
like the Sun advanced to their rescue. And that lordly being was clad in
blazing red and decked with a wreath of red flowers. And cased in armour
of gold he rode in a gold-coloured chariot bright as the Sun and drawn
by chestnut horses. And at his sight the army of the daityas was
suddenly dispirited on the field of battle. And, O great king, the
mighty Mahasena discharged a bright _Sakti_ for the destruction of
Mahisha. That missile cut off the head of Mahisha, and he fell upon the
ground and died. And his head massive as a hillock, falling on the
ground, barred the entrance to the country of the Northern Kurus,
extending in length for sixteen _Yojanas_ though at present the people
of that country pass easily by that gate.

"'It was observed both by the gods and the _Danavas_ that Skanda hurled
his _sakti_ again and again on the field of battle, and that it returned
to his hands, after killing thousands of the enemy's forces. And the
terrible _Danavas_ fell in large numbers by the arrows of the wise
Mahasena. And then a panic seized them, and the followers of Skanda
began to slay and eat them up by thousands and drink their blood. And
they joyously exterminated the _Danavas_ in no time, just as the sun
destroys darkness, or as fire destroys a forest, or as the winds drive
away the clouds. And in this manner the famous Skanda defeated all his
enemies. And the gods came to congratulate him, and he, in turn, paid
his respects to Maheswara. And that son of Krittika looked grand like
the sun in all the glory of his effulgence. And when the enemy was
completely defeated by Skanda and when Maheswara left the battle-field,
Purandara embraced Mahasena and said to him, "This Mahisha, who was made
invincible by the favour of Brahma hath been killed by thee. O best of
warriors, the gods were like grass to him. O strong-limbed hero, thou
hast removed a thorn of the celestials. Thou hast killed in battle
hundreds of Danavas equal in valour to Mahisha who were all hostile to
us, and who used to harass us before. And thy followers too have
devoured them by hundreds. Thou art, O mighty being, invincible in
battle like Uma's lord; and this victory shall be celebrated as thy
first achievement, and thy fame shall be undying in the three worlds.
And, O strong-armed god, all the gods will yield their allegiance to
thee." Having spoken thus to Mahasena, the husband of Sachi left the
place accompanied by the gods and with the permission of the adorable
three-eyed god (Siva). And Rudra returned to Bhadravata, and the
celestials too returned to their respective abodes. And Rudra spoke,
addressing the gods, "Ye must render allegiance to Skanda just as ye do
unto me." And that son of the Fire-god, having killed the Danavas hath
conquered the three worlds, in one day, and he hath been worshipped by
the great _Rishis_. The Brahmana who with due attention readeth this
story of the birth of Skanda, attaineth to great prosperity in this
world and the companionship of Skanda hereafter.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O good and adorable Brahmana, I wish to know the
different names of that high-souled being, by which he is celebrated
throughout the three worlds.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by the Pandava in that assembly
of _Rishis_, the worshipful Markandeya of high ascetic merit replied,
'Agneya (Son of Agni), Skanda (Cast-off), Diptakirti (Of blazing fame),
Anamaya (Always hale), Mayuraketu (Peacock-bannered), Dharmatman (The
virtuous-souled), Bhutesa (The lord of all creatures), Mahishardana (The
slayer of Mahisha), Kamajit (The subjugator of desires), Kamada (The
fulfiller of desires), Kanta (The handsome), Satyavak (The truthful in
speech), Bhuvaneswara (The lord of the universe), Sisu (The child),
Sighra (The quick), Suchi (The pure), Chanda (The fiery), Diptavarna
(The bright-complexioned), Subhanana (Of beautiful face), Amogha
(Incapable of being baffled), Anagha (The sinless), Rudra (The
terrible), Priya (The favourite), Chandranana (Of face like the moon),
Dipta-sasti (The wielder of the blazing lance), Prasantatman (Of
tranquil soul), Bhadrakrit (The doer of good), Kutamahana (The chamber
of even the wicked), Shashthipriya (True favourite of Shashthi), Pavitra
(The holy), Matrivatsala (The reverencer of his mother), Kanya-bhartri
(The protector of virgins), Vibhakta (Diffused over the universe),
Swaheya (The son of Swaha), Revatisuta (The child of Revati), Prabhu
(The Lord), Neta (The leader), Visakha (Reared up by Visakha), Naigameya
(Sprang from the Veda), Suduschara (Difficult of propitiation), Suvrata
(Of excellent vows), Lalita (The beautiful), Valakridanaka-priya (Fond
of toys), Khacharin (The ranger of skies), Brahmacharin (The chaste),
Sura (The brave), Saravanodbhava (Born in a forest of heath), Viswamitra
priya (The favourite of Viswamitra), Devasena-priya (The lover of
Devasena), Vasudeva-priya (The beloved of Vasudeva), and Priya-krit (The
doer of agreeable things)--these are the divine names of Kartikeya.
Whoever repeateth them, undoubtedly secureth fame, wealth, and
salvation.'

"Markandeya continued, 'O valiant scion of Kuru's race, I shall now with
due devotion pray to that unrivalled, mighty, six-faced, and valiant
Guha who is worshipped by gods and _Rishis_, enumerating his other
