the king's successor.

2 Mac 14:27
Then the king being in a rage, and provoked with the
accusations of the most wicked man, wrote to Nicanor, signifying
that he was much displeased with the covenants, and commanding
him that he should send Maccabeus prisoner in all haste unto
Antioch.

2 Mac 14:28
When this came to Nicanor's hearing, he was much confounded
in himself, and took it grievously that he should make void the
articles which were agreed upon, the man being in no fault.

2 Mac 14:29
But because there was no dealing against the king, he watched
his time to accomplish this thing by policy.

2 Mac 14:30
Notwithstanding, when Maccabeus saw that Nicanor began to be
churlish unto him, and that he entreated him more roughly than
he was wont, perceiving that such sour behaviour came not of
good, he gathered together not a few of his men, and withdrew
himself from Nicanor.

2 Mac 14:31
But the other, knowing that he was notably prevented by
Judas' policy, came into the great and holy temple, and
commanded the priests, that were offering their usual
sacrifices, to deliver him the man.

2 Mac 14:32
And when they sware that they could not tell where the man
was whom he sought,

2 Mac 14:33
He stretched out his right hand toward the temple, and made
an oath in this manner: If ye will not deliver me Judas as a
prisoner, I will lay this temple of God even with the ground,
and I will break down the altar, and erect a notable temple unto
Bacchus.

2 Mac 14:34
After these words he departed. Then the priests lifted up
their hands toward heaven, and besought him that was ever a
defender of their nation, saying in this manner;

2 Mac 14:35
Thou, O Lord of all things, who hast need of nothing, wast
pleased that the temple of thine habitation should be among us:

2 Mac 14:36
Therefore now, O holy Lord of all holiness, keep this house
ever undefiled, which lately was cleansed, and stop every
unrighteous mouth.

2 Mac 14:37
Now was there accused unto Nicanor one Razis, one of the
elders of Jerusalem, a lover of his countrymen, and a man of
very good report, who for his kindness was called a father of
the Jews.

2 Mac 14:38
For in the former times, when they mingled not themselves
with the Gentiles, he had been accused of Judaism, and did
boldly jeopard his body and life with all vehemency for the
religion of the Jews.

2 Mac 14:39
So Nicanor, willing to declare the hate that he bare unto the
Jews, sent above five hundred men of war to take him:

2 Mac 14:40
For he thought by taking him to do the Jews much hurt.

2 Mac 14:41
Now when the multitude would have taken the tower, and
violently broken into the outer door, and bade that fire should
be brought to burn it, he being ready to be taken on every side
fell upon his sword;

2 Mac 14:42
Choosing rather to die manfully, than to come into the hands
of the wicked, to be abused otherwise than beseemed his noble
birth:

2 Mac 14:43
But missing his stroke through haste, the multitude also
rushing within the doors, he ran boldly up to the wall, and cast
himself down manfully among the thickest of them.

2 Mac 14:44
But they quickly giving back, and a space being made, he fell
down into the midst of the void place.

2 Mac 14:45
Nevertheless, while there was yet breath within him, being
inflamed with anger, he rose up; and though his blood gushed out
like spouts of water, and his wounds were grievous, yet he ran
through the midst of the throng; and standing upon a steep rock,

2 Mac 14:46
When as his blood was now quite gone, he plucked out his
bowels, and taking them in both his hands, he cast them upon the
throng, and calling upon the Lord of life and spirit to restore
him those again, he thus died.

2 Mac 15:1
But Nicanor, hearing that Judas and his company were in the
strong places about Samaria, resolved without any danger to set
upon them on the sabbath day.

2 Mac 15:2
Nevertheless the Jews that were compelled to go with him
said, O destroy not so cruelly and barbarously, but give honour
to that day, which he, that seeth all things, hath honoured with
holiness above all other days.

2 Mac 15:3
Then the most ungracious wretch demanded, if there were a
Mighty one in heaven, that had commanded the sabbath day to be
kept.

2 Mac 15:4
And when they said, There is in heaven a living Lord, and
mighty, who commanded the seventh day to be kept:

2 Mac 15:5
Then said the other, And I also am mighty upon earth, and I
command to take arms, and to do the king's business. Yet he
obtained not to have his wicked will done.

2 Mac 15:6
So Nicanor in exceeding pride and haughtiness determined to
set up a publick monument of his victory over Judas and them
that were with him.

2 Mac 15:7
But Maccabeus had ever sure confidence that the Lord would
help him:

2 Mac 15:8
Wherefore he exhorted his people not to fear the coming of
the heathen against them, but to remember the help which in
former times they had received from heaven, and now to expect
the victory and aid, which should come unto them from the
Almighty.

2 Mac 15:9
And so comforting them out of the law and the prophets, and
withal putting them in mind of the battles that they won afore,
he made them more cheerful.

2 Mac 15:10
And when he had stirred up their minds, he gave them their
charge, shewing them therewithall the falsehood of the heathen,
and the breach of oaths.

2 Mac 15:11
Thus he armed every one of them, not so much with defence of
shields and spears, as with comfortable and good words: and
beside that, he told them a dream worthy to be believed, as if
it had been so indeed, which did not a little rejoice them.

2 Mac 15:12
And this was his vision: That Onias, who had been high
priest, a virtuous and a good man, reverend in conversation,
gentle in condition, well spoken also, and exercised from a
child in all points of virtue, holding up his hands prayed for
the whole body of the Jews.

2 Mac 15:13
This done, in like manner there appeared a man with gray
hairs, and exceeding glorious, who was of a wonderful and
excellent majesty.

2 Mac 15:14
Then Onias answered, saying, This is a lover of the brethren,
who prayeth much for the people, and for the holy city, to wit,
Jeremias the prophet of God.

2 Mac 15:15
Whereupon Jeremias holding forth his right hand gave to Judas
a sword of gold, and in giving it spake thus,

2 Mac 15:16
Take this holy sword, a gift from God, with the which thou
shalt wound the adversaries.

2 Mac 15:17
Thus being well comforted by the words of Judas, which were
very good, and able to stir them up to valour, and to encourage
the hearts of the young men, they determined not to pitch camp,
but courageously to set upon them, and manfully to try the
matter by conflict, because the city and the sanctuary and the
temple were in danger.

2 Mac 15:18
For the care that they took for their wives, and their
children, their brethren, and folks, was in least account with
them: but the greatest and principal fear was for the holy
temple.

2 Mac 15:19
Also they that were in the city took not the least care,
being troubled for the conflict abroad.

2 Mac 15:20
And now, when as all looked what should be the trial, and the
enemies were already come near, and the army was set in array,
and the beasts conveniently placed, and the horsemen set in
wings,

2 Mac 15:21
Maccabeus seeing the coming of the multitude, and the divers
preparations of armour, and the fierceness of the beasts,
stretched out his hands toward heaven, and called upon the Lord
that worketh wonders, knowing that victory cometh not by arms,
but even as it seemeth good to him, he giveth it to such as are
worthy:

2 Mac 15:22
Therefore in his prayer he said after this manner; O Lord,
thou didst send thine angel in the time of Ezekias king of
Judea, and didst slay in the host of Sennacherib an hundred
fourscore and five thousand:

2 Mac 15:23
Wherefore now also, O Lord of heaven, send a good angel
before us for a fear and dread unto them;

2 Mac 15:24
And through the might of thine arm let those be stricken with
terror, that come against thy holy people to blaspheme. And he
ended thus.

2 Mac 15:25
Then Nicanor and they that were with him came forward with
trumpets and songs.

2 Mac 15:26
But Judas and his company encountered the enemies with
invocation and prayer.

2 Mac 15:27
So that fighting with their hands, and praying unto God
with their hearts, they slew no less than thirty
and five thousand men: for through the appearance of God they
were greatly cheered.

2 Mac 15:28
Now when the battle was done, returning again with joy, they
knew that Nicanor lay dead in his harness.

2 Mac 15:29
Then they made a great shout and a noise, praising the
Almighty in their own language.

2 Mac 15:30
And Judas, who was ever the chief defender of the citizens
both in body and mind, and who continued his love toward his
countrymen all his life, commanded to strike off Nicanor's head,
and his hand with his shoulder, and bring them to Jerusalem.

2 Mac 15:31
So when he was there, and called them of his nation together,
and set the priests before the altar, he sent for them that were
of the tower,

2 Mac 15:32
And shewed them vile Nicanor's head, and the hand of that
blasphemer, which with proud brags he had stretched out against
the holy temple of the Almighty.

2 Mac 15:33
And when he had cut out the tongue of that ungodly Nicanor,
he commanded that they should give it by pieces unto the fowls,
and hang up the reward of his madness before the temple.

2 Mac 15:34
So every man praised toward the heaven the glorious Lord,
saying, Blessed be he that hath kept his own place undefiled.

2 Mac 15:35
He hanged also Nicanor's head upon the tower, an evident and
manifest sign unto all of the help of the Lord.

2 Mac 15:36
And they ordained all with a common decree in no case to let
that day pass without solemnity, but to celebrate the thirtieth
day of the twelfth month, which in the Syrian tongue is called
Adar, the day before Mardocheus' day.

2 Mac 15:37
Thus went it with Nicanor: and from that time forth the
Hebrews had the city in their power. And here will I make an
end.

2 Mac 15:38
And if I have done well, and as is fitting the story, it is
that which I desired: but if slenderly and meanly, it is that
which I could attain unto.

2 Mac 15:39
For as it is hurtful to drink wine or water alone; and as
wine mingled with water is pleasant, and delighteth the taste:
even so speech finely framed delighteth the ears of them that
read the story. And here shall be an end.




The Book of Tobit



Tob 1:1
The book of the words of Tobit, son of Tobiel, the son of
Ananiel, the son of Aduel, the son of Gabael, of the seed of
Asael, of the tribe of Nephthali;

Tob 1:2
Who in the time of Enemessar king of the Assyrians was led
captive out of Thisbe, which is at the right hand of that city,
which is called properly Nephthali in Galilee above Aser.

Tob 1:3
I Tobit have walked all the days of my life in the ways of
truth and justice, and I did many almsdeeds to my brethren, and
my nation, who came with me to Nineve, into the land of the
Assyrians.

Tob 1:4
And when I was in mine own country, in the land of Israel
being but young, all the tribe of Nephthali my father fell from
the house of Jerusalem, which was chosen out of all the tribes
of Israel, that all the tribes should sacrifice there, where the
temple of the habitation of the most High was consecrated and
built for all ages.

Tob 1:5
Now all the tribes which together revolted, and the house of
my father Nephthali, sacrificed unto the heifer Baal.

Tob 1:6
But I alone went often to Jerusalem at the feasts, as it was
ordained unto all the people of Israel by an everlasting decree,
having the firstfruits and tenths of increase, with that which
was first shorn; and them gave I at the altar to the priests the
children of Aaron.

Tob 1:7
The first tenth part of all increase I gave to the sons of
Aaron, who ministered at Jerusalem: another tenth part I sold
away, and went, and spent it every year at Jerusalem:

Tob 1:8
And the third I gave unto them to whom it was meet, as Debora
my father's mother had commanded me, because I was left an
orphan by my father.

Tob 1:9
Furthermore, when I was come to the age of a man, I married
Anna of mine own kindred, and of her I begat Tobias.

Tob 1:10
And when we were carried away captives to Nineve, all my
brethren and those that were of my kindred did eat of the bread
of the Gentiles.

Tob 1:11
But I kept myself from eating;

Tob 1:12
Because I remembered God with all my heart.

Tob 1:13
And the most High gave me grace and favour before Enemessar,
so that I was his purveyor.

Tob 1:14
And I went into Media, and left in trust with Gabael, the
brother of Gabrias, at Rages a city of Media ten talents of
silver.

Tob 1:15
Now when Enemessar was dead, Sennacherib his son reigned in
his stead; whose estate was troubled, that I could not go into
Media.

Tob 1:16
And in the time of Enemessar I gave many alms to my brethren,
and gave my bread to the hungry,

Tob 1:17
And my clothes to the naked: and if I saw any of my nation
dead, or cast about the walls of Nineve, I buried him.

Tob 1:18
And if the king Sennacherib had slain any, when he was come,
and fled from Judea, I buried them privily; for in his wrath he
killed many; but the bodies were not found, when they were
sought for of the king.

Tob 1:19
And when one of the Ninevites went and complained of me to
the king, that I buried them, and hid myself; understanding that
I was sought for to be put to death, I withdrew myself for fear.

Tob 1:20
Then all my goods were forcibly taken away, neither was there
any thing left me, beside my wife Anna and my son Tobias.

Tob 1:21
And there passed not five and fifty days, before two of his
sons killed him, and they fled into the mountains of Ararath;
and Sarchedonus his son reigned in his stead; who appointed over
his father's accounts, and over all his affairs, Achiacharus my
brother Anael's son.

Tob 1:22
And Achiacharus intreating for me, I returned to Nineve. Now
Achiacharus was cupbearer, and keeper of the signet, and
steward, and overseer of the accounts: and Sarchedonus appointed
him next unto him: and he was my brother's son.

Tob 2:1
Now when I was come home again, and my wife Anna was restored
unto me, with my son Tobias, in the feast of Pentecost, which is
the holy feast of the seven weeks, there was a good dinner
prepared me, in the which I sat down to eat.

Tob 2:2
And when I saw abundance of meat, I said to my son, Go and
bring what poor man soever thou shalt find out of our brethren,
who is mindful of the Lord; and, lo, I tarry for thee.

Tob 2:3
But he came again, and said, Father, one of our nation is
strangled, and is cast out in the marketplace.

Tob 2:4
Then before I had tasted of any meat, I started up, and took
him up into a room until the going down of the sun.

Tob 2:5
Then I returned, and washed myself, and ate my meat in
heaviness,

Tob 2:6
Remembering that prophecy of Amos, as he said, Your feasts
shall be turned into mourning, and all your mirth into
lamentation.

Tob 2:7
Therefore I wept: and after the going down of the sun I went
and made a grave, and buried him.

Tob 2:8
But my neighbours mocked me, and said, This man is not yet
afraid to be put to death for this matter: who fled away; and
yet, lo, he burieth the dead again.

Tob 2:9
The same night also I returned from the burial, and slept by
the wall of my courtyard, being polluted and my face was
uncovered:

Tob 2:10
And I knew not that there were sparrows in the wall, and mine
eyes being open, the sparrows muted warm dung into mine eyes,
and a whiteness came in mine eyes: and I went to the physicians,
but they helped me not: moreover Achiacharus did nourish me,
until I went into Elymais.

Tob 2:11
And my wife Anna did take women's works to do.

Tob 2:12
And when she had sent them home to the owners, they paid her
wages, and gave her also besides a kid.

Tob 2:13
And when it was in my house, and began to cry, I said unto
her, From whence is this kid? is it not stolen? render it to the
owners; for it is not lawful to eat any thing that is stolen.

Tob 2:14
But she replied upon me, It was given for a gift more than
the wages. Howbeit I did not believe her, but bade her render it
to the owners: and I was abashed at her. But she replied upon
me, Where are thine alms and thy righteous deeds? behold, thou
and all thy works are known.

Tob 3:1
Then I being grieved did weep, and in my sorrow prayed,
saying,

Tob 3:2
O Lord, thou art just, and all thy works and all thy ways are
mercy and truth, and thou judgest truly and justly for ever.

Tob 3:3
Remember me, and look on me, punish me not for my sins and
ignorances, and the sins of my fathers, who have sinned before
thee:

Tob 3:4
For they obeyed not thy commandments: wherefore thou hast
delivered us for a spoil, and unto captivity, and unto death,
and for a proverb of reproach to all the nations among whom we
are dispersed.

Tob 3:5
And now thy judgments are many and true: deal with me
according to my sins and my fathers': because we have not kept
thy commandments, neither have walked in truth before thee.

Tob 3:6
Now therefore deal with me as seemeth best unto thee, and
command my spirit to be taken from me, that I may be dissolved,
and become earth: for it is profitable for me to die rather than
to live, because I have heard false reproaches, and have much
sorrow: command therefore that I may now be delivered out of
this distress, and go into the everlasting place: turn not thy
face away from me.

Tob 3:7
It came to pass the same day, that in Ecbatane a city of
Media Sara the daughter of Raguel was also reproached by her
father's maids;

Tob 3:8
Because that she had been married to seven husbands, whom
Asmodeus the evil spirit had killed, before they had lain with
her. Dost thou not know, said they, that thou hast strangled
thine husbands? thou hast had already seven husbands, neither
wast thou named after any of them.

Tob 3:9
Wherefore dost thou beat us for them? if they be dead, go thy
ways after them, let us never see of thee either son or
daughter.

Tob 3:10
Whe she heard these things, she was very sorrowful, so that
she thought to have strangled herself; and she said, I am the
only daughter of my father, and if I do this, it shall be a
reproach unto him, and I shall bring his old age with sorrow
unto the grave.

Tob 3:11
Then she prayed toward the window, and said, Blessed art
thou, O Lord my God, and thine holy and glorious name is blessed
and honourable for ever: let all thy works praise thee for
ever.

Tob 3:12
And now, O Lord, I set I mine eyes and my face toward thee,

Tob 3:13
And say, Take me out of the earth, that I may hear no more
the reproach.

Tob 3:14
Thou knowest, Lord, that I am pure from all sin with man,

Tob 3:15
And that I never polluted my name, nor the name of my father,
in the land of my captivity: I am the only daughter of my
father, neither hath he any child to be his heir, neither any
near kinsman, nor any son of his alive, to whom I may keep
myself for a wife: my seven husbands are already dead; and why
should I live? but if it please not thee that I should die,
command some regard to be had of me, and pity taken of me, that
I hear no more reproach.

Tob 3:16
So the prayers of them both were heard before the majesty of
the great God.

Tob 3:17
And Raphael was sent to heal them both, that is, to scale
away the whiteness of Tobit's eyes, and to give Sara the
daughter of Raguel for a wife to Tobias the son of Tobit; and to
bind Asmodeus the evil spirit; because she belonged to Tobias by
right of inheritance. The selfsame time came Tobit home, and
entered into his house, and Sara the daughter of Raguel came
down from her upper chamber.

Tob 4:1
In that day Tobit remembered the money which he had committed
to Gabael in Rages of Media,

Tob 4:2
And said with himself, I have wished for death; wherefore do
I not call for my son Tobias that I may signify to him of the
money before I die?

Tob 4:3
And when he had called him, he said, My son, when I am dead,
bury me; and despise not thy mother, but honour her all the days
of thy life, and do that which shall please her, and grieve her
not.

Tob 4:4
Remember, my son, that she saw many dangers for thee, when
thou wast in her womb: and when she is dead, bury her by me in
one grave.

Tob 4:5
My son, be mindful of the Lord our God all thy days, and let
not thy will be set to sin, or to transgress his commandments:
do uprightly all thy life long, and follow not the ways of
unrighteousness.

Tob 4:6
For if thou deal truly, thy doings shall prosperously succeed
to thee, and to all them that live justly.

Tob 4:7
Give alms of thy substance; and when thou givest alms, let
not thine eye be envious, neither turn thy face from any poor,
and the face of God shall not be turned away from thee.

Tob 4:8
If thou hast abundance give alms accordingly: if thou have
but a little, be not afraid to give according to that little:

Tob 4:9
For thou layest up a good treasure for thyself against the
day of necessity.

Tob 4:10
Because that alms do deliver from death, and suffereth not to
come into darkness.

Tob 4:11
For alms is a good gift unto all that give it in the sight of
the most High.

Tob 4:12
Beware of all whoredom, my son, and chiefly take a wife of
the seed of thy fathers, and take not a strange woman to wife,
which is not of thy father's tribe: for we are the children of
the prophets, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: remember, my son,
that our fathers from the beginning, even that they all married
wives of their own kindred, and were blessed in their children,
and their seed shall inherit the land.

Tob 4:13
Now therefore, my son, love thy brethren, and despise not in
thy heart thy brethren, the sons and daughters of thy people, in
not taking a wife of them: for in pride is destruction and much
trouble, and in lewdness is decay and great want: for lewdness
is the mother of famine.

Tob 4:14
Let not the wages of any man, which hath wrought for thee,
tarry with thee, but give him it out of hand: for if thou serve
God, he will also repay thee: be circumspect my son, in all
things thou doest, and be wise in all thy conversation.

Tob 4:15
Do that to no man which thou hatest: drink not wine to make
thee drunken: neither let drunkenness go with thee in thy
journey.

Tob 4:16
Give of thy bread to the hungry, and of thy garments to them
that are naked; and according to thine abundance give alms: and
let not thine eye be envious, when thou givest alms.

Tob 4:17
Pour out thy bread on the burial of the just, but give
nothing to the wicked.

Tob 4:18
Ask counsel of all that are wise, and despise not any counsel
that is profitable.

Tob 4:19
Bless the Lord thy God alway, and desire of him that thy ways
may be directed, and that all thy paths and counsels may
prosper: for every nation hath not counsel; but the Lord himself
giveth all good things, and he humbleth whom he will, as he
will; now therefore, my son, remember my commandments, neither
let them be put out of thy mind.

Tob 4:20
And now I signify this to they that I committed ten talents
to Gabael the son of Gabrias at Rages in Media.

Tob 4:21
And fear not, my son, that we are made poor: for thou hast
much wealth, if thou fear God, and depart from all sin, and do
that which is pleasing in his sight.

Tob 5:1
Tobias then answered and said, Father, I will do all things
which thou hast commanded me:

Tob 5:2
But how can I receive the money, seeing I know him not?

Tob 5:3
Then he gave him the handwriting, and said unto him, Seek
thee a man which may go with thee, whiles I yet live, and I will
give him wages: and go and receive the money.

Tob 5:4
Therefore when he went to seek a man, he found Raphael that
was an angel.

Tob 5:5
But he knew not; and he said unto him, Canst thou go with me
to Rages? and knowest thou those places well?

Tob 5:6
To whom the angel said, I will go with thee, and I know the
way well: for I have lodged with our brother Gabael.

Tob 5:7
Then Tobias said unto him, Tarry for me, till I tell my
father.

Tob 5:8
Then he said unto him, Go and tarry not. So he went in and
said to his father, Behold, I have found one which will go with
me. Then he said, Call him unto me, that I may know of what
tribe he is, and whether he be a trusty man to go with thee.

Tob 5:9
So he called him, and he came in, and they saluted one
another.

Tob 5:10
Then Tobit said unto him, Brother, shew me of what tribe and
family thou art.

Tob 5:11
To whom he said, Dost thou seek for a tribe or family, or an
hired man to go with thy son? Then Tobit said unto him, I would
know, brother, thy kindred and name.

Tob 5:12
Then he said, I am Azarias, the son of Ananias the great, and
of thy brethren.

Tob 5:13
Then Tobit said, Thou art welcome, brother; be not now angry
with me, because I have enquired to know thy tribe and thy
family; for thou art my brother, of an honest and good stock:
for I know Ananias and Jonathas, sons of that great Samaias, as
we went together to Jerusalem to worship, and offered the
firstborn, and the tenths of the fruits; and they were not
seduced with the error of our brethren: my brother, thou art of
a good stock.

Tob 5:14
But tell me, what wages shall I give thee? wilt thou a drachm
a day, and things necessary, as to mine own son?

Tob 5:15
Yea, moreover, if ye return safe, I will add something to thy
wages.

Tob 5:16
So they were well pleased. Then said he to Tobias, Prepare
thyself for the journey, and God send you a good journey. And
when his son had prepared all things far the journey, his father
said, Go thou with this man, and God, which dwelleth in heaven,
prosper your journey, and the angel of God keep you company. So
they went forth both, and the young man's dog with them.

Tob 5:17
But Anna his mother wept, and said to Tobit, Why hast thou
sent away our son? is he not the staff of our hand, in going in
and out before us?

Tob 5:18
Be not greedy to add money to money: but let it be as refuse
in respect of our child.

Tob 5:19
For that which the Lord hath given us to live with doth
suffice us.

Tob 5:20
Then said Tobit to her, Take no care, my sister; he shall
return in safety, and thine eyes shall see him.

Tob 5:21
For the good angel will keep him company, and his journey
shall be prosperous, and he shall return safe.

Tob 5:22
Then she made an end of weeping.

Tob 6:1
And as they went on their journey, they came in the evening
to the river Tigris, and they lodged there.

Tob 6:2
And when the young man went down to wash himself, a fish
leaped out of the river, and would have devoured him.

Tob 6:3
Then the angel said unto him, Take the fish. And the young
man laid hold of the fish, and drew it to land.

Tob 6:4
To whom the angel said, Open the fish, and take the heart and
the liver and the gall, and put them up safely.

Tob 6:5
So the young man did as the angel commanded him; and when
they had roasted the fish, they did eat it: then they both went
on their way, till they drew near to Ecbatane.

Tob 6:6
Then the young man said to the angel, Brother Azarias, to
what use is the heart and the liver and the gal of the fish?

Tob 6:7
And he said unto him, Touching the heart and the liver, if a
devil or an evil spirit trouble any, we must make a smoke
thereof before the man or the woman, and the party shall be no
more vexed.

Tob 6:8
As for the gall, it is good to anoint a man that hath
whiteness in his eyes, and he shall be healed.

Tob 6:9
And when they were come near to Rages,

Tob 6:10
The angel said to the young man, Brother, to day we shall
lodge with Raguel, who is thy cousin; he also hath one only
daughter, named Sara; I will speak for her, that she may be
given thee for a wife.

Tob 6:11
For to thee doth the right of her appertain, seeing thou only
art of her kindred.

Tob 6:12
And the maid is fair and wise: now therefore hear me, and I
will speak to her father; and when we return from Rages we will
celebrate the marriage: for I know that Raguel cannot marry her
to another according to the law of Moses, but he shall be guilty
of death, because the right of inheritance doth rather appertain
to thee than to any other.

Tob 6:13
Then the young man answered the angel, I have heard, brother
Azarias that this maid hath been given to seven men, who all
died in the marriage chamber.

Tob 6:14
And now I am the only son of my father, and I am afraid, lest
if I go in unto her, I die, as the other before: for a wicked
spirit loveth her, which hurteth no body, but those which come
unto her; wherefore I also fear lest I die, and bring my
father's and my mother's life because of me to the grave with
sorrow: for they have no other son to bury them.

Tob 6:15
Then the angel said unto him, Dost thou not remember the
precepts which thy father gave thee, that thou shouldest marry a
wife of thine own kindred? wherefore hear me, O my brother; for
she shall be given thee to wife; and make thou no reckoning of
the evil spirit; for this same night shall she be given thee in
marriage.

Tob 6:16
And when thou shalt come into the marriage chamber, thou
shalt take the ashes of perfume, and shalt lay upon them some of
the heart and liver of the fish, and shalt make a smoke with it:

Tob 6:17
And the devil shall smell it, and flee away, and never come
again any more: but when thou shalt come to her, rise up both of
you, and pray to God which is merciful, who will have pity on
you, and save you: fear not, for she is appointed unto thee from
the beginning; and thou shalt preserve her, and she shall go
with thee. Moreover I suppose that she shall bear thee children.
Now when Tobias had heard these things, he loved her, and his
heart was effectually joined to her.

Tob 7:1
And when they were come to Ecbatane, they came to the house
of Raguel, and Sara met them: and after they had saluted one
another, she brought them into the house.

Tob 7:2
Then said Raguel to Edna his wife, How like is this young man
to Tobit my cousin!
