Drona from his bow, touching one another at the wings, appeared like one
endless line in the sky. And those heroes, thus discharging their arrows
decked with gold, seemed to cover the sky with showers of meteors. And
furnished with feathers of the _Kanka_ bird, those arrows looked like
rows of cranes ranging in the autumnal sky. And the fierce and terrible
encounter that took place between the illustrious Drona and Arjuna
resembled that between Virata and Vasava of old. And discharging arrows
at each other from bows drawn at their fullest stretch, they resembled
two elephants assailing each other with their tusks. And those wrathful
warriors--those ornaments of battle--fighting strictly according to
established usage, displayed in that conflict various celestial weapons
in due order. Then that foremost of victorious men, Arjuna, by means of
his keen shafts resisted the whetted arrows shot by that best of
preceptors. And displaying before the spectators various weapons, that
hero of terrible prowess covered the sky with various kinds of arrows.
And beholding that tiger among men, Arjuna, endued with fierce energy
and intent upon striking him, that foremost of warriors and best of
preceptors (from affection) began to fight with him playfully by means
of smooth and straight arrows. And Bharadwaja's son fought on with
Phalguna, resisting with his own the celestial weapons shot by the
former. And the fight that took place between those enraged lions among
men, incapable of bearing each other, was like unto encounter between
the gods and the _Danavas_. And the son of Pandu repeatedly baffled with
his own, the _Aindra_, the _Vayavya_, and the _Agneya_ weapons that were
shot by Drona. And discharging keen shafts, those mighty bowmen, by
their arrowy showers completely covered the sky and made a wide expanse
of shade. And then the arrows shot by Arjuna, falling on the bodies of
hostile warriors, produced the crash of thunderbolt. O king, elephants,
cars, and horses, bathed in blood, looked like _Kinsuka_ trees crowned
with flowers. And in that encounter between Drona and Arjuna, beholding
the field covered with arms decked with bangles, and gorgeously-attired
car-warriors, and coats of mail variegated with gold, and with banners
lying scattered all about, and with warriors slain by means of Partha's
arrows, the Kuru host became panic-stricken. And shaking their bows
capable of bearing much strain, those combatants began to shroud and
weaken each other with their shafts. And, O bull of the Bharata race,
the encounter that took place between Drona and Kunti's son was dreadful
in the extreme and resembled that between Vali and Vasava. And staking
their very lives, they began to pierce each other straight arrows shot
from their fully-stretched bow-strings. And a voice was heard in the sky
applauding Drona, and saying, 'Difficult is the feat performed by Drona,
inasmuch as he fighteth with Arjuna,--that grinder of foes, that warrior
endued with mighty energy, of firm grasp, and invincible in
battle,--that conqueror of both celestials and _Daityas_, that foremost
of all car-warriors.' And beholding Partha's infallibility, training,
fleetness of hand, and the range also of Arjuna's, arrows, Drona became
amazed. And, O bull of the Bharata race, lifting up his excellent bow,
the _Gandiva_, the unforbearing Partha drew it now with one hand and now
with another shot an arrowy shower. And beholding that shower resembling
a flight of locusts, the spectators wondering applauded him exclaiming,
'Excellent! Excellent!' And so ceaselessly did he shoot his arrows that
the very air was unable to penetrate the thick array. And the spectators
could not perceive any interval between the taking up of the arrows and
letting them off. And in that fierce encounter characterised by
lightness of hand in the discharge of weapons, Partha began to shoot his
arrows more quickly than before. And then all at once hundreds and
thousands of straight arrows fell upon Drona's car. And, O bull of the
Bharata race, beholding Drona completely covered by the wielder of the
_Gandiva_ with his arrows, the Kuru army set up exclamation of '_Oh'!_
and '_Alas'!_ And Maghavat, together with those _Gandharvas_ and
_Apsaras_ that have come there, applauded the fleetness of Partha's
hand. And that mighty car-warrior, the preceptor's son, then resisted
the Pandva with a mighty array of cars. And although enraged with
Arjuna, yet Aswatthaman mentally admired that feat of the high-souled
son of Pritha. And waxing wroth, he rushed towards Partha, and
discharged at him an arrowy shower like a heavy down-pour by the cloud.
And turning his steeds towards Drona's son, Partha gave Drona an
opportunity to leave the field. And thereupon the latter, wounded in
that terrible encounter, and his mail and banner gone sped away by the
aid of swift horses."


SECTION LIX

Vaisampayana said, "Then, O mighty king, Drona's son rushed to an
encounter with Arjuna in battle. And beholding his rush to the conflict
like a hurricane, showering shafts like a rain charged cloud Pritha's
son received him with a cloud of arrows. And terrible was the encounter
between them, like that between the gods and the _Danavas_. And they
shot arrows at each other like Virata and Vasava. And the welkin being
enveloped on all sides with arrows, the sun was completely hidden, and
the air itself was hushed. And, O conqueror of hostile cities, as they
assailed and struck each other, loud sounds arose as of bamboos on fire.
And, O king, Aswatthaman's horses being sorely afflicted by Arjuna, they
became bewildered and could not ascertain which way to go. And as
Pritha's son ranged on the field, the powerful son of Drona finding an
opportunity, cut off the string of the _Gandiva_ with an arrow furnished
with a horse-shoe head. And beholding that extraordinary feat of his,
the celestials applauded him highly. And exclaiming--'Well done!'--'Well
done!' Drona and Bhishma, and Karna, and the mighty warrior Kripa, all
applauded that feat of his greatly. And the son of Drona, drawing his
excellent bow, pierced with his shafts, furnished with the feathers of
the _Kanka_ bird, the breast of Partha, that bull among warriors.
Thereupon, with a loud laughter, the mighty-armed son of Pritha attached
a strong and fresh string to _Gandiva_. And moistening his bow-string
with the sweat that stood on his forehead resembling the crescent moon,
Pritha's son advanced towards his adversary, even as an infuriated
leader of a herd of elephants rusheth at another elephant. And the
encounter that took place between those two matchless heroes on the
field of battle was exceedingly fierce and made the bristles of the
spectators stand on their ends. And as those heroes endued with mighty
energy fought on, the two mighty elephants, the Kurus beheld them with
wonder. And those brave bulls among men assailed each other with arrows
of snaky forms and resembling blazing fires. And as the couple of
quivers belonging to the Pandava was inexhaustible, that hero was able
to remain on the field immovable as a mountain. And as Aswatthaman's
arrows, in consequence of his ceaseless discharge in that conflict, were
quickly exhausted, it was for this that Arjuna prevailed over his
adversary. Then Karna, drawing his large bow with great force twanged
the bow-string. And thereupon arose loud exclamation of '_Oh!_' and
'_Alas!_' And Pritha's son, casting his eyes towards the spot where that
bow was twanged, beheld before him the son of Radha. And at that sight
his wrath was greatly excited. And inflamed with ire and desirous of
slaying Karna, that bull of the Kuru race stared at him with rolling
eyes. And, O king, beholding Partha turn away from Aswatthaman's side,
the Kuru warriors discharged thousands of arrows on Arjuna. And the
mighty-armed Dhananjaya, that conqueror of foes, leaving Drona's son,
all on a sudden rushed towards Karna. And rushing towards Karna, with
eyes reddened in anger the son of Kunti, desirous of a single combat
with him, said these words."


SECTION LX

"Arjuna said, 'The time, O Karna, hath now come for making good thy
loquacious boast in the midst of the assembly, viz., that there is none
equal to thee in fight. Today, O Karna, contending with me in terrible
conflict, thou shalt know thy own strength, and shalt no longer
disregard others. Abandoning good breeding, thou hadst uttered many
harsh words, but this that thou endeavourest to do, is, I think,
exceedingly difficult. Do thou now, O Radha's son, contending with me in
the sight of the Kurus, make good what thou hadst said before in
disregard of myself. Thou who hadst witnessed Panchala's princess
outraged by villains in the midst of the court, do thou now reap the
fruit of that act of thine. Fettered by the bonds of morality before, I
desisted from vengeance then. Behold now, O son of Radha, the fruit of
that wrath in conflict at hand. O wicked wight, we have suffered much
misery in that forest for full twelve years. Reap thou today the fruits
of our concentrated vengeance. Come, O Karna, cope with me in battle.
Let these thy Kaurava warriors witness the conflict.' Hearing these
words, Karna replied, 'Do thou, O Partha, accomplish in deed what thou
sayst in words. The world knows that thy words verily exceed thy deed.
That thou hadst foreborne formerly was owing to thy inability to do
anything. If we witness thy prowess even now, we may acknowledge its
truth. If thy past forbearance was due to thy having been bound by the
bonds of morality, truly thou art equally bound now although thou
regardest thyself free. Having as thou sayst, passed thy exile in the
woods in strict accordance with thy pledge and being therefore weakened
by practising an ascetic course of life, how canst thou desire a combat
with me now! O Pritha's son, if Sakra himself fight on thy side, still I
would feel no anxiety in putting forth my prowess. Thy wish, O son of
Kunti, is about to be gratified. Do thou fight with me now, and behold
my strength.' Hearing this, Arjuna said, 'Even now, O Radha's son, thou
hadst fled from battle with me, and it is for this that thou livest
although thy younger brother hath been slain. What other person, save
thee, having beheld his younger brother slain in battle would himself
fly from the field, and boast as thou dost, amid good and true men?'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having said these words unto Karna, the
invincible Vibhatsu rushed at him and charged a volley of shafts capable
of penetrating through a coat of mail. But that mighty car-warrior,
Karna, received with great alacrity that discharge with an arrowy shower
of his own, heavy as the downpour of the clouds. And that fierce volley
of arrows covered all sides and severally pierced the steeds and arms
and leathern fences of the combatants. And incapable of putting up with
that assault, Arjuna cut off the strings of Karna's quiver by means of a
straight and sharp arrow. Thereupon, taking out from his quiver another
arrow, Karna pierced the Pandava in the hand at which the latter's hold
of the bow was loosened. And then the mighty-armed Partha cut off
Karna's bow into fragments. And Karna replied by hurling a dart at his
adversary, but Arjuna cut it off by means of his arrows. And then the
warriors that followed the son of Radha rushed in crowds at Arjuna, but
Partha sent them all to the abode of Yama by means of arrows shot from
the _Gandiva_. And Vibhatsu slew the steeds of Karna by means of sharp
and tough arrows shot from the bow-string drawn to the ear, and deprived
of life they dropped down on the ground. And taking another sharp and
blazing arrow endued with great energy, the mighty son of Kunti pierced
the breast of Karna. And that arrow, cleaving through his mail,
penetrated into his body. And at this, Karna's vision was obscured and
his senses left him. And regaining consciousness, he felt a great pain,
and leaving the combat fled in a northernly direction. And at this, the
mighty car-warrior Arjuna and Uttara, both began to address him
contumely."


SECTION LXI

Vaisampayana said, "Having defeated Vikartana's son, Arjuna said unto
the son of Virata, 'Take me towards that division where yonder device of
a golden palmyra is seen. There our grandfather, Santanu's son, like
unto a celestial, waiteth, desirous of an encounter with me.' Thereupon,
beholding that mighty host thronged with cars and horses and elephants,
Uttara, sorely pierced with arrows, said, 'O hero, I am no longer able
to guide thy excellent steeds. My spirits droop and my mind is
exceedingly bewildered. All the directions seem to be whirling before my
eyes in consequence of the energy of the celestial weapons used by thee
and the Kurus. I have been deprived of my senses by the stench of fat
and blood and flesh. Beholding all this, from terror my mind is, as it
were, cleft in twain. Never before had I beheld such a muster of horses
in battle. And at the flapping of fences, and the blare of conchs, the
leonine roars made by the warriors and the shrieks of elephants, and the
twang of the _Gandiva_ resembling the thunder, I have, O hero, been so
stupefied that I have been deprived of both hearing and memory. And, O
hero, beholding thee incessantly drawing to a circle, in course of the
conflict, the _Gandiva_ which resembleth a circle of fire, my sight
faileth me and my heart is rent asunder. And seeing thy fierce form in
battle, like that of the wielder of the _Pinaka_ while inflamed with
wrath, and looking also at the terrible arrows shot by thee, I am filled
with fear. I fail to see when thou takest up thy excellent arrows, when
thou fixest them on the bow-string, and when thou lettest them off. And
though all this is done before my eyes, yet, deprived of my senses, I do
not see it. My spirits are drooping and earth itself seems to be
swimming before me. I have no strength to hold the whip and the reins.'
Hearing these words, Arjuna said, 'Do thou not fear. Assure thyself.
Thou also hast, on the field of battle performed, O bull among men,
wonderful feats. Blessed be thou, thou art a prince and born in the
illustrious line of Matsyas. It behoveth thee not to feel dispirited in
chastising thy foes. Therefore, O prince, stationed on my car, muster
all thy fortitude and hold the reins of my steeds, O slayer of foes,
when I once more become engaged in battle.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having said this unto Virata's son, that best
of men and foremost of car-warriors, the mighty-armed Arjuna, again
addressed the son of Virata, saying. 'Take me without delay to the van
of Bhishma's division. I will cut off his very bow-string in the battle.
Thou shalt behold today the celestial weapons of blazing beauty, shot by
me, look like flashes of lightning disporting amid the clouds in the
sky. The Kauravas shall behold the gold decked back of my _Gandiva_
today, and assembled together the foe shall dispute, saying,--_By which
hand of his, the right or the left, doth he shoot_? And I shall cause a
dreadful river (of death) to flow today towards the other world with
blood for its waters and cars for its eddies, and elephants for its
crocodiles. I shall today, with my straight arrows, extirpate the _Kuru_
forest having hands and feet and heads and backs and arms for the
branches of its trees. Alone, bow in hand, vanquishing the Kuru host, a
hundred paths shall open before me like those of a forest in
conflagration. Struck by me thou shalt today behold the Kuru army moving
round and round like a wheel (unable to fly off the field). I shall show
thee today my excellent training in arrows and weapons. Stay thou on my
car firmly, whether the ground be smooth or uneven. I can pierce with my
winged arrows even the mountain of _Sumeru_ that stands touching the
very heavens. I slew of old, at Indra's command, hundreds and thousands
of _Paulomas_ and _Kalakhanjas_ in battle. I have obtained my firmness
of grasp from Indra, and my lightness of hand from _Brahman_, and I have
learnt various modes of fierce attack and defence amid crowds of foes
from _Prajapati_. I vanquished, on the other side of the great ocean,
sixty thousands of car-warriors--all fierce archers--residing in
_Hiranyapura_. Behold, now I defeat the multitudinous host of the Kurus
like a tempest scattering a heap of cotton. With my fiery arrows I shall
today set the _Kuru_-forest to fire, having banners for its trees, the
foot-soldiers for its shrubs, and the car-warriors for its beasts of
prey. Like unto the wielder of the thunderbolt overthrowing the Danavas,
alone I shall, with my straight arrows, bring down from the chambers of
their cars the mighty warrior of the Kuru army stationed therein and
struggling in the conflict to the best of their power. I have obtained
from _Rudra_ the _Raudra_, from _Varuna_ the _Varuna_, from _Agni_ the
_Agneya_, from the god of Wind the _Vayava_, and from Sakra the
thunderbolt and other weapons. I shall certainly exterminate the fierce
_Dhartarashtra-forest_ though protected by many leonine warriors.
Therefore, O Virata's son, let thy fears be dispelled.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus assured by Savyasachin, the son of Virata
penetrated into that fierce array of cars protected by Bhishma. The son
of Ganga, however, of fierce deeds, cheerfully withstood the
mighty-armed hero advancing from desire of vanquishing the heroes in
battle. Jishnu, then, confronting Bhishma, cut off his standard clean
off at the roots by shooting a gold-decked arrow pierced by which it
fell to the ground. And at this, four mighty warriors, Duhsasana and
Vikarna and Dussaha and Vivingsati, skilled in weapons and endued with
great energy, and all decked with handsome garlands and ornaments,
rushed towards that terrible bowman. And advancing towards
Vibhatsu--that fierce archer, these all encompassed him around. Then the
heroic Duhsasana pierced the son of Virata with a crescent-shaped arrow
and he pierced Arjuna with another arrow in the breast. And Jishnu,
confronting Duhsasana, cut off by means of a sharp-edged arrow furnished
with vulturine wings his adversary's bow plaited with gold, and then
pierced his person in the breast by means of five arrows. And afflicted
by the arrows of Partha, Duhsasana fled, leaving the combat. Then
Vikarna, the son of Dhritarashtra, pierced Arjuna--that slayer of
hostile heroes, by means of sharp and straight arrows furnished with
vulturine wings. But the son of Kunti within a moment hit him also in
the forehead with straight shafts. And pierced by Arjuna, he fell down
from his car. And at this, Dussaha, supported by Vivingsati, covered
Arjuna with a cloud of sharp arrows, impelled by the desire of rescuing
his brother. Dhananjaya, however, without the least anxiety, pierced
both of them almost at the same instant by means of couple of keen-edged
arrows and then slew the steeds of both. And there upon, both those sons
of Dhritarashtra, deprived of their steeds and their bodies mangled were
taken away by the warrior behind them who had rushed forward with other
cars. Then the unvanquished Vibhatsu, the mighty son of Kunti, decked
with diadem and sure of aim, simultaneously attacked all sides with his
arrows."


SECTION LXII

Vaisampayana said, "Then, O thou of the Bharata race, all the great
car-warriors of the Kurus, united together, began to assail Arjuna to
the best of their might from all sides. But that hero of immeasurable
soul completely covered all those mighty car-warriors with clouds of
arrows, even as the mist covereth the mountains. And the roars of huge
elephants and conchs, mingling together, produced a loud up roar. And
penetrating through the bodies of elephants and horses as also through
steel coats of mail, the arrows shot by Partha fell by thousands. And
shooting shafts with the utmost celerity, the son of Pandu seemed in
that contest to resemble the blazing sun of an autumnal midday. And
afflicted with fear, the car-warriors began to leap down from their cars
and the horse-soldiers from horse-back, while the foot-soldiers began to
fly in all directions. And loud was the clatter made by Arjuna's shafts
as they cleft the coats of mail belonging to mighty warriors, made of
steel, silver, and copper. And the field was soon covered with the
corpses of warriors mounted on elephants and horses, all mangled by the
shafts of Partha of great impetuosity like unto sighing snakes. And then
it seemed as if Dhananjaya, bow in hand, was dancing on the field of
battle. And sorely affrighted at the twang of the _Gandiva_ resembling
the noise of the thunder, many were the combatants that fled from that
terrible conflict. And the field of battle was bestrewn with severed
heads decked with turbans, ear-rings and necklaces of gold, and the
