 himself, "Well done, good and faithful servant?" Brethren, that habit
 of looking forwards to the future prevents all pride and
 self-righteousness, and makes our best and only rest and satisfaction
 to consist in contemplating the future which is bringing us nearer and
 nearer home. Our motto, therefore, must be that striking one of the
 Apostle Paul, "Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching
 forth to those things which are before, I press towards the mark for
 the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus."




 XIII.

 _Preached January 4, 1852._

 CHRISTIAN CASUISTRY.


   "Is any man called being circumcised? let him not become
    uncircumcised. Is any called in uncircumcision? let him not be
    circumcised. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
    nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God. Let every man
    abide in the same calling wherein he was called. Art thou called
    being a servant? care not for it: but if thou mayest be made free
    use it rather. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant,
    is the Lord's freeman; likewise also he that is called being free,
    is Christ's servant. Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the
    servants of men. Brethren, let every man wherein he is called
    therein abide with God."--1 Corinthians, vii. 18-24.

 The whole of these seven chapters of the First Epistle of the Apostle
 Paul to the Corinthians, is occupied with questions of Christian
 casuistry. In the application of the principles of Christianity to the
 varying circumstances of life, innumerable difficulties had arisen,
 and the Corinthians upon these difficulties had put certain questions
 to the Apostle Paul. This seventh chapter contains the apostle's
 answer to many of these questions. There are however, two great
 divisions into which these answers generally fall. St. Paul makes a
 distinction between those things which he speaks by commandment and
 those which he speaks only by permission; there is a distinction
 between what he says as from the Lord, and what only from himself;
 between that which he speaks to them as being taught of God, and that
 which he speaks only as a servant, "called of the Lord and faithful."

 It is manifestly plain that there are many questions in which _right_
 and _wrong_ are not variable, but indissoluble and fixed; while there
 are questions, on the other hand, where these terms are not fixed, but
 variable, fluctuating, altering, dependent upon circumstances. As, for
 instance, those in which the apostle teaches in the present chapter
 the several duties and advantages of marriage and celibacy. There may
 be circumstances in which it is the duty of a Christian man to be
 married, there are others in which it may be his duty to remain
 unmarried. For instance, in the case of a missionary it may be right
 to be married rather than unmarried; on the other hand, in the case of
 a pauper, not having the wherewithal to bring up and maintain a
 family, it may be proper to remain unmarried. You will observe
 however, that no fixed law can be laid down upon this subject. We
 cannot say marriage is a Christian duty, nor celibacy is a Christian
 duty; nor that it is in every case the duty of a missionary to be
 married, or of a pauper to be unmarried. All these things must vary
 according to circumstances, and the duty must be stated not
 universally, but with reference to those circumstances.

 These therefore, are questions of casuistry, which depend upon the
 particular _case_: from which word the term "casuistry" is derived. On
 these points the apostle speaks not by commandment, but by permission;
 not as speaking by God's command, but as having the Spirit of God. A
 distinction has sometimes been drawn with reference to this chapter
 between that which the apostle speaks by inspiration, and what he
 speaks as a man uninspired. The distinction, however, is an altogether
 false one, and beside the question. For the real distinction is not
 between inspired and uninspired, but between a _decision_ in matters
 of Christian duty, and _advice_ in matters of Christian prudence. It
 is abundantly evident that God cannot give advice; He can only issue a
 command. God cannot say, "It is better to do this;" His perfections
 demand something absolute: "Thou shalt _do_ this; thou shalt _not_ do
 this." Whensoever therefore, we come to advice there is introduced
 the human element rather than the divine. In all such cases therefore,
 as are dependent upon circumstances the apostle speaks not as
 inspired, but as uninspired; as one whose judgment we have no right to
 find fault with or to cavil at, who lays down what is a matter of
 Christian prudence, and not a bounden and universal duty. The matter
 of the present discourse will take in various verses in this
 chapter--from the tenth to the twenty-fourth verse--leaving part of
 the commencement and the conclusion for our consideration, if God
 permit, next Sunday.

 There are three main questions on which the apostle here gives his
 inspired decision. The first decision is concerning the sanctity of
 the marriage-bond between two Christians. His verdict is given in the
 tenth verse: "Unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Let
 not the wife depart from her husband." He lays down this principle,
 that the union is an indissoluble one.

 Upon such a subject, Christian brethren, before a mixed congregation,
 it is manifestly evident that we can only speak in general terms. It
 will be sufficient to say that marriage is of all earthly unions
 almost the only one permitting of no change but that of death. It is
 that engagement in which man exerts his most awful and solemn
 power,--the power of responsibility which belongs to him as one that
 shall give account,--the power of abnegating the right to change,--the
 power of parting with his freedom,--the power of doing _that_ which in
 this world can never be reversed. And yet it is perhaps that
 relationship which is spoken of most frivolously, and entered into
 most carelessly and most wantonly. It is not an union merely between
 two creatures, it is an union between two spirits; and the intention
 of that bond is to perfect the nature of both, by supplementing their
 deficiencies with the force of contrast, giving to each sex those
 excellencies in which it is naturally deficient; to the one strength
 of character and firmness of moral will, to the other sympathy,
 meekness, tenderness. And just so solemn, and just so glorious as
 these ends are for which the union was contemplated and intended, just
 so terrible are the consequences if it be perverted and abused. For
 there is no earthly relationship which has so much power to ennoble
 and to exalt. Very strong language does the apostle use in this
 chapter respecting it: "What knoweth thou, O wife, whether thou shalt
 _save_ thy husband? or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt
 save thy wife?" The very power of _saving_ belongs to this
 relationship. And on the other hand, there is no earthly relationship
 which has so much power to wreck and ruin the soul. For there are two
 rocks in this world of ours on which the soul must either anchor or be
 wrecked. The one is God; the other is the sex opposite to itself. The
 one is the "Rock of Ages," on which if the human soul anchors it lives
 the blessed life of faith; against which if the soul be dashed and
 broken, there ensues the wreck of Atheism--the worst ruin of the soul.
 The other rock is of another character. Blessed is the man, blessed is
 the woman whose life-experience has taught a confiding belief in the
 excellencies of the sex opposite to their own--a blessedness second
 only to the blessedness of salvation. And the ruin in the other case
 is second only to the ruin of everlasting perdition--the same wreck
 and ruin of the soul.

 These then, are the two tremendous alternatives: on the one hand the
 possibility of securing, in all sympathy and tenderness, the laying of
 that step on which man rises towards his perfection; on the other hand
 the blight of all sympathy, to be dragged down to earth, and forced to
 become frivolous and common-place; to lose all zest and earnestness in
 life, to have heart and life degraded by mean and
 perpetually-recurring sources of disagreement; these are the two
 alternatives, and it is the worst of these alternatives which the
 young risk when they form an inconsiderate union, excusably
 indeed--because through inexperience; and it is the worst of these
 alternatives which parents risk--not excusably but inexcusably--when
 they bring up their children with no higher view of what that tie is,
 than the merely prudential one of a rich and honourable marriage.

 The second decision which the apostle makes respecting another of the
 questions proposed to him by the Corinthians, is as to the sanctity of
 the marriage bond between a Christian and one who is a heathen. When
 Christianity first entered into our world, and was little understood,
 it seemed to threaten the dislocation and alteration of all existing
 relationships. Many difficulties arose; such for instance, as the one
 here started. When of two heathen parties only one was converted to
 Christianity, the question arose, What in this case is the duty of the
 Christian? Is not the duty separation? Is not the marriage in itself
 null and void? as if it were an union between one dead and one living?
 And that perpetual contact with a heathen, and therefore an enemy of
 God, is not that in a relation so close and intimate, perpetual
 defilement? The apostle decides this with his usual inspired wisdom.
 He decides that the marriage-bond is sacred still. Diversities of
 religious opinion, even the farthest and widest diversity, cannot
 sanction separation. And so he decides in the 13th verse, "The woman
 which hath an husband that believeth not, if he be pleased to dwell
 with her, let her not leave him." And, "if any brother hath a wife
 that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not
 put her away," v. 12.

 Now for us in the present day, the decision on this point is not of so
 much importance as the reason which is adduced in support of it. The
 proof which the Apostle gives of the sanctity of the marriage is
 exceedingly remarkable. Practically it amounts to this;--If this were
 no marriage, but an unhallowed alliance, it would follow as a
 necessary consequence that the offspring could not be reckoned in any
 sense as the children of God; but, on the other hand, it is the
 instinctive, unwavering conviction of every Christian parent, united
 though he or she may be to a heathen, "My child is a child of God,"
 or, in the Jewish form of expression, "My child is _clean_." So the
 apostle says, "the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and
 the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your
 children unclean; but now they are holy," for it follows if the
 children are holy in this sense of dedicated to God, and are capable
 of Christian relationship, then the marriage relation was not
 unhallowed, but sacred and indissoluble.

 The value of this argument in the present day depends on its relation
 to baptism. The great question we are deciding in the present day may
 be reduced to a very few words. This question--the Baptismal
 question--is this:--whether we are baptized because we _are_ the
 children of God, or, whether we are the children of God because we are
 _baptized_; whether in other words, when the Catechism of the Church
 of England says that by baptism we are "made the children of God," we
 are to understand thereby that we are made something which we were not
 before--magically and mysteriously changed; or, whether we are to
 understand that we are made the children of God by baptism in the same
 sense that a sovereign is made a sovereign by coronation. Here the
 apostle's argument is full, decisive, and unanswerable. He does not
 say that these children were Christian, or clean, because they were
 _baptized_, but they were the children of God because they were the
 children of one Christian parent; nay more than that, such children
 could scarcely ever have been baptized, because, if the rite met with
 opposition from one of the parents, it would be an entire and perfect
 veto to the possibility of baptism. You will observe that the very
 fundamental idea out of which infant-baptism arises is, that the
 impression produced upon the mind and character of the child by the
 Christian parent, makes the child one of a Christian community; and,
 therefore, as Peter argued that Cornelius had received the Holy Ghost,
 and so was to be baptized, just in the same way, as they are adopted
 into the Christian family and receive a Christian impression, the
 children of Christian parents are also to be baptized.

 Observe also the important truth which comes out collaterally from
 this argument--namely, the sacredness of the impression, which arises
 from the close connection between parent and child. Stronger far than
 education--going on before education can commence, possibly from the
 very first moments of consciousness, we begin to impress ourselves on
 our children. Our character, voice, features, qualities--modified, no
 doubt, by entering into a new human being, and into a different
 organization--are impressed upon our children. Not the inculcation of
 opinions, but much rather the formation of principles, and of the tone
 of character, the derivation of qualities. Physiologists tell us of
 the derivation of the mental qualities from the father, and of the
 moral from the mother. But be this as it may, there is scarcely one
 here who cannot trace back his present religious character to some
 impression, in early life, from one or other of his parents--a tone, a
 look, a word, a habit, or even, it may be, a bitter, miserable
 exclamation of remorse.

 The third decision which the apostle gives, the third principle which
 he lays down, is but the development of the last. Christianity he
 says, does not interfere with existing relationships. First he lays
 down the principle, and then unfolds the principle in two ways,
 ecclesiastically and civilly. The principle he lays down in almost
 every variety of form. In the 17th verse, "As God hath distributed to
 every man, as the Lord hath called every one, so let him walk." In the
 20th verse, "Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was
 called." In the 24th verse, "Brethren, let every man wherein he is
 called therein abide with God." This is the principle. Christianity
 was not to interfere with existing relationships; Christian men were
 to remain in those relationships in which they were, and in them to
 develope the inward spirituality of the Christian life. Then he
 applies this principle in two ways. First of all, ecclesiastically.
 With respect to their church, or ecclesiastical affairs, he says--"Is
 any man called being circumcised? Let him not become uncircumcised. Is
 any man in uncircumcision? Let him not be circumcised." In other
 words, the Jews, after their conversion, were to continue Jews, if
 they would. Christianity required no change in these outward things,
 for it was not in _these_ that the depth and reality of the kingdom of
 Christ consisted. So the Apostle Paul took Timothy and circumcised
 him; so, also, he used all the Jewish customs with which he was
 familiar, and performed a vow, as related in the Acts of the Apostles,
 "having shorn his head in Cenchrea; for he had a vow." It was not his
 opinion that it was the duty of a Christian to overthrow the Jewish
 system. He knew that the Jewish system could not last, but what he
 wanted was to vitalize the system--to throw into it not a Jewish, but
 a Christian feeling; and so doing, he might continue in it so long as
 it would hold together. And so it was no doubt, with all the other
 apostles. We have no evidence that before the destruction of the
 Jewish polity, there was any attempt made by them to overthrow the
 Jewish external religion. They kept the Jewish Sabbath, and observed
 the Jewish ritual. One of them, James, the Christian Bishop of
 Jerusalem, though a Christian, was even among the Jews remarkable and
 honourable for the regularity with which he observed all his Jewish
 duties. Now let us apply this to modern duties. The great desire among
 men now, appears to be to alter institutions, to have perfect
 institutions, as if _they_ would make perfect men. Mark the difference
 between this feeling and that of the apostle, "Let every man abide in
 the same calling wherein he was called." We are called to be members
 of the Church of England--what is our duty now? What would Paul have
 done? Is this our duty--to put such questions to ourselves as these?
 "Is there any single, particular sentence in the service of my Church
 with which I do not entirely agree? Is there any single ceremony with
 which my whole soul does not go along? If so, then is it my duty to
 leave it at once?" No, my brethren, all that we have to do is to say,
 "All our existing institutions are those under which God has placed
 us, under which we are to mould our lives according to His will." It
 is our duty to vitalize our forms, to throw into them a holier, deeper
 meaning. My Christian brethren, surely no man will get true rest, true
 repose for his soul in these days of controversy, until he has learned
 the wise significance of these wise words--"Let every man abide in the
 same calling wherein he was called." He will but gain unrest, he will
 but disquiet himself, if he says, "I am sinning by continuing in this
 imperfect system," if he considers it his duty to change his calling
 if his opinions do not agree in every particular and special point
 with the system under which God has placed him.

 Lastly, the apostle applies this principle civilly. And you will
 observe he applies it to that civil relationship which of all others,
 was the most difficult to harmonize with Christianity--slavery. "Art
 thou called," he says, "being a servant? Care not for it." Now, in
 considering this part of the subject we should carry along with us
 these two recollections. First, we should recollect that Christianity
 had made much way among this particular class, the class of slaves. No
 wonder that men cursed with slavery embraced with joy a religion which
 was perpetually teaching the worth and dignity of the human soul, and
 declaring that rich and poor, peer and peasant, master and slave, were
 equal in the sight of God. And yet, great as this growth was, it
 contained within it elements of danger. It was to be feared, lest men,
 hearing for ever of brotherhood and Christian equality, should be
 tempted and excited to throw off the yoke by _force_, and compel their
 masters and oppressors to do them right.

 The other fact we are to keep in remembrance is this--that all this
 occurred in an age in which slavery had reached its worst and most
 fearful form, an age in which the emperors were accustomed, not
 unfrequently, to feed their fish with living slaves; when captives
 were led to fight in the amphitheatre with wild beasts or with each
 other, to glut the Roman appetite for blood upon a Roman holiday. And
 yet fearful as it was, the apostle says, "Care not for it." And
 fearful as war was in those days, when the soldiers came to John to be
 baptized, he did not recommend them to join some "Peace Association,"
 to use the modern term; he simply exhorted them to be content with
 their wages.

 And hence we understand the way in which Christianity was to work. It
 interferes indirectly and not directly with existing institutions. No
 doubt it will at length abolish war and slavery, but there is not one
 case where we find Christianity interfering with institutions, as
 such. Even when Onesimus ran away and came to Paul, the apostle sent
 him back to his master Philemon, not dissolving the connection between
 them. And then, as a consolation to the servant, he told him of a
