P: Nay, but their hearts are in ignorance of this (Qur'an), and they
have other works, besides, which they are doing;

S: Nay, their hearts are in overwhelming ignorance with respect to it
and they have besides this other deeds which they do.

023.064
Y: Until, when We seize in Punishment those of them who received the
good things of this world, behold, they will groan in supplication!

P: Till when We grasp their luxurious ones with the punishment, behold!
they supplicate.

S: Until when We overtake those who lead easy lives among them with
punishment, lo! they cry for succor.

023.065
Y: (It will be said): "Groan not in supplication this day: for ye shall
certainly not be helped by Us."

P: Supplicate not this day! Assuredly ye will not be helped by Us.

S: Cry not for succor this day; surely you shall not be given help from
Us.

023.066
Y: "My Signs used to be rehearsed to you, but ye used to turn back on
your heels"-

P: My revelations were recited unto you, but ye used to turn back on
your heels,

S: My communications were indeed recited to you, but you used to turn
back on your heels,

023.067
Y: "In arrogance: talking nonsense about the (Qur'an), like one telling
fables by night."

P: In scorn thereof. Nightly did ye rave together.

S: In arrogance; talking nonsense about the Quran, and left him like one
telling fables by night.

023.068
Y: Do they not ponder over the Word (of Allah), or has anything (new)
come to them that did not come to their fathers of old?

P: Have they not pondered the Word, or hath that come unto them which
came not unto their fathers of old?

S: Is it then that they do not ponder over what is said, or is it that
there has come to them that which did not come to their fathers of old?

023.069
Y: Or do they not recognise their Messenger, that they deny him?

P: Or know they not their messenger, and so reject him?

S: Or is it that they have not recognized their Messenger, so that they
deny him?

023.070
Y: Or do they say, "He is possessed"? Nay, he has brought them the
Truth, but most of them hate the Truth.

P: Or say they: There is a madness in him? Nay, but he bringeth them the
Truth; and most of them are haters of the Truth.

S: Or do they say: There is madness in him? Nay! he has brought them the
truth, and most of them are averse from the truth.

023.071
Y: If the Truth had been in accord with their desires, truly the heavens
and the earth, and all beings therein would have been in confusion and
corruption! Nay, We have sent them their admonition, but they turn away
from their admonition.

P: And if the Truth had followed their desires, verily the heavens and
the earth and whosoever is therein had been corrupted. Nay, We have
brought them their Reminder, but from their Reminder they now turn
away.

S: And should the truth follow their low desires, surely the heavens and
the earth and all those who are therein would have perished. Nay! We
have brought to them their reminder, but from their reminder they turn
aside.

023.072
Y: Or is it that thou askest them for some recompense? But the
recompense of thy Lord is best: He is the Best of those who give
sustenance.

P: Or dost thou ask of them (O Muhammad) any tribute? But the bounty of
thy Lord is better, for He is Best of all who make provision.

S: Or is it that you ask them a recompense? But the recompense of your
Lord is best, and He is the best of those who provide sustenance.

023.073
Y: But verily thou callest them to the Straight Way;

P: And lo! thou summonest them indeed unto a straight path.

S: And most surely you invite them to a right way.

023.074
Y: And verily those who believe not in the Hereafter are deviating from
that Way.

P: And lo! those who believe not in the Hereafter are indeed astray from
the path.

S: And most surely those who do not believe in the hereafter are
deviating from the way.

023.075
Y: If We had mercy on them and removed the distress which is on them,
they would obstinately persist in their transgression, wandering in
distraction to and fro.

P: Though We had mercy on them and relieved them of the harm afflicting
them, they still would wander blindly on in their contumacy.

S: And if We show mercy to them and remove the distress they have, they
would persist in their inordinacy, blindly wandering on.

023.076
Y: We inflicted Punishment on them, but they humbled not themselves to
their Lord, nor do they submissively entreat (Him)!-

P: Already have We grasped them with punishment, but they humble not
themselves unto their Lord, nor do they pray,

S: And already We overtook them with chastisement, but they were not
submissive to their Lord, nor do they humble themselves.

023.077
Y: Until We open on them a gate leading to a severe Punishment: then Lo!
they will be plunged in despair therein!

P: Until, when We open for them the gate of extreme punishment, behold!
they are aghast thereat.

S: Until when We open upon them a door of severe chastisement, lo! they
are in despair at it.

023.078
Y: It is He Who has created for you (the faculties of) hearing, sight,
feeling and understanding: little thanks it is ye give!

P: He it is Who hath created for you ears and eyes and hearts. Small
thanks give ye!

S: And He it is Who made for you the ears and the eyes and the hearts;
little is it that you give thanks.

023.079
Y: And He has multiplied you through the earth, and to Him shall ye be
gathered back.

P: And He it is Who hath sown you broadcast in the earth, and unto Him
ye will be gathered.

S: And He it is Who multiplied you in the earth, and to Him you shall be
gathered.

023.080
Y: It is He Who gives life and death, and to Him (is due) the
alternation of Night and Day: will ye not then understand?

P: And He it is Who giveth life and causeth death, and His is the
difference of night and day. Have ye then no sense?

S: And He it is Who gives life and causes death, and (in) His (control)
is the alternation of the night and the day; do you not then
understand?

023.081
Y: On the contrary they say things similar to what the ancients said.

P: Nay, but they say the like of that which said the men of old;

S: Nay, they say the like of what the ancients said:

023.082
Y: They say: "What! when we die and become dust and bones, could we
really be raised up again?"

P: They say: When we are dead and have become (mere) dust and bones,
shall we then, forsooth, be raised again?

S: They say: What! When we are dead and become dust and bones, shall we
then be raised?

023.083
Y: "Such things have been promised to us and to our fathers before! they
are nothing but tales of the ancients!"

P: We were already promised this, we and our forefathers. Lo! this is
naught but fables of the men of old.

S: Certainly we are promised this, and (so were) our fathers aforetime;
this is naught but stories of those of old.

023.084
Y: Say: "To whom belong the earth and all beings therein? (say) if ye
know!"

P: Say: Unto Whom (belongeth) the earth and whosoever is therein, if ye
have knowledge?

S: Say: Whose is the earth, and whoever is therein, if you know?

023.085
Y: They will say, "To Allah!" say: "Yet will ye not receive admonition?"

P: They will say: Unto Allah. Say: Will ye not then remember?

S: They will say: Allah's. Say: Will you not then mind?

023.086
Y: Say: "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and the Lord of the
Throne (of Glory) Supreme?"

P: Say: Who is Lord of the seven heavens, and Lord of the Tremendous
Throne?

S: Say: Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the mighty
dominion?

023.087
Y: They will say, "(They belong) to Allah." Say: "Will ye not then be
filled with awe?"

P: They will say: Unto Allah (all that belongeth). Say: Will ye not then
keep duty (unto Him)?

S: They will say: (This is) Allah's. Say: Will you not then guard
(against evil)?

023.088
Y: Say: "Who is it in whose hands is the governance of all things,- who
protects (all), but is not protected (of any)? (say) if ye know."

P: Say: In Whose hand is the dominion over all things and He protecteth,
while against Him there is no protection, if ye have knowledge?

S: Say: Who is it in Whose hand is the kingdom of all things and Who
gives succor, but against Him Succor is not given, if you do but know?

023.089
Y: They will say, "(It belongs) to Allah." Say: "Then how are ye
deluded?"

P: They will say: Unto Allah (all that belongeth). Say: How then are ye
bewitched?

S: They will say: (This is) Allah's. Say: From whence are you then
deceived?

023.090
Y: We have sent them the Truth: but they indeed practise falsehood!

P: Nay, but We have brought them the Truth, and lo! they are liars.

S: Nay! We have brought to them the truth, and most surely they are
liars.

023.091
Y: No son did Allah beget, nor is there any god along with Him: (if
there were many gods), behold, each god would have taken away what he
had created, and some would have lorded it over others! Glory to Allah!
(He is free) from the (sort of) things they attribute to Him!

P: Allah hath not chosen any son, nor is there any god along with Him;
else would each god have assuredly championed that which he created,
and some of them would assuredly have overcome others. Glorified be
Allah above all that they allege.

S: Never did Allah take to Himself a son, and never was there with him
any (other) god-- in that case would each god have certainly taken away
what he created, and some of them would certainly have overpowered
others; glory be to Allah above what they describe!

023.092
Y: He knows what is hidden and what is open: too high is He for the
partners they attribute to Him!

P: Knower of the invisible and the visible! and exalted be He over all
that they ascribe as partners (unto Him)!

S: The Knower of the unseen and the seen, so may He be exalted above
what they associate (with Him).

023.093
Y: Say: "O my Lord! if Thou wilt show me (in my lifetime) that which
they are warned against,"-

P: Say: My Lord! If Thou shouldst show me that which they are promised.

S: Say: O my Lord! if Thou shouldst make me see what they are threatened
with:

023.094
Y: "Then, O my Lord! put me not amongst the people who do wrong!"

P: My Lord! then set me not among the wrongdoing folk.

S: My Lord! then place me not with the unjust.

023.095
Y: And We are certainly able to show thee (in fulfilment) that against
which they are warned.

P: And verily We are Able to show thee that which We have promised them.

S: And most surely We are well able to make you see what We threaten
them with.

023.096
Y: Repel evil with that which is best: We are well acquainted with the
things they say.

P: Repel evil with that which is better. We are Best Aware of that which
they allege.

S: Repel evil by what is best; We know best what they describe.

023.097
Y: And say "O my Lord! I seek refuge with Thee from the suggestions of
the Evil Ones."

P: And say: My Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from suggestions of the evil
ones,

S: And say: O my Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from the evil suggestions
of the Shaitans;

023.098
Y: "And I seek refuge with Thee O my Lord! lest they should come near
me."

P: And I seek refuge in Thee, my Lord, lest they be present with me,

S: And I seek refuge in Thee! O my Lord! from their presence.

023.099
Y: (In Falsehood will they be) Until, when death comes to one of them,
he says: "O my Lord! send me back (to life),"-

P: Until, when death cometh unto one of them, he saith: My Lord! Send me
back,

S: Until when death overtakes one of them, he says: Send me back, my
Lord, send me back;

023.100
Y: "In order that I may work righteousness in the things I neglected." -
"By no means! It is but a word he says."- Before them is a Partition
till the Day they are raised up.

P: That I may do right in that which I have left behind! But nay! It is
but a word that he speaketh; and behind them is a barrier until the day
when they are raised.

S: Haply I may do good in that which I have left. By no means! it is a
(mere) word that he speaks; and before them is a barrier until the day
they are raised.

023.101
Y: Then when the Trumpet is blown, there will be no more relationships
between them that day, nor will one ask after another!

P: And when the trumpet is blown there will be no kinship among them
that day, nor will they ask of one another.

S: So when the trumpet is blown, there shall be no ties of relationship
between them on that day, nor shall they ask of each other.

023.102
Y: Then those whose balance (of good deeds) is heavy,- they will attain
salvation:

P: Then those whose scales are heavy, they are the successful.

S: Then as for him whose good deeds are preponderant, these are the
successful.

023.103
Y: But those whose balance is light, will be those who have lost their
souls, in Hell will they abide.

P: And those whose scales are light are those who lose their souls, in
hell abiding.

S: And as for him whose good deeds are light, these are they who shall
have lost their souls, abiding in hell.

023.104
Y: The Fire will burn their faces, and they will therein grin, with
their lips displaced.

P: The fire burneth their faces, and they are glum therein.

S: The fire shall scorch their faces, and they therein shall be in
severe affliction.

023.105
Y: "Were not My Signs rehearsed to you, and ye did but treat them as
falsehood?"

P: (It will be said): Were not My revelations recited unto you, and then
ye used to deny them?

S: Were not My communications recited to you? But you used to reject
them.

023.106
Y: They will say: "Our Lord! Our misfortune overwhelmed us, and we
became a people astray!"

P: They will say: Our Lord! Our evil fortune conquered us, and we were
erring folk.

S: They shall say: O our Lord! our adversity overcame us and we were an
erring people:

023.107
Y: "Our Lord! bring us out of this: if ever we return (to Evil), then
shall we be wrong-doers indeed!"

P: Our Lord! Oh, bring us forth from hence! If we return (to evil) then
indeed we shall be wrong-doers.

S: O our Lord! Take us out of it; then if we return (to evil) surely we
shall be unjust.

023.108
Y: He will say: "Be ye driven into it (with ignominy)! And speak ye not
to Me!"

P: He saith: Begone therein, and speak not unto Me.

S: He shall say: Go away into it and speak not to Me;

023.109
Y: "A part of My servants there was, who used to pray 'our Lord! we
believe; then do Thou forgive us, and have mercy upon us: For Thou art
the Best of those who show mercy!"

P: Lo! there was a party of My slaves who said: Our Lord! We believe,
therefor forgive us and have mercy on us for Thou art Best of all who
show mercy;

S: Surely there was a party of My servants who said: O our Lord! we
believe, so do Thou forgive us and have mercy on us, and Thou art the
best of the Merciful ones.

023.110
Y: "But ye treated them with ridicule, so much so that (ridicule of)
them made you forget My Message while ye were laughing at them!"

P: But ye chose them for a laughing-stock until they caused you to
forget remembrance of Me, while ye laughed at them.

S: But you took them for a mockery until they made you forget My
remembrance and you used to laugh at them.

023.111
Y: "I have rewarded them this Day for their patience and constancy: they
are indeed the ones that have achieved Bliss..."

P: Lo! I have rewarded them this day forasmuch as they were steadfast;
and they surely are the triumphant.

S: Surely I have rewarded them this day because they were patient, that
they are the achievers.

023.112
Y: He will say: "What number of years did ye stay on earth?"

P: He will say: How long tarried ye in the earth, counting by years?

S: He will say: How many years did you tarry in the earth?

023.113
Y: They will say: "We stayed a day or part of a day: but ask those who
keep account."

P: They will say: We tarried by a day or part of a day. Ask of those who
keep count!

S: They will say: We tarried a day or part of a day, but ask those who
keep account.

023.114
Y: He will say: "Ye stayed not but a little,- if ye had only known!"

P: He will say: Ye tarried but a little if ye only knew.

S: He will say: You did tarry but a little-- had you but known (it):

023.115
Y: "Did ye then think that We had created you in jest, and that ye would
not be brought back to Us (for account)?"

P: Deemed ye then that We had created you for naught, and that ye would
not be returned unto Us?

S: What! did you then think that We had created you in vain and that you
shall not be returned to Us?

023.116
Y: Therefore exalted be Allah, the King, the Reality: there is no god
but He, the Lord of the Throne of Honour!

P: Now Allah be Exalted, the True King! There is no God save Him, the
Lord of the Throne of Grace.

S: So exalted be Allah, the True King; no god is there but He, the Lord
of the honorable dominion.

023.117
Y: If anyone invokes, besides Allah, any other god, he has no authority
therefor; and his reckoning will be only with his Lord! and verily the
Unbelievers will fail to win through!

P: He who crieth unto any other god along with Allah hath no proof
thereof. His reckoning is only with his Lord. Lo! disbelievers will not
be successful.

S: And whoever invokes with Allah another god-- he has no proof of
this-- his reckoning is only with his Lord; surely the unbelievers
shall not be successful.

023.118
Y: So say: "O my Lord! grant Thou forgiveness and mercy for Thou art the
Best of those who show mercy!"

P: And (O Muhammad) say: My Lord! Forgive and have mercy, for Thou art
best of all who show mercy.

S: And say: O my Lord! forgive and have mercy, and Thou art the best of
the Merciful ones.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 24:

                            AL-NOOR (THE LIGHT)
 Total Verses: 64 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

024.001
Y: A sura which We have sent down and which We have ordained in it have
We sent down Clear Signs, in order that ye may receive admonition.

P: (Here is) a surah which We have revealed and enjoined, and wherein We
have revealed plain tokens, that haply ye may take heed.

S: (This is) a Chapter which We have revealed and made obligatory and in
which We have revealed clear communications that you may be mindful.

024.002
Y: The woman and the man guilty of adultery or fornication,- flog each
of them with a hundred stripes: Let not compassion move you in their
case, in a matter prescribed by Allah, if ye believe in Allah and the
Last Day: and let a party of the Believers witness their punishment.

P: The adulterer and the adulteress, scourge ye each one of them (with)
a hundred stripes. And let not pity for the twain withhold you from
obedience to Allah, if ye believe in Allah and the Last Day. And let a
party of believers witness their punishment.

S: (As for) the fornicatress and the fornicator, flog each of them,
(giving) a hundred stripes, and let not pity for them detain you in the
matter of obedience to Allah, if you believe in Allah and the last day,
and let a party of believers witness their chastisement.

024.003
Y: Let no man guilty of adultery or fornication marry and but a woman
similarly guilty, or an Unbeliever: nor let any but such a man or an
unbeliever marry such a woman: to the Believers such a thing is
forbidden.

P: The adulterer shall not marry save an adulteress or an idolatress,
and the adulteress none shall marry save an adulterer or an idolater.
All that is forbidden unto believers.

S: The fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatress or idolatress,
and (as for) the fornicatress, none shall marry her but a fornicator or
an idolater; and it is forbidden to the believers.

024.004
Y: And those who launch a charge against chaste women, and produce not
four witnesses (to support their allegations),- flog them with eighty
stripes; and reject their evidence ever after: for such men are wicked
transgressors;-

P: And those who accuse honourable women but bring not four witnesses,
scourge them (with) eighty stripes and never (afterward) accept their
testimony - They indeed are evil-doers -

S: And those who accuse free women then do not bring four witnesses,
flog them, (giving) eighty stripes, and do not admit any evidence from
them ever; and these it is that are the transgressors,

024.005
Y: Unless they repent thereafter and mend (their conduct); for Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Save those who afterward repent and make amends. (For such) lo! Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Except those who repent after this and act aright, for surely Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful.

024.006
Y: And for those who launch a charge against their spouses, and have (in
support) no evidence but their own,- their solitary evidence (can be
received) if they bear witness four times (with an oath) by Allah that
they are solemnly telling the truth;

P: As for those who accuse their wives but have no witnesses except
themselves; let the testimony of one of them be four testimonies,
(swearing) by Allah that he is of those who speak the truth;

S: And (as for) those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses
except themselves, the evidence of one of these (should be taken) four
times, bearing Allah to witness that he is most surely of the truthful
ones.

024.007
Y: And the fifth (oath) (should be) that they solemnly invoke the curse
of Allah on themselves if they tell a lie.

P: And yet a fifth, invoking the curse of Allah on him if he is of those
who lie.

S: And the fifth (time) that the curse of Allah be on him if he is one
of the liars.

024.008
Y: But it would avert the punishment from the wife, if she bears witness
four times (with an oath) By Allah, that (her husband) is telling a
lie;

P: And it shall avert the punishment from her if she bear witness before
Allah four times that the thing he saith is indeed false,

S: And it shall avert the chastisement from her if she testify four
times, bearing Allah to witness that he is most surely one of the
liars;

024.009
Y: And the fifth (oath) should be that she solemnly invokes the wrath of
Allah on herself if (her accuser) is telling the truth.

P: And a fifth (time) that the wrath of Allah be upon her if he speaketh
truth.

S: And the fifth (time) that the wrath of Allah be on her if he is one
of the truthful.

024.010
Y: If it were not for Allah's grace and mercy on you, and that Allah is
Oft-Returning, Full of Wisdom,- (Ye would be ruined indeed).

P: And had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you,
and that Allah is Clement, Wise, (ye had been undone).

S: And were it not for Allah's grace upon you and His mercy-- and that
Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy), Wise!

024.011
Y: Those who brought forward the lie are a body among yourselves: think
it not to be an evil to you; On the contrary it is good for you: to
every man among them (will come the punishment) of the sin that he
earned, and to him who took on himself the lead among them, will be a
penalty grievous.

P: Lo! they who spread the slander are a gang among you. Deem it not a
bad thing for you; nay, it is good for you. Unto every man of them
(will be paid) that which he hath earned of the sin; and as for him
among them who had the greater share therein, his will be an awful
doom.

S: Surely they who concocted the lie are a party from among you. Do not
regard it an evil to you; nay, it is good for you. Every man of them
shall have what he has earned of sin; and (as for) him who took upon
himself the main part thereof, he shall have a grievous chastisement.

024.012
Y: Why did not the believers - men and women - when ye heard of the
affair,- put the best construction on it in their own minds and say,
"This (charge) is an obvious lie"?

P: Why did not the believers, men and women, when ye heard it, think
good of their own folk, and say: It is a manifest untruth?

S: Why did not the believing men and the believing women, when you heard
it, think well of their own people, and say: This is an evident
falsehood?

024.013
Y: Why did they not bring four witnesses to prove it? When they have not
brought the witnesses, such men, in the sight of Allah, (stand forth)
themselves as liars!

P: Why did they not produce four witnesses? Since they produce not
witnesses, they verily are liars in the sight of Allah.

S: Why did they not bring four witnesses of it? But as they have not
brought witnesses they are liars before Allah.

024.014
Y: Were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah on you, in this world
and the Hereafter, a grievous penalty would have seized you in that ye
rushed glibly into this affair.

P: Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you in the
world and the Hereafter an awful doom had overtaken you for that
whereof ye murmured.

S: And were it not for Allah's grace upon you and His mercy in this
world and the hereafter, a grievous chastisement would certainly have
touched you on account of the discourse which you entered into.

024.015
Y: Behold, ye received it on your tongues, and said out of your mouths
things of which ye had no knowledge; and ye thought it to be a light
matter, while it was most serious in the sight of Allah.

P: When ye welcomed it with your tongues, and uttered with your mouths
that whereof ye had no knowledge, ye counted it a trifle. In the sight
of Allah it is very great.

S: When you received it with your tongues and spoke with your mouths
what you had no knowledge of, and you deemed it an easy matter while
with Allah it was grievous.

024.016
Y: And why did ye not, when ye heard it, say? - "It is not right of us
to speak of this: Glory to Allah! this is a most serious slander!"

P: Wherefor, when ye heard it, said ye not: It is not for us to speak of
this. Glory be to Thee (O Allah)! This is awful calumny.

S: And why did you not, when you heard it, say: It does not beseem us
that we should talk of it; glory be to Thee! this is a great calumny?

024.017
Y: Allah doth admonish you, that ye may never repeat such (conduct), if
ye are (true) Believers.

P: Allah admonisheth you that ye repeat not the like thereof ever, if ye
are (in truth) believers.

S: Allah admonishes you that you should not return to the like of it
ever again if you are believers.

024.018
Y: And Allah makes the Signs plain to you: for Allah is full of
knowledge and wisdom.

P: And He expoundeth unto you the revelations. Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: And Allah makes clear to you the communications; and Allah is
Knowing, Wise.

024.019
Y: Those who love (to see) scandal published broadcast among the
Believers, will have a grievous Penalty in this life and in the
Hereafter: Allah knows, and ye know not.

P: Lo! those who love that slander should be spread concerning those who
believe, theirs will be a painful punishment in the world and the
Hereafter. Allah knoweth. Ye know not.

S: Surely (as for) those who love that scandal should circulate
respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement
in this world and the hereafter; and Allah knows, while you do not
know.

024.020
Y: Were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah on you, and that Allah
is full of kindness and mercy, (ye would be ruined indeed).

P: Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you, and
that Allah is Clement, Merciful, (ye had been undone).

S: And were it not for Allah's grace on you and His mercy, and that
Allah is Compassionate, Merciful.

024.021
Y: O ye who believe! follow not Satan's footsteps: if any will follow
the footsteps of Satan, he will (but) command what is shameful and
wrong: and were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah on you, not one
of you would ever have been pure: but Allah doth purify whom He
pleases: and Allah is One Who hears and knows (all things).

P: O ye who believe! Follow not the footsteps of the devil. Unto
whomsoever followeth the footsteps of the devil, lo! he commandeth
filthiness and wrong. Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His
mercy unto you, not one of you would ever have grown pure. But Allah
causeth whom He will to grow. And Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: O you who believe! do not follow the footsteps of the Shaitan, and
whoever follows the footsteps of the Shaitan, then surely he bids the
doing of indecency and evil; and were it not for Allah's grace upon you
and His mercy, not one of you would have ever been pure, but Allah
purifies whom He pleases; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

024.022
Y: Let not those among you who are endued with grace and amplitude of
means resolve by oath against helping their kinsmen, those in want, and
those who have left their homes in Allah's cause: let them forgive and
overlook, do you not wish that Allah should forgive you? For Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: And let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear not to
give to the near of kin and to the needy, and to fugitives for the
cause of Allah. Let them forgive and show indulgence. Yearn ye not that
Allah may forgive you? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And let not those of you who possess grace and abundance swear
against giving to the near of kin and the poor and those who have fled
in Allah's way, and they should pardon and turn away. Do you not love
that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

024.023
Y: Those who slander chaste women, indiscreet but believing, are cursed
in this life and in the Hereafter: for them is a grievous Penalty,-

P: Lo! as for those who traduce virtuous, believing women (who are)
careless, cursed are they in the world and the Hereafter. Theirs will
be an awful doom.

S: Surely those who accuse chaste believing women, unaware (of the
evil), are cursed in this world and the hereafter, and they shall have
a grievous chastisement.

024.024
Y: On the Day when their tongues, their hands, and their feet will bear
witness against them as to their actions.

P: On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet testify
against them as to what they used to do,

S: On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet shall
bear witness against them as to what they did.

024.025
Y: On that Day Allah will pay them back (all) their just dues, and they
will realise that Allah is the (very) Truth, that makes all things
manifest.

P: On that day Allah will pay them their just due, and they will know
that Allah, He is the Manifest Truth.

S: On that day Allah will pay back to them in full their just reward,
and they shall know that Allah is the evident Truth.

024.026
Y: Women impure are for men impure, and men impure for women impure and
women of purity are for men of purity, and men of purity are for women
of purity: these are not affected by what people say: for them there is
forgiveness, and a provision honourable.

P: Vile women are for vile men, and vile men for vile women. Good women
are for good men, and good men for good women; such are innocent of
that which people say: For them is pardon and a bountiful provision.

S: Unclean things are for unclean ones and unclean ones are for unclean
things, and the good things are for good ones and the good ones are for
good things; these are free from what they say; they shall have
forgiveness and an honorable sustenance.

024.027
Y: O ye who believe! enter not houses other than your own, until ye have
asked permission and saluted those in them: that is best for you, in
order that ye may heed (what is seemly).

P: O ye who believe! Enter not houses other than your own without first
announcing your presence and invoking peace upon the folk thereof. That
is better for you, that ye may be heedful.

S: O you who believe! Do not enter houses other than your own houses
until you have asked permission and saluted their inmates; this is
better for you, that you may be mindful.

024.028
Y: If ye find no one in the house, enter not until permission is given
to you: if ye are asked to go back, go back: that makes for greater
purity for yourselves: and Allah knows well all that ye do.

P: And if ye find no-one therein, still enter not until permission hath
been given. And if it be said unto you: Go away again, then go away,
for it is purer for you. Allah knoweth what ye do.

S: But if you do not find any one therein, then do not enter them until
permission is given to you; and if it is said to you: Go back, then go
back; this is purer for you; and Allah is Cognizant of what you do.

024.029
Y: It is no fault on your part to enter houses not used for living in,
which serve some (other) use for you: And Allah has knowledge of what
ye reveal and what ye conceal.

P: (It is) no sin for you to enter uninhabited houses wherein is comfort
for you. Allah knoweth what ye proclaim and what ye hide.

S: It is no sin in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein you
have your necessaries; and Allah knows what you do openly and what you
hide.

024.030
Y: Say to the believing men that they should lower their gaze and guard
their modesty: that will make for greater purity for them: And Allah is
well acquainted with all that they do.

P: Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and be modest. That is
purer for them. Lo! Allah is aware of what they do.

S: Say to the believing men that they cast down their looks and guard
their private parts; that is purer for them; surely Allah is Aware of
what they do.

024.031
Y: And say to the believing women that they should lower their gaze and
guard their modesty; that they should not display their beauty and
ornaments except what (must ordinarily) appear thereof; that they
should draw their veils over their bosoms and not display their beauty
except to their husbands, their fathers, their husband's fathers, their
sons, their husbands' sons, their brothers or their brothers' sons, or
their sisters' sons, or their women, or the slaves whom their right
hands possess, or male servants free of physical needs, or small
children who have no sense of the shame of sex; and that they should
not strike their feet in order to draw attention to their hidden
ornaments. And O ye Believers! turn ye all together towards Allah, that
ye may attain Bliss.

P: And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and be modest, and
to display of their adornment only that which is apparent, and to draw
their veils over their bosoms, and not to reveal their adornment save
to their own husbands or fathers or husbands' fathers, or their sons or
their husbands' sons, or their brothers or their brothers' sons or
sisters' sons, or their women, or their slaves, or male attendants who
lack vigour, or children who know naught of women's nakedness. And let
them not stamp their feet so as to reveal what they hide of their
adornment. And turn unto Allah together, O believers, in order that ye
may succeed.

S: And say to the believing women that they cast down their looks and
guard their private parts and do not display their ornaments except
what appears thereof, and let them wear their head-coverings over their
bosoms, and not display their ornaments except to their husbands or
their fathers, or the fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the
sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or
their sisters' sons, or their women, or those whom their right hands
possess, or the male servants not having need (of women), or the
children who have not attained knowledge of what is hidden of women;
and let them not strike their feet so that what they hide of their
ornaments may be known; and turn to Allah all of you, O believers! so
that you may be successful.

024.032
Y: Marry those among you who are single, or the virtuous ones among
yourselves, male or female: if they are in poverty, Allah will give
them means out of His grace: for Allah encompasseth all, and he knoweth
all things.

P: And marry such of you as are solitary and the pious of your slaves
and maid-servants. If they be poor, Allah will enrich them of His
bounty. Allah is of ample means, Aware.

S: And marry those among you who are single and those who are fit among
your male slaves and your female slaves; if they are needy, Allah will
make them free from want out of His grace; and Allah is Ample-giving,
Knowing.

024.033
Y: Let those who find not the wherewithal for marriage keep themselves
chaste, until Allah gives them means out of His grace. And if any of
your slaves ask for a deed in writing (to enable them to earn their
freedom for a certain sum), give them such a deed if ye know any good
in them: yea, give them something yourselves out of the means which
Allah has given to you. But force not your maids to prostitution when
they desire chastity, in order that ye may make a gain in the goods of
this life. But if anyone compels them, yet, after such compulsion, is
Allah, Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (to them),

P: And let those who cannot find a match keep chaste till Allah give
them independence by His grace. And such of your slaves as seek a
writing (of emancipation), write it for them if ye are aware of aught
of good in them, and bestow upon them of the wealth of Allah which He
hath bestowed upon you. Force not your slave-girls to whoredom that ye
may seek enjoyment of the life of the world, if they would preserve
their chastity. And if one force them, then (unto them), after their
compulsion, lo! Allah will be Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And let those who do not find the means to marry keep chaste until
Allah makes them free from want out of His grace. And (as for) those
who ask for a writing from among those whom your right hands possess,
give them the writing if you know any good in them, and give them of
the wealth of Allah which He has given you; and do not compel your
slave girls to prostitution, when they desire to keep chaste, in order
to seek the frail good of this world's life; and whoever compels them,
then surely after their compulsion Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

024.034
Y: We have already sent down to you verses making things clear, an
illustration from (the story of) people who passed away before you, and
an admonition for those who fear (Allah).

P: And verily We have sent down for you revelations that make plain, and
the example of those who passed away before you. An admonition unto
those who ward off (evil).

S: And certainly We have sent to you clear communications and a
description of those who have passed away before you, and an admonition
to those who guard (against evil).

024.035
Y: Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The Parable of His
Light is as if there were a Niche and within it a Lamp: the Lamp
enclosed in Glass: the glass as it were a brilliant star: Lit from a
blessed Tree, an Olive, neither of the east nor of the west, whose oil
is well-nigh luminous, though fire scarce touched it: Light upon Light!
Allah doth guide whom He will to His Light: Allah doth set forth
Parables for men: and Allah doth know all things.

P: Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The similitude of
His light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The
glass is as it were a shining star. (This lamp is) kindled from a
blessed tree, an olive neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil
would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it. Light
upon light. Allah guideth unto His light whom He will. And Allah
speaketh to mankind in allegories, for Allah is Knower of all things.

S: Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth; a likeness of His
light is as a niche in which is a lamp, the lamp is in a glass, (and)
the glass is as it were a brightly shining star, lit from a blessed
olive-tree, neither eastern nor western, the oil whereof almost gives
light though fire touch it not-- light upon light-- Allah guides to His
light whom He pleases, and Allah sets forth parables for men, and Allah
is Cognizant of all things.

024.036
Y: (Lit is such a Light) in houses, which Allah hath permitted to be
raised to honour; for the celebration, in them, of His name: In them is
He glorified in the mornings and in the evenings, (again and again),-

P: (This lamp is found) in houses which Allah hath allowed to be exalted
and that His name shall be remembered therein. Therein do offer praise
to Him at morn and evening.

S: In houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted and that His name
may be remembered in them; there glorify Him therein in the mornings
and the evenings,

024.037
Y: By men whom neither traffic nor merchandise can divert from the
Remembrance of Allah, nor from regular Prayer, nor from the practice of
regular Charity: Their (only) fear is for the Day when hearts and eyes
will be transformed (in a world wholly new),-

P: Men whom neither merchandise nor sale beguileth from remembrance of
Allah and constancy in prayer and paying to the poor their due; who
fear a day when hearts and eyeballs will be overturned;

S: Men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the remembrance
of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and the giving of poor-rate; they
fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall turn about;

024.038
Y: That Allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds, and
add even more for them out of His Grace: for Allah doth provide for
those whom He will, without measure.

P: That Allah may reward them with the best of what they did, and
increase reward for them of His bounty. Allah giveth blessings without
stint to whom He will.

S: That Allah may give them the best reward of what they have done, and
give them more out of His grace; and Allah gives sustenance to whom He
pleases without measure.

024.039
Y: But the Unbelievers,- their deeds are like a mirage in sandy deserts,
which the man parched with thirst mistakes for water; until when he
comes up to it, he finds it to be nothing: But he finds Allah (ever)
with him, and Allah will pay him his account: and Allah is swift in
taking account.

P: As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are as a mirage in a desert.
The thirsty one supposeth it to be water till he cometh unto it and
findeth it naught, and findeth, in the place thereof, Allah Who payeth
him his due; and Allah is swift at reckoning.

S: And (as for) those who disbelieve, their deeds are like the mirage in
a desert, which the thirsty man deems to be water; until when he comes
to it he finds it to be naught, and there he finds Allah, so He pays
back to him his reckoning in full; and Allah is quick in reckoning;

024.040
Y: Or (the Unbelievers' state) is like the depths of darkness in a vast
deep ocean, overwhelmed with billow topped by billow, topped by (dark)
clouds: depths of darkness, one above another: if a man stretches out
his hands, he can hardly see it! for any to whom Allah giveth not
light, there is no light!

P: Or as darkness on a vast, abysmal sea. There covereth him a wave,
above which is a wave, above which is a cloud. Layer upon layer of
darkness. When he holdeth out his hand he scarce can see it. And he for
whom Allah hath not appointed light, for him there is no light.

S: Or like utter darkness in the deep sea: there covers it a wave above
which is another wave, above which is a cloud, (layers of) utter
darkness one above another; when he holds out his hand, he is almost
unable to see it; and to whomsoever Allah does not give light, he has
no light.

024.041
Y: Seest thou not that it is Allah Whose praises all beings in the
heavens and on earth do celebrate, and the birds (of the air) with
wings outspread? Each one knows its own (mode of) prayer and praise.
And Allah knows well all that they do.

P: Hast thou not seen that Allah, He it is Whom all who are in the
heavens and the earth praise, and the birds in their flight? Of each He
knoweth verily the worship and the praise; and Allah is Aware of what
they do.

S: Do you not see that Allah is He Whom do glorify all those who are in
the heavens and the earth, and the (very) birds with expanded wings? He
knows the prayer of each one and its glorification, and Allah is
Cognizant of what they do.

024.042
Y: Yea, to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth; and
to Allah is the final goal (of all).

P: And unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the
earth, and unto Allah is the journeying.

S: And Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and to Allah
is the eventual coming.

024.043
Y: Seest thou not that Allah makes the clouds move gently, then joins
them together, then makes them into a heap? - then wilt thou see rain
issue forth from their midst. And He sends down from the sky mountain
masses (of clouds) wherein is hail: He strikes therewith whom He
pleases and He turns it away from whom He pleases, the vivid flash of
His lightning well-nigh blinds the sight.

P: Hast thou not seen how Allah wafteth the clouds, then gathereth them,
then maketh them layers, and thou seest the rain come forth from
between them; He sendeth down from the heaven mountains wherein is
hail, and smiteth therewith whom He will, and averteth it from whom He
will. The flashing of His lightning all but snatcheth away the sight.

S: Do you not see that Allah drives along the clouds, then gathers them
together, then piles them up, so that you see the rain coming forth
from their midst? And He sends down of the clouds that are (like)
mountains wherein is hail, afflicting therewith whom He pleases and
turning it away from whom He pleases; the flash of His lightning almost
takes away the sight.

024.044
Y: It is Allah Who alternates the Night and the Day: verily in these
things is an instructive example for those who have vision!

P: Allah causeth the revolution of the day and the night. Lo! herein is
indeed a lesson for those who see.

S: Allah turns over the night and the day; most surely there is a lesson
in this for those who have sight.

024.045
Y: And Allah has created every animal from water: of them there are some
that creep on their bellies; some that walk on two legs; and some that
walk on four. Allah creates what He wills for verily Allah has power
over all things.

P: Allah hath created every animal of water. Of them is (a kind) that
goeth upon its belly and (a kind) that goeth upon two legs and (a kind)
that goeth upon four. Allah createth what He will. Lo! Allah is Able to
do all things.

S: And Allah has created from water every living creature: so of them is
that which walks upon its belly, and of them is that which walks upon
two feet, and of them is that which walks upon four; Allah creates what
He pleases; surely Allah has power over all things.

024.046
Y: We have indeed sent down signs that make things manifest: and Allah
guides whom He wills to a way that is straight.

P: Verily We have sent down revelations and explained them. Allah
guideth whom He will unto a straight path.

S: Certainly We have revealed clear communications, and Allah guides
whom He pleases to the right way.

024.047
Y: They say, "We believe in Allah and in the messenger, and we obey":
but even after that, some of them turn away: they are not (really)
Believers.

P: And they say: We believe in Allah and the messenger, and we obey;
then after that a faction of them turn away. Such are not believers.

S: And they say: We believe in Allah and in the messenger and we obey;
then a party of them turn back after this, and these are not believers.

024.048
Y: When they are summoned to Allah and His messenger, in order that He
may judge between them, behold some of them decline (to come).

P: And when they appeal unto Allah and His messenger to judge between
them, lo! a faction of them are averse;

S: And when they are called to Allah and His Messenger that he may judge
between them, lo! a party of them turn aside.

024.049
Y: But if the right is on their side, they come to him with all
submission.

P: But if right had been with them they would have come unto him
willingly.

S: And if the truth be on their side, they come to him quickly,
obedient.

024.050
Y: Is it that there is a disease in their hearts? or do they doubt, or
are they in fear, that Allah and His Messenger will deal unjustly with
them? Nay, it is they themselves who do wrong.

P: Is there in their hearts a disease, or have they doubts, or fear they
lest Allah and His messenger should wrong them in judgment? Nay, but
such are evil-doers.

S: Is there in their hearts a disease, or are they in doubt, or do they
fear that Allah and His Messenger will act wrongfully towards them?
Nay! they themselves are the unjust.

024.051
Y: The answer of the Believers, when summoned to Allah and His
Messenger, in order that He may judge between them, is no other than
this: they say, "We hear and we obey": it is such as these that will
attain felicity.

P: The saying of (all true) believers when they appeal unto Allah and
His messenger to judge between them is only that they say: We hear and
we obey. And such are the successful.

S: The response of the believers, when they are invited to Allah and His
Messenger that he may judge between them, is only to say: We hear and
we obey; and these it is that are the successful.

024.052
Y: It is such as obey Allah and His Messenger, and fear Allah and do
right, that will win (in the end),

P: He who obeyeth Allah and His messenger, and feareth Allah, and
keepeth duty (unto Him): such indeed are the victorious.

S: And he who obeys Allah and His Messenger, and fears Allah, and is
careful of (his duty to) Him, these it is that are the achievers.

024.053
Y: They swear their strongest oaths by Allah that, if only thou wouldst
command them, they would leave (their homes). Say: "Swear ye not;
Obedience is (more) reasonable; verily, Allah is well acquainted with
all that ye do."

P: They swear by Allah solemnly that, if thou order them, they will go
forth. Say: Swear not; known obedience (is better). Lo! Allah is
Informed of what ye do.

S: And they swear by Allah with the most energetic of their oaths that
if you command them they would certainly go forth. Say: Swear not;
reasonable obedience (is desired); surely Allah is aware of what you
do.

024.054
Y: Say: "Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger: but if ye turn away, he is
only responsible for the duty placed on him and ye for that placed on
you. If ye obey him, ye shall be on right guidance. The Messenger's
duty is only to preach the clear (Message)."

P: Say: Obey Allah and obey the messenger. But if ye turn away, then (it
is) for him (to do) only that wherewith he hath been charged, and for
you (to do) only that wherewith ye have been charged. If ye obey him,
ye will go aright. But the messenger hath no other charge than to
convey (the message) plainly.

S: Say: Obey Allah and obey the Messenger; but if you turn back, then on
him rests that which is imposed on him and on you rests that which is
imposed on you; and if you obey him, you are on the right way; and
nothing rests on the Messenger but clear delivering (of the message).

024.055
Y: Allah has promised, to those among you who believe and work righteous
deeds, that He will, of a surety, grant them in the land, inheritance
(of power), as He granted it to those before them; that He will
establish in authority their religion - the one which He has chosen for
them; and that He will change (their state), after the fear in which
they (lived), to one of security and peace: 'They will worship Me
(alone) and not associate aught with Me. 'If any do reject Faith after
this, they are rebellious and wicked.

P: Allah hath promised such of you as believe and do good work that He
will surely make them to succeed (the present rulers) in the earth even
as He caused those who were before them to succeed (others); and that
He will surely establish for them their religion which He hath approved
for them, and will give them in exchange safety after their fear. They
serve Me. They ascribe no thing as partner unto Me. Those who
disbelieve henceforth, they are the miscreants.

S: Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall
serve Me, not associating aught with Me; and whoever is ungrateful
after this, these it is who are the transgressors.

024.056
Y: So establish regular Prayer and give regular Charity; and obey the
Messenger; that ye may receive mercy.

P: Establish worship and pay the poor-due and obey the messenger, that
haply ye may find mercy.

S: And keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey the Messenger, so
that mercy may be shown to you.

024.057
Y: Never think thou that the Unbelievers are going to frustrate (Allah's
Plan) on earth: their abode is the Fire,- and it is indeed an evil
refuge!

P: Think not that the disbelievers can escape in the land. Fire will be
their home - a hapless journey's end!

S: Think not that those who disbelieve shall escape in the earth, and
their abode is the fire; and certainly evil is the resort!

024.058
Y: O ye who believe! let those whom your right hands possess, and the
(children) among you who have not come of age ask your permission
(before they come to your presence), on three occasions: before morning
prayer; the while ye doff your clothes for the noonday heat; and after
the late-night prayer: these are your three times of undress: outside
those times it is not wrong for you or for them to move about attending
to each other: Thus does Allah make clear the Signs to you: for Allah
is full of knowledge and wisdom.

P: O ye who believe! Let your slaves, and those of you who have not come
to puberty, ask leave of you at three times (before they come into your
presence): Before the prayer of dawn, and when ye lay aside your
raiment for the heat of noon, and after the prayer of night. Three
times of privacy for you. It is no sin for them or for you at other
times, when some of you go round attendant upon others (if they come
into your presence without leave). Thus Allah maketh clear the
revelations for you. Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: O you who believe! let those whom your right hands possess and those
of you who have not attained to puberty ask permission of you three
times; before the morning prayer, and when you put off your clothes at
midday in summer, and after the prayer of the nightfall; these are
three times of privacy for you; neither is it a sin for you nor for
them besides these, some of you must go round about (waiting) upon
others; thus does Allah make clear to you the communications, and Allah
is Knowing, Wise.

024.059
Y: But when the children among you come of age, let them (also) ask for
permission, as do those senior to them (in age): Thus does Allah make
clear His Signs to you: for Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

P: And when the children among you come to puberty then let them ask
leave even as those before them used to ask it. Thus Allah maketh clear
His revelations for you. Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: And when the children among you have attained to puberty, let them
seek permission as those before them sought permission; thus does Allah
make clear to you His communications, and Allah is knowing, Wise.

024.060
Y: Such elderly women as are past the prospect of marriage,- there is no
blame on them if they lay aside their (outer) garments, provided they
make not a wanton display of their beauty: but it is best for them to
be modest: and Allah is One Who sees and knows all things.

P: As for women past child-bearing, who have no hope of marriage, it is
no sin for them if they discard their (outer) clothing in such a way as
not to show adornment. But to refrain is better for them. Allah is
Hearer, Knower.

S: And (as for) women advanced in years who do not hope for a marriage,
it is no sin for them if they put off their clothes without displaying
their ornaments; and if they restrain themselves it is better for them;
and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

024.061
Y: It is no fault in the blind nor in one born lame, nor in one
afflicted with illness, nor in yourselves, that ye should eat in your
own houses, or those of your fathers, or your mothers, or your
brothers, or your sisters, or your father's brothers or your father's
sisters, or your mother's brothers, or your mother's sisters, or in
houses of which the keys are in your possession, or in the house of a
sincere friend of yours: there is no blame on you, whether ye eat in
company or separately. But if ye enter houses, salute each other - a
greeting of blessing and purity as from Allah. Thus does Allah make
clear the signs to you: that ye may understand.

P: No blame is there upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor any
blame upon the sick nor on yourselves if ye eat from your houses, or
the houses of your fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or the
houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters, or the houses
of your fathers' brothers, or the houses of your fathers' sisters, or
the houses of your mothers' brothers, or the houses of your mothers'
sisters, or (from that) whereof ye hold the keys, or (from the house)
of a friend. No sin shall it be for you whether ye eat together or
apart. But when ye enter houses, salute one another with a greeting
from Allah, blessed and sweet. Thus Allah maketh clear His revelations
for you, that haply ye may understand.

S: There is no blame on the blind man, nor is there blame on the lame,
nor is there blame on the sick, nor on yourselves that you eat from
your houses, or your fathers' houses or your mothers' houses, or your
brothers' houses, or your sisters' houses, or your paternal uncles'
houses, or your paternal aunts' houses, or your maternal uncles'
houses, or your maternal aunts' houses, or what you possess the keys
of, or your friends' (houses). It is no sin in you that you eat
together or separately. So when you enter houses, greet your people
with a salutation from Allah, blessed (and) goodly; thus does Allah
make clear to you the communications that you may understand.

024.062
Y: Only those are believers, who believe in Allah and His Messenger:
when they are with him on a matter requiring collective action, they do
not depart until they have asked for his leave; those who ask for thy
leave are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger; so when they
ask for thy leave, for some business of theirs, give leave to those of
them whom thou wilt, and ask Allah for their forgiveness: for Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: They only are the true believers who believe in Allah and His
messenger and, when they are with him on some common errand, go not
away until they have asked leave of him. Lo! those who ask leave of
thee, those are they who believe in Allah and His messenger. So, if
they ask thy leave for some affair of theirs, give leave to whom thou
wilt of them, and ask for them forgiveness of Allah. Lo! Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Only those are believers who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and
when they are with him on a momentous affair they go not away until
they have asked his permission; surely they who ask your permission are
they who believe in Allah and His Messenger; so when they ask your
permission for some affair of theirs, give permission to whom you
please of them and ask forgiveness for them from Allah; surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

024.063
Y: Deem not the summons of the Messenger among yourselves like the
summons of one of you to another: Allah doth know those of you who slip
away under shelter of some excuse: then let those beware who withstand
the Messenger's order, lest some trial befall them, or a grievous
penalty be inflicted on them.

P: Make not the calling of the messenger among you as your calling one
of another. Allah knoweth those of you who steal away, hiding
themselves. And let those who conspire to evade orders beware lest
grief or painful punishment befall them.

S: Do not hold the Messenger's calling (you) among you to be like your
calling one to the other; Allah indeed knows those who steal away from
among you, concealing themselves; therefore let those beware who go
against his order lest a trial afflict them or there befall them a
painful chastisement.

024.064
Y: Be quite sure that to Allah doth belong whatever is in the heavens
and on earth. Well doth He know what ye are intent upon: and one day
they will be brought back to Him, and He will tell them the truth of
what they did: for Allah doth know all things.

P: Lo! verily unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the
earth. He knoweth your condition. And (He knoweth) the Day when they
are returned unto Him so that He may inform them of what they did.
Allah is Knower of all things.

S: Now surely Allah's is whatever is in the heavens and the earth; He
knows indeed that to which you are conforming yourselves; and on the
day on which they are returned to Him He will inform them of what they
did; and Allah is Cognizant of all things.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 25:

                  AL-FURQAN (THE CRITERION, THE STANDARD)
 Total Verses: 77 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

025.001
Y: Blessed is He who sent down the criterion to His servant, that it may
be an admonition to all creatures;-

P: Blessed is He Who hath revealed unto His slave the Criterion (of
right and wrong), that he may be a warner to the peoples.

S: Blessed is He Who sent down the Furqan upon His servant that he may
be a warner to the nations;

025.002
Y: He to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth: no son
has He begotten, nor has He a partner in His dominion: it is He who
created all things, and ordered them in due proportions.

P: He unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth,
He hath chosen no son nor hath He any partner in the Sovereignty. He
hath created everything and hath meted out for it a measure.

S: He, Whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and Who did
not take to Himself a son, and Who has no associate in the kingdom, and
Who created everything, then ordained for it a measure.

025.003
Y: Yet have they taken, besides him, gods that can create nothing but
are themselves created; that have no control of hurt or good to
themselves; nor can they control death nor life nor resurrection.

P: Yet they choose beside Him other gods who create naught but are
themselves created, and possess not hurt nor profit for themselves, and
possess not death nor life, nor power to raise the dead.

S: And they have taken besides Him gods, who do not create anything
while they are themselves created, and they control not for themselves
any harm or profit, and they control not death nor life, nor raising
(the dead) to life.

025.004
Y: But the misbelievers say: "Naught is this but a lie which he has
forged, and others have helped him at it." In truth it is they who have
put forward an iniquity and a falsehood.

P: Those who disbelieve say: This is naught but a lie that he hath
invented, and other folk have helped him with it, so that they have
produced a slander and a lie.

S: And those who disbelieve say: This is nothing but a lie which he has
forged, and other people have helped him at it; so indeed they have
done injustice and (uttered) a falsehood.

025.005
Y: And they say: "Tales of the ancients, which he has caused to be
written: and they are dictated before him morning and evening."

P: And they say: Fables of the men of old which he hath had written down
so that they are dictated to him morn and evening.

S: And they say: The stories of the ancients-- he has got them written--
so these are read out to him morning and evening.

025.006
Y: Say: "The (Qur'an) was sent down by Him who knows the mystery (that
is) in the heavens and the earth: verily He is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful."

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): He who knoweth the secret of the heavens
and the earth hath revealed it. Lo! He ever is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Say: He has revealed it Who knows the secret in the heavens and the
earth; surely He is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

025.007
Y: And they say: "What sort of a messenger is this, who eats food, and
walks through the streets? Why has not an angel been sent down to him
to give admonition with him?"

P: And they say: What aileth this messenger (of Allah) that he eateth
food and walketh in the markets? Why is not an angel sent down unto
him, to be a warner with him.

S: And they say: What is the matter with this Messenger that he eats
food and goes about in the markets; why has not an angel been sent down
to him, so that he should have been a warner with him?

025.008
Y: "Or (Why) has not a treasure been bestowed on him, or why has he
(not) a garden for enjoyment?" The wicked say: "Ye follow none other
than a man bewitched."

P: Or (why is not) treasure thrown down unto him, or why hath he not a
paradise from whence to eat? And the evil-doers say: Ye are but
following a man bewitched.

S: Or (why is not) a treasure sent down to him, or he is made to have a
garden from which he should eat? And the unjust say: You do not follow
any but a man deprived of reason.

025.009
Y: See what kinds of comparisons they make for thee! But they have gone
astray, and never a way will they be able to find!

P: See how they coin similitudes for thee, so that they are all astray
and cannot find a road!

S: See what likenesses do they apply to you, so they have gone astray,
therefore they shall not be able to find a way.

025.010
Y: Blessed is He who, if that were His will, could give thee better
(things) than those,- Gardens beneath which rivers flow; and He could
give thee palaces (secure to dwell in).

P: Blessed is He Who, if He will, will assign thee better than (all)
that - Gardens underneath which rivers flow - and will assign thee
mansions.

S: Blessed is He Who, if He please, will give you what is better than
this, gardens beneath which rivers flow, and He will give you palaces.

025.011
Y: Nay they deny the hour (of the judgment to come): but We have
prepared a blazing fire for such as deny the hour:

P: Nay, but they deny (the coming of) the Hour, and for those who deny
(the coming of) the Hour We have prepared a flame.

S: But they reject the hour, and We have prepared a burning fire for him
who rejects the hour.

025.012
Y: When it sees them from a place far off, they will hear its fury and
its ranging sigh.

P: When it seeth them from afar, they hear the crackling and the roar
thereof.

S: When it shall come into their sight from a distant place, they shall
hear its vehement raging and roaring.

025.013
Y: And when they are cast, bound together into a constricted place
therein, they will plead for destruction there and then!

P: And when they are flung into a narrow place thereof, chained
together, they pray for destruction there.

S: And when they are cast into a narrow place in it, bound, they shall
there call out for destruction.

025.014
Y: "This day plead not for a single destruction: plead for destruction
oft-repeated!"

P: Pray not that day for one destruction, but pray for many
destructions!

S: Call not this day for one destruction, but call for destructions
many.

025.015
Y: Say: "Is that best, or the eternal garden, promised to the righteous?
for them, that is a reward as well as a goal (of attainment)."

P: Say: Is that (doom) better or the Garden of Immortality which is
promised unto those who ward off (evil)? It will be their reward and
journey's end.

S: Say: Is this better or the abiding garden which those who guard
(against evil) are promised? That shall be a reward and a resort for
them.

025.016
Y: "For them there will be therein all that they wish for: they will
dwell (there) for aye: A promise to be prayed for from thy Lord."

P: Therein abiding, they have all that they desire. It is for thy Lord a
promise that must be fulfilled.

S: They shall have therein what they desire abiding (in it); it is a
promise which it is proper to be prayed for from your Lord.

025.017
Y: The day He will gather them together as well as those whom they
worship besides Allah, He will ask: "Was it ye who let these My
servants astray, or did they stray from the Path themselves?"

P: And on the day when He will assemble them and that which they worship
instead of Allah and will say: Was it ye who misled these My slaves or
did they (themselves) wander from the way?

S: And on the day when He shall gather them, and whatever they served
besides Allah, He shall say: Was it you who led astray these My
servants, or did they themselves go astray from the path?

025.018
Y: They will say: "Glory to Thee! not meet was it for us that we should
take for protectors others besides Thee: But Thou didst bestow, on them
and their fathers, good things (in life), until they forgot the
Message: for they were a people (worthless and) lost."

P: They will say: Be Thou Glorified! it was not for us to choose any
protecting friends beside thee; but Thou didst give them and their
fathers ease till they forgot the warning and became lost folk.

S: They shall say: Glory be to Thee; it was not beseeming for us that we
should take any guardians besides Thee, but Thou didst make them and
their fathers to enjoy until they forsook the reminder, and they were a
people in perdition,

025.019
Y: (Allah will say): "Now have they proved you liars in what ye say: so
ye cannot avert (your penalty) nor (get) help." And whoever among you
does wrong, him shall We cause to taste of a grievous Penalty.

P: Thus they will give you the lie regarding what ye say, then ye can
neither avert (the doom) nor obtain help. And whoso among you doeth
wrong, We shall make him taste great torment.

S: So they shall indeed give you the lie in what you say, then you shall
not be able to ward off or help, and whoever among you is unjust, We
will make him taste a great chastisement.

025.020
Y: And the messengers whom We sent before thee were all (men) who ate
food and walked through the streets: We have made some of you as a
trial for others: will ye have patience? for Allah is One Who sees (all
things).

P: We never sent before thee any messengers but lo! they verily ate food
and walked in the markets. And We have appointed some of you a test for
others: Will ye be steadfast? And thy Lord is ever Seer.

S: And We have not sent before you any messengers but they most surely
ate food and went about in the markets; and We have made some of you a
trial for others; will you bear patiently? And your Lord is ever
Seeing.

025.021
Y: Such as fear not the meeting with Us (for Judgment) say: "Why are not
the angels sent down to us, or (why) do we not see our Lord?" Indeed
they have an arrogant conceit of themselves, and mighty is the
insolence of their impiety!

P: And those who look not for a meeting with Us say: Why are angels not
sent down unto us and (Why) do we not see our Lord! Assuredly they
think too highly of themselves and are scornful with great pride.

S: And those who do not hope for Our meeting, say: Why have not angels
been sent down upon us, or (why) do we not see our Lord? Now certainly
they are too proud of themselves and have revolted in great revolt.

025.022
Y: The Day they see the angels,- no joy will there be to the sinners
that Day: The (angels) will say: "There is a barrier forbidden (to you)
altogether!"

P: On the day when they behold the angels, on that day there will be no
good tidings for the guilty; and they will cry: A forbidding ban!

S: On the day when they shall see the angels, there shall be no joy on
that day for the guilty, and they shall say: It is a forbidden thing
totally prohibited.

025.023
Y: And We shall turn to whatever deeds they did (in this life), and We
shall make such deeds as floating dust scattered about.

P: And We shall turn unto the work they did and make it scattered motes.

S: And We will proceed to what they have done of deeds, so We shall
render them as scattered floating dust.

025.024
Y: The Companions of the Garden will be well, that Day, in their abode,
and have the fairest of places for repose.

P: Those who have earned the Garden on that day will be better in their
home and happier in their place of noonday rest;

S: The dwellers of the garden shall on that day be in a better
abiding-place and a better resting-place.

025.025
Y: The Day the heaven shall be rent asunder with clouds, and angels
shall be sent down, descending (in ranks),-

P: A day when the heaven with the clouds will be rent asunder and the
angels will be sent down, a grand descent.

S: And on the day when the heaven shall burst asunder with the clouds,
and the angels shall be sent down descending (in ranks).

025.026
Y: That Day, the dominion as of right and truth, shall be (wholly) for
(Allah) Most Merciful: it will be a Day of dire difficulty for the
Misbelievers.

P: The Sovereignty on that day will be the True (Sovereignty) belonging
to the Beneficent One, and it will be a hard day for disbelievers.

S: The kingdom on that day shall rightly belong to the Beneficent Allah,
and a hard day shall it be for the unbelievers.

025.027
Y: The Day that the wrong-doer will bite at his hands, he will say,
"Oh! would that I had taken a (straight) path with the Messenger!"

P: On the day when the wrong-doer gnaweth his hands, he will say: Ah,
would that I had chosen a way together with the messenger (of Allah)!

S: And the day when the unjust one shall bite his hands saying: O! would
that I had taken a way with the Messenger;

025.028
Y: "Ah! woe is me! Would that I had never taken such a one for a friend!"

P: Alas for me! Ah, would that I had never taken such a one for friend!

S: O woe is me! would that I had not taken such a one for a friend!

025.029
Y: "He did lead me astray from the Message (of Allah) after it had come
to me! Ah! the Evil One is but a traitor to man!"

P: He verily led me astray from the Reminder after it had reached me.
Satan was ever man's deserter in the hour of need.

S: Certainly he led me astray from the reminder after it had come to me;
and the Shaitan fails to aid man.

025.030
Y: Then the Messenger will say: "O my Lord! Truly my people took this
Qur'an for just foolish nonsense."

P: And the messenger saith: O my Lord! Lo! mine own folk make this
Qur'an of no account.

S: And the Messenger cried out: O my Lord! surely my people have treated
this Quran as a forsaken thing.

025.031
Y: Thus have We made for every prophet an enemy among the sinners: but
enough is thy Lord to guide and to help.

P: Even so have We appointed unto every prophet an opponent from among
the guilty; but Allah sufficeth for a Guide and Helper.

S: And thus have We made for every prophet an enemy from among the
sinners and sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and a Helper.

025.032
Y: Those who reject Faith say: "Why is not the Qur'an revealed to him
all at once? Thus (is it revealed), that We may strengthen thy heart
thereby, and We have rehearsed it to thee in slow, well-arranged
stages, gradually."

P: And those who disbelieve say: Why is the Qur'an not revealed unto him
all at once? (It is revealed) thus that We may strengthen thy heart
therewith; and We have arranged it in right order.

S: And those who disbelieve say: Why has not the Quran been revealed to
him all at once? Thus, that We may strengthen your heart by it and We
have arranged it well in arranging.

025.033
Y: And no question do they bring to thee but We reveal to thee the truth
and the best explanation (thereof).

P: And they bring thee no similitude but We bring thee the Truth (as
against it), and better (than their similitude) as argument.

S: And they shall not bring to you any argument, but We have brought to
you (one) with truth and best in significance.

025.034
Y: Those who will be gathered to Hell (prone) on their faces,- they will
be in an evil plight, and, as to Path, most astray.

P: Those who will be gathered on their faces unto hell: such are worse
in plight and further from the right road.

S: (As for) those who shall be gathered upon their faces to hell, they
are in a worse plight and straying farther away from the path.

025.035
Y: (Before this,) We sent Moses The Book, and appointed his brother
Aaron with him as minister;

P: We verily gave Moses the Scripture and placed with him his brother
Aaron as henchman.

S: And certainly We gave Musa the Book and We appointed with him his
brother Haroun an aider.

025.036
Y: And We command: "Go ye both, to the people who have rejected our
Signs:" And those (people) We destroyed with utter destruction.

P: Then We said: Go together unto the folk who have denied Our
revelations. Then We destroyed them, a complete destruction.

S: Then We said: Go you both to the people who rejected Our
communications; so We destroyed them with utter destruction.

025.037
Y: And the people of Noah,- when they rejected the messengers, We
drowned them, and We made them as a Sign for mankind; and We have
prepared for (all) wrong-doers a grievous Penalty;-

P: And Noah's folk, when they denied the messengers, We drowned them and
made of them a portent for mankind. We have prepared a painful doom for
evil-doers.

S: And the people of Nuh, when they rejected the messengers, We drowned
them, and made them a sign for men, and We have prepared a painful
punishment for the unjust;

025.038
Y: As also 'Ad and Thamud, and the Companions of the Rass, and many a
generation between them.

P: And (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud, and the dwellers in Ar-Rass, and
many generations in between.

S: And Ad and Samood and the dwellers of the Rass and many generations
between them.

025.039
Y: To each one We set forth Parables and examples; and each one We broke
to utter annihilation (for their sins).

P: Each (of them) We warned by examples, and each (of them) We brought
to utter ruin.

S: And to every one We gave examples and every one did We destroy with
utter destruction.

025.040
Y: And the (Unbelievers) must indeed have passed by the town on which
was rained a shower of evil: did they not then see it (with their own
eyes)? But they fear not the Resurrection.

P: And indeed they have passed by the township whereon was rained the
fatal rain. Can it be that they have not seen it? Nay, but they hope
for no resurrection.

S: And certainly they have (often) passed by the town on which was
rained an evil rain; did they not then see it? Nay! they did not hope
to be raised again.

025.041
Y: When they see thee, they treat thee no otherwise than in mockery:

"Is this the one whom Allah has sent as a messenger?"
P: And when they see thee (O Muhammad) they treat thee only as a jest
(saying): Is this he whom Allah sendeth as a messenger?

S: And when they see you, they do not take you for aught but a mockery:
Is this he whom Allah has raised to be a messenger?

025.042
Y: "He indeed would well-nigh have misled us from our gods, had it not
been that we were constant to them!" - Soon will they know, when they
see the Penalty, who it is that is most misled in Path!

P: He would have led us far away from our gods if we had not been
staunch to them. They will know, when they behold the doom, who is more
astray as to the road.

S: He had well-nigh led us astray from our gods had we not adhered to
them patiently! And they will know, when they see the punishment, who
is straying farther off from the path.

025.043
Y: Seest thou such a one as taketh for his god his own passion (or
impulse)? Couldst thou be a disposer of affairs for him?

P: Hast thou seen him who chooseth for his god his own lust? Wouldst
thou then be guardian over him?

S: Have you seen him who takes his low desires for his god? Will you
then be a protector over him?

025.044
Y: Or thinkest thou that most of them listen or understand? They are
only like cattle;- nay, they are worse astray in Path.

P: Or deemest thou that most of them hear or understand? They are but as
the cattle - nay, but they are farther astray?

S: Or do you think that most of them do hear or understand? They are
nothing but as cattle; nay, they are straying farther off from the
path.

025.045
Y: Hast thou not turned thy vision to thy Lord?- How He doth prolong the
shadow! If He willed, He could make it stationary! then do We make the
sun its guide;

P: Hast thou not seen how thy Lord hath spread the shade - And if He
willed He could have made it still - then We have made the sun its
pilot;

S: Have you not considered (the work of) your Lord, how He extends the
shade? And if He had pleased He would certainly have made it
stationary; then We have made the sun an indication of it;

025.046
Y: Then We draw it in towards Ourselves,- a contraction by easy stages.

P: Then We withdraw it unto Us, a gradual withdrawal?

S: Then We take it to Ourselves, taking little by little.

025.047
Y: And He it is Who makes the Night as a Robe for you, and Sleep as
Repose, and makes the Day (as it were) a Resurrection.

P: And He it is Who maketh night a covering for you, and sleep repose,
and maketh day a resurrection.

S: And He it is Who made the night a covering for you, and the sleep a
rest, and He made the day to rise up again.

025.048
Y: And He it is Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going
before His mercy, and We send down pure water from the sky,-

P: And He it is Who sendeth the winds, glad tidings heralding His mercy,
and We send down purifying water from the sky,

S: And He it is Who sends the winds as good news before His mercy; and
We send down pure water from the cloud,

025.049
Y: That with it We may give life to a dead land, and slake the thirst of
things We have created,- cattle and men in great numbers.

P: That We may give life thereby to a dead land, and We give many beasts
and men that We have created to drink thereof.

S: That We may give life thereby to a dead land and give it for drink,
out of what We have created, to cattle and many people.

025.050
Y: And We have distributed the (water) amongst them, in order that they
may celebrate (our) praises, but most men are averse (to aught) but
(rank) ingratitude.

P: And verily We have repeated it among them that they may remember, but
most of mankind begrudge aught save ingratitude.

S: And certainly We have repeated this to them that they may be mindful,
but the greater number of men do not consent to aught except denying.

025.051
Y: Had it been Our Will, We could have sent a warner to every centre of
population.

P: If We willed, We could raise up a warner in every village.

S: And if We had pleased We would certainly have raised a warner in
every town.

025.052
Y: Therefore listen not to the Unbelievers, but strive against them with
the utmost strenuousness, with the (Qur'an).

P: So obey not the disbelievers, but strive against them herewith with a
great endeavour.

S: So do not follow the unbelievers, and strive against them a mighty
striving with it.

025.053
Y: It is He Who has let free the two bodies of flowing water: One
palatable and sweet, and the other salt and bitter; yet has He made a
barrier between them, a partition that is forbidden to be passed.

P: And He it is Who hath given independence to the two seas (though they
meet); one palatable, sweet, and the other saltish, bitter; and hath
set a bar and a forbidding ban between them.

S: And He it is Who has made two seas to flow freely, the one sweet that
subdues thirst by its sweetness, and the other salt that burns by its
saltness; and between the two He has made a barrier and inviolable
obstruction.

025.054
Y: It is He Who has created man from water: then has He established
relationships of lineage and marriage: for thy Lord has power (over all
things).

P: And He it is Who hath created man from water, and hath appointed for
him kindred by blood and kindred by marriage; for thy Lord is ever
Powerful.

S: And He it is Who has created man from the water, then He has made for
him blood relationship and marriage relationship, and your Lord is
powerful.

025.055
Y: Yet do they worship, besides Allah, things that can neither profit
them nor harm them: and the Misbeliever is a helper (of Evil), against
his own Lord!

P: Yet they worship instead of Allah that which can neither benefit them
nor hurt them. The disbeliever was ever a partisan against his Lord.

S: And they serve besides Allah that which neither profits them nor
causes them harm; and the unbeliever is a partisan against his Lord.

025.056
Y: But thee We only sent to give glad tidings and admonition.

P: And We have sent thee (O Muhammad) only as a bearer of good tidings
and a warner.

S: And We have not sent you but as a giver of good news and as a warner.

025.057
Y: Say: "No reward do I ask of you for it but this: that each one who
will may take a (straight) Path to his Lord."

P: Say: I ask of you no reward for this, save that whoso will may choose
a way unto his Lord.

S: Say: I do not ask you aught in return except that he who will, may
take the way to his Lord.

025.058
Y: And put thy trust in Him Who lives and dies not; and celebrate his
praise; and enough is He to be acquainted with the faults of His
servants;-

P: And trust thou in the Living One Who dieth not, and hymn His praise.
He sufficeth as the Knower of His bondmen's sins,

S: And rely on the Ever-living Who dies not, and celebrate His praise;
and Sufficient is He as being aware of the faults of His servants,

025.059
Y: He Who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between, in
six days, and is firmly established on the Throne (of Authority): Allah
Most Gracious: ask thou, then, about Him of any acquainted (with such
things).

P: Who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in
six Days, then He mounted the Throne. The Beneficent! Ask anyone
informed concerning Him!

S: Who created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six
periods, and He is firmly established on the throne of authority; the
Beneficent Allah, so ask respecting it one aware.

025.060
Y: When it is said to them, "Prostrate to (Allah) Most Gracious!", they
say, "And what is (Allah) Most Gracious? Shall we prostrate to that
which thou commandest us?" And it increases their flight (from the
Truth).

P: And when it is said unto them: Prostrate to the Beneficent! they say:
And what is the Beneficent? Are we to prostrate to whatever thou
(Muhammad) biddest us? And it increaseth aversion in them.

S: And when it is said to them: Prostrate to the Beneficent Allah, they
say: And what is the Allah of beneficence? Shall we prostrate to what
you bid us? And it adds to their aversion.

025.061
Y: Blessed is He Who made constellations in the skies, and placed
therein a Lamp and a Moon giving light;

P: Blessed be He Who hath placed in the heaven mansions of the stars,
and hath placed therein a great lamp and a moon giving light!

S: Blessed is He Who made the constellations in the heavens and made
therein a lamp and a shining moon.

025.062
Y: And it is He Who made the Night and the Day to follow each other: for
such as have the will to celebrate His praises or to show their
gratitude.

P: And He it is Who hath appointed night and day in succession, for him
who desireth to remember, or desireth thankfulness.

S: And He it is Who made the night and the day to follow each other for
him who desires to be mindful or desires to be thankful.

025.063
Y: And the servants of (Allah) Most Gracious are those who walk on the
earth in humility, and when the ignorant address them, they say,

"Peace!";
P: The (faithful) slaves of the Beneficent are they who walk upon the
earth modestly, and when the foolish ones address them answer: Peace;

S: And the servants of the Beneficent Allah are they who walk on the
earth in humbleness, and when the ignorant address them, they say:
Peace.

025.064
Y: Those who spend the night in adoration of their Lord prostrate and
standing;

P: And who spend the night before their Lord, prostrate and standing,

S: And they who pass the night prostrating themselves before their Lord
and standing.

025.065
Y: Those who say, "Our Lord! avert from us the Wrath of Hell, for its
Wrath is indeed an affliction grievous,"-

P: And who say: Our Lord! Avert from us the doom of hell; lo! the doom
thereof is anguish;

S: And they who say: O our Lord! turn away from us the punishment of
hell, surely the punishment thereof is a lasting evil.

025.066
Y: "Evil indeed is it as an abode, and as a place to rest in";

P: Lo! it is wretched as abode and station;

S: Surely it is an evil abode and (evil) place to stay.

025.067
Y: Those who, when they spend, are not extravagant and not niggardly,
but hold a just (balance) between those (extremes);

P: And those who, when they spend, are neither prodigal nor grudging;
and there is ever a firm station between the two;

S: And they who when they spend, are neither extravagant nor
parsimonious, and (keep) between these the just mean.

025.068
Y: Those who invoke not, with Allah, any other god, nor slay such life
as Allah has made sacred except for just cause, nor commit fornication;
- and any that does this (not only) meets punishment,

P: And those who cry not unto any other god along with Allah, nor take
the life which Allah hath forbidden save in (course of) justice, nor
commit adultery - and whoso doeth this shall pay the penalty;

S: And they who do not call upon another god with Allah and do not slay
the soul, which Allah has forbidden except in the requirements of
justice, and (who) do not commit fornication and he who does this shall
find a requital of sin;

025.069
Y: (But) the Penalty on the Day of Judgment will be doubled to him, and
he will dwell therein in ignominy,-

P: The doom will be doubled for him on the Day of Resurrection, and he
will abide therein disdained for ever;

S: The punishment shall be doubled to him on the day of resurrection,
and he shall abide therein in abasement;

025.070
Y: Unless he repents, believes, and works righteous deeds, for Allah
will change the evil of such persons into good, and Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful,

P: Save him who repenteth and believeth and doth righteous work; as for
such, Allah will change their evil deeds to good deeds. Allah is ever
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Except him who repents and believes and does a good deed; so these
are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones; and Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful.

025.071
Y: And whoever repents and does good has truly turned to Allah with an
(acceptable) conversion;-

P: And whosoever repenteth and doeth good, he verily repenteth toward
Allah with true repentance -

S: And whoever repents and does good, he surely turns to Allah a
(goodly) turning.

025.072
Y: Those who witness no falsehood, and, if they pass by futility, they
pass by it with honourable (avoidance);

P: And those who will not witness vanity, but when they pass near
senseless play, pass by with dignity.

S: And they who do not bear witness to what is false, and when they pass
by what is vain, they pass by nobly.

025.073
Y: Those who, when they are admonished with the Signs of their Lord,
droop not down at them as if they were deaf or blind;

P: And those who, when they are reminded of the revelations of their
Lord, fall not deaf and blind thereat.

S: And they who, when reminded of the communications of their Lord, do
not fall down thereat deaf and blind.

025.074
Y: And those who pray, "Our Lord! Grant unto us wives and offspring who
will be the comfort of our eyes, and give us (the grace) to lead the
righteous."

P: And who say: Our Lord! Vouchsafe us comfort of our wives and of our
offspring, and make us patterns for (all) those who ward off (evil).

S: And they who say: O our Lord! grant us in our wives and our offspring
the joy of our eyes, and make us guides to those who guard (against
evil).

025.075
Y: Those are the ones who will be rewarded with the highest place in
heaven, because of their patient constancy: therein shall they be met
with salutations and peace,

P: They will be awarded the high place forasmuch as they were steadfast,
and they will meet therein with welcome and the ward of peace,

S: These shall be rewarded with high places because they were patient,
and shall be met therein with greetings and salutations.

025.076
Y: Dwelling therein;- how beautiful an abode and place of rest!

P: Abiding there for ever. Happy is it as abode and station!

S: Abiding therein; goodly the abode and the resting-place.

025.077
Y: Say (to the Rejecters): "My Lord is not uneasy because of you if ye
call not on Him: But ye have indeed rejected (Him), and soon will come
the inevitable (punishment)!"

P: Say (O Muhammad, unto the disbelievers): My Lord would not concern
Himself with you but for your prayer. But now ye have denied (the
Truth), therefor there will be judgment.

S: Say: My Lord would not care for you were it not for your prayer; but
you have indeed rejected (the truth), so that which shall cleave shall
come.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 26:

                           AL-SHUARA (THE POETS)
 Total Verses: 227 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

026.001
Y: Ta. Sin. Mim.

P: Ta. Sin. Mim.

S: Ta Sin Mim.

026.002
Y: These are verses of the Book that makes (things) clear.

P: These are revelations of the Scripture that maketh plain.

S: These are the verses of the Book that makes (things) clear.

026.003
Y: It may be thou frettest thy soul with grief, that they do not become
Believers.

P: It may be that thou tormentest thyself (O Muhammad) because they
believe not.

S: Perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not
believe.

026.004
Y: If (such) were Our Will, We could send down to them from the sky a
Sign, to which they would bend their necks in humility.

P: If We will, We can send down on them from the sky a portent so that
their necks would remain bowed before it.

S: If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven so
that their necks should stoop to it.

026.005
Y: But there comes not to them a newly-revealed Message from (Allah)
Most Gracious, but they turn away therefrom.

P: Never cometh there unto them a fresh reminder from the Beneficent
One, but they turn away from it.
