fortitude, since the former's fortitude is more prudent. You will
find that this applies to the other virtues if you run over them all
in the same way."

The other kind of connection among virtues followed the opinion of
those who hold these virtues to have their own proper respective
matters (Q. 65, AA. 1, 2). In this way the connection among moral
virtues results from prudence, and, as to the infused virtues, from
charity, and not from the inclination, which is on the part of the
subject, as stated above (Q. 65, A. 1). Accordingly the nature of the
equality among virtues can also be considered on the part of
prudence, in regard to that which is formal in all the moral virtues:
for in one and the same man, so long as his reason has the same
degree of perfection, the mean will be proportionately defined
according to right reason in each matter of virtue.

But in regard to that which is material in the moral virtues, viz.
the inclination to the virtuous act, one may be readier to perform
the act of one virtue, than the act of another virtue, and this
either from nature, or from habituation, or again by the grace of God.

Reply Obj. 1: This saying of the Apostle may be taken to refer to the
gifts of gratuitous grace, which are not common to all, nor are all
of them equal in the one same subject. We might also say that it
refers to the measure of sanctifying grace, by reason of which one
man has all the virtues in greater abundance than another man, on
account of his greater abundance of prudence, or also of charity, in
which all the infused virtues are connected.

Reply Obj. 2: One saint is praised chiefly for one virtue, another
saint for another virtue, on account of his more admirable readiness
for the act of one virtue than for the act of another virtue.

This suffices for the Reply to the Third Objection.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 66, Art. 3]

Whether the Moral Virtues Are Better Than the Intellectual Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that the moral virtues are better than the
intellectual. Because that which is more necessary, and more lasting,
is better. Now the moral virtues are "more lasting even than the
sciences" (Ethic. i) which are intellectual virtues: and, moreover,
they are more necessary for human life. Therefore they are preferable
to the intellectual virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, virtue is defined as "that which makes its possessor
good." Now man is said to be good in respect of moral virtue, and art
in respect of intellectual virtue, except perhaps in respect of
prudence alone. Therefore moral is better than intellectual virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, the end is more excellent than the means. But
according to _Ethic._ vi, 12, "moral virtue gives right intention of
the end; whereas prudence gives right choice of the means." Therefore
moral virtue is more excellent than prudence, which is the
intellectual virtue that regards moral matters.

_On the contrary,_ Moral virtue is in that part of the soul which is
rational by participation; while intellectual virtue is in the
essentially rational part, as stated in _Ethic._ i, 13. Now rational
by essence is more excellent than rational by participation.
Therefore intellectual virtue is better than moral virtue.

_I answer that,_ A thing may be said to be greater or less in two
ways: first, simply; secondly, relatively. For nothing hinders
something from being better simply, e.g. "learning than riches," and
yet not better relatively, i.e. "for one who is in want" [*Aristotle,
_Topic._ iii.]. Now to consider a thing simply is to consider it in
its proper specific nature. Accordingly, a virtue takes its species
from its object, as explained above (Q. 54, A. 2; Q. 60, A. 1).
Hence, speaking simply, that virtue is more excellent, which has the
more excellent object. Now it is evident that the object of the
reason is more excellent than the object of the appetite: since the
reason apprehends things in the universal, while the appetite tends
to things themselves, whose being is restricted to the particular.
Consequently, speaking simply, the intellectual virtues, which
perfect the reason, are more excellent than the moral virtues, which
perfect the appetite.

But if we consider virtue in its relation to act, then moral virtue,
which perfects the appetite, whose function it is to move the other
powers to act, as stated above (Q. 9, A. 1), is more excellent. And
since virtue is so called from its being a principle of action, for
it is the perfection of a power, it follows again that the nature of
virtue agrees more with moral than with intellectual virtue, though
the intellectual virtues are more excellent habits, simply speaking.

Reply Obj. 1: The moral virtues are more lasting than the
intellectual virtues, because they are practised in matters
pertaining to the life of the community. Yet it is evident that the
objects of the sciences, which are necessary and invariable, are more
lasting than the objects of moral virtue, which are certain
particular matters of action. That the moral virtues are more
necessary for human life, proves that they are more excellent, not
simply, but relatively. Indeed, the speculative intellectual virtues,
from the very fact that they are not referred to something else, as a
useful thing is referred to an end, are more excellent. The reason
for this is that in them we have a kind of beginning of that
happiness which consists in the knowledge of truth, as stated above
(Q. 3, A. 6).

Reply Obj. 2: The reason why man is said to be good simply, in
respect of moral virtue, but not in respect of intellectual virtue,
is because the appetite moves the other powers to their acts, as
stated above (Q. 56, A. 3). Wherefore this argument, too, proves
merely that moral virtue is better relatively.

Reply Obj. 3: Prudence directs the moral virtues not only in the
choice of the means, but also in appointing the end. Now the end of
each moral virtue is to attain the mean in the matter proper to that
virtue; which mean is appointed according to the right ruling of
prudence, as stated in _Ethic._ ii, 6; vi, 13.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 66, Art. 4]

Whether Justice Is the Chief of the Moral Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not the chief of the moral
virtues. For it is better to give of one's own than to pay what is
due. Now the former belongs to liberality, the latter to justice.
Therefore liberality is apparently a greater virtue than justice.

Obj. 2: Further, the chief quality of a thing is, seemingly, that in
which it is most perfect. Now, according to Jam. 1:4, "Patience hath
a perfect work." Therefore it would seem that patience is greater
than justice.

Obj. 3: Further, "Magnanimity has a great influence on every virtue,"
as stated in _Ethic._ iv, 3. Therefore it magnifies even justice.
Therefore it is greater than justice.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that "justice
is the most excellent of the virtues."

_I answer that,_ A virtue considered in its species may be greater or
less, either simply or relatively. A virtue is said to be greater
simply, whereby a greater rational good shines forth, as stated above
(A. 1). In this way justice is the most excellent of all the moral
virtues, as being most akin to reason. This is made evident by
considering its subject and its object: its subject, because this is
the will, and the will is the rational appetite, as stated above (Q.
8, A. 1; Q. 26, A. 1): its object or matter, because it is about
operations, whereby man is set in order not only in himself, but also
in regard to another. Hence "justice is the most excellent of
virtues" (Ethic. v, 1). Among the other moral virtues, which are
about the passions, the more excellent the matter in which the
appetitive movement is subjected to reason, so much the more does the
rational good shine forth in each. Now in things touching man, the
chief of all is life, on which all other things depend. Consequently
fortitude which subjects the appetitive movement to reason in matters
of life and death, holds the first place among those moral virtues
that are about the passions, but is subordinate to justice. Hence the
Philosopher says (Rhet. 1) that "those virtues must needs be greatest
which receive the most praise: since virtue is a power of doing good.
Hence the brave man and the just man are honored more than others;
because the former," i.e. fortitude, "is useful in war, and the
latter," i.e. justice, "both in war and in peace." After fortitude
comes temperance, which subjects the appetite to reason in matters
directly relating to life, in the one individual, or in the one
species, viz. in matters of food and of sex. And so these three
virtues, together with prudence, are called principal virtues, in
excellence also.

A virtue is said to be greater relatively, by reason of its helping
or adorning a principal virtue: even as substance is more excellent
simply than accident: and yet relatively some particular accident is
more excellent than substance in so far as it perfects substance in
some accidental mode of being.

Reply Obj. 1: The act of liberality needs to be founded on an act of
justice, for "a man is not liberal in giving, unless he gives of his
own" (Polit. ii, 3). Hence there could be no liberality apart from
justice, which discerns between "meum" and "tuum": whereas justice
can be without liberality. Hence justice is simply greater than
liberality, as being more universal, and as being its foundation:
while liberality is greater relatively since it is an ornament and an
addition to justice.

Reply Obj. 2: Patience is said to have "a perfect work," by enduring
evils, wherein it excludes not only unjust revenge, which is also
excluded by justice; not only hatred, which is also suppressed by
charity; nor only anger, which is calmed by gentleness; but also
inordinate sorrow, which is the root of all the above. Wherefore it
is more perfect and excellent through plucking up the root in this
matter. It is not, however, more perfect than all the other virtues
simply. Because fortitude not only endures trouble without being
disturbed, but also fights against it if necessary. Hence whoever is
brave is patient; but the converse does not hold, for patience is a
part of fortitude.

Reply Obj. 3: There can be no magnanimity without the other virtues,
as stated in _Ethic._ iv, 3. Hence it is compared to them as their
ornament, so that relatively it is greater than all the others, but
not simply.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 66, Art. 5]

Whether Wisdom Is the Greatest of the Intellectual Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that wisdom is not the greatest of the
intellectual virtues. Because the commander is greater than the one
commanded. Now prudence seems to command wisdom, for it is stated in
_Ethic._ i, 2 that political science, which belongs to prudence
(Ethic. vi, 8), "orders that sciences should be cultivated in states,
and to which of these each individual should devote himself, and to
what extent." Since, then, wisdom is one of the sciences, it seems
that prudence is greater than wisdom.

Obj. 2: Further, it belongs to the nature of virtue to direct man to
happiness: because virtue is "the disposition of a perfect thing to
that which is best," as stated in _Phys._ vii, text. 17. Now prudence
is "right reason about things to be done," whereby man is brought to
happiness: whereas wisdom takes no notice of human acts, whereby man
attains happiness. Therefore prudence is a greater virtue than wisdom.

Obj. 3: Further, the more perfect knowledge is, the greater it seems
to be. Now we can have more perfect knowledge of human affairs, which
are the subject of science, than of Divine things, which are the
object of wisdom, which is the distinction given by Augustine (De
Trin. xii, 14): because Divine things are incomprehensible, according
to Job 26:26: "Behold God is great, exceeding our knowledge."
Therefore science is a greater virtue than wisdom.

Obj. 4: Further, knowledge of principles is more excellent than
knowledge of conclusions. But wisdom draws conclusions from
indemonstrable principles which are the object of the virtue of
understanding, even as other sciences do. Therefore understanding is
a greater virtue than wisdom.

_On the contrary,_ The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 7) that wisdom is
"the head" among "the intellectual virtues."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), the greatness of a virtue,
as to its species, is taken from its object. Now the object of wisdom
surpasses the objects of all the intellectual virtues: because wisdom
considers the Supreme Cause, which is God, as stated at the beginning
of the _Metaphysics._ And since it is by the cause that we judge of
an effect, and by the higher cause that we judge of the lower
effects; hence it is that wisdom exercises judgment over all the
other intellectual virtues, directs them all, and is the architect of
them all.

Reply Obj. 1: Since prudence is about human affairs, and wisdom about
the Supreme Cause, it is impossible for prudence to be a greater
virtue than wisdom, "unless," as stated in _Ethic._ vi, 7, "man were
the greatest thing in the world." Wherefore we must say, as stated in
the same book (Ethic. vi), that prudence does not command wisdom, but
vice versa: because "the spiritual man judgeth all things; and he
himself is judged by no man" (1 Cor. 2:15). For prudence has no
business with supreme matters which are the object of wisdom: but its
command covers things directed to wisdom, viz. how men are to obtain
wisdom. Wherefore prudence, or political science, is, in this way,
the servant of wisdom; for it leads to wisdom, preparing the way for
her, as the doorkeeper for the king.

Reply Obj. 2: Prudence considers the means of acquiring happiness,
but wisdom considers the very object of happiness, viz. the Supreme
Intelligible. And if indeed the consideration of wisdom were perfect
in respect of its object, there would be perfect happiness in the act
of wisdom: but as, in this life, the act of wisdom is imperfect in
respect of its principal object, which is God, it follows that the
act of wisdom is a beginning or participation of future happiness, so
that wisdom is nearer than prudence to happiness.

Reply Obj. 3: As the Philosopher says (De Anima i, text. 1), "one
knowledge is preferable to another, either because it is about a
higher object, or because it is more certain." Hence if the objects
be equally good and sublime, that virtue will be greater which
possesses more certain knowledge. But a virtue which is less certain
about a higher and better object, is preferable to that which is more
certain about an object of inferior degree. Wherefore the Philosopher
says (De Coelo ii, text. 60) that "it is a great thing to be able to
know something about celestial beings, though it be based on weak and
probable reasoning"; and again (De Part. Animal. i, 5) that "it is
better to know a little about sublime things, than much about mean
things." Accordingly wisdom, to which knowledge about God pertains,
is beyond the reach of man, especially in this life, so as to be his
possession: for this "belongs to God alone" (Metaph. i, 2): and yet
this little knowledge about God which we can have through wisdom is
preferable to all other knowledge.

Reply Obj. 4: The truth and knowledge of indemonstrable principles
depends on the meaning of the terms: for as soon as we know what is a
whole, and what is a part, we know at once that every whole is
greater than its part. Now to know the meaning of being and
non-being, of whole and part, and of other things consequent to
being, which are the terms whereof indemonstrable principles are
constituted, is the function of wisdom: since universal being is the
proper effect of the Supreme Cause, which is God. And so wisdom makes
use of indemonstrable principles which are the object of
understanding, not only by drawing conclusions from them, as other
sciences do, but also by passing its judgment on them, and by
vindicating them against those who deny them. Hence it follows that
wisdom is a greater virtue than understanding.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 66, Art. 6]

Whether Charity Is the Greatest of the Theological Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not the greatest of the
theological virtues. Because, since faith is in the intellect, while
hope and charity are in the appetitive power, it seems that faith is
compared to hope and charity, as intellectual to moral virtue. Now
intellectual virtue is greater than moral virtue, as was made evident
above (Q. 62, A. 3). Therefore faith is greater than hope and charity.

Obj. 2: Further, when two things are added together, the result is
greater than either one. Now hope results from something added to
charity; for it presupposes love, as Augustine says (Enchiridion
viii), and it adds a certain movement of stretching forward to the
beloved. Therefore hope is greater than charity.

Obj. 3: Further, a cause is more noble than its effect. Now faith and
hope are the cause of charity: for a gloss on Matt. 1:3 says that
"faith begets hope, and hope charity." Therefore faith and hope are
greater than charity.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:13): "Now there remain
faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is
charity."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), the greatness of a virtue,
as to its species, is taken from its object. Now, since the three
theological virtues look at God as their proper object, it cannot be
said that any one of them is greater than another by reason of its
having a greater object, but only from the fact that it approaches
nearer than another to that object; and in this way charity is
greater than the others. Because the others, in their very nature,
imply a certain distance from the object: since faith is of what is
not seen, and hope is of what is not possessed. But the love of
charity is of that which is already possessed: since the beloved is,
in a manner, in the lover, and, again, the lover is drawn by desire
to union with the beloved; hence it is written (1 John 4:16): "He
that abideth in charity, abideth in God, and God in him."

Reply Obj. 1: Faith and hope are not related to charity in the same
way as prudence to moral virtue; and for two reasons. First, because
the theological virtues have an object surpassing the human soul:
whereas prudence and the moral virtues are about things beneath man.
Now in things that are above man, to love them is more excellent than
to know them. Because knowledge is perfected by the known being in
the knower: whereas love is perfected by the lover being drawn to the
beloved. Now that which is above man is more excellent in itself than
in man: since a thing is contained according to the mode of the
container. But it is the other way about in things beneath man.
Secondly, because prudence moderates the appetitive movements
pertaining to the moral virtues, whereas faith does not moderate the
appetitive movement tending to God, which movement belongs to the
theological virtues: it only shows the object. And this appetitive
movement towards its object surpasses human knowledge, according to
Eph. 3:19: "The charity of Christ which surpasseth all knowledge."

Reply Obj. 2: Hope presupposes love of that which a man hopes to
obtain; and such love is love of concupiscence, whereby he who
desires good, loves himself rather than something else. On the other
hand, charity implies love of friendship, to which we are led by
hope, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 4).

Reply Obj. 3: An efficient cause is more noble than its effect: but
not a disposing cause. For otherwise the heat of fire would be more
noble than the soul, to which the heat disposes the matter. It is in
this way that faith begets hope, and hope charity: in the sense, to
wit, that one is a disposition to the other.
________________________

QUESTION 67

OF THE DURATION OF VIRTUES AFTER THIS LIFE
(In Six Articles)

We must now consider the duration of virtues after this life, under
which head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the moral virtues remain after this life?

(2) Whether the intellectual virtues remain?

(3) Whether faith remains?

(4) Whether hope remains?

(5) Whether anything remains of faith or hope?

(6) Whether charity remains?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 67, Art. 1]

Whether the Moral Virtues Remain After This Life?

Objection 1: It would seem that the moral virtues do not remain after
this life. For in the future state of glory men will be like angels,
according to Matt. 22:30. But it is absurd to put moral virtues in
the angels [*"Whatever relates to moral action is petty, and unworthy
of the gods" (Ethic. x, 8)], as stated in _Ethic._ x, 8. Therefore
neither in man will there be moral virtues after this life.

Obj. 2: Further, moral virtues perfect man in the active life. But
the active life does not remain after this life: for Gregory says
(Moral. iv, 18): "The works of the active life pass away from the
body." Therefore moral virtues do not remain after this life.

Obj. 3: Further, temperance and fortitude, which are moral virtues,
are in the irrational parts of the soul, as the Philosopher states
(Ethic. iii, 10). Now the irrational parts of the soul are corrupted,
when the body is corrupted: since they are acts of bodily organs.
Therefore it seems that the moral virtues do not remain after this
life.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Wis. 1:15) that "justice is
perpetual and immortal."

_I answer that,_ As Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 9), Cicero held
that the cardinal virtues do not remain after this life; and that, as
Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 9), "in the other life men are made
happy by the mere knowledge of that nature, than which nothing is
better or more lovable, that Nature, to wit, which created all
others." Afterwards he concludes that these four virtues remain in
the future life, but after a different manner.

In order to make this evident, we must note that in these virtues
there is a formal element, and a quasi-material element. The material
element in these virtues is a certain inclination of the appetitive
part to the passions and operations according to a certain mode: and
since this mode is fixed by reason, the formal element is precisely
this order of reason.

Accordingly we must say that these moral virtues do not remain in the
future life, as regards their material element. For in the future
life there will be no concupiscences and pleasures in matters of food
and sex; nor fear and daring about dangers of death; nor
distributions and commutations of things employed in this present
life. But, as regards the formal element, they will remain most
perfect, after this life, in the Blessed, in as much as each one's
reason will have most perfect rectitude in regard to things
concerning him in respect of that state of life: and his appetitive
power will be moved entirely according to the order of reason, in
things pertaining to that same state. Hence Augustine says (De Trin.
xiv, 9) that "prudence will be there without any danger of error;
fortitude, without the anxiety of bearing with evil; temperance,
without the rebellion of the desires: so that prudence will neither
prefer nor equal any good to God; fortitude will adhere to Him most
steadfastly; and temperance will delight in Him Who knows no
imperfection." As to justice, it is yet more evident what will be its
act in that life, viz. "to be subject to God": because even in this
life subjection to a superior is part of justice.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher is speaking there of these moral
virtues, as to their material element; thus he speaks of justice, as
regards "commutations and distributions"; of fortitude, as to
"matters of terror and danger"; of temperance, in respect of "lewd
desires."

The same applies to the Second Objection. For those things that
concern the active life, belong to the material element of the
virtues.

Reply Obj. 3: There is a twofold state after this life; one before
the resurrection, during which the soul will be separate from the
body; the other, after the resurrection, when the souls will be
reunited to their bodies. In this state of resurrection, the
irrational powers will be in the bodily organs, just as they now are.
Hence it will be possible for fortitude to be in the irascible, and
temperance in the concupiscible part, in so far as each power will be
perfectly disposed to obey the reason. But in the state preceding the
resurrection, the irrational parts will not be in the soul actually,
but only radically in its essence, as stated in the First Part (Q.
77, A. 8). Wherefore neither will these virtues be actually, but only
in their root, i.e. in the reason and will, wherein are certain
nurseries of these virtues, as stated above (Q. 63, A. 1). Justice,
however, will remain because it is in the will. Hence of justice it
is specially said that it is "perpetual and immortal"; both by reason
of its subject, since the will is incorruptible; and because its act
will not change, as stated.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 67, Art. 2]

Whether the Intellectual Virtues Remain After This Life?

Objection 1: It would seem that the intellectual virtues do not
remain after this life. For the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:8, 9) that
"knowledge shall be destroyed," and he states the reason to be
because "we know in part." Now just as the knowledge of science is in
part, i.e. imperfect; so also is the knowledge of the other
intellectual virtues, as long as this life lasts. Therefore all the
intellectual virtues will cease after this life.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Categor. vi) that since
science is a habit, it is a quality difficult to remove: for it is
not easily lost, except by reason of some great change or sickness.
But no bodily change is so great as that of death. Therefore science
and the other intellectual virtues do not remain after death.

Obj. 3: Further, the intellectual virtues perfect the intellect so
that it may perform its proper act well. Now there seems to be no act
of the intellect after this life, since "the soul understands nothing
without a phantasm" (De Anima iii, text. 30); and, after this life,
the phantasms do not remain, since their only subject is an organ of
the body. Therefore the intellectual virtues do not remain after this
life.

_On the contrary,_ The knowledge of what is universal and necessary
is more constant than that of particular and contingent things. Now
the knowledge of contingent particulars remains in man after this
life; for instance, the knowledge of what one has done or suffered,
according to Luke 16:25: "Son, remember that thou didst receive good
things in thy life-time, and likewise Lazarus evil things." Much
more, therefore, does the knowledge of universal and necessary things
remain, which belong to science and the other intellectual virtues.

_I answer that,_ As stated in the First Part (Q. 79, A. 6) some have
held that the intelligible species do not remain in the passive
intellect except when it actually understands; and that so long as
actual consideration ceases, the species are not preserved save in
the sensitive powers which are acts of bodily organs, viz. in the
powers of imagination and memory. Now these powers cease when the
body is corrupted: and consequently, according to this opinion,
neither science nor any other intellectual virtue will remain after
this life when once the body is corrupted.

But this opinion is contrary to the mind of Aristotle, who states (De
Anima iii, text. 8) that "the possible intellect is in act when it is
identified with each thing as knowing it; and yet, even then, it is
in potentiality to consider it actually." It is also contrary to
reason, because intelligible species are contained by the "possible"
intellect immovably, according to the mode of their container. Hence
the "possible" intellect is called "the abode of the species" (De
Anima iii) because it preserves the intelligible species.

And yet the phantasms, by turning to which man understands in this
life, by applying the intelligible species to them as stated in the
First Part (Q. 84, A. 7; Q. 85, A. 1, ad 5), cease as soon as the
body is corrupted. Hence, so far as the phantasms are concerned,
which are the quasi-material element in the intellectual virtues,
these latter cease when the body is destroyed: but as regards the
intelligible species, which are in the "possible" intellect, the
intellectual virtues remain. Now the species are the quasi-formal
element of the intellectual virtues. Therefore these remain after
this life, as regards their formal element, just as we have stated
concerning the moral virtues (A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: The saying of the Apostle is to be understood as
referring to the material element in science, and to the mode of
understanding; because, to it, neither do the phantasms remain, when
the body is destroyed; nor will science be applied by turning to the
phantasms.

Reply Obj. 2: Sickness destroys the habit of science as to its
material element, viz. the phantasms, but not as to the intelligible
species, which are in the "possible" intellect.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated in the First Part (Q. 89, A. 1), the
separated soul has a mode of understanding, other than by turning to
the phantasms. Consequently science remains, yet not as to the same
mode of operation; as we have stated concerning the moral virtues
(A. 1).
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 67, Art. 3]

Whether Faith Remains After This Life?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith remains after this life.
Because faith is more excellent than science. Now science remains
after this life, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore faith remains also.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (1 Cor. 3:11): "Other foundation no
man can lay, but that which is laid; which is Christ Jesus," i.e.
faith in Jesus Christ. Now if the foundation is removed, that which
is built upon it remains no more. Therefore, if faith remains not
after this life, no other virtue remains.

Obj. 3: Further, the knowledge of faith and the knowledge of glory
differ as perfect from imperfect. Now imperfect knowledge is
compatible with perfect knowledge: thus in an angel there can be
"evening" and "morning" knowledge [*Cf. I, Q. 58, A. 6]; and a man
can have science through a demonstrative syllogism, together with
opinion through a probable syllogism, about one same conclusion.
Therefore after this life faith also is compatible with the knowledge
of glory.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (2 Cor. 5:6, 7): "While we are in
the body, we are absent from the Lord: for we walk by faith and not
by sight." But those who are in glory are not absent from the Lord,
but present to Him. Therefore after this life faith does not remain
in the life of glory.

_I answer that,_ Opposition is of itself the proper cause of one
thing being excluded from another, in so far, to wit, as wherever two
things are opposite to one another, we find opposition of affirmation
and negation. Now in some things we find opposition in respect of
contrary forms; thus in colors we find white and black. In others we
find opposition in respect of perfection and imperfection: wherefore
in alterations, more and less are considered to be contraries, as
when a thing from being less hot is made more hot (Phys. v, text.
19). And since perfect and imperfect are opposite to one another, it
is impossible for perfection and imperfection to affect the same
thing at the same time.

Now we must take note that sometimes imperfection belongs to a
thing's very nature, and belongs to its species: even as lack of
reason belongs to the very specific nature of a horse and an ox. And
since a thing, so long as it remains the same identically, cannot
pass from one species to another, it follows that if such an
imperfection be removed, the species of that thing is changed: even
as it would no longer be an ox or a horse, were it to be rational.
Sometimes, however, the imperfection does not belong to the specific
nature, but is accidental to the individual by reason of something
else; even as sometimes lack of reason is accidental to a man,
because he is asleep, or because he is drunk, or for some like
reason; and it is evident, that if such an imperfection be removed,
the thing remains substantially.

Now it is clear that imperfect knowledge belongs to the very nature
of faith: for it is included in its definition; faith being defined
as "the substance of things to be hoped for, the evidence of things
that appear not" (Heb. 11:1). Wherefore Augustine says (Tract. xl in
Joan.): "What is faith? Believing without seeing." But it is an
imperfect knowledge that is of things unapparent or unseen.
Consequently imperfect knowledge belongs to the very nature of faith:
therefore it is clear that the knowledge of faith cannot be perfect
and remain identically the same.

But we must also consider whether it is compatible with perfect
knowledge: for there is nothing to prevent some kind of imperfect
knowledge from being sometimes with perfect knowledge. Accordingly we
must observe that knowledge can be imperfect in three ways: first, on
the part of the knowable object; secondly, on the part of the medium;
thirdly, on the part of the subject. The difference of perfect and
imperfect knowledge on the part of the knowable object is seen in the
"morning" and "evening" knowledge of the angels: for the "morning"
knowledge is about things according to the being which they have in
the Word, while the "evening" knowledge is about things according as
they have being in their own natures, which being is imperfect in
comparison with the First Being. On the part of the medium, perfect
and imperfect knowledge are exemplified in the knowledge of a
conclusion through a demonstrative medium, and through a probable
medium. On the part of the subject the difference of perfect and
imperfect knowledge applies to opinion, faith, and science. For it is
essential to opinion that we assent to one of two opposite assertions
with fear of the other, so that our adhesion is not firm: to science
it is essential to have firm adhesion with intellectual vision, for
science possesses certitude which results from the understanding of
principles: while faith holds a middle place, for it surpasses
opinion in so far as its adhesion is firm, but falls short of science
in so far as it lacks vision.

Now it is evident that a thing cannot be perfect and imperfect in the
same respect; yet the things which differ as perfect and imperfect
can be together in the same respect in one and the same other thing.
Accordingly, knowledge which is perfect on the part of the object is
quite incompatible with imperfect knowledge about the same object;
but they are compatible with one another in respect of the same
medium or the same subject: for nothing hinders a man from having at
one and the same time, through one and the same medium, perfect and
imperfect knowledge about two things, one perfect, the other
imperfect, e.g. about health and sickness, good and evil. In like
manner knowledge that is perfect on the part of the medium is
incompatible with imperfect knowledge through one and the same
medium: but nothing hinders them being about the same subject or in
the same subject: for one man can know the same conclusions through a
probable and through a demonstrative medium. Again, knowledge that is
perfect on the part of the subject is incompatible with imperfect
knowledge in the same subject. Now faith, of its very nature,
contains an imperfection on the part of the subject, viz. that the
believer sees not what he believes: whereas bliss, of its very
nature, implies perfection on the part of the subject, viz. that the
Blessed see that which makes them happy, as stated above (Q. 3, A.
8). Hence it is manifest that faith and bliss are incompatible in one
and the same subject.

Reply Obj. 1: Faith is more excellent than science, on the part of
the object, because its object is the First Truth. Yet science has a
more perfect mode of knowing its object, which is not incompatible
with vision which is the perfection of happiness, as the mode of
faith is incompatible.

Reply Obj. 2: Faith is the foundation in as much as it is knowledge:
consequently when this knowledge is perfected, the foundation will be
perfected also.

The Reply to the Third Objection is clear from what has been said.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 67, Art. 4]

Whether Hope Remains After Death, in the State of Glory?

Objection 1: It would seem that hope remains after death, in the
state of glory. Because hope perfects the human appetite in a more
excellent manner than the moral virtues. But the moral virtues remain
after this life, as Augustine clearly states (De Trin. xiv, 9). Much
more then does hope remain.

Obj. 2: Further, fear is opposed to hope. But fear remains after this
life: in the Blessed, filial fear, which abides for ever--in the
lost, the fear of punishment. Therefore, in a like manner, hope can
remain.

Obj. 3: Further, just as hope is of future good, so is desire. Now in
the Blessed there is desire for future good; both for the glory of
the body, which the souls of the Blessed desire, as Augustine
declares (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35); and for the glory of the soul,
according to Ecclus. 24:29: "They that eat me, shall yet hunger, and
they that drink me, shall yet thirst," and 1 Pet. 1:12: "On Whom the
angels desire to look." Therefore it seems that there can be hope in
the Blessed after this life is past.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 8:24): "What a man seeth,
why doth he hope for?" But the Blessed see that which is the object
of hope, viz. God. Therefore they do not hope.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), that which, in its very
nature, implies imperfection of its subject, is incompatible with the
opposite perfection in that subject. Thus it is evident that movement
of its very nature implies imperfection of its subject, since it is
"the act of that which is in potentiality as such" (Phys. iii): so
that as soon as this potentiality is brought into act, the movement
ceases; for a thing does not continue to become white, when once it
is made white. Now hope denotes a movement towards that which is not
possessed, as is clear from what we have said above about the passion
of hope (Q. 40, AA. 1, 2). Therefore when we possess that which we
hope for, viz. the enjoyment of God, it will no longer be possible to
have hope.

Reply Obj. 1: Hope surpasses the moral virtues as to its object,
which is God. But the acts of the moral virtues are not incompatible
with the perfection of happiness, as the act of hope is; except
perhaps, as regards their matter, in respect of which they do not
remain. For moral virtue perfects the appetite, not only in respect
of what is not yet possessed, but also as regards something which is
in our actual possession.

Reply Obj. 2: Fear is twofold, servile and filial, as we shall state
further on (II-II, Q. 19, A. 2). Servile fear regards punishment, and
will be impossible in the life of glory, since there will no longer
be possibility of being punished. Filial fear has two acts: one is an
act of reverence to God, and with regard to this act, it remains: the
other is an act of fear lest we be separated from God, and as regards
this act, it does not remain. Because separation from God is in the
nature of an evil: and no evil will be feared there, according to
Prov. 1:33: "He . . . shall enjoy abundance without fear of evils."
Now fear is opposed to hope by opposition of good and evil, as stated
above (Q. 23, A. 2; Q. 40, A. 1), and therefore the fear which will
remain in glory is not opposed to hope. In the lost there can be fear
of punishment, rather than hope of glory in the Blessed. Because in
the lost there will be a succession of punishments, so that the
notion of something future remains there, which is the object of
fear: but the glory of the saints has no succession, by reason of its
being a kind of participation of eternity, wherein there is neither
past nor future, but only the present. And yet, properly speaking,
neither in the lost is there fear. For, as stated above (Q. 42, A.
2), fear is never without some hope of escape: and the lost have no
such hope. Consequently neither will there be fear in them; except
speaking in a general way, in so far as any expectation of future
evil is called fear.

Reply Obj. 3: As to the glory of the soul, there can be no desire in
the Blessed, in so far as desire looks for something future, for the
reason already given (ad 2). Yet hunger and thirst are said to be in
them because they never weary, and for the same reason desire is said
to be in the angels. With regard to the glory of the body, there can
be desire in the souls of the saints, but not hope, properly
speaking; neither as a theological virtue, for thus its object is
God, and not a created good; nor in its general signification.
Because the object of hope is something difficult, as stated above
(Q. 40, A. 1): while a good whose unerring cause we already possess,
is not compared to us as something difficult. Hence he that has money
is not, properly speaking, said to hope for what he can buy at once.
In like manner those who have the glory of the soul are not, properly
speaking, said to hope for the glory of the body, but only to desire
it.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 67, Art. 5]

Whether Anything of Faith or Hope Remains in Glory?

Objection 1: It would seem that something of faith and hope remains
in glory. For when that which is proper to a thing is removed, there
remains what is common; thus it is stated in _De Causis_ that "if you
take away rational, there remains living, and when you remove living,
there remains being." Now in faith there is something that it has in
common with beatitude, viz. knowledge: and there is something proper
to it, viz. darkness, for faith is knowledge in a dark manner.
Therefore, the darkness of faith removed, the knowledge of faith
still remains.

Obj. 2: Further, faith is a spiritual light of the soul, according to
Eph. 1:17, 18: "The eyes of your heart enlightened . . . in the
knowledge of God"; yet this light is imperfect in comparison with the
light of glory, of which it is written (Ps. 35:10): "In Thy light we
shall see light." Now an imperfect light remains when a perfect light
supervenes: for a candle is not extinguished when the sun's rays
appear. Therefore it seems that the light of faith itself remains
with the light of glory.

Obj. 3: Further, the substance of a habit does not cease through the
withdrawal of its matter: for a man may retain the habit of
liberality, though he have lost his money: yet he cannot exercise the
act. Now the object of faith is the First Truth as unseen. Therefore
when this ceases through being seen, the habit of faith can still
remain.

_On the contrary,_ Faith is a simple habit. Now a simple thing is
either withdrawn entirely, or remains entirely. Since therefore faith
does not remain entirely, but is taken away as stated above (A. 3),
it seems that it is withdrawn entirely.

_I answer that,_ Some have held that hope is taken away entirely: but
that faith is taken away in part, viz. as to its obscurity, and
remains in part, viz. as to the substance of its knowledge. And if
this be understood to mean that it remains the same, not identically
but generically, it is absolutely true; since faith is of the same
genus, viz. knowledge, as the beatific vision. On the other hand,
hope is not of the same genus as heavenly bliss: because it is
compared to the enjoyment of bliss, as movement is to rest in the
term of movement.

But if it be understood to mean that in heaven the knowledge of faith
remains identically the same, this is absolutely impossible. Because
when you remove a specific difference, the substance of the genus
does not remain identically the same: thus if you remove the
difference constituting whiteness, the substance of color does not
remain identically the same, as though the identical color were at
one time whiteness, and, at another, blackness. The reason is that
genus is not related to difference as matter to form, so that the
substance of the genus remains identically the same, when the
difference is removed, as the substance of matter remains identically
the same, when the form is changed: for genus and difference are not
the parts of a species, else they would not be predicated of the
species. But even as the species denotes the whole, i.e. the compound
of matter and form in material things, so does the difference, and
likewise the genus; the genus denotes the whole by signifying that
which is material; the difference, by signifying that which is
formal; the species, by signifying both. Thus, in man, the sensitive
nature is as matter to the intellectual nature, and animal is
predicated of that which has a sensitive nature, rational of that
which has an intellectual nature, and man of that which has both. So
that the one same whole is denoted by these three, but not under the
same aspect.

It is therefore evident that, since the signification of the
difference is confined to the genus if the difference be removed, the
substance of the genus cannot remain the same: for the same animal
nature does not remain, if another kind of soul constitute the
animal. Hence it is impossible for the identical knowledge, which was
previously obscure, to become clear vision. It is therefore evident
that, in heaven, nothing remains of faith, either identically or
specifically the same, but only generically.

Reply Obj. 1: If "rational" be withdrawn, the remaining "living"
thing is the same, not identically, but generically, as stated.

Reply Obj. 2: The imperfection of candlelight is not opposed to the
perfection of sunlight, since they do not regard the same subject:
whereas the imperfection of faith and the perfection of glory are
opposed to one another and regard the same subject. Consequently they
are incompatible with one another, just as light and darkness in the
air.

Reply Obj. 3: He that loses his money does not therefore lose the
possibility of having money, and therefore it is reasonable for the
habit of liberality to remain. But in the state of glory not only is
the object of faith, which is the unseen, removed actually, but even
its possibility, by reason of the unchangeableness of heavenly bliss:
and so such a habit would remain to no purpose.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 67, Art. 6]

Whether Charity Remains After This Life, in Glory?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity does not remain after this
life, in glory. Because according to 1 Cor. 13:10, "when that which
is perfect is come, that which is in part," i.e. that which is
imperfect, "shall be done away." Now the charity of the wayfarer is
imperfect. Therefore it will be done away when the perfection of
glory is attained.

Obj. 2: Further, habits and acts are differentiated by their objects.
But the object of love is good apprehended. Since therefore the
apprehension of the present life differs from the apprehension of the
life to come, it seems that charity is not the same in both cases.

Obj. 3: Further, things of the same kind can advance from
imperfection to perfection by continuous increase. But the charity of
the wayfarer can never attain to equality with the charity of heaven,
however much it be increased. Therefore it seems that the charity of
the wayfarer does not remain in heaven.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:8): "Charity never
falleth away."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), when the imperfection of a
thing does not belong to its specific nature, there is nothing to
hinder the identical thing passing from imperfection to perfection,
even as man is perfected by growth, and whiteness by intensity. Now
charity is love, the nature of which does not include imperfection,
since it may relate to an object either possessed or not possessed,
either seen or not seen. Therefore charity is not done away by the
perfection of glory, but remains identically the same.

Reply Obj. 1: The imperfection of charity is accidental to it;
because imperfection is not included in the nature of love. Now
although that which is accidental to a thing be withdrawn, the
substance remains. Hence the imperfection of charity being done away,
charity itself is not done away.

Reply Obj. 2: The object of charity is not knowledge itself;
if it were, the charity of the wayfarer would not be the same as the
charity of heaven: its object is the thing known, which remains the
same, viz. God Himself.

Reply Obj. 3: The reason why charity of the wayfarer cannot
attain to the perfection of the charity of heaven, is a difference on
the part of the cause: for vision is a cause of love, as stated in
_Ethic._ ix, 5: and the more perfectly we know God, the more perfectly
we love Him.
________________________

QUESTION 68

OF THE GIFTS
(In Eight Articles)

We now come to consider the Gifts; under which head there are eight
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the Gifts differ from the virtues?

(2) Of the necessity of the Gifts?

(3) Whether the Gifts are habits?

(4) Which, and how many are they?

(5) Whether the Gifts are connected?

(6) Whether they remain in heaven?

(7) Of their comparison with one another;

(8) Of their comparison with the virtues.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 68, Art. 1]

Whether the Gifts Differ from the Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gifts do not differ from the
virtues. For Gregory commenting on Job 1:2, "There were born to him
seven sons," says (Moral. i, 12): "Seven sons were born to us, when
through the conception of heavenly thought, the seven virtues of the
Holy Ghost take birth in us": and he quotes the words of Isa. 11:2,
3: "And the Spirit . . . of understanding . . . shall rest upon him,"
etc. where the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are enumerated.
Therefore the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine commenting on Matt. 12:45, "Then he goeth
and taketh with him seven other spirits," etc., says (De Quaest.
Evang. i, qu. 8): "The seven vices are opposed to the seven virtues
of the Holy Ghost," i.e. to the seven gifts. Now the seven vices are
opposed to the seven virtues, commonly so called. Therefore the gifts
do not differ from the virtues commonly so called.

Obj. 3: Further, things whose definitions are the same, are
themselves the same. But the definition of virtue applies to the
gifts; for each gift is "a good quality of the mind, whereby we lead
a good life," etc. [*Cf. Q. 55, A. 4]. Likewise the definition of a
gift can apply to the infused virtues: for a gift is "an unreturnable
giving," according to the Philosopher (Topic. iv, 4). Therefore the
virtues and gifts do not differ from one another.

Obj. 4: Several of the things mentioned among the gifts, are virtues:
for, as stated above (Q. 57, A. 2), wisdom, understanding, and
knowledge are intellectual virtues, counsel pertains to prudence,
piety to a kind of justice, and fortitude is a moral virtue.
Therefore it seems that the gifts do not differ from the virtues.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory (Moral. i, 12) distinguishes seven gifts,
which he states to be denoted by the seven sons of Job, from the
three theological virtues, which, he says, are signified by Job's
three daughters. He also distinguishes (Moral. ii, 26) the same seven
gifts from the four cardinal virtues, which he says were signified by
the four corners of the house.

_I answer that,_ If we speak of gift and virtue with regard to the
notion conveyed by the words themselves, there is no opposition
between them. Because the word "virtue" conveys the notion that it
perfects man in relation to well-doing, while the word "gift" refers
to the cause from which it proceeds. Now there is no reason why that
which proceeds from one as a gift should not perfect another in
well-doing: especially as we have already stated (Q. 63, A. 3) that
some virtues are infused into us by God. Wherefore in this respect we
cannot differentiate gifts from virtues. Consequently some have held
that the gifts are not to be distinguished from the virtues. But
there remains no less a difficulty for them to solve; for they must
explain why some virtues are called gifts and some not; and why among
the gifts there are some, fear, for instance, that are not reckoned
virtues.

Hence it is that others have said that the gifts should be held as
being distinct from the virtues; yet they have not assigned a
suitable reason for this distinction, a reason, to wit, which would
apply either to all the virtues, and to none of the gifts, or vice
versa. For, seeing that of the seven gifts, four belong to the
reason, viz. wisdom, knowledge, understanding and counsel, and three
to the appetite, viz. fortitude, piety and fear; they held that the
gifts perfect the free-will according as it is a faculty of the
reason, while the virtues perfect it as a faculty of the will: since
they observed only two virtues in the reason or intellect, viz. faith
and prudence, the others being in the appetitive power or the
affections. If this distinction were true, all the virtues would have
to be in the appetite, and all the gifts in the reason.

Others observing that Gregory says (Moral. ii, 26) that "the gift of
the Holy Ghost, by coming into the soul endows it with prudence,
temperance, justice, and fortitude, and at the same time strengthens
it against every kind of temptation by His sevenfold gift," said that
the virtues are given us that we may do good works, and the gifts,
that we may resist temptation. But neither is this distinction
sufficient. Because the virtues also resist those temptations which
lead to the sins that are contrary to the virtues; for everything
naturally resists its contrary: which is especially clear with regard
to charity, of which it is written (Cant. 8:7): "Many waters cannot
quench charity."

Others again, seeing that these gifts are set down in Holy Writ as
having been in Christ, according to Isa. 11:2, 3, said that the
virtues are given simply that we may do good works, but the gifts, in
order to conform us to Christ, chiefly with regard to His Passion,
for it was then that these gifts shone with the greatest splendor.
Yet neither does this appear to be a satisfactory distinction.
Because Our Lord Himself wished us to be conformed to Him, chiefly in
humility and meekness, according to Matt. 11:29: "Learn of Me,
because I am meek and humble of heart," and in charity, according to
John 15:12: "Love one another, as I have loved you." Moreover, these
virtues were especially resplendent in Christ's Passion.

Accordingly, in order to differentiate the gifts from the virtues, we
must be guided by the way in which Scripture expresses itself, for we
find there that the term employed is "spirit" rather than "gift." For
thus it is written (Isa. 11:2, 3): "The spirit . . . of wisdom and of
understanding . . . shall rest upon him," etc.: from which words we
are clearly given to understand that these seven are there set down
as being in us by Divine inspiration. Now inspiration denotes motion
from without. For it must be noted that in man there is a twofold
principle of movement, one within him, viz. the reason; the other
extrinsic to him, viz. God, as stated above (Q. 9, AA. 4, 6):
moreover the Philosopher says this in the chapter On Good Fortune
(Ethic. Eudem. vii, 8).

Now it is evident that whatever is moved must be proportionate to its
mover: and the perfection of the mobile as such, consists in a
disposition whereby it is disposed to be well moved by its mover.
Hence the more exalted the mover, the more perfect must be the
disposition whereby the mobile is made proportionate to its mover:
thus we see that a disciple needs a more perfect disposition in order
to receive a higher teaching from his master. Now it is manifest that
human virtues perfect man according as it is natural for him to be
moved by his reason in his interior and exterior actions.
Consequently man needs yet higher perfections, whereby to be disposed
to be moved by God. These perfections are called gifts, not only
because they are infused by God, but also because by them man is
disposed to become amenable to the Divine inspiration, according to
Isa. 50:5: "The Lord . . . hath opened my ear, and I do not resist; I
have not gone back." Even the Philosopher says in the chapter On Good
Fortune (Ethic. Eudem., vii, 8) that for those who are moved by
Divine instinct, there is no need to take counsel according to human
reason, but only to follow their inner promptings, since they are
moved by a principle higher than human reason. This then is what some
say, viz. that the gifts perfect man for acts which are higher than
acts of virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Sometimes these gifts are called virtues, in the broad
sense of the word. Nevertheless, they have something over and above
the virtues understood in this broad way, in so far as they are
Divine virtues, perfecting man as moved by God. Hence the Philosopher
(Ethic. vii, 1) above virtue commonly so called, places a kind of
"heroic" or "divine virtue [*_arete heroike kai theia_]," in respect
of which some men are called "divine."

Reply Obj. 2: The vices are opposed to the virtues, in so far as they
are opposed to the good as appointed by reason; but they are opposed
to the gifts, in as much as they are opposed to the Divine instinct.
For the same thing is opposed both to God and to reason, whose light
flows from God.

Reply Obj. 3: This definition applies to virtue taken in its general
sense. Consequently, if we wish to restrict it to virtue as
distinguished from the gifts, we must explain the words, "whereby we
lead a good life" as referring to the rectitude of life which is
measured by the rule of reason. Likewise the gifts, as distinct from
infused virtue, may be defined as something given by God in relation
to His motion; something, to wit, that makes man to follow well the
promptings of God.

Reply Obj. 4: Wisdom is called an intellectual virtue, so far as it
proceeds from the judgment of reason: but it is called a gift,
according as its work proceeds from the Divine prompting. The same
applies to the other virtues.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 68, Art. 2]

Whether the Gifts Are Necessary to Man for Salvation?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gifts are not necessary to man
for salvation. Because the gifts are ordained to a perfection
surpassing the ordinary perfection of virtue. Now it is not necessary
for man's salvation that he should attain to a perfection surpassing
the ordinary standard of virtue; because such perfection falls, not
under the precept, but under a counsel. Therefore the gifts are not
necessary to man for salvation.

Obj. 2: Further, it is enough, for man's salvation, that he behave
well in matters concerning God and matters concerning man. Now man's
behavior to God is sufficiently directed by the theological virtues;
and his behavior towards men, by the moral virtues. Therefore gifts
are not necessary to man for salvation.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. ii, 26) that "the Holy Ghost
gives wisdom against folly, understanding against dullness, counsel
against rashness, fortitude against fears, knowledge against
ignorance, piety against hardness of our heart, and fear against
pride." But a sufficient remedy for all these things is to be found
in the virtues. Therefore the gifts are not necessary to man for
salvation.

_On the contrary,_ Of all the gifts, wisdom seems to be the highest,
and fear the lowest. Now each of these is necessary for salvation:
since of wisdom it is written (Wis. 7:28): "God loveth none but him
that dwelleth with wisdom"; and of fear (Ecclus. 1:28): "He that is
without fear cannot be justified." Therefore the other gifts that are
placed between these are also necessary for salvation.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the gifts are perfections of
man, whereby he is disposed so as to be amenable to the promptings of
God. Wherefore in those matters where the prompting of reason is not
sufficient, and there is need for the prompting of the Holy Ghost,
there is, in consequence, need for a gift.

Now man's reason is perfected by God in two ways: first, with its
natural perfection, to wit, the natural light of reason; secondly,
with a supernatural perfection, to wit, the theological virtues, as
stated above (Q. 62, A. 1). And, though this latter perfection is
greater than the former, yet the former is possessed by man in a more
perfect manner than the latter: because man has the former in his
full possession, whereas he possesses the latter imperfectly, since
we love and know God imperfectly. Now it is evident that anything
that has a nature or a form or a virtue perfectly, can of itself work
according to them: not, however, excluding the operation of God, Who
works inwardly in every nature and in every will. On the other hand,
that which has a nature, or form, or virtue imperfectly, cannot of
itself work, unless it be moved by another. Thus the sun which
possesses light perfectly, can shine by itself; whereas the moon
which has the nature of light imperfectly, sheds only a borrowed
light. Again, a physician, who knows the medical art perfectly, can
work by himself; but his pupil, who is not yet fully instructed,
cannot work by himself, but needs to receive instructions from him.

Accordingly, in matters subject to human reason, and directed to
man's connatural end, man can work through the judgment of his
reason. If, however, even in these things man receive help in the
shape of special promptings from God, this will be out of God's
superabundant goodness: hence, according to the philosophers, not
every one that had the acquired moral virtues, had also the heroic or
divine virtues. But in matters directed to the supernatural end, to
which man's reason moves him, according as it is, in a manner, and
imperfectly, informed by the theological virtues, the motion of
reason does not suffice, unless it receive in addition the prompting
or motion of the Holy Ghost, according to Rom. 8:14, 17: "Whosoever
are led by the Spirit of God, they are sons of God . . . and if sons,
heirs also": and Ps. 142:10: "Thy good Spirit shall lead me into the
right land," because, to wit, none can receive the inheritance of
that land of the Blessed, except he be moved and led thither by the
Holy Ghost. Therefore, in order to accomplish this end, it is
necessary for man to have the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 1: The gifts surpass the ordinary perfection of the
virtues, not as regards the kind of works (as the counsels surpass
the commandments), but as regards the manner of working, in respect
of man being moved by a higher principle.

Reply Obj. 2: By the theological and moral virtues, man is not so
perfected in respect of his last end, as not to stand in continual
need of being moved by the yet higher promptings of the Holy Ghost,
for the reason already given.

Reply Obj. 3: Whether we consider human reason as perfected in its
natural perfection, or as perfected by the theological virtues, it
does not know all things, nor all possible things. Consequently it is
unable to avoid folly and other like things mentioned in the
objection. God, however, to Whose knowledge and power all things are
subject, by His motion safeguards us from all folly, ignorance,
dullness of mind and hardness of heart, and the rest. Consequently
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which make us amenable to His
promptings, are said to be given as remedies to these defects.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 68, Art. 3]

Whether the Gifts of the Holy Ghost Are Habits?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gifts of the Holy Ghost are not
habits. Because a habit is a quality abiding in man, being defined as
"a quality difficult to remove," as stated in the _Predicaments_
(Categor. vi). Now it is proper to Christ that the gifts of the Holy
Ghost rest in Him, as stated in Isa. 11:2, 3: "He upon Whom thou
shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining upon Him, He it is that
baptizeth"; on which words Gregory comments as follows (Moral. ii,
27): "The Holy Ghost comes upon all the faithful; but, in a singular
way, He dwells always in the Mediator." Therefore the gifts of the
Holy Ghost are not habits.

Obj. 2: Further, the gifts of the Holy Ghost perfect man according as
he is moved by the Spirit of God, as stated above (AA. 1, 2). But in
so far as man is moved by the Spirit of God, he is somewhat like an
instrument in His regard. Now to be perfected by a habit is
befitting, not an instrument, but a principal agent. Therefore the
gifts of the Holy Ghost are not habits.

Obj. 3: Further, as the gifts of the Holy Ghost are due to Divine
inspiration, so is the gift of prophecy. Now prophecy is not a habit:
for "the spirit of prophecy does not always reside in the prophets,"
as Gregory states (Hom. i in Ezechiel). Neither, therefore, are the
gifts of the Holy Ghost.

_On the contrary,_ Our Lord in speaking of the Holy Ghost said to His
disciples (John 14:17): "He shall abide with you, and shall be in
you." Now the Holy Ghost is not in a man without His gifts. Therefore
His gifts abide in man. Therefore they are not merely acts or
passions but abiding habits.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the gifts are perfections of
man, whereby he becomes amenable to the promptings of the Holy Ghost.
Now it is evident from what has been already said (Q. 56, A. 4; Q.
58, A. 2), that the moral virtues perfect the appetitive power
according as it partakes somewhat of the reason, in so far, to wit,
as it has a natural aptitude to be moved by the command of reason.
Accordingly the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as compared with the Holy
Ghost Himself, are related to man, even as the moral virtues, in
comparison with the reason, are related to the appetitive power. Now
the moral virtues are habits, whereby the powers of appetite are
disposed to obey reason promptly. Therefore the gifts of the Holy
Ghost are habits whereby man is perfected to obey readily the Holy
Ghost.

Reply Obj. 1: Gregory solves this objection (Moral. ii, 27) by saying
that "by those gifts without which one cannot obtain life, the Holy
Ghost ever abides in all the elect, but not by His other gifts." Now
the seven gifts are necessary for salvation, as stated above (A. 2).
Therefore, with regard to them, the Holy Ghost ever abides in holy
men.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument holds, in the case of an instrument which
has no faculty of action, but only of being acted upon. But man is
not an instrument of that kind; for he is so acted upon, by the Holy
Ghost, that he also acts himself, in so far as he has a free-will.
Therefore he needs a habit.

Reply Obj. 3: Prophecy is one of those gifts which are for the
manifestation of the Spirit, not for the necessity of salvation:
hence the comparison fails.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 68, Art. 4]

Whether the Seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost Are Suitably Enumerated?

Objection 1: It would seem that seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are
unsuitably enumerated. For in that enumeration four are set down
corresponding to the intellectual virtues, viz. wisdom,
understanding, knowledge, and counsel, which corresponds to prudence;
whereas nothing is set down corresponding to art, which is the fifth
intellectual virtue. Moreover, something is included corresponding to
justice, viz. piety, and something corresponding to fortitude, viz.
the gift of fortitude; while there is nothing to correspond to
temperance. Therefore the gifts are enumerated insufficiently.

Obj. 2: Further, piety is a part of justice. But no part of fortitude
is assigned to correspond thereto, but fortitude itself. Therefore
justice itself, and not piety, ought to have been set down.

Obj. 3: Further, the theological virtues, more than any, direct us to
God. Since, then, the gifts perfect man according as he is moved by
God, it seems that some gifts, corresponding to the theological
virtues, should have been included.

Obj. 4: Further, even as God is an object of fear, so is He of love,
of hope, and of joy. Now love, hope, and joy are passions condivided
with fear. Therefore, as fear is set down as a gift, so ought the
other three.

Obj. 5: Further, wisdom is added in order to direct understanding;
counsel, to direct fortitude; knowledge, to direct piety. Therefore,
some gift should have been added for the purpose of directing fear.
Therefore the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are unsuitably enumerated.

_On the contrary,_ stands the authority of Holy Writ (Isa. 11:2, 3).

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), the gifts are habits
perfecting man so that he is ready to follow the promptings of the
Holy Ghost, even as the moral virtues perfect the appetitive powers
so that they obey the reason. Now just as it is natural for the
appetitive powers to be moved by the command of reason, so it is
natural for all the forces in man to be moved by the instinct of God,
as by a superior power. Therefore whatever powers in man can be the
principles of human actions, can also be the subjects of gifts, even
as they are virtues; and such powers are the reason and appetite.

Now the reason is speculative and practical: and in both we find the
apprehension of truth (which pertains to the discovery of truth), and
judgment concerning the truth. Accordingly, for the apprehension of
truth, the speculative reason is perfected by _understanding;_ the
practical reason, by _counsel._ In order to judge aright, the
speculative reason is perfected by _wisdom_; the practical reason by
_knowledge._ The appetitive power, in matters touching a man's
relations to another, is perfected by _piety;_ in matters touching
himself, it is perfected by _fortitude_ against the fear of dangers;
and against inordinate lust for pleasures, by _fear,_ according to
Prov. 15:27: "By the fear of the Lord every one declineth from evil,"
and Ps. 118:120: "Pierce Thou my flesh with Thy fear: for I am afraid
of Thy judgments." Hence it is clear that these gifts extend to all
those things to which the virtues, both intellectual and moral,
extend.

Reply Obj. 1: The gifts of the Holy Ghost perfect man in matters
concerning a good life: whereas art is not directed to such matters,
but to external things that can be made, since art is the right
reason, not about things to be done, but about things to be made
(Ethic. vi, 4). However, we may say that, as regards the infusion of
the gifts, the art is on the part of the Holy Ghost, Who is the
principal mover, and not on the part of men, who are His organs when
He moves them. The gift of fear corresponds, in a manner, to
temperance: for just as it belongs to temperance, properly speaking,
to restrain man from evil pleasures for the sake of the good
appointed by reason, so does it belong to the gift of fear, to
withdraw man from evil pleasures through fear of God.

Reply Obj. 2: Justice is so called from the rectitude of the reason,
and so it is more suitably called a virtue than a gift. But the name
of piety denotes the reverence which we give to our father and to our
country. And since God is the Father of all, the worship of God is
also called piety, as Augustine states (De Civ. Dei x, 1). Therefore
the gift whereby a man, through reverence for God, works good to all,
is fittingly called piety.

Reply Obj. 3: The mind of man is not moved by the Holy Ghost, unless
in some way it be united to Him: even as the instrument is not moved
by the craftsman, unless there by contact or some other kind of union
between them. Now the primal union of man with God is by faith, hope
and charity: and, consequently, these virtues are presupposed to the
gifts, as being their roots. Therefore all the gifts correspond to
these three virtues, as being derived therefrom.

Reply Obj. 4: Love, hope and joy have good for their object. Now God
is the Sovereign Good: wherefore the names of these passions are
transferred to the theological virtues which unite man to God. On the
other hand, the object of fear is evil, which can nowise apply to
God: hence fear does not denote union with God, but withdrawal from
certain things through reverence for God. Hence it does not give its
name to a theological virtue, but to a gift, which withdraws us from
evil, for higher motives than moral virtue does.

Reply Obj. 5: Wisdom directs both the intellect and the affections of
man. Hence two gifts are set down as corresponding to wisdom as their
directing principle; on the part of the intellect, the gift of
understanding; on the part of the affections, the gift of fear.
Because the principal reason for fearing God is taken from a
consideration of the Divine excellence, which wisdom considers.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 68, Art. 5]

Whether the Gifts of the Holy Ghost Are Connected?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gifts are not connected, for the
Apostle says (1 Cor. 12:8): "To one . . . by the Spirit, is given the
word of wisdom, and to another, the word of knowledge, according to
the same Spirit." Now wisdom and knowledge are reckoned among the
gifts of the Holy Ghost. Therefore the gifts of the Holy Ghost are
given to divers men, and are not connected together in the same man.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1) that "many of the
faithful have not knowledge, though they have faith." But some of the
gifts, at least the gift of fear, accompany faith. Therefore it seems
that the gifts are not necessarily connected together in one and the
same man.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. i) that wisdom "is of small
account if it lack understanding, and understanding is wholly useless
if it be not based upon wisdom . . . Counsel is worthless, when the
strength of fortitude is lacking thereto . . . and fortitude is very
weak if it be not supported by counsel . . . Knowledge is nought if
it hath not the use of piety . . . and piety is very useless if it
lack the discernment of knowledge . . . and assuredly, unless it has
these virtues with it, fear itself rises up to the doing of no good
action": from which it seems that it is possible to have one gift
without another. Therefore the gifts of the Holy Ghost are not
connected.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory prefaces the passage above quoted, with
the following remark: "It is worthy of note in this feast of Job's
sons, that by turns they fed one another." Now the sons of Job, of
whom he is speaking, denote the gifts of the Holy Ghost. Therefore
the gifts of the Holy Ghost are connected together by strengthening
one another.

_I answer that,_ The true answer to this question is easily gathered
from what has been already set down. For it has been stated (A. 3)
that as the powers of the appetite are disposed by the moral virtues
as regards the governance of reason, so all the powers of the soul
are disposed by the gifts as regards the motion of the Holy Ghost.
Now the Holy Ghost dwells in us by charity, according to Rom. 5:5:
"The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost,
Who is given to us," even as our reason is perfected by prudence.
Wherefore, just as the moral virtues are united together in prudence,
so the gifts of the Holy Ghost are connected together in charity: so
that whoever has charity has all the gifts of the Holy Ghost, none of
which can one possess without charity.

Reply Obj. 1: Wisdom and knowledge can be considered in one way as
gratuitous graces, in so far, to wit, as man so far abounds in the
knowledge of things Divine and human, that he is able both to
instruct the believer and confound the unbeliever. It is in this
sense that the Apostle speaks, in this passage, about wisdom and
knowledge: hence he mentions pointedly the "word" of wisdom and the
"word" of knowledge. They may be taken in another way for the gifts
of the Holy Ghost: and thus wisdom and knowledge are nothing else but
perfections of the human mind, rendering it amenable to the
promptings of the Holy Ghost in the knowledge of things Divine and
human. Consequently it is clear that these gifts are in all who are
possessed of charity.

Reply Obj. 2: Augustine is speaking there of knowledge, while
expounding the passage of the Apostle quoted above (Obj. 1): hence he
is referring to knowledge, in the sense already explained, as a
gratuitous grace. This is clear from the context which follows: "For
it is one thing to know only what a man must believe in order to gain
the blissful life, which is no other than eternal life; and another,
to know how to impart this to godly souls, and to defend it against
the ungodly, which latter the Apostle seems to have styled by the
proper name of knowledge."

Reply Obj. 3: Just as the connection of the cardinal virtues
is proved in one way from the fact that one is, in a manner, perfected
by another, as stated above (Q. 65, A. 1); so Gregory wishes to
prove the connection of the gifts, in the same way, from the fact that
one cannot be perfect without the other. Hence he had already observed
that "each particular virtue is to the last degree destitute, unless
one virtue lend its support to another." We are therefore not to
understand that one gift can be without another; but that if
understanding were without wisdom, it would not be a gift; even as
temperance, without justice, would not be a virtue.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 68, Art. 6]

Whether the Gifts of the Holy Ghost Remain in Heaven?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gifts of the Holy Ghost do not
remain in heaven. For Gregory says (Moral. ii, 26) that by means of
His sevenfold gift the "Holy Ghost instructs the mind against all
temptations." Now there will be no temptations in heaven, according
to Isa. 11:9: "They shall not hurt, nor shall they kill in all My
holy mountain." Therefore there will be no gifts of the Holy Ghost in
heaven.

Obj. 2: Further, the gifts of the Holy Ghost are habits, as stated
above (A. 3). But habits are of no use, where their acts are
impossible. Now the acts of some gifts are not possible in heaven;
for Gregory says (Moral. i, 15) that "understanding . . . penetrates
the truths heard . . . counsel . . . stays us from acting rashly . .
. fortitude . . . has no fear of adversity . . . piety satisfies the
inmost heart with deeds of mercy," all of which are incompatible with
the heavenly state. Therefore these gifts will not remain in the
state of glory.

Obj. 3: Further, some of the gifts perfect man in the contemplative
life, e.g. wisdom and understanding: and some in the active life,
e.g. piety and fortitude. Now the active life ends with this as
Gregory states (Moral. vi). Therefore not all the gifts of the Holy
Ghost will be in the state of glory.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says (De Spiritu Sancto i, 20): "The city
of God, the heavenly Jerusalem is not washed with the waters of an
earthly river: it is the Holy Ghost, of Whose outpouring we but
taste, Who, proceeding from the Fount of life, seems to flow more
abundantly in those celestial spirits, a seething torrent of
sevenfold heavenly virtue."

_I answer that,_ We may speak of the gifts in two ways: first, as to
their essence; and thus they will be most perfectly in heaven, as may
be gathered from the passage of Ambrose, just quoted. The reason for
this is that the gifts of the Holy Ghost render the human mind
amenable to the motion of the Holy Ghost: which will be especially
realized in heaven, where God will be "all in all" (1 Cor. 15:28),
and man entirely subject unto Him. Secondly, they may be considered
as regards the matter about which their operations are: and thus, in
the present life they have an operation about a matter, in respect of
which they will have no operation in the state of glory. Considered
in this way, they will not remain in the state of glory; just as we
have stated to be the case with regard to the cardinal virtues (Q.
67, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: Gregory is speaking there of the gifts according as
they are compatible with the present state: for it is thus that they
afford us protection against evil temptations. But in the state of
glory, where all evil will have ceased, we shall be perfected in good
by the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 2: Gregory, in almost every gift, includes something that
passes away with the present state, and something that remains in the
future state. For he says that "wisdom strengthens the mind with the
hope and certainty of eternal things"; of which two, hope passes, and
certainty remains. Of understanding, he says "that it penetrates the
truths heard, refreshing the heart and enlightening its darkness," of
which, hearing passes away, since "they shall teach no more every man
. . . his brother" (Jer. 31:3, 4); but the enlightening of the mind
remains. Of counsel he says that it "prevents us from being
impetuous," which is necessary in the present life; and also that "it
makes the mind full of reason," which is necessary even in the future
state. Of fortitude he says that it "fears not adversity," which is
necessary in the present life; and further, that it "sets before us
the viands of confidence," which remains also in the future life.
With regard to knowledge he mentions only one thing, viz. that "she
overcomes the void of ignorance," which refers to the present state.
When, however, he adds "in the womb of the mind," this may refer
figuratively to the fulness of knowledge, which belongs to the future
state. Of piety he says that "it satisfies the inmost heart with
deeds of mercy." These words taken literally refer only to the
present state: yet the inward regard for our neighbor, signified by
"the inmost heart," belongs also to the future state, when piety will
achieve, not works of mercy, but fellowship of joy. Of fear he says
that "it oppresses the mind, lest it pride itself in present things,"
which refers to the present state, and that "it strengthens it with
the meat of hope for the future," which also belongs to the present
state, as regards hope, but may also refer to the future state, as
regards being "strengthened" for things we hope are here, and obtain
there.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers the gifts as to their matter.
For the matter of the gifts will not be the works of the active life;
but all the gifts will have their respective acts about things
pertaining to the contemplative life, which is the life of heavenly
bliss.
________________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 68, Art. 7]

Whether the Gifts Are Set Down by Isaias in Their Order of Dignity?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gifts are not set down by Isaias
in their order of dignity. For the principal gift is, seemingly, that
which, more than the others, God requires of man. Now God requires of
man fear, more than the other gifts: for it is written (Deut. 10:12):
"And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but
that thou fear the Lord thy God?" and (Malachi 1:6): "If . . . I be a
master, where is My fear?" Therefore it seems that fear, which is
mentioned last, is not the lowest but the greatest of the gifts.

Obj. 2: Further, piety seems to be a kind of common good; since the
Apostle says (1 Tim. 4:8): "Piety [Douay: 'Godliness'] is profitable
to all things." Now a common good is preferable to particular goods.
Therefore piety, which is given the last place but one, seems to be
the most excellent gift.

Obj. 3: Further, knowledge perfects man's judgment, while counsel
pertains to inquiry. But judgment is more excellent than inquiry.
Therefore knowledge is a more excellent gift than counsel; and yet it
is set down as being below it.

Obj. 4: Further, fortitude pertains to the appetitive power, while
science belongs to reason. But reason is a more excellent power than
the appetite. Therefore knowledge is a more excellent gift than
fortitude; and yet the latter is given the precedence. Therefore the
gifts are not set down in their order of dignity.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says [*De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4]: "It
seems to me that the sevenfold operation of the Holy Ghost, of which
Isaias speaks, agrees in degrees and expression with these" (of which
we read in Matt. 5:3): "but there is a difference of order, for
there" (viz. in Isaias) "the enumeration begins with the more
excellent gifts, here, with the lower gifts."

_I answer that,_ The excellence of the gifts can be measured in two
ways: first, simply, viz. by comparison to their proper acts as
proceeding from their principles; secondly, relatively, viz. by
comparison to their matter. If we consider the excellence of the
gifts simply, they follow the same rule as the virtues, as to their
comparison one with another; because the gifts perfect man for all
the acts of the soul's powers, even as the virtues do, as stated
above (A. 4). Hence, as the intellectual virtues have the precedence
of the moral virtues, and among the intellectual virtues, the
contemplative are preferable to the active, viz. wisdom,
understanding and science to prudence and art (yet so that wisdom
stands before understanding, and understanding before science, and
prudence and synesis before eubulia): so also among the gifts,
wisdom, understanding, knowledge, and counsel are more excellent than
piety, fortitude, and fear; and among the latter, piety excels
fortitude, and fortitude fear, even as justice surpasses fortitude,
and fortitude temperance. But in regard to their matter, fortitude
and counsel precede knowledge and piety: because fortitude and
counsel are concerned with difficult matters, whereas piety and
knowledge regard ordinary matters. Consequently the excellence of the
gifts corresponds with the order in which they are enumerated; but so
far as wisdom and understanding are given the preference to the
others, their excellence is considered simply, while, so far, as
counsel and fortitude are preferred to knowledge and piety, it is
considered with regard to their matter.

Reply Obj. 1: Fear is chiefly required as being the foundation, so to
speak, of the perfection of the other gifts, for "the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom" (Ps. 110:10; Ecclus. 1:16), and not
as though it were more excellent than the others. Because, in the
order of generation, man departs from evil on account of fear (Prov.
16:16), before doing good works, and which result from the other
gifts.

Reply Obj. 2: In the words quoted from the Apostle, piety is not
compared with all God's gifts, but only with "bodily exercise," of
which he had said it "is profitable to little."

Reply Obj. 3: Although knowledge stands before counsel by reason of
its judgment, yet counsel is more excellent by reason of its matter:
for counsel is only concerned with matters of difficulty (Ethic. iii,
3), whereas the judgment of knowledge embraces all matters.

Reply Obj. 4: The directive gifts which pertain to the reason are
more excellent than the executive gifts, if we consider them in
relation to their acts as proceeding from their powers, because
reason transcends the appetite as a rule transcends the thing ruled.
But on the part of the matter, counsel is united to fortitude as the
directive power to the executive, and so is knowledge united to
piety: because counsel and fortitude are concerned with matters of
difficulty, while knowledge and piety are concerned with ordinary
matters. Hence counsel together with fortitude, by reason of their
matter, are given the preference to knowledge and piety.
________________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 68, Art. 8]

Whether the Virtues Are More Excellent Than the Gifts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the virtues are more excellent than
the gifts. For Augustine says (De Trin. xv, 18) while speaking of
charity: "No gift of God is more excellent than this. It is this
alone which divides the children of the eternal kingdom from the
children of eternal damnation. Other gifts are bestowed by the Holy
Ghost, but, without charity, they avail nothing." But charity is a
virtue. Therefore a virtue is more excellent than the gifts of the
Holy Ghost.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is first naturally, seems to be more
excellent. Now the virtues precede the gifts of the Holy Ghost; for
Gregory says (Moral. ii, 26) that "the gift of the Holy Ghost in the
mind it works on, forms first of all justice, prudence, fortitude,
temperance . . . and doth afterwards give it a temper in the seven
virtues" (viz. the gifts), so "as against folly to bestow wisdom;
against dullness, understanding; against rashness, counsel; against
fear, fortitude; against ignorance, knowledge; against hardness of
heart, piety; against piety, fear." Therefore the virtues are more
excellent than the gifts.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii, 19) that "the
virtues cannot be used to evil purpose." But it is possible to make
evil use of the gifts, for Gregory says (Moral. i, 18): "We offer up
the sacrifice of prayer . . . lest wisdom may uplift; or
understanding, while it runs nimbly, deviate from the right path; or
counsel, while it multiplies itself, grow into confusion; that
fortitude, while it gives confidence, may not make us rash; lest
knowledge, while it knows and yet loves not, may swell the mind; lest
piety, while it swerves from the right line, may become distorted;
and lest fear, while it is unduly alarmed, may plunge us into the pit
of despair." Therefore the virtues are more excellent than the gifts
of the Holy Ghost.

_On the contrary,_ The gifts are bestowed to assist the virtues and
to remedy certain defects, as is shown in the passage quoted (Obj.
2), so that, seemingly, they accomplish what the virtues cannot.
Therefore the gifts are more excellent than the virtues.

_I answer that,_ As was shown above (Q. 58, A. 3; Q. 62, A. 1), there
are three kinds of virtues: for some are theological, some
intellectual, and some moral. The theological virtues are those
whereby man's mind is united to God; the intellectual virtues are
those whereby reason itself is perfected; and the moral virtues are
those which perfect the powers of appetite in obedience to the
reason. On the other hand the gifts of the Holy Ghost dispose all the
powers of the soul to be amenable to the Divine motion.

Accordingly the gifts seem to be compared to the theological virtues,
by which man is united to the Holy Ghost his Mover, in the same way
as the moral virtues are compared to the intellectual virtues, which
perfect the reason, the moving principle of the moral virtues.
Wherefore as the intellectual virtues are more excellent than the
moral virtues and control them, so the theological virtues are more
excellent than the gifts of the Holy Ghost and regulate them. Hence
Gregory says (Moral. i, 12) that "the seven sons," i.e. the seven
gifts, "never attain the perfection of the number ten, unless all
they do be done in faith, hope, and charity."

But if we compare the gifts to the other virtues, intellectual and
moral, then the gifts have the precedence of the virtues. Because the
gifts perfect the soul's powers in relation to the Holy Ghost their
Mover; whereas the virtues perfect, either the reason itself, or the
other powers in relation to reason: and it is evident that the more
exalted the mover, the more excellent the disposition whereby the
thing moved requires to be disposed. Therefore the gifts are more
perfect than the virtues.

Reply Obj. 1: Charity is a theological virtue; and such we grant to
be more perfect than the gifts.

Reply Obj. 2: There are two ways in which one thing precedes another.
One is in order of perfection and dignity, as love of God precedes
love of our neighbor: and in this way the gifts precede the
intellectual and moral virtues, but follow the theological virtues.
The other is the order of generation or disposition: thus love of
one's neighbor precedes love of God, as regards the act: and in this
way moral and intellectual virtues precede the gifts, since man,
through being well subordinate to his own reason, is disposed to be
rightly subordinate to God.

Reply Obj. 3: Wisdom and understanding and the like are gifts of the
Holy Ghost, according as they are quickened by charity, which
"dealeth not perversely" (1 Cor. 13:4). Consequently wisdom and
understanding and the like cannot be used to evil purpose, in so far
as they are gifts of the Holy Ghost. But, lest they depart from the
perfection of charity, they assist one another. This is what Gregory
means to say.
________________________

QUESTION 69

OF THE BEATITUDES
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the beatitudes: under which head there are four
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the beatitudes differ from the gifts and virtues?

(2) Of the rewards of the beatitudes: whether they refer to this life?

(3) Of the number of the beatitudes;

(4) Of the fittingness of the rewards ascribed to the beatitudes.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 69, Art. 1]

Whether the Beatitudes Differ from the Virtues and Gifts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the beatitudes do not differ from the
virtues and gifts. For Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4)
assigns the beatitudes recited by Matthew (v 3, seqq.) to the gifts
of the Holy Ghost; and Ambrose in his commentary on Luke 6:20, seqq.,
ascribes the beatitudes mentioned there, to the four cardinal
virtues. Therefore the beatitudes do not differ from the virtues and
gifts.

Obj. 2: Further, there are but two rules of the human will: the
reason and the eternal law, as stated above (Q. 19, A. 3; Q. 21, A.
1). Now the virtues perfect man in relation to reason; while the
gifts perfect him in relation to the eternal law of the Holy Ghost,
as is clear from what has been said (Q. 68, AA. 1, 3, seqq.).
Therefore there cannot be anything else pertaining to the rectitude
of the human will, besides the virtues and gifts. Therefore the
beatitudes do not differ from them.

Obj. 3: Further, among the beatitudes are included meekness, justice,
and mercy, which are said to be virtues. Therefore the beatitudes do
not differ from the virtues and gifts.

_On the contrary,_ Certain things are included among the beatitudes,
that are neither virtues nor gifts, e.g. poverty, mourning, and
peace. Therefore the beatitudes differ from the virtues and gifts.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 2, A. 7; Q. 3, A. 1), happiness
is the last end of human life. Now one is said to possess the end
already, when one hopes to possess it; wherefore the Philosopher says
(Ethic. i, 9) that "children are said to be happy because they are
full of hope"; and the Apostle says (Rom. 8:24): "We are saved by
hope." Again, we hope to obtain an end, because we are suitably moved
towards that end, and approach thereto; and this implies some action.
And a man is moved towards, and approaches the happy end by works of
virtue, and above all by the works of the gifts, if we speak of
eternal happiness, for which our reason is not sufficient, since we
need to be moved by the Holy Ghost, and to be perfected with His
gifts that we may obey and follow him. Consequently the beatitudes
differ from the virtues and gifts, not as habit from habit, but as
act from habit.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine and Ambrose assign the beatitudes to the
gifts and virtues, as acts are ascribed to habits. But the gifts are
more excellent than the cardinal virtues, as stated above (Q. 68, A.
8). Wherefore Ambrose, in explaining the beatitudes propounded to the
throng, assigns them to the cardinal virtues, whereas Augustine, who
is explaining the beatitudes delivered to the disciples on the
mountain, and so to those who were more perfect, ascribes them to the
gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument proves that no other habits, besides the
virtues and gifts, rectify human conduct.

Reply Obj. 3: Meekness is to be taken as denoting the act of
meekness: and the same applies to justice and mercy. And though these
might seem to be virtues, they are nevertheless ascribed to gifts,
because the gifts perfect man in all matters wherein the virtues
perfect him, as stated above (Q. 68, A. 2).
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 69, Art. 2]
