Buddhism is geographically divided into two schools[FN#1]--the
Southern, the older and simpler, and the Northern, the later and more
developed faith.  The former, based mainly on the Pali texts[FN#2] is
known as Hinayana[FN#3] (small vehicle), or the inferior doctrine;
while the latter, based on the various Sanskrit texts,[4] is known as
Mahayana (large vehicle), or superior doctrine.  The chief tenets of
the Southern School are so well known to occidental scholars that
they almost always mean the Southern School by the word Buddhism.
But with regard to the Northern School very little is known to the
West, owing to the fact that most of its original texts were lost,
and that the teachings based on these texts are written in Chinese,
or Tibetan, or Japanese languages unfamiliar to non-Buddhist
investigators.


[FN#1]  The Southern School has its adherents in Ceylon, Burma, Siam,
Anan, etc.; while the Northern School is found in Nepal, China,
Japan, Tibet, etc.

[FN#2]  They chiefly consist of the Four Nikayas: (1) Digha Nikaya
(Dirghagamas, translated into Chinese by Buddhaya?as, A.D. 412-413);
(2) Majjhima Nikaya (Madhyamagamas, translated into Chinese by
Gautama Sanghadeva, A.D. 397-398); (3) Sanyutta Nikaya
(Samyuktagamas, translated into Chinese by Gunabhadra, of the earlier
Sung dynasty, A.D. 420 479); (4) Anguttara Nikaya (Ekottaragamas,
translated into Chinese by Dharmanandi, A.D. 384-385).  Out of these
Hinayana books, the English translation of twenty-three suttas by
Rhys Davids exist in 'Sacred Books of Buddhist,' vols. ii.-iii., and
of seven suttas by the same author in 'Sacred Books of the East,'
vol. xi.

[FN#3]  The Southern Buddhists never call their faith Hinayana, the
name being an invention of later Buddhists, who call their doctrine
Mahayana in contradistinction to the earlier form of Buddhism.  We
have to notice that the word Hinayana frequently occurs in Mahayana
books, while it does not in Hinayana books.

[FN#4]  A catalogue of the Buddhist Canon, K'-yuen-luh, gives the
titles of 897 Mahayana sutras, yet the most important books often
quoted by Northern Buddhist teachers amount to little more than
twenty.  There exist the English translation of Larger
Sukhavati-vyuha-sutra, Smaller Sukhavati-vyuha-sutra,
Vajracchedika-sutra, Larger Prajna-paramita-hradya-sutra, Smaller
Prajna-paramita-hrdaya-sutra, by Max M?ller, and
Amitayur-dhyana-sutra, by J. Takakusu, in 'Sacred Books of the East,'
vol. xlix.  An English translation of Saddharma-pundarika-sutra, by
Kern, is given in 'Sacred Books of the East,' Vol. xxi.  Compare
these books with 'Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism,' by D. Suzuki.


It is hardly justifiable to cover the whole system of Buddhism with a
single epithet[FN#5] 'pessimistic' or 'nihilistic,' because Buddhism,
having been adopted by savage tribes as well as civilized nations, by
quiet, enervated people as well as by warlike, sturdy hordes, during
some twenty-five hundred years, has developed itself into beliefs
widely divergent and even diametrically opposed.  Even in Japan alone
it has differentiated itself into thirteen main sects and forty-four
sub-sects[FN#6] and is still in full vigour, though in other
countries it has already passed its prime.  Thus Japan seems to be
the best representative of the Buddhist countries where the majority
of people abides by the guiding principle of the Northern School.  To
study her religion, therefore, is to penetrate into Mahayanism, which
still lies an unexplored land for the Western minds.  And to
investigate her faith is not to dig out the remains of Buddhist faith
that existed twenty centuries ago, but to touch the heart and soul of
Mahayanism that enlivens its devotees at the present moment.


[FN#5]  Hinayanism is, generally speaking, inclined to be
pessimistic, but Mahayanism in the main holds the optimistic view of
life.  Nihilism is advocated in some Mahayana sutras, but others set
forth idealism or realism.

[FN#6]  (1) The Ten Dai Sect, including three sub-sects; (2) The Shin
Gon Sect, including eleven sub-sects; (3) The Ritsu Sect; (4) The Rin
Zai Sect, including fourteen sub-sects; (5) The So To Sect; (6) The O
Baku Sect; (7) The Jo Do Sect, including two sub-sects; (8) The Shin
Sect, including ten sub-sects; (9) The Nichi Ren Sect, including nine
sub-sects; (10) The Yu Zu Nen Butsu Sect; (11) The Hosso Sect; (12)
The Ke Gon Sect; (13) The Ji Sect.  Out of these thirteen Buddhist
sects, Rin Zai, So To, and O Baku belong to Zen.  For further
information, see 'A Short History of the Twelve Japanese Buddhist
Sects,' by Dr. B. Nanjo.


The object of this little book is to show how the Mahayanistic view
of life and of the world differs markedly from that of Hinayanism,
which is generally taken as Buddhism by occidentals, to explain how
the religion of Buddha has adapted itself to its environment in the
Far East, and also to throw light on the existing state of the
spiritual life of modern Japan.

For this purpose we have singled out of thirteen Japanese sects the
Zen Sect, [FN#7] not only because of the great influence it has
exercised on the nation, but because of the unique position it holds
among the established religious systems of the world.  In the first
place, it is as old as Buddhism itself, or even older, for its mode
of practising Meditation has been handed down without much alteration
from pre-Buddhistic recluses of India; and it may, on that account,
provide the student of comparative religion with an interesting
subject for his research.


[FN#7]  The word Zen is the Sinico-Japanese abbreviation of the
Sanskrit Dhyana, or Meditation.  It implies the whole body of
teachings and discipline peculiar to a Buddhist sect now popularly
known as the Zen Sect.


In the second place, in spite of its historical antiquity, ideas
entertained by its advocates are so new that they are in harmony with
those of the New Buddhists;[FN#8] accordingly the statement of these
ideas may serve as an explanation of the present movement conducted
by young and able reformers of Japanese Buddhism.


[FN#8]  There exists a society formed by men who have broken with the
old creeds of Buddhism, and who call themselves the New Buddhists.
It has for its organ 'The New Buddhism,' and is one of the
influential religious societies in Japan.  We mean by the New
Buddhists, however, numerous educated young men who still adhere to
Buddhist sects, and are carrying out a reformation.


Thirdly, Buddhist denominations, like non-Buddhist religions, lay
stress on scriptural authority; but Zen denounces it on the ground
that words or characters can never adequately express religious
truth, which can only be realized by mind; consequently it claims
that the religious truth attained by Shakya Muni in his Enlightenment
has been handed down neither by word of mouth nor by the letters of
scriptures, but from teacher's mind to disciple's through the line of
transmission until the present day.  It is an isolated instance in
the whole history of the world's religions that holy scriptures are
declared to be 'no more than waste[FN#9] paper by religionists, as
done by Zen masters.


[FN#9]  Lin Tsi Luh (Rin-zai-roku).


Fourthly, Buddhist as well as non-Buddhist religions regard, without
exception, their founders as superhuman beings, but the practisers of
Zen hold the Buddha as their predecessor, whose spiritual level they
confidently aim to attain.  Furthermore, they liken one who remains
in the exalted position of Buddhaship to a man bound by a gold chain,
and pity his state of bondage.  Some of them went even so far as to
declare Buddhas and Bodhisattvas to be their servants and
slaves.[FN#10]  Such an attitude of religionists can hardly be found
in any other religion.


[FN#10]  "Shakya and Maitreya," says Go So, "are servants to the
other person.  Who is that other person?" (Zen-rin-rui-ju, Vol. i.,
p. 28).


Fifthly, although non-Buddhist people are used to call Buddhism
idolatry, yet Zen can never be called so in the accepted sense of the
term, because it, having a grand conception of Deity, is far from
being a form of idol-worship; nay, it sometimes even took an
iconoclastic attitude as is exemplified by Tan Hia, [FN#11] who
warmed himself on a cold morning by making a fire of wooden statues.
Therefore our exposition on this point will show the real state of
existing Buddhism, and serve to remove religious prejudices
entertained against it.


[FN#11]  A Chinese Zen teacher, well known for his peculiarities, who
died in A.D. 824.  For the details of this anecdote, see
Zen-rin-rui-ju, Vol. i., P. 39.


Sixthly, there is another characteristic of Zen, which cannot be
found in any other religion-that is to say, its peculiar mode of
expressing profound religious insight by such actions as the lifting
up of a hair-brush, or by the tapping of the chair with a staff, or
by a loud outcry, and so forth.  This will give the student of
religion a striking illustration of differentiated forms of religion
in its scale of evolution.

Besides these characteristics, Zen is noted for its physical and
mental training.  That the daily practice of Zazen[FN#12] and the
breathing exercise remarkably improves one's physical condition is an
established fact.  And history proves that most Zen masters enjoyed a
long life in spite of their extremely simple mode of living.  Its
mental discipline, however, is by far more fruitful, and keeps one's
mind in equipoise, making one neither passionate nor dispassionate,
neither sentimental nor unintelligent, neither nervous nor senseless.
 It is well known as a cure to all sorts of mental disease,
occasioned by nervous disturbance, as a nourishment to the fatigued
brain, and also as a stimulus to torpor and sloth.  It is
self-control, as it is the subduing of such pernicious passions as
anger, jealousy, hatred, and the like, and the awakening of noble
emotions such as sympathy, mercy, generosity, and what not.  It is a
mode of Enlightenment, as it is the dispelling of illusion and of
doubt, and at the same time it is the overcoming of egoism, the
destroying of mean desires, the uplifting of the moral ideal, and the
disclosing of inborn wisdom.


[FN#12]  The sitting-in-meditation, for the full explanation of which
see Chapter VIII.


The historical importance of Zen can hardly be exaggerated.  After
its introduction into China in the sixth century, A.D., it grew
ascendant through the Sui (598-617) and the Tang dynasty (618-906),
and enjoyed greater popularity than any other sect of Buddhism during
the whole period of the Sung (976-1126) and the Southern Sung dynasty
(1127-1367).  In these times its commanding influence became so
irresistible that Confucianism, assimilating the Buddhist teachings,
especially those of Zen, into itself and changing its entire aspect,
brought forth the so-called Speculative philosophy.[FN#13]  And in
the Ming dynasty (1368-1659) the principal doctrines of Zen were
adopted by a celebrated Confucian scholar, Wang Yang Ming,[FN#14] who
thereby founded a school, through which Zen exercised profound
influence on Chinese and Japanese men of letters, statesmen, and
soldiers.

As regards Japan, it was first introduced into the island as the
faith first for the Samurai or the military class, and moulded the
characters of many distinguished soldiers whose lives adorn the pages
of her history.  Afterwards it gradually found its way to palaces as
well as to cottages through literature and art, and at last permeated
through every fibre of the national life.  It is Zen that modern
Japan, especially after the Russo-Japanese War, has acknowledged as
an ideal doctrine for her rising generation.


[FN#13]  See 'A History of Chinese Philosophy,' by Ryukichi Endo, and
A History of Chinese Philosophy,' by Giichi Nakauchi.

[FN#14]  For the life of this distinguished scholar and soldier
(1472-1529), see 'A Detailed Life of O Yo Mei’ by Takejiro Takase, and
also 'O-yo-mei-shutsu-shin-sei-ran-roku.'





CHAPTER I



HISTORY OF ZEN IN CHINA


1. Origin of Zen in India.

To-day Zen as a living faith can be found in its pure form only among
the Japanese Buddhists.  You cannot find it in the so-called Gospel
of Buddha anymore than you can find Unitarianism in the Pentateuch,
nor can you find it in China and India any more than you can find
life in fossils of bygone ages.  It is beyond all doubt that it can
be traced back to Shakya Muni himself, nay, even to pre-Buddhistic
times, because Brahmanic teachers practised Dhyana, or
Meditation,[FN#15] from earliest times.


[FN#15]  "If a wise man hold his body with its three parts (chest,
neck, and head) erect, and turn his senses with the mind towards the
heart, he will then in the boat of Brahman cross all the torrents
which cause fear.

"Compressing his breathings let him, who has subdued all motions,
breathe forth through the nose with the gentle breath.  Let the wise
man without fail restrain his mind, that chariot yoked with vicious
horses.

"Let him perform his exercises in a place level, pure, free from
pebbles, fire, and dust, delightful by its sounds, its water, and
bowers; not painful to the eye, and full of shelters and eaves.

"When Yoga, is being performed, the forms which come first, producing
apparitions in Brahman, are those of misty smoke, sun, fire, wind,
fire-flies, lightnings, and a crystal moon.

"When, as earth, water, light, heat, and ether arises, the fivefold
quality of Yoga takes place, then there is no longer illness, old
age, or pain for him who has obtained a body produced by the fire of
Yoga.

The first results of Yoga they call lightness, healthiness,
steadiness, a good complexion, an easy pronunciation, a sweet odour,
and slight excretions "(Cvet. Upanisad, ii. 8-13).

"When the five instruments of knowledge stand still together with the
mind, and when the intellect does not move, that is called the
highest state.

"This, the firm holding back of the senses, is what is called Yoga.
He must be free from thoughtlessness then, for Yoga comes and goes"
(Katha Upanisad, ii. 10, 11).

"This is the rule for achieving it (viz., concentration of the mind
on the object of meditation): restraint of the breath, restraint of
the senses, meditation, fixed attention, investigation,
absorption-these are called the sixfold Yoga.  When beholding by this
Yoga, be beholds the gold-coloured maker, the lord, the person,
Brahman, the cause; then the sage, leaving behind good and evil,
makes everything (breath, organs of sense, body, etc.) to be one in
the Highest Indestructible (in the pratyagatman or Brahman) " (Maitr.
Upanisad, vi. 18).

"And thus it has been elsewhere: There is the superior fixed
attention (dharana) for him-viz., if he presses the tip of the tongue
down the palate, and restrain the voice, mind, and breath, he sees
Brahman by discrimination (taraka).  And when, after the cessation of
mind, he sees his own Self, smaller than small, and shining as the
Highest Self, then, having seen his Self as the Self, he becomes
Self-less, and because he is Self-less, he is without limit, without
cause, absorbed in thought.  This is the highest mystery--viz., final
liberation " (Maitr. Upanisad, vi. 20).

Amrtab. Upanisad, 18, describes three modes of sitting-namely, the
Lotus-seat (Padmasana), the sitting with legs bent underneath; the
mystic diagram seat (Svastika); and the auspicious-seat
(Bhadrasana);--while Yogacikha directs the choice of the
Lotus-posture, with attention concentrated on the tip of the nose,
hands and feet closely joined.


But Brahmanic Zen was carefully distinguished even by early
Buddhists[FN#16] as the heterodox Zen from that taught by the Buddha.
 Our Zen originated in the Enlightenment of Shakya Muni, which took
place in his thirtieth year, when he was sitting absorbed in profound
meditation under the Bodhi Tree.


[FN#16]  The anonymous author of Lankavatara-sutra distinguishes the
heterodox Zen from the Hinayana Zen, the Hinayana Zen from the
Mahayana Zen, and calls the last by the name of the Buddha's Holy
Zen.  The sutra is believed by many Buddhists, not without reason, to
be the exposition of that Mahayana doctrine which Acvaghosa restated
in his Craddhotpada-castra.  The sutra was translated, first, into
Chinese by Gunabbadra, in A.D. 443; secondly, by Bodhiruci in A.D.
513; and, thirdly, by Ciksanada in A.D. 700-704.  The book is famous
for its prophecy about Nagdrajuna, which (according to Dr. Nanjo's
translation) is as follows:

"After the Nirvana of the Tathagata,
There will be a man in the future,
Listen to me carefully, O Mahatma,
A man who will hold my law.
In the great country of South,
There will be a venerable Bhiksu
The Bodhisattva Nagarjuna by name,
