sovereign and the subjects.

The fear of the Gods, religion, the terrors of another life--these are
the metaphysical and supernatural barriers which are opposed to the
furious passions of princes! Are these barriers sufficient? We leave it
to experience to solve the question! To oppose religion to the
wickedness of tyrants, is to wish that vague speculations should be more
powerful than inclinations which conspire to fortify them in it from day
to day.




CXLV.--RELIGION IS FATAL TO POLITICS; IT FORMS BUT LICENTIOUS AND
PERVERSE DESPOTS, AS WELL AS ABJECT AND UNHAPPY SUBJECTS.

We are told constantly of the immense advantages which religion secures
to politics; but if we reflect a moment, we will see without trouble
that religious opinions blind and lead astray equally the rulers and the
people, and never enlighten them either in regard to their true duties
or their real interests. Religion but too often forms licentious,
immoral tyrants, obeyed by slaves who are obliged to conform to their
views. From lack of the knowledge of the true principles of
administration, the aim and the rights of social life, the real
interests of men, and the duties which unite them, the princes are
become, in almost every land, licentious, absolute, and perverse; and
their subjects abject unhappy, and wicked. It was to avoid the trouble
of studying these important subjects, that they felt themselves obliged
to have recourse to chimeras, which so far, instead of being a remedy,
have but increased the evils of the human race and withdrawn their
attention from the most interesting things. Does not the unjust and
cruel manner in which so many nations are governed here below, furnish
the most visible proofs, not only of the non-effect produced by the fear
of another life, but of the non-existence of a Providence interested in
the fate of the human race? If there existed a good God, would we not be
forced to admit that He strangely neglects the majority of men in this
life? It would appear that this God created the nations but to be toys
for the passions and follies of His representatives upon earth.




CXLVI.--CHRISTIANITY EXTENDED ITSELF BUT BY ENCOURAGING DESPOTISM, OF
WHICH IT, LIKE ALL RELIGION, IS THE STRONGEST SUPPORT.

If we read history with some attention, we shall see that Christianity,
fawning at first, insinuated itself among the savage and free nations of
Europe but by showing their chiefs that its principles would favor
despotism and place absolute power in their hands. We see, consequently,
barbarous kings converting themselves with a miraculous promptitude;
that is to say, adopting without examination a system so favorable to
their ambition, and exerting themselves to have it adopted by their
subjects. If the ministers of this religion have since often moderated
their servile principles, it is because the theory has no influence upon
the conduct of the Lord's ministers, except when it suits their temporal
interests.




Christianity boasts of having brought to men a happiness unknown to
preceding centuries. It is true that the Grecians have not known the
Divine right of tyrants or usurpers over their native country. Under the
reign of Paganism it never entered the brain of anybody that Heaven did
not want a nation to defend itself against a ferocious beast which
insolently ravaged it. The Christian religion, devised for the benefit
of tyrants, was established on the principle that the nations should
renounce the legitimate defense of themselves. Thus Christian nations
are deprived of the first law of nature, which decrees that man should
resist evil and disarm all who attempt to destroy him. If the ministers
of the Church have often permitted nations to revolt for Heaven's cause,
they never allowed them to revolt against real evils or known violences.

It is from Heaven that the chains have come to fetter the minds of
mortals. Why is the Mohammedan everywhere a slave? It is because his
Prophet subdued him in the name of the Deity, just as Moses before him
subjugated the Jews. In all parts of the world we see that priests were
the first law-givers and the first sovereigns of the savages whom they
governed. Religion seems to have been invented but to exalt princes
above their nations, and to deliver the people to their discretion. As
soon as the latter find themselves unhappy here below, they are silenced
by menacing them with God's wrath; their eyes are fixed on Heaven, in
order to prevent them from perceiving the real causes of their
sufferings and from applying the remedies which nature offers them.




CXLVII.--THE ONLY AIM OF RELIGIOUS PRINCIPLES IS TO PERPETUATE THE
TYRANNY OF KINGS AND TO SACRIFICE THE NATIONS TO THEM.

By incessantly repeating to men that the earth is not their true
country; that the present life is but a passage; that they were not made
to be happy in this world; that their sovereigns hold their authority
but from God, and are responsible to Him alone for the misuse of it;
that it is never permitted to them to resist, the priesthood succeeded
in perpetuating the misconduct of the kings and the misfortunes of the
people; the interests of the nations have been cowardly sacrificed to
their chiefs. The more we consider the dogmas and the principles of
religion, the more we shall be convinced that their only aim is to give
advantage to tyrants and priests; not having the least regard for the
good of society. In order to mask the powerlessness of these deaf Gods,
religion has succeeded in making mortals believe that it is always
iniquity which excites the wrath of Heaven. The people blame themselves
for the disasters and the adversities which they endure continually. If
disturbed nature sometimes causes the people to feel its blows, their
bad governments are but too often the immediate and permanent causes
from which spring the continual calamities that they are obliged to
endure. Is it not the ambition of kings and of the great, their
negligence, their vices, their oppression, to which are generally due
sterility, mendacity, wars, contagions, bad morals, and all the
multiplied scourges which desolate the earth?

In continually directing the eyes of men toward Heaven, making them
believe that all their evils are due to Divine wrath, in furnishing them
but inefficient and futile means of lessening their troubles, it would
appear that the only object of the priests is to prevent the nations
from dreaming of the true sources of their miseries, and to perpetuate
them. The ministers of religion act like those indigent mothers, who, in
need of bread, put their hungry children to sleep by songs, or who
present them toys to make them forget the want which torments them.

Blinded from childhood by error, held by the invincible ties of opinion,
crushed by panic terrors, stupefied at the bosom of ignorance, how could
the people understand the true causes of their troubles? They think to
remedy them by invoking the gods. Alas! do they not see that it is it
the name of these gods that they are ordered to present their throat to
the sword of their pitiless tyrants, in whom they would find the most
visible cause of the evils under which they groan, and for which they
uselessly implore the assistance of Heaven? Credulous people! in your
adversities redouble your prayers, your offerings, your sacrifices;
besiege your temples, strangle countless victims, fast in sackcloth and
in ashes, drink your own tears; finally, exhaust yourselves to enrich
your gods: you will do nothing but enrich their priests; the gods of
Heaven will not be propitious to you, except when the gods of the earth
will recognize that they are men like yourselves, and will give to your
welfare the care which is your due.




CXLVIII.--HOW FATAL IT IS TO PERSUADE KINGS THAT THEY HAVE ONLY GOD TO
FEAR IF THEY INJURE THE PEOPLE.

Negligent, ambitious, and perverse princes are the real causes of public
adversities, of useless and unjust wars continually depopulating the
earth, of greedy and despotic governments, destroying the benefactions
of nature for men. The rapacity of the courts discourages agriculture,
blots out industry, causes famine, contagion, misery; Heaven is neither
cruel nor favorable to the wishes of the people; it is their haughty
chiefs, who always have a heart of brass.

It is a notion destructive to wholesome politics and to the morals of
princes, to persuade them that God alone is to be feared by them, when
they injure their subjects or when they neglect to render them happy.
Sovereigns! It is not the Gods, but your people whom you offend when you
do evil. It is to these people, and by retroaction, to yourselves, that
you do harm when you govern unjustly.

Nothing is more common in history than to see religious tyrants; nothing
more rare than to find equitable, vigilant, enlightened princes. A
monarch can be pious, very strict in fulfilling servilely the duties of
his religion, very submissive to his priests, liberal in their behalf,
and at the same time destitute of all the virtues and talents necessary
for governing. Religion for the princes is but an instrument intended to
keep the people more firmly under the yoke. According to the beautiful
principles of religious morality, a tyrant who, during a long reign,
will have done nothing but oppress his subjects, rob them of the fruits
of their labor, sacrifice them without pity to his insatiable ambition;
a conqueror who will have usurped the provinces of others, who will have
slaughtered whole nations, who will have been all his life a real
scourge of the human race, imagines that his conscience can be
tranquillized, if, in order to expiate so many crimes, he will have wept
at the feet of a priest, who will have the cowardly complaisance to
console and reassure a brigand, whom the most frightful despair would
punish too little for the evil which he has done upon earth.




CLXIX.--A RELIGIOUS KING IS A SCOURGE TO HIS KINGDOM.

A sincerely religious sovereign is generally a very dangerous chief for
a State; credulity always indicates a narrow mind; devotion generally
absorbs the attention which the prince ought to give to the ruling of
his people. Docile to the suggestions of his priests, he constantly
becomes the toy of their caprices, the abettor of their quarrels, the
instrument and the accomplice of their follies, to which he attaches the
greatest importance. Among the most fatal gifts which religion has
bestowed upon the world, we must consider above all, these devoted and
zealous monarchs, who, with the idea of working for the salvation of
their subjects, have made it their sacred duty to torment, to persecute,
to destroy those whose conscience made them think otherwise than they
do. A religious bigot at the head of an empire, is one of the greatest
scourges which Heaven in its fury could have sent upon earth. One
fanatical or deceitful priest who has the ear of a credulous and
powerful prince, suffices to put a State into disorder and the universe
into combustion.

In almost all countries, priests and devout persons are charged with
forming the mind and the heart of the young princes destined to govern
the nations. What enlightenment can teachers of this stamp give? Filled
themselves with prejudices, they will hold up to their pupil
superstition as the most important and the most sacred thing, its
chimerical duties as the most holy obligations, intolerance, and the
spirit of persecution, as the true foundations of his future authority;
they will try to make him a chief of party, a turbulent fanatic, and a
tyrant; they will suppress at an early period his reason; they will
premonish him against it; they will prevent truth from reaching him;
they will prejudice him against true talents, and prepossess him in
favor of despicable talents; finally they will make of him an imbecile
devotee, who will have no idea of justice or of injustice, of true glory
or of true greatness, and who will be devoid of the intelligence and
virtue necessary to the government of a great kingdom. Here, in brief,
is the plan of education for a child destined to make, one day, the
happiness or the misery of several millions of men.




CL.--THE SHIELD OF RELIGION IS FOR TYRANNY, A WEAK RAMPART AGAINST THE
DESPAIR OF THE PEOPLE. A DESPOT IS A MADMAN, WHO INJURES HIMSELF AND
SLEEPS UPON THE EDGE OF A PRECIPICE.

Priests in all times have shown themselves supporters of despotism, and
the enemies of public liberty. Their profession requires vile and
submissive slaves, who never have the audacity to reason. In an absolute
government, their great object is to secure control of the mind of a
weak and stupid prince, in order to make themselves masters of the
people. Instead of leading the people to salvation, priests have always
led them to servitude.

For the sake of the supernatural titles which religion has forged for
the most wicked princes, the latter have generally united with the
priests, who, sure of governing by controlling the opinion of the
sovereign himself, have charge of tying the hands of the people and of
keeping them under their yoke. But it is vain that the tyrant, protected
by the shield of religion, flatters himself with being sheltered from
all the blows of fate. Opinion is a weak rampart against the despair of
the people. Besides, the priest is the friend of the tyrant only so long
as he finds his profit by the tyranny; he preaches sedition and
demolishes the idol which he has made, when he considers it no longer in
conformity with the interests of Heaven, which he speaks of as he
pleases, and which never speaks but in behalf of his interests. No doubt
it will be said, that the sovereigns, knowing all the advantages which
religion procures for them, are truly interested in upholding it with
all their strength. If religious opinions are useful to tyrants, it is
evident that they are useless to those who govern according to the laws
of reason and of equity. Is there any advantage in exercising tyranny?
Does not tyranny deprive princes of true power, the love of the people,
in which is safety? Should not every rational prince perceive that the
despot is but an insane man who injures himself? Will not every
enlightened prince beware of his flatterers, whose object is to put him
to sleep at the edge of the precipice to which they lead him?




CLI.--RELIGION FAVORS THE ERRORS OF PRINCES, BY DELIVERING THEM FROM FEAR
AND REMORSE.

If the sacerdotal flatteries succeed in perverting princes and changing
them into tyrants, the latter on their side necessarily corrupt the
great men and the people. Under an unjust master, without goodness,
without virtue, who knows no law but his caprice, a nation must become
necessarily depraved. Will this master wish to have honest, enlightened,
and virtuous men near him? No! he needs flatterers in those who
approach him, imitators, slaves, base and servile minds, who give
themselves up to his taste; his court will spread the contagion of vice
to the inferior classes. By degrees all will be necessarily corrupted,
in a State whose chief is corrupt himself. It was said a long time ago
that the princes seem ordained to do all they do themselves. Religion,
far from being a restraint upon the sovereigns, entitles them, without
fear and without remorse, to the errors which are as fatal to themselves
as to the nations which they govern. Men are never deceived with
impunity. Tell a prince that he is a God, and very soon he will believe
that he owes nothing to anybody. As long as he is feared, he will not
care much for love; he will recognize no rights, no relations with his
subjects, nor obligations in their behalf. Tell this prince that he is
responsible for his actions to God alone, and very soon he will act as
if he was responsible to nobody.




CLII.--WHAT IS AN ENLIGHTENED SOVEREIGN?

An enlightened sovereign is he who understands his true interests; he
knows they are united to those of his nation; he knows that a prince can
be neither great, nor powerful, nor beloved, nor respected, so long as
he will command but miserable slaves; he knows that equity, benevolence,
and vigilance will give him more real rights over men than fabulous
titles which claim to come from Heaven. He will feel that religion is
useful but to the priests; that it is useless to society, which is often
troubled by it; that it must be limited to prevent it from doing injury;
finally, he will understand that, in order to reign with glory, he must
make good laws, possess virtues, and not base his power on impositions
and chimeras.




