ever against the falsehoods and follies of the world, has tried their
work, and it is burned and lost.  But they themselves are saved; yet as
through fire.

Looking at history in this light, we may justify God for many a heavy
blow, and fearful judgment, which seems to the unbeliever a wanton
cruelty of chance or fate; while at the same time we may feel deep
sympathy with--often deep admiration for--many a noble spirit, who has
been defeated, and justly defeated, by those irreversible laws of God's
kingdom, of which it is written--"On whomsoever that stone shall fall, it
will grind him to powder."  We may look with reverence, as well as pity,
on many figures in history, such as Sir Thomas More's; on persons who,
placed by no fault of their own in some unnatural and unrighteous
position; involved in some decaying and unworkable system; conscious more
or less of their false position; conscious, too, of coming danger, have
done their best, according to their light, to work like men, before the
night came in which no man could work; to do what of their duty seemed
still plain and possible; and to set right that which would never come
right more: forgetting that, alas, the crooked cannot be made straight,
and that which is wanting cannot be numbered; till the flood came and
swept them away, standing bravely to the last at a post long since
untenable, but still--all honour to them--standing at their post.

When we consider such sad figures on the page of history, we may have, I
say, all respect for their private virtues.  We may accept every excuse
for their public mistakes.  And yet we may feel a solemn satisfaction at
their downfall, when we see it to have been necessary for the progress of
mankind, and according to those laws and that will of God and of Christ,
by which alone the human race is ruled.  We may look back on old orders
of things with admiration; even with a touch of pardonable, though
sentimental, regret.  But we shall not forget that the old order changes,
giving place to the new;

   And God fulfils Himself in many ways,
   Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.

And we shall believe, too, if we be wise, that all these things were
written for our example, that we may see, and fear, and be turned to the
Lord, each asking himself solemnly, What is the system on which I am
governing my actions?  Is it according to the laws and will of God, as
revealed in facts?  Let me discover that in time: lest, when it becomes
bankrupt in God's books, I be involved--I cannot guess how far--in the
common ruin of my compeers.

What is my duty?  Let me go and work at it, lest a night come, in which I
cannot work.  What fruit am I expected to bring forth?  Let me train and
cultivate my mind, heart, whole humanity to bring it forth, lest the
great Husbandman come seeking fruit on me, and find none.  And if I see a
man who falls in the battle of life, let me not count him a worse sinner
than myself; but let me judge myself in fear and trembling; lest God
judge me, and I perish in like wise.




SERMON XXI.  THE WAR IN HEAVEN.


REV. XIX. 11-16.

   And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat
   upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth
   judge and make war.  His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head
   were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he
   himself.  And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his
   name is called The Word of God.  And the armies which were in heaven
   followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and
   clean.  And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he
   should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron:
   and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty
   God.  And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING
   OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

Let me ask you to consider seriously this noble passage.  It was never
more worth men's while to consider it than now, when various selfish and
sentimental religions--call them rather superstitions--have made men
altogether forget the awful reality of Christ's kingdom; the awful fact
that Christ reigns, and will reign, till He has put all enemies under His
feet.

Who, then, is He of whom the text speaks?  Who is this personage, who
appears eternally in heaven as a warrior, with His garments stained with
blood, the leader of armies, smiting the nations, and ruling them with a
rod of iron?

St John tells us that He had one name which none knew save Himself.  But
he tells us that He was called Faithful and True; and he tells us, too,
that He had another name which St John did know; and that is, "The Word
of God."

Now who the Word of God is, all are bound to know who call themselves
Christians; even Jesus Christ our Lord, who was born of the Virgin Mary,
crucified under Pontius Pilate, rose again the third day, ascended into
heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God.

He it is who makes everlasting war as King of kings and Lord of lords.
But against what does He make war?  His name tells us that.  For it
is--Faithful and True; and therefore He makes war against all things and
beings who are unfaithful and false.  He Himself is full of chivalry,
full of fidelity; and therefore all that is unchivalrous and treacherous
is hateful in His eyes; and that which He hates, He is both able and
willing to destroy.

Moreover, He makes war in righteousness.  And therefore all men and
things which are unrighteous and unjust are on the opposite side to Him;
His enemies, which He will trample under His feet.  The only hope for
them, and indeed for all mankind, is that He does make war in
righteousness, and that He Himself is faithful and true, whoever else is
not; that He is always just, always fair, always honourable and
courteous; that He always keeps His word; and governs according to fixed
and certain laws, which men may observe and calculate upon, and shape
their conduct accordingly, sure that Christ's laws will not change for
any soul on earth or in heaven.  But, within those honourable and
courteous conditions, He will, as often as He sees fit, smite the
nations, and rule them with a rod of iron; and tread the winepress of the
fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.

And if any say--as too many in these luxurious unbelieving days will
say--What words are these?  Threatening, terrible, cruel?  My answer
is,--The words are not mine.  I did not put them into the Bible.  I find
them there, and thousands like them, in the New Testament as well as in
the Old, in the Gospels and Epistles as well as in the Revelation of St
John.  If you do not like them, your quarrel must be, not with me, but
with the whole Bible, and especially with St John the Apostle, who
said--"Little children, love one another;" and who therefore was likely
to have as much love and pity in his heart as any philanthropic, or
sentimental, or superstitious, or bigoted, personage of modern days.

And if any one say,--But you must mistake the meaning of the text.  It
must be understood spiritually.  The meek and gentle Jesus, who is
nothing but love and mercy, cannot be such an awful and destroying being
as you would make Him out to be.  Then I must answer--That our Lord was
meek and gentle when on earth, and therefore is meek and gentle for ever
and ever, there can be no doubt.  "I am meek and lowly of heart," He said
of Himself.  But with that meekness and lowliness, and not in
contradiction to it, there was, when He was upon earth, and therefore
there is now and for ever, a burning indignation against all wrong and
falsehood; and especially against that worst form of falsehood--hypocrisy;
and that worst form of hypocrisy--covetousness which shelters itself
under religion.

When our Lord saw men buying and selling in the temple, He made a scourge
of cords, and drove them out, and overthrew the tables of the
money-changers, and said,--"It is written, my Father's house is a house
of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves."

When He faced the Pharisees, who were covetous, He had no meek and gentle
words for them: but, "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye
escape the damnation of hell?"

And because His character is perfect and eternal: because He is the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever, we are bound by the Christian faith to
believe that He has now, and will have for ever, the same Divine
indignation against wrong, the same determination to put it down: and to
cast out of His kingdom, which is simply the whole universe, all that
offends, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.

And if any say, as some say now-a-days--"Ah, but you cannot suppose that
our Lord would propagate His Gospel by the sword, or wish Christians to
do so."  My friends, this chapter and this sermon has nothing to do with
the propagation of the Gospel, in the popular sense; nothing to do with
converting heathens or others to Christianity.  It has to do with that
awful government of the world, of which the Bible preaches from beginning
to end; that moral and providential kingdom of God, which rules over the
destiny of every kingdom, every nation, every tribe, every family, nay,
over the destiny of each human being; ay, of each horde of Tartars on the
furthest Siberian steppe, and each group of savages in the furthest
island of the Pacific; rendering to each man according to his works,
rewarding the good, punishing the bad, and exterminating evildoers, even
wholesale and seemingly without discrimination, when the measure of their
iniquity is full.  Christ's herald in this noble chapter calls men, not
to repentance, but to inevitable doom.  His angel--His messenger--stands
in the sun, the source of light and life; above this petty planet, its
fashions, its politics, its sentimentalities, its notions of how the
universe ought to have been made and managed; and calls to whom?--to all
the fowl that fly in the firmament of heaven--"Come and gather yourselves
together, to the feast of the great God, that ye may eat the flesh of
kings, and of captains, and of mighty men; and the flesh of horses and of
them that sit on them; and the flesh of all men, both free and slave,
both small and great."

What those awful words may mean I cannot say.  But this I say, that the
Apostle would never have used such words, conveying so plain and so
terrible a meaning to anyone who has ever seen or heard of a
battle-field, if he had really meant by them nothing like a battle-field
at all.

It may be that these words have fulfilled themselves many times--at the
fall of Jerusalem--at the wars which convulsed the Roman empire during
the first century after Christ--at the final fall of the Roman empire
before the lances of our German ancestors--in many another great war, and
national calamity, in many a land since then.  It may be, too, that, as
learned divines have thought, they will have their complete fulfilment in
some war of all wars, some battle of all battles; in which all the powers
of evil, and all those who love a lie, shall be arrayed against all the
powers of good, and all those who fear God and keep His commandments: to
fight it out, if the controversy can be settled by no reason, no
persuasion; a battle in which the whole world shall discover that, even
in an appeal to brute force, the good are stronger than the bad; because
they have moral force also on their side; because God and the laws of His
whole universe are fighting for them, against those who transgress law,
and outrage reason.

The wisest of living Britons has said,--"Infinite Pity, yet infinite
rigour of Law.  It is so that the world is made."  I should add, It is so
the world must be made, because it is made by Jesus Christ our Lord, and
its laws are the likeness of His character; pitiful, because Christ is
pitiful; and rigorous, because He is rigorous.  So pitiful is Christ,
that He did not hesitate to be slain for men, that mankind through Him
might be saved.  But so rigorous is Christ, that He does not hesitate to
slay men, if needful, that mankind thereby may be saved.  War and
bloodshed, pestilence and famine, earthquake and tempest--all of them, as
sure as there is a God, are the servants of God, doing His awful but
necessary work, for the final benefit of the whole human race.

It may be difficult to believe this: at least to believe it with the same
intense faith with which prophets and apostles of old believed it, and
cried--"When Thy judgments, O Lord, are abroad in the earth, then shall
the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness."  But we must believe
it: or we shall be driven to believe in no God at all; and that will be
worse for us than all the evil that has happened to us from our youth up
until now.

But most people find it very difficult to believe in such a God as the
Scripture sets forth--a God of boundless tenderness; and yet a God of
boundless indignation.

The covetous and luxurious find it very difficult to understand such a
being.  Their usual notion of tenderness is a selfish dislike of seeing
any one else uncomfortable, because it makes them uncomfortable likewise.
Their usual notion of indignation is a selfish desire of revenge against
anyone who interferes with their comfort.  And therefore they have no
wholesome indignation against wrong and wrong-doers, and a great deal of
unwholesome tenderness for them.  They are afraid of any one's being
punished; probably from a fellow-feeling; a suspicion that they deserve
to be punished themselves.  They hate and dread honest severity, and
stern exercise of lawful power.  They are indulgent to the bad, severe
upon the good; till, as has been bitterly but too truly said,--"Public
opinion will allow a man to do anything, except his duty."

Now this is a humour which cannot last.  It breeds weakness, anarchy, and
at last ruin to society.  And then the effeminate and luxurious,
terrified for their money and their comfort, fly from an unwholesome
tenderness to an unwholesome indignation; break out into a panic of
selfish rage; and become, as cowards are apt to do, blindly and wantonly
cruel; and those who fancied God too indulgent to punish His enemies,
will be the very first to punish their own.

But there are those left, I thank God, in this land, who have a clear
understanding of what they ought to be, and an honest desire to be it;
who know that a manful indignation against wrong-doing, a hearty hatred
of falsehood and meanness, a rigorous determination to do their duty at
all risks, and to repress evil with all severity, may dwell in the same
heart with gentleness, forgiveness, tenderness to women and children;
active pity to the weak, the sick, the homeless; and courtesy to all
mankind, even to their enemies.

God grant that that spirit may remain alive among us.  For without it we
shall not long be a strong nation; not indeed long a nation at all.  And
it is alive among us.  Not that we, any of us, have enough of it--God
forgive us for all our shortcomings.  And God grant it may remain alive
among us; for it is, as far as it goes, the likeness of Christ, the Maker
and Ruler of the world.

"Christian," said a great genius and a great divine,

   "If thou wouldst learn to love,
   Thou first must learn to hate."

And if any one answer--"Hate?  Even God hateth nothing that He has made."
The rejoinder is,--And for that very reason God hates evil; because He
has not made it, and it is ruinous to all that He has made.

Go you and do likewise.  Hate what is wrong with all your heart, and
mind, and soul, and strength.  For so, and so only, you will shew that
you love God with all your heart, and mind, and soul, and strength,
likewise.

Oh pray--and that not once for all merely, but day by day, ay, almost
hour by hour--Strengthen me, O Lord, to hate what Thou hatest, and love
what Thou lovest; and therefore, whenever I see an opportunity, to put
down what Thou hatest, and to help what Thou lovest--That so, at the last
dread day, when every man shall be rewarded according to his works, you
may have some answer to give to the awful question--On whose side wert
thou in the battle of life?  On the side of good men and of God, or on
the side of bad men and the devil?  Lest you find yourselves forced to
reply--as too many will be forced--with surprise, and something like
shame and confusion of face--I really do not know.  I never thought about
the matter at all.  I never knew that there was any battle of life.

Never knew that there was any battle of life?  And yet you were
christened, and signed with the sign of the Cross, in token that you
should fight manfully under Christ's banner against sin, the world, and
the devil, and continue Christ's faithful soldier and servant to your
life's end.  Did it never occur to you that those words might possibly
mean something?  And you used to sing hymns, too, on earth, about
"Soldiers of Christ, arise, And put your armour on."  What prophets, and
apostles, and martyrs, and confessors meant by those words, you should
know well enough.  Did it never occur to you that they might possibly
mean something to you?  That as long as the world was no better than it
is, there was still a battle of life; and that you too were sworn to
fight in it?  How many will answer--Yes--Yes--But I thought that these
words only meant having my soul saved, and going to heaven when I died.
And how did you expect to do that?  By believing certain doctrines which
you were told were true; and leading a tolerably respectable life,
without which you would not have been received into society?  Was that
all which was needed to go to heaven?  And was that all that was meant by
fighting manfully under Christ's banner against sin, the world, and the
devil?  Why, Cyrus and his old Persians, 2,400 years ago, were nearer to
the kingdom of God than that.  They had a clearer notion of what the
battle of life meant than that, when they said that not only the man who
did a merciful or just deed, but the man who drained a swamp, tilled a
field, made any little corner of the earth somewhat better than he found
it, was fighting against Ahriman the evil spirit of darkness, on the side
of Ormuzd the good god of light; and that as he had taken his part in
Ormuzd's battle, he should share in Ormuzd's triumph.

Oh be at least able to say in that day,--Lord, I am no hero.  I have been
careless, cowardly, sometimes all but mutinous.  Punishment I have
deserved, I deny it not.  But a traitor I have never been; a deserter I
have never been.  I have tried to fight on Thy side in Thy battle against
evil.  I have tried to do the duty which lay nearest me; and to leave
whatever Thou didst commit to my charge a little better than I found it.
I have not been good: but I have at least tried to be good.  I have not
done good, it may be, either: but I have at least tried to do good.  Take
the will for the deed, good Lord.  Accept the partial self-sacrifice
which Thou didst inspire, for the sake of the one perfect self-sacrifice
which Thou didst fulfil upon the Cross.  Pardon my faults, out of Thine
own boundless pity for human weakness.  Strike not my unworthy name off
the roll-call of the noble and victorious army, which is the blessed
company of all faithful people; and let me, too, be found written in the
Book of Life: even though I stand the lowest and last upon its list.
Amen.




SERMON XXII.  NOBLE COMPANY.


HEBREWS XII. 22, 23.

   Ye are come to the city of the living God, and to the spirits of just
   men made perfect.

I have quoted only part of the passage of Scripture in which these words
occur.  If you want a good employment for All Saints' Day, read the whole
passage, the whole chapter; and no less, the 11th chapter, which comes
before it: so will you understand better the meaning of All Saints' Day.
But sufficient for the day is the good thereof, as well as the evil; and
the good which I have to say this morning is--You are come to the spirits
of just men made perfect; for this is All Saints' Day.

Into the presence of this noble company we have come: even nobler
company, remember, than that which was spoken of in the text.  For more
than 1800 years have passed since the Epistle to the Hebrews was written:
and how many thousands of just men and women, pure, noble, tender, wise,
beneficent, have graced the earth since then, and left their mark upon
mankind, and helped forward the hallowing of our heavenly Father's name,
the coming of His kingdom, the doing of His will on earth as it is done
in heaven; and helped therefore to abolish the superstition, the misrule,
the vice, and therefore the misery of this struggling, moaning world.  How
many such has Christ sent on this earth during the last 1800 years.  How
many before that; before His own coming, for many a century and age.  We
know not, and we need not know.  The records of Holy Scripture and of
history strike with light an isolated mountain peak, or group of peaks,
here and here through the ages; but between and beyond all is dark to us
now.  But it may not have been dark always.  Scripture and history
likewise hint to us of great hills far away, once brilliant in the one
true sunshine which comes from God, now shrouded in the mist of ages, or
literally turned away beyond our horizon by the revolution of our planet:
and of lesser hills, too, once bright and green and fair, giving pasture
to lonely flocks, sending down fertilizing streams into now forgotten
valleys; themselves all but forgotten now, save by the God who made and
blessed them.

Yes: many a holy soul, many a useful soul, many a saint who is now at
God's right hand, has lived and worked, and been a blessing, himself
blest, of whom the world, and even the Church, has never heard, who will
never be seen or known again, till the day in which the Lord counteth up
His jewels.

Let us rejoice in that thought on this day, above all days in the year.
On this day we give special thanks to God for all His servants departed
this life in His faith and fear.  Let us rejoice in the thought that we
know not how many they are; only that they are an innumerable company,
out of all tongues and nations, whom no man can number.  Let us rejoice
that Christ's grace is richer, and not poorer, than our weak imaginations
can conceive, or our narrow systems account for.  Let us rejoice that the
goodly company in whose presence we stand, can be limited and defined by
no mortal man, or school of men: but only by Him from whom, with the
Father, proceeds for ever the Holy Spirit, the inspirer of all good; and
who said of that Spirit--"The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou
hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and
whither it goeth.  So is every one who is born of the Spirit"--and who
said again, "John came neither eating nor drinking, and ye said, He hath
a devil.  The Son of man came eating and drinking, and ye say, Behold a
man gluttonous and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.  But
I say unto you, Verily wisdom is justified of all her children"--and who
said again--when John said to Him, "Master, we saw one casting out devils
in Thy name, and he followeth not us"--"Forbid him not.  For I say to
you, that he that doeth a miracle in My name will not lightly speak evil
of Me"--and who said, lastly--and most awfully--that the unpardonable
sin, either in this life or the life to come, was to attribute beneficent
deeds to a bad origin, because they were performed by one who differed
from us in opinion; and to say, "He casteth out devils by Beelzebub,
prince of the devils."

These are words of our Lord, which we are specially bound to keep in our
minds, with reverence and godly fear, on All Saints' Day, lest by
arranging our calendar of saints according to our own notions of who
ought to be a saint, and who ought not--that is, who agrees with our
notions of perfection, and who does not--we exclude ourselves, by
fastidiousness, from much unquestionably good company; and possibly mix
ourselves up with not a little which is, to say the least, questionable.

Men in all ages, Churchmen or others, have fallen into this mistake.  They
have been but too ready to limit their calendar of saints; to narrow the
thanksgivings which they offer to God on All Saints' Day.

The Romish Church has been especially faulty on this point.  It has
assumed, as necessary preliminaries for saintship--at least after the
Christian era--the practice of, or at least the longing after, celibacy;
and after the separation of the Eastern and Western Churches,
unconditional submission to the Church of Rome.  But how has this
injured, if not spoiled, their exclusive calendar of saints.  Amid
apostles, martyrs, divines, who must be always looked on as among the
very heroes and heroines of humanity, we find more than one fanatic
persecutor; more than two or three clearly insane personages; and too
many who all but justify the terrible sneer--that the Romish Calendar is
the "Pantheon of Hysteria."

And Protestants, too--How have they narrowed the number of the spirits of
just men made perfect; and confined the Paean which should go up from the
human race on All Saints' Day, till a "saint" has too often meant with
them only a person who has gone through certain emotional experiences,
and assented to certain subjective formulas, neither of which, according
to the opinion of some of the soundest divines, both of the Romish,
