     (see _Seven Tablets_, Vol. I, pp. 86 ff.). The comparison is
     justified whether we regard the Sumerian speech as a direct
     preliminary to man's creation, or as a reassertion of his
     duty after his rescue from destruction by the Flood.

     SUMERIAN VERSION                    SEMITIC VERSION

     "The people will I cause to . . .  "I will make man, that man may
     in their settlements,               (. . .).
     Cities . . . shall (man) build,    I will create man who shall
     in their protection will I cause    inhabit (. . .),
     him to rest,
     That he may lay the brick of our   That the service of the gods may
     house in a clean spot,              be established, and that
     (their) shrines (may be
     built).
     That in a clean spot he may        But I will alter the ways of the
     establish our . . . !"             gods, and I will change (their
     paths);
     Together shall they be
     oppressed, and unto evil shall
     (they . . .)!"

The welding of incongruous elements is very apparent in the Semitic
Version. For the statement that man will be created in order that the
gods may have worshippers is at once followed by the announcement that
the gods themselves must be punished and their "ways" changed. In the
Sumerian Version the gods are united and all are naturally regarded as
worthy of man's worship. The Sumerian Creator makes no distinctions; he
refers to "our houses", or temples, that shall be established. But in
the later version divine conflict has been introduced, and the future
head of the pantheon has conquered and humiliated the revolting deities.
Their "ways" must therefore be altered before they are fit to receive
the worship which was accorded them by right in the simpler Sumerian
tradition. In spite of the epitomized character of the Sumerian
Version, a comparison of these passages suggests very forcibly that the
Semitic-Babylonian myth of Creation is based upon a simpler Sumerian
story, which has been elaborated to reconcile it with the Dragon myth.

The Semitic poem itself also supplies evidence of the independent
existence of the Dragon myth apart from the process of Creation, for the
story of Ea and Apsu, which it incorporates, is merely the local Dragon
myth of Eridu. Its inclusion in the story is again simply a tribute to
Marduk; for though Ea, now become Marduk's father, could conquer Apsu,
he was afraid of Tiamat, "and turned back".(1) The original Eridu myth
no doubt represented Enki as conquering the watery Abyss, which became
his home; but there is nothing to connect this tradition with his
early creative activities. We have long possessed part of another local
version of the Dragon myth, which describes the conquest of a dragon by
some deity other than Marduk; and the fight is there described as taking
place, not before Creation, but at a time when men existed and cities
had been built.(2) Men and gods were equally terrified at the monster's
appearance, and it was to deliver the land from his clutches that one
of the gods went out and slew him. Tradition delighted to dwell on the
dragon's enormous size and terrible appearance. In this version he is
described as fifty _beru_(3) in length and one in height; his mouth
measured six cubits and the circuit of his ears twelve; he dragged
himself along in the water, which he lashed with his tail; and, when
slain, his blood flowed for three years, three months, a day and a
night. From this description we can see he was given the body of an
enormous serpent.(4)

     (1) Tabl. III, l. 53, &c. In the story of Bel and the
     Dragon, the third of the apocryphal additions to Daniel, we
     have direct evidence of the late survival of the Dragon
     _motif_ apart from any trace of the Creation myth; in this
     connexion see Charles, _Apocrypha and Pseudopigrapha_, Vol.
     I (1913), p. 653 f.

     (2) See _Seven Tablets_, Vol. I, pp. 116 ff., lxviii f. The
     text is preserved on an Assyrian tablet made for the library
     of Ashur-bani-pal.

     (3) The _beru_ was the space that could be covered in two
     hours' travelling.

     (4) The Babylonian Dragon has progeny in the later
     apocalyptic literature, where we find very similar
     descriptions of the creatures' size. Among them we may
     perhaps include the dragon in the Apocalypse of Baruch, who,
     according to the Slavonic Version, apparently every day
     drinks a cubit's depth from the sea, and yet the sea does
     not sink because of the three hundred and sixty rivers that
     flow into it (cf. James, "Apocrypha Anecdota", Second
     Series, in Armitage Robinson's _Texts and Studies_, V, No.
     1, pp. lix ff.). But Egypt's Dragon _motif_ was even more
     prolific, and the _Pistis Sophia_ undoubtedly suggested
     descriptions of the Serpent, especially in connexion with
     Hades.

A further version of the Dragon myth has now been identified on one of
the tablets recovered during the recent excavations at Ashur,(1) and in
it the dragon is not entirely of serpent form, but is a true dragon with
legs. Like the one just described, he is a male monster. The description
occurs as part of a myth, of which the text is so badly preserved that
only the contents of one column can be made out with any certainty. In
it a god, whose name is wanting, announces the presence of the dragon:
"In the water he lies and I (. . .)!" Thereupon a second god cries
successively to Aruru, the mother-goddess, and to Pallil, another deity,
for help in his predicament. And then follows the description of the
dragon:

     In the sea was the Serpent cre(ated).
     Sixty _beru_ is his length;
     Thirty _beru_ high is his he(ad).(2)
     For half (a _beru_) each stretches the surface of his ey(es);(3)
     For twenty _beru_ go (his feet).(4)
     He devours fish, the creatures (of the sea),
     He devours birds, the creatures (of the heaven),
     He devours wild asses, the creatures (of the field),
     He devours men,(5) to the peoples (he . . .).

     (1) For the text, see Ebeling, _Assurtexte_ I, No. 6; it is
     translated by him in _Orient. Lit.-Zeit._, Vol. XIX, No. 4
     (April, 1916).

     (2) The line reads: _30 beru sa-ka-a ri-(sa-a-su)_. Dr.
     Ebeling renders _ri-sa-a_ as "heads" (Koepfe), implying that
     the dragon had more than one head. It may be pointed out
     that, if we could accept this translation, we should have an
     interesting parallel to the description of some of the
     primaeval monsters, preserved from Berossus, as {soma men
     ekhontas en, kephalas de duo}. But the common word for
     "head" is _kakkadu_, and there can be little doubt that
     _risa_ is here used in its ordinary sense of "head, summit,
     top" when applied to a high building.

     (3) The line reads: _a-na 1/2 ta-am la-bu-na li-bit en(a-
     su)_. Dr. Ebeling translates, "auf je eine Haelfte ist ein
     Ziegel (ihrer) Auge(n) gelegt". But _libittu_ is clearly
     used here, not with its ordinary meaning of "brick", which
     yields a strange rendering, but in its special sense, when
     applied to large buildings, of "foundation, floor-space,
     area", i.e. "surface". Dr. Ebeling reads _ena-su_ at the end
     of the line, but the sign is broken; perhaps the traces may
     prove to be those of _uzna su_, "his ears", in which case
     _li-bit uz(na-su)_ might be rendered either as "surface of
     his ears", or as "base (lit. foundation) of his ears".

     (4) i.e. the length of his pace was twenty _beru_.

     (5) Lit. "the black-headed".

The text here breaks off, at the moment when Pallil, whose help against
the dragon had been invoked, begins to speak. Let us hope we shall
recover the continuation of the narrative and learn what became of this
carnivorous monster.

There are ample grounds, then, for assuming the independent existence of
the Babylonian Dragon-myth, and though both the versions recovered
have come to us in Semitic form, there is no doubt that the myth itself
existed among the Sumerians. The dragon _motif_ is constantly recurring
in descriptions of Sumerian temple-decoration, and the twin dragons
of Ningishzida on Gudea's libation-vase, carved in green steatite and
inlaid with shell, are a notable product of Sumerian art.(1) The very
names borne by Tiamat's brood of monsters in the "Seven Tablets" are
stamped in most cases with their Sumerian descent, and Kingu, whom she
appointed as her champion in place of Apsu, is equally Sumerian. It
would be strange indeed if the Sumerians had not evolved a Dragon
myth,(2) for the Dragon combat is the most obvious of nature myths and
is found in most mythologies of Europe and the Near East. The trailing
storm-clouds suggest his serpent form, his fiery tongue is seen in the
forked lightning, and, though he may darken the world for a time,
the Sun-god will always be victorious. In Egypt the myth of "the
Overthrowing of Apep, the enemy of Ra" presents a close parallel to that
of Tiamat;(3) but of all Eastern mythologies that of the Chinese
has inspired in art the most beautiful treatment of the Dragon, who,
however, under his varied forms was for them essentially beneficent.
Doubtless the Semites of Babylonia had their own versions of the Dragon
combat, both before and after their arrival on the Euphrates, but the
particular version which the priests of Babylon wove into their epic is
not one of them.

     (1) See E. de Sarzec, _Decouvertes en Chaldee_, pl. xliv,
     Fig. 2, and Heuzey, _Catalogue des antiquites chaldeennes_,
     p. 281.

     (2) In his very interesting study of "Sumerian and Akkadian
     Views of Beginnings", contributed to the _Journ. of the
     Amer. Or. Soc._, Vol. XXXVI (1916), pp. 274 ff., Professor
     Jastrow suggests that the Dragon combat in the Semitic-
     Babylonian Creation poem is of Semitic not Sumerian origin.
     He does not examine the evidence of the poem itself in
     detail, but bases the suggestion mainly on the two
     hypotheses, that the Dragon combat of the poem was suggested
     by the winter storms and floods of the Euphrates Valley, and
     that the Sumerians came from a mountain region where water
     was not plentiful. If we grant both assumptions, the
     suggested conclusion does not seem to me necessarily to
     follow, in view of the evidence we now possess as to the
     remote date of the Sumerian settlement in the Euphrates
     Valley. Some evidence may still be held to point to a
     mountain home for the proto-Sumerians, such as the name of
     their early goddess Ninkharsagga, "the Lady of the
     Mountains". But, as we must now regard Babylonia itself as
     the cradle of their civilization, other data tend to lose
     something of their apparent significance. It is true that
     the same Sumerian sign means "land" and "mountain"; but it
     may have been difficult to obtain an intelligible profile
     for "land" without adopting a mountain form. Such a name as
     Ekur, the "Mountain House" of Nippur, may perhaps indicate
     size, not origin; and Enki's association with metal-working
     may be merely due to his character as God of Wisdom, and is
     not appropriate solely "to a god whose home is in the
     mountains where metals are found" (op. cit., p. 295). It
     should be added that Professor Jastrow's theory of the
     Dragon combat is bound up with his view of the origin of an
     interesting Sumerian "myth of beginnings", to which
     reference is made later.

     (3) Cf. Budge, _Gods of the Egyptians_, Vol. I, pp. 324 ff.
     The inclusion of the two versions of the Egyptian Creation
     myth, recording the Birth of the Gods in the "Book of
     Overthrowing Apep", does not present a very close parallel
     to the combination of Creation and Dragon myths in the
     Semitic-Babylonian poem, for in the Egyptian work the two
     myths are not really combined, the Creation Versions being
     inserted in the middle of the spells against Apep, without
     any attempt at assimilation (see Budge, _Egyptian
     Literature_, Vol. I, p. xvi).

We have thus traced four out of the five strands which form the
Semitic-Babylonian poem of Creation to a Sumerian ancestry. And we now
come back to the first of the strands, the Birth of the Gods, from which
our discussion started. For if this too should prove to be Sumerian, it
would help to fill in the gap in our Sumerian Creation myth, and might
furnish us with some idea of the Sumerian view of "beginnings", which
preceded the acts of creation by the great gods. It will be remembered
that the poem opens with the description of a time when heaven and earth
did not exist, no field or marsh even had been created, and the universe
consisted only of the primaeval water-gods, Apsu, Mummu, and Tiamat,
whose waters were mingled together. Then follows the successive
generation of two pairs of deities, Lakhmu and Lakhamu, and Anshar and
Kishar, long ages separating the two generations from each other and
from the birth of the great gods which subsequently takes place. In
the summary of the myth which is given by Damascius(1) the names of the
various deities accurately correspond to those in the opening lines of
the poem; but he makes some notable additions, as will be seen from the
following table:

     DAMASCUS                            "SEVEN TABLETS" I

     {'Apason---Tauthe}                       Apsu---Tiamat
     |
     {Moumis}                               Mummu
     {Lakhos---Lakhe}(2)                   Lakhmu---Lakhamu
     {'Assoros---Kissare}                    Anshar---Kishar
     {'Anos, 'Illinos, 'Aos}              Anu, ( ), Nudimmud (= Ea)
     {'Aos---Dauke}
     |
     {Belos}

     (1) _Quaestiones de primis principiis_, cap. 125; ed. Kopp,
     p. 384.

     (2) Emended from the reading {Dakhen kai Dakhon} of the
     text.

In the passage of the poem which describes the birth of the great gods
after the last pair of primaeval deities, mention is duly made of Anu
and Nudimmud (the latter a title of Ea), corresponding to the {'Anos}
and {'Aos} of Damascius; and there appears to be no reference to Enlil,
the original of {'Illinos}. It is just possible that his name occurred
at the end of one of the broken lines, and, if so, we should have a
complete parallel to Damascius. But the traces are not in favour of the
restoration;(1) and the omission of Enlil's name from this part of
the poem may be readily explained as a further tribute to Marduk, who
definitely usurps his place throughout the subsequent narrative. Anu and
Ea had both to be mentioned because of the parts they play in the Epic,
but Enlil's only recorded appearance is in the final assembly of the
gods, where he bestows his own name "the Lord of the World"(2) upon
Marduk. The evidence of Damascius suggests that Enlil's name was here
retained, between those of Anu and Ea, in other versions of the poem.
But the occurrence of the name in any version is in itself evidence
of the antiquity of this strand of the narrative. It is a legitimate
inference that the myth of the Birth of the Gods goes back to a time at
least before the rise of Babylon, and is presumably of Sumerian origin.

     (1) Anu and Nudimmud are each mentioned for the first time
     at the beginning of a line, and the three lines following
     the reference to Nudimmud are entirely occupied with
     descriptions of his wisdom and power. It is also probable
     that the three preceding lines (ll. 14-16), all of which
     refer to Anu by name, were entirely occupied with his
     description. But it is only in ll. 13-16 that any reference
     to Enlil can have occurred, and the traces preserved of
     their second halves do not suggestion the restoration.

     (2) Cf. Tabl. VII, . 116.

Further evidence of this may be seen in the fact that Anu, Enlil, and Ea
(i.e. Enki), who are here created together, are the three great gods of
the Sumerian Version of Creation; it is they who create mankind with the
help of the goddess Ninkharsagga, and in the fuller version of that myth
we should naturally expect to find some account of their own origin. The
reference in Damascius to Marduk ({Belos}) as the son of Ea and Damkina
({Dauke}) is also of interest in this connexion, as it exhibits a
goddess in close connexion with one of the three great gods, much as
we find Ninkharsagga associated with them in the Sumerian Version.(1)
Before leaving the names, it may be added that, of the primaeval
deities, Anshar and Kishar are obviously Sumerian in form.

     (1) Damkina was the later wife of Ea or Enki; and
     Ninkharsagga is associated with Enki, as his consort, in
     another Sumerian myth.

It may be noted that the character of Apsu and Tiamat in this portion of
the poem(1) is quite at variance with their later actions. Their revolt
at the ordered "way" of the gods was a necessary preliminary to the
incorporation of the Dragon myths, in which Ea and Marduk are the
heroes. Here they appear as entirely beneficent gods of the primaeval
water, undisturbed by storms, in whose quiet depths the equally
beneficent deities Lakhmu and Lakhamu, Anshar and Kishar, were
generated.(2) This interpretation, by the way, suggests a more
satisfactory restoration for the close of the ninth line of the poem
than any that has yet been proposed. That line is usually taken to imply
that the gods were created "in the midst of (heaven)", but I think the
following rendering, in connexion with ll. 1-5, gives better sense:

     When in the height heaven was not named,
     And the earth beneath did not bear a name,
     And the primaeval Apsu who begat them,(3)
     And Mummu, and Tiamat who bore them(3) all,--
     Their waters were mingled together,
     . . .
     . . .
     . . .
     Then were created the gods in the midst of (their waters),(4)
     Lakhmu and Lakhamu were called into being . . .

     (1) Tabl. I, ll. 1-21.

     (2) We may perhaps see a survival of Tiamat's original
     character in her control of the Tablets of Fate. The poem
     does not represent her as seizing them in any successful
     fight; they appear to be already hers to bestow on Kingu,
     though in the later mythology they are "not his by right"
     (cf. Tabl. I, ll. 137 ff., and Tabl. IV, l. 121).

     (3) i.e. the gods.

     (4) The ninth line is preserved only on a Neo-Babylonian
     duplicate (_Seven Tablets_, Vol. II, pl. i). I suggested the
     restoration _ki-rib s(a-ma-mi)_, "in the midst of heaven",
     as possible, since the traces of the first sign in the last
     word of the line seemed to be those of the Neo-Babylonian
     form of _sa_. The restoration appeared at the time not
     altogether satisfactory in view of the first line of the
     poem, and it could only be justified by supposing that
     _samamu_, or "heaven", was already vaguely conceived as in
     existence (op. cit., Vol. I, p. 3, n. 14). But the traces of
     the sign, as I have given them (op. cit., Vol. II, pl. i),
     may also possibly be those of the Neo-Babylonian form of the
     sign _me_; and I would now restore the end of the line in
     the Neo-Babylonian tablet as _ki-rib m(e-e-su-nu)_, "in the
