    Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you? 15 And he said
    unto them, Take heed, and keep yourselves from all covetousness:
    for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things
    which he possesseth. 16 And he spake a parable unto them, saying,
    The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: 17 and
    he reasoned within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I
    have not where to bestow my fruits? 18 And he said, This will I
    do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I
    bestow all my grain and my goods, 19 And I will say to my soul,
    Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine
    ease, eat, drink, be merry 20 But God said unto him, Thou foolish
    one, this night is thy soul required of thee; and the things which
    thou hast prepared, whose shall they be? 21 So is he that layeth
    up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.


The parable of the Rich Fool was related by our Lord to teach that riches
neither form the real content nor assure the continuance of life, so that
it is the sheerest folly to seek for gold while forgetting God.

A man had come to Jesus with the request, "Teacher, bid my brother divide
the inheritance with me." The reply implied that the Master regarded his
work as spiritual, and that he was not willing to invade the sphere of
civil law or to usurp the place of regularly appointed authorities, "Man,
who made me a judge or a divider over you?"

Possibly this reply contains a message for the modern day and warns us
against confusing the functions of the Church with those of the State. The
sphere of the Church is spiritual, and its province is not to determine
questions which are commercial and political. The Church, however, does
provide and inculcate principles which are involved in all moral questions
and which determine justice and right in every sphere of human life. Thus
Jesus refused to "divide the inheritance," but he pierced to the root of
the request and saw that the man was neglecting the civil law and seeking
the support of a religious teacher because he was moved by avarice; and it
is this same "love of money" which lies at the root of most of the
injustice and inequity and cruelty which burden the world to-day.

Therefore Jesus turned to the multitude with the warning: "Take heed, and
keep yourselves from all covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in
the abundance of the things which he possesseth." To enforce his message
Jesus told the story of the rich man who was heaping up goods for selfish
enjoyment in future years, and who was suddenly confronted by the
necessity which death brings of leaving to others all that he had amassed.
His foolishness consisted in forgetting that fortune and life itself are
dependent upon the will of God, and that a man really owns nothing but
owes everything to God, and that the real value of life consists in the
unselfish use of wealth and of opportunity according to the will of God.
How his vain words, "my fruits," "my barns," "my grains," "my goods," "my
soul," are contrasted with the solemn message: "This night is thy soul
required of thee."

"So is he," continued Jesus, "that layeth up treasure for himself, and is
not rich toward God." It is the sheerest folly to forget that riches
neither form the real content nor assure the continuance of life; it is
madness to heap up goods while neglecting God.



11. The Cure of Anxiety. Ch. 12:22-34


    22 And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Be
    not anxious for _your_ life, what ye shall eat; nor yet for your
    body, what ye shall put on. 23 For the life is more than the food,
    and the body than the raiment. 24 Consider the ravens, that they
    sow not, neither reap; which have no store-chamber nor barn; and
    God feedeth them: of how much more value are ye than the birds! 25
    And which of you by being anxious can add a cubit unto the measure
    of his life? 26 If then ye are not able to do even that which is
    least, why are ye anxious concerning the rest? 27 Consider the
    lilies, how they grow: they toil not, neither do they spin; yet I
    say unto you, Even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
    one of these. 28 But if God doth so clothe the grass in the field,
    which to-day is and to-morrow is cast into the oven; how much more
    _shall he clothe_ you, O ye of little faith? 29 And seek not ye
    what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, neither be ye of
    doubtful mind. 30 For all these things do the nations of the world
    seek after: but your Father knoweth that ye have need of these
    things. 31 Yet seek ye his kingdom, and these things shall be
    added unto you. 32 Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's
    good pleasure to give you the kingdom. 33 Sell that which ye have,
    and give alms; make for yourselves purses which wax not old, a
    treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief draweth
    near, neither moth destroyeth. 34 For where your treasure is,
    there will your heart be also.


In addressing the crowds Jesus warned them against covetousness by
speaking to them the parable of the Foolish Rich Man who trusted in his
goods and forgot God; he now turned to his disciples to urge them to
forget their worries by trust in God. While a Christian must not be
selfishly absorbed in amassing wealth, he need not be anxious about even
the necessities of life. The reason is that "the life is more than the
food, and the body than the raiment," and therefore God who gave life and
made the body will surely provide food and clothing; he who did the
greater will not fail to do the less.

For an example of such providential care Jesus points to the birds:
without the "fruits" and the "barns" and the "goods," which failed to
prolong the life of the rich man, the ravens continue to live; "God
feedeth them: of how much more value are ye than the birds!" Of course we
are to be diligent and industrious and to exercise thrift and foresight;
but we are not to be anxious. Worry will not prolong life; on the other
hand, it is worry and not work that kills. Therefore, if anxiety shortens
life, it surely will not supply the necessities of life; trust God for
food. Vs. 24-26.

So, too, as for clothing; if God robes in such beautiful colors the
perishable flowers of the field, will he not provide garments for his own
children? To be anxious about these necessities is to imitate the heathen
who know nothing of God's providential care. We show ourselves to be his
children by our trust in him. Vs. 27-30.

However, while we are not to be absorbed in seeking wealth, as the foolish
rich man, or to be anxious about food and raiment, as are men of the
world, there is something about which we should feel a deep concern, and
that is the Kingdom of God. If we seek and labor for its coming, we can be
sure that our Father will supply our temporal needs. Even though at times
we may be in peril and in want, we can be certain that we are to share at
last the blessedness of that Kingdom. Vs. 31, 32. Therefore we should not
be absorbed in gathering the goods that perish, but by deeds of sacrifice
and works of charity, inspired by gratitude to God and love to men, we are
to lay up "treasure in the heavens" which will never be stolen or
destroyed; and as the heart always follows its treasure, our thoughts will
be turned upward toward God; trust in his power and love will banish our
anxiety and free us from care. Vs. 33, 34.



12. An Exhortation to Watchfulness. Ch. 12:35-48


    35 Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning; 36 and
    be ye yourselves like unto men looking for their lord, when he
    shall return from the marriage feast; that, when he cometh and
    knocketh, they may straightway open unto him. 37 Blessed are those
    servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily
    I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them sit down
    to meat, and shall come and serve them. 38 And if he shall come in
    the second watch, and if in the third, and find _them_ so, blessed
    are those _servants_. 39 But know this, that if the master of the
    house had known in what hour the thief was coming, he would have
    watched, and not have left his house to be broken through. 40 Be
    ye also ready: for in an hour that ye think not the Son of man
    cometh.


    41 And Peter said, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or
    even unto all? 42 And the Lord said, Who then is the faithful and
    wise steward, whom his lord shall set over his household, to give
    them their portion of food in due season? 43 Blessed is that
    servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. 44 Of a
    truth I say unto you, that he will set him over all that he hath.
    45 But if that servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth
    his coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants and the
    maidservants, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken; 46 the lord
    of that servant shall come in a day when he expecteth not, and in
    an hour when he knoweth not, and shall cut him asunder, and
    appoint his portion with the unfaithful. 47 And that servant, who
    knew his lord's will, and made not ready, nor did according to his
    will, shall be beaten with many _stripes_; 48 but he that knew
    not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
    _stripes_. And to whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be
    required: and to whom they commit much, of him will they ask the
    more.


Our Lord had been warning his disciples against allowing their minds to be
absorbed in the selfish acquisition of wealth, and against being anxious
about needed food and clothing; they were to be supremely concerned about
his Kingdom which would appear in glory at the time of his return. As to
the events preceding this return, as to its circumstances and results, he
taught them more definitely just before his death; here he simply enjoined
upon them the attitude of watchfulness, implying that if his coming was
occupying their thoughts they would be kept at once from worldliness and
from worry, and would be diligent in serving him.

He illustrated this attitude of heart and mind by two parables, the
parable of the Returning Lord and the parable of the Thief. In the former,
the master has been attending a marriage, his servants are awake and
clothed, the house is lighted, and all are ready to receive him. So
delighted is he on his arrival to find them faithful that he is ready to
give any expression to his joy; he even is willing to cause them to sit
down and to partake of the banquet they have prepared for him.

The second parable illustrates the truth that as the time when a thief
will come is unknown, therefore the only way to act is to be ready at all
times for his approach; therefore, our Saviour added, "Be ye also ready:
for in an hour that ye think not the Son of man cometh."

The Master here as elsewhere indicated that his return was to be delayed;
his absence was to be like a long night; much must transpire, much be done
before he would reappear, but his followers must ever be prepared for his
return. This did not mean that they were to be nervously expectant nor
were they to be saying that the day of his coming was just at hand; rather
they were to be at their places of duty, faithfully performing their
tasks, and absorbed in the work which the Master had given them to do.

This attitude of watchfulness, and of interest in the return of Christ,
should particularly characterize teachers and leaders. This is the force
of the question which Peter now asked. He inquired whether all believers
would share equally in the blessings of the Lord's return; would not
those, like the apostles, who had been most prominent in his service
receive from him a greater reward? Jesus replied that larger privileges
imply greater temptations and greater responsibilities. If a Christian
minister has been faithful in feeding his people with spiritual food, he
will be rewarded with even higher opportunities for service; but if the
long delay of his Lord's return shall make him forgetful and unmindful of
its reality, if he shall use his high position selfishly or shall use his
power unkindly, then when the Master appears he will be punished with the
utmost severity.

The chief advantage of a religious leader lies in his opportunity for
knowing more fully the teachings of Christ; his superior knowledge,
therefore, will be the ground of his more terrible punishment in case of
unfaithfulness; the principle is abiding and applies in every sphere. "To
whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required."

Thus Christ taught that in the future there will be degrees and gradations
both of punishments and rewards.



13. The Divisive Influence of Christ. Ch. 12:49-59


    49 I came to cast fire upon the earth; and what do I desire, if it
    is already kindled? 50 But I have a baptism to be baptized with;
    and how am I straitened till it be accomplished! 51 Think ye that
    I come to give peace in the earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather
    division: 52 for there shall be from henceforth five in one house
    divided, three against two, and two against three. 53 They shall
    be divided, father against son, and son against father; mother
    against daughter, and daughter against her mother; mother in law
    against her daughter in law, and daughter in law against her
    mother in law.


    54 And he said to the multitudes also, When ye see a cloud rising
    in the west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it
    cometh to pass. 55 And when _ye see_ a south wind blowing, ye say,
    There will be a scorching heat; and it cometh to pass. 56 Ye
    hypocrites, ye know how to interpret the face of the earth and the
    heaven; but how is it that ye know not how to interpret this time?
    57 And why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right? 58 For
    as thou art going with thine adversary before the magistrate, on
    the way give diligence to be quit of him; lest haply he drag thee
    unto the judge, and the judge shall deliver thee to the officer,
    and the officer shall cast thee into prison. 59 I say unto thee,
    Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
    very last mite.


Jesus had been warning the crowds against the peril of selfish enjoyment
and urging his followers to watch and to labor for his return and his
Kingdom; but he did not want them to be deceived and to suppose that this
Kingdom could be established without conflict and delay. The present age
was to be one of strife and division, and the Master himself was to be
their innocent cause. Some day he would return to bring justice and
holiness and righteousness to complete victory, and then he would be
indeed the Prince of peace.

Now, however, his coming into the world had cast upon the earth the
burning brand of division and strife. This was so inevitable that Jesus
had no regret that the fire was already kindled; but it would not burst
into a conflagration until Jesus had been crucified, and he felt a
pathetic impatience to have that dreadful experience accomplished. As
Jesus emerged from that baptism of fire he would be the torch which would
set the world ablaze with conflict and separation. This division would
occur even in a home circle of five: father and mother would be divided
against son and daughter and daughter-in-law.

Thus Christ, and specifically his cross, is now dividing the world. Happy
are those who interpret his message and understand his mission and turn to
him in repentance and faith!

The multitudes, however, were still unbelieving, and Jesus rebuked their
stupid ignorance. He declared that they could so interpret the signs of
weather as to predict correctly rain or drought, but they could not see in
his words and works the proofs that he was the Christ, the Saviour of the
world. However, he warned them to repent before it was too late. They
would have wisdom enough to agree with an adversary while on the way to a
courtroom before sentence had been pronounced, much more should they see
that it was the part of wisdom to seek peace with God before the day of
mercy and grace had passed.



14. A Call to Repentance. Ch. 13:1-9


    1 Now there were some present at that very season who told him of
    the Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
    sacrifices. 2 And he answered and said unto them, Think ye that
    these Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they
    have suffered these things? 3 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye
    repent, ye shall all in like manner perish. 4 Or those eighteen,
    upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them, think ye that
    they were offenders above all the men that dwell in Jerusalem? 5 I
    tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
    perish.


    6 And he spake this parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted
    in his vineyard; and he came seeking fruit thereon, and found
    none. 7 And he said unto the vinedresser, Behold, these three
    years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it
