319:6   from a material basis, would infringe upon
        spiritual law and misguide human hope. Having faith
        in the divine Principle of Health and spiritually under-
319:9   standing God, sustains man under all circumstances;
        whereas the lower appeal to the general faith in material
        means (commonly called nature) must yield to the all-
319:12  might of infinite Spirit.

        Throughout the infinite cycles of eternal existence,
        Spirit and matter neither concur in man nor in the universe.

                            God the only Mind

319:15  The varied doctrines and theories which presuppose
        life and intelligence to exist in matter are so many ancient
        and modern mythologies. Mystery, miracle,
319:18  sin, and death will disappear when it becomes
        fairly understood that the divine Mind controls man and
        man has no Mind but God.

                        Scriptures misinterpreted

319:21  The divine Science taught in the original language
        of the Bible came through inspiration, and needs inspi-
        ration to be understood. Hence the misappre-
319:24  hension of the spiritual meaning of the Bible,
        and the misinterpretation of the Word in
        some instances by uninspired writers, who only wrote
319:27  down what an inspired teacher had said. A misplaced
        word changes the sense and misstates the Science of
        the Scriptures, as, for instance, to name Love as merely
319:30  an attribute of God; but we can by special and proper
        capitalization speak of the love of Love, meaning by that
        what the beloved disciple meant in one of his epistles,
320:1   when he said, "God is love." Likewise we can speak of
        the truth of Truth and of the life of Life, for Christ plainly
320:3   declared, "I am the way, the truth, and the life."

                            Interior meaning

        Metaphors abound in the Bible, and names are often
        expressive of spiritual ideas. The most distinguished
320:6   theologians in Europe and America agree that
        the Scriptures have both a spiritual and lit-
        eral meaning. In Smith's Bible Dictionary it is said:
320:9   "The spiritual interpretation of Scripture must rest
        upon both the literal and moral;" and in the learned
        article on Noah in the same work, the familiar text,
320:12  Genesis vi. 3, "And the Lord said, My spirit shall not
        always strive with man, for that he also is flesh," is quoted
        as follows, from the original Hebrew: "And Jehovah
320:15  said, My spirit shall not forever rule [or be humbled] in
        men, seeing that they are [or, in their error they are]
        but flesh." Here the original text declares plainly the
320:18  spiritual fact of being, even man's eternal and harmo-
        nious existence as image, idea, instead of matter (how-
        ever transcendental such a thought appears), and avers
320:21  that this fact is not forever to be humbled by the belief
        that man is flesh and matter, for according to that error
        man is mortal.

                        Job, on the resurrection

320:24  The one important interpretation of Scripture is the
        spiritual. For example, the text, "In my flesh shall I
        see God," gives a profound idea of the di-
320:27  vine power to heal the ills of the flesh, and
        encourages mortals to hope in Him who healeth all our
        diseases; whereas this passage is continually quoted
320:30  as if Job intended to declare that even if disease and
        worms destroyed his body, yet in the latter days he should
        stand in celestial perfection before Elohim, still clad
321:1   in material flesh, - an interpretation which is just the op-
        posite of the true, as may be seen by studying the book
321:3   of Job. As Paul says, in his first epistle to the Corin-
        thians, "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
        God."

                      Fear of the serpent overcome

321:6   The Hebrew Lawgiver, slow of speech, despaired of
        making the people understand what should be revealed
        to him. When, led by wisdom to cast down his
321:9   rod, he saw it become a serpent, Moses fled be-
        fore it; but wisdom bade him come back and
        handle the serpent, and then Moses' fear departed. In
321:12  this incident was seen the actuality of Science. Matter
        was shown to be a belief only. The serpent, evil, under
        wisdom's bidding, was destroyed through understanding
321:15  divine Science, and this proof was a staff upon which to
        lean. The illusion of Moses lost its power to alarm him,
        when he discovered that what he apparently saw was really
321:18  but a phase of mortal belief.

                             Leprosy healed

        It was scientifically demonstrated that leprosy was a
        creation of mortal mind and not a condition of matter,
321:21  when Moses first put his hand into his bosom
        and drew it forth white as snow with the dread
        disease, and presently restored his hand to its natural con-
321:24  dition by the same simple process. God had lessened
        Moses' fear by this proof in divine Science, and the in-
        ward voice became to him the voice of God, which said:
321:27  "It shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
        hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe
        the voice of the latter sign." And so it was in the coming
321:30  centuries, when the Science of being was demonstrated
        by Jesus, who showed his students the power of Mind by
        changing water into wine, and taught them how to handle
322:1   serpents unharmed, to heal the sick and cast out evils in
        proof of the supremacy of Mind.

                           Standpoints changed

322:3   When understanding changes the standpoints of life and
        intelligence from a material to a spiritual basis, we shall
        gain the reality of Life, the control of Soul over
322:6   sense, and we shall perceive Christianity, or
        Truth, in its divine Principle. This must be the climax
        before harmonious and immortal man is obtained and his
322:9   capabilities revealed. It is highly important - in view
        of the immense work to be accomplished before this recog-
        nition of divine Science can come - to turn our thoughts
322:12  towards divine Principle, that finite belief may be pre-
        pared to relinquish its error.

                          Saving the inebriate

        Man's wisdom finds no satisfaction in sin, since God
322:15  has sentenced sin to suffer. The necromancy of yester-
        day foreshadowed the mesmerism and hypno-
        tism of to-day. The drunkard thinks he enjoys
322:18  drunkenness, and you cannot make the inebriate leave
        his besottedness, until his physical sense of pleasure yields
        to a higher sense. Then he turns from his cups, as
322:21  the startled dreamer who wakens from an incubus in-
        curred through the pains of distorted sense. A man who
        likes to do wrong - finding pleasure in it and refraining
322:24  from it only through fear of consequences - is neither
        a temperate man nor a reliable religionist.

                            Uses of suffering

        The sharp experiences of belief in the supposititious life
322:27  of matter, as well as our disappointments and ceaseless
        woes, turn us like tired children to the arms
        of divine Love. Then we begin to learn Life
322:30  in divine Science. Without this process of weaning,
        "Canst thou by searching find out God?" It is easier
        to desire Truth than to rid one's self of error. Mortals
323:1   may seek the understanding of Christian Science, but they
        will not be able to glean from Christian Science the facts
323:3   of being without striving for them. This strife consists
        in the endeavor to forsake error of every kind and to pos-
        sess no other consciousness but good.

                            A bright outlook

323:6   Through the wholesome chastisements of Love, we
        are helped onward in the march towards righteousness,
        peace, and purity, which are the landmarks
323:9   of Science. Beholding the infinite tasks of
        truth, we pause, - wait on God. Then we push onward,
        until boundless thought walks enraptured, and concep-
323:12  tion unconfined is winged to reach the divine glory.

                             Need and supply

        In order to apprehend more, we must put into prac-
        tice what we already know. We must recollect that
323:15  Truth is demonstrable when understood, and
        that good is not understood until demonstrated.
        If "faithful over a few things," we shall be made rulers
323:18  over many; but the one unused talent decays and is lost.
        When the sick or the sinning awake to realize their need
        of what they have not, they will be receptive of divine
323:21  Science, which gravitates towards Soul and away from
        material sense, removes thought from the body, and ele-
        vates even mortal mind to the contemplation of some-
323:24  thing better than disease or sin. The true idea of God
        gives the true understanding of Life and Love, robs the
        grave of victory, takes away all sin and the delusion that
323:27  there are other minds, and destroys mortality.

                          Childlike receptivity

        The effects of Christian Science are not so much seen
        as felt. It is the "still, small voice" of Truth
323:30  uttering itself. We are either turning away
        from this utterance, or we are listening to it and going
        up higher. Willingness to become as a little child and
324:1   to leave the old for the new, renders thought receptive of
        the advanced idea. Gladness to leave the false landmarks
324:3   and joy to see them disappear, - this disposition helps
        to precipitate the ultimate harmony. The purification
        of sense and self is a proof of progress. "Blessed are the
324:6   pure in heart: for they shall see God."

                             Narrow pathway

        Unless the harmony and immortality of man are be-
        coming more apparent, we are not gaining the true idea
324:9   of God; and the body will reflect what gov-
        erns it, whether it be Truth or error,
        understanding or belief, Spirit or matter. Therefore
324:12  "acquaint now thyself with Him, and be at peace."
        Be watchful, sober, and vigilant. The way is straight
        and narrow, which leads to the understanding that God
324:15  is the only Life. It is a warfare with the flesh, in which
        we must conquer sin, sickness, and death, either here
        or hereafter, - certainly before we can reach the goal
324:18  of Spirit, or life in God.

                          Paul's enlightenment

        Paul was not at first a disciple of Jesus but a perse-
        cutor of Jesus' followers. When the truth first appeared
324:21  to him in Science, Paul was made blind,
        and his blindness was felt; but spiritual
        light soon enabled him to follow the example and teach-
324:24  ings of Jesus, healing the sick and preaching Christian-
        ity throughout Asia Minor, Greece, and even in imperial
        Rome.

324:27  Paul writes, "If Christ [Truth] be not risen, then is
        our preaching vain." That is, if the idea of the suprem-
        acy of Spirit, which is the true conception of being,
324:30  come not to your thought, you cannot be benefited by
        what I say.

                             Abiding in Life

        Jesus said substantially, "He that believeth in me
325:1   shall not see death." That is, he who perceives the
        true idea of Life loses his belief in death. He who has
325:3   the true idea of good loses all sense of evil,
        and by reason of this is being ushered into the
        undying realities of Spirit. Such a one abideth in Life, -
325:6   life obtained not of the body incapable of supporting life,
        but of Truth, unfolding its own immortal idea. Jesus
        gave the true idea of being, which results in infinite bless-
325:9   ings to mortals.

                          Indestructible being

        In Colossians (iii. 4) Paul writes: "When Christ, who
        is our life, shall appear [be manifested], then shall ye also
325:12  appear [be manifested] with him in glory."
        When spiritual being is understood in all its
        perfection, continuity, and might, then shall man be found
325:15  in God's image. The absolute meaning of the apostolic
        words is this: Then shall man be found, in His likeness,
        perfect as the Father, indestructible in Life, "hid with
325:18  Christ in God," - with Truth in divine Love, where
        human sense hath not seen man.

                          Consecration required

        Paul had a clear sense of the demands of Truth upon
325:21  mortals physically and spiritually, when he said: "Pre-
        sent your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, ac-
        ceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
325:24  service." But he, who is begotten of the beliefs of the
        flesh and serves them, can never reach in this world the
        divine heights of our Lord. The time cometh when
325:27  the spiritual origin of man, the divine Science which
        ushered Jesus into human presence, will be understood
        and demonstrated.

325:30  When first spoken in any age, Truth, like the light,
        "shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended
        it not." A false sense of life, substance, and mind
326:1   hides the divine possibilities, and conceals scientific
        demonstration.

                          Loving God supremely

326:3   If we wish to follow Christ, Truth, it must be in the
        way of God's appointing. Jesus said, "He that believeth
        on me, the works that I do shall he do also."
326:6   He, who would reach the source and find the
        divine remedy for every ill, must not try to climb the hill
        of Science by some other road. All nature teaches God's
326:9   love to man, but man cannot love God supremely and set
        his whole affections on spiritual things, while loving the
        material or trusting in it more than in the spiritual.

326:12  We must forsake the foundation of material systems,
        however time-honored, if we would gain the Christ as
        our only Saviour. Not partially, but fully, the great
326:15  healer of mortal mind is the healer of the body.

        The purpose and motive to live aright can be gained
        now. This point won, you have started as you should.
326:18  You have begun at the numeration-table of Christian
        Science, and nothing but wrong intention can hinder your
        advancement. Working and praying with true motives,
326:21  your Father will open the way. "Who did hinder you,
        that ye should not obey the truth?"

                           Conversion of Saul

        Saul of Tarsus beheld the way - the Christ, or Truth
326:24  - only when his uncertain sense of right yielded to a
        spiritual sense, which is always right. Then
        the man was changed. Thought assumed a
326:27  nobler outlook, and his life became more spiritual. He
        learned the wrong that he had done in persecuting Chris-
        tians, whose religion he had not understood, and in hu-
326:30  mility he took the new name of Paul. He beheld for the
        first time the true idea of Love, and learned a lesson in
        divine Science.

327:1   Reform comes by understanding that there is no abid-
        ing pleasure in evil, and also by gaining an affection for
327:3   good according to Science, which reveals the immortal
        fact that neither pleasure nor pain, appetite nor passion,
        can exist in or of matter, while divine Mind can and does
327:6   destroy the false beliefs of pleasure, pain, or fear and all
        the sinful appetites of the human mind.

                           Image of the beast

        What a pitiful sight is malice, finding pleasure in re-
327:9   venge! Evil is sometimes a man's highest conception
        of right, until his grasp on good grows stronger.
        Then he loses pleasure in wickedness, and it
327:12  becomes his torment. The way to escape the misery of
        sin is to cease sinning. There is no other way. Sin is
        the image of the beast to be effaced by the sweat of agony.
327:15  It is a moral madness which rushes forth to clamor with
        midnight and tempest.

                           Peremptory demands

        To the physical senses, the strict demands of Christian
327:18  Science seem peremptory; but mortals are has-
        tening to learn that Life is God, good, and that
        evil has in reality neither place nor power in the human or
327:21  the divine economy.

                              Moral courage

        Fear of punishment never made man truly honest.
        Moral courage is requisite to meet the wrong and to
327:24  proclaim the right. But how shall we re-
        form the man who has more animal than
        moral courage, and who has not the true idea of good?
327:27  Through human consciousness, convince the mortal of
        his mistake in seeking material means for gaining hap-
        piness. Reason is the most active human faculty. Let
327:30  that inform the sentiments and awaken the man's dor-
        mant sense of moral obligation, and by degrees he will
        learn the nothingness of the pleasures of human sense
328:1   and the grandeur and bliss of a spiritual sense, which
        silences the material or corporeal. Then he not only will
328:3   be saved, but /is/ saved.

                       Final destruction of error

        Mortals suppose that they can live without goodness,
        when God is good and the only real Life. What is the
328:6   result? Understanding little about the divine
        Principle which saves and heals, mortals get
        rid of sin, sickness, and death only in belief. These errors
328:9   are not thus really destroyed, and must therefore cling
        to mortals until, here or hereafter, they gain the true un-
        derstanding of God in the Science which destroys human
328:12  delusions about Him and reveals the grand realities of
        His allness.

                            Promise perpetual

        This understanding of man's power, when he is
328:15  equipped by God, has sadly disappeared from Christian
        history. For centuries it has been dormant, a
        lost element of Christianity. Our missionaries
328:18  carry the Bible to India, but can it be said that they
        explain it practically, as Jesus did, when hundreds of
        persons die there annually from serpent-bites? Under-
328:21  standing spiritual law and knowing that there is no mate-
        rial law, Jesus said: "These signs shall follow them that
        believe, . . . they shall take up serpents, and if they
328:24  drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They
        shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." It
        were well had Christendom believed and obeyed this
328:27  sacred saying.

        Jesus' promise is perpetual. Had it been given only
        to his immediate disciples, the Scriptural passage would
328:30  read you, not /they/. The purpose of his great life-work
        extends through time and includes universal humanity.
        Its Principle is infinite, reaching beyond the pale of a
329:1   single period or of a limited following. As time moves
        on, the healing elements of pure Christianity will be fairly
329:3   dealt with; they will be sought and taught, and will glow
        in all the grandeur of universal goodness.

                           Imitation of Jesus

        A little leaven leavens the whole lump. A little under-
329:6   standing of Christian Science proves the truth of all that
        I say of it. Because you cannot walk on the
        water and raise the dead, you have no right to
329:9   question the great might of divine Science in these direc-
        tions. Be thankful that Jesus, who was the true demon-
        strator of Science, did these things, and left his example for
329:12  us. In Science we can use only what we understand. We
        must prove our faith by demonstration.

        One should not tarry in the storm if the body is freez-
329:15  ing, nor should he remain in the devouring flames. Un-
        til one is able to prevent bad results, he should avoid their
        occasion. To be discouraged, is to resemble a pupil in
329:18  addition, who attempts to solve a problem of Euclid, and
        denies the rule of the problem because he fails in his first
        effort.

                      Error destroyed, not pardoned

329:21  There is no hypocrisy in Science. Principle is impera-
        tive. You cannot mock it by human will. Science is a
        divine demand, not a human. Always right,
329:24  its divine Principle never repents, but main-
        tains the claim of Truth by quenching error.
        The pardon of divine mercy is the destruction of error. If
329:27  men understood their real spiritual source to be all bless-
        edness, they would struggle for recourse to the spiritual
        and be at peace; but the deeper the error into which mor-
329:30  tal mind is plunged, the more intense the opposition to
        spirituality, till error yields to Truth.

                           The hopeful outlook

        Human resistance to divine Science weakens in pro-
330:1   portion as mortals give up error for Truth and the un-
        derstanding of being supersedes mere belief. Until the
330:3   author of this book learned the vastness of
        Christian Science, the fixedness of mortal illu-
        sions, and the human hatred of Truth, she cherished
330:6   sanguine hopes that Christian Science would meet with
        immiediate and universal acceptance.

        When the following platform is understood and the
330:9   letter and the spirit bear witness, the infallibility of divine
        metaphysics will be demonstrated.

                          The deific supremacy

        I. God is infinite, the only Life, substance, Spirit, or
330:12  Soul, the only intelligence of the universe, including man.
        Eye hath neither seen God nor His image and
        likeness. Neither God nor the perfect man
330:15  can be discerned by the material senses. The individ-
        uality of Spirit, or the infinite, is unknown, and thus a
        knowledge of it is left either to human conjecture or to the
330:18  revelation of divine Science.

                         The deific definitions

        II. God is what the Scriptures declare Him to be, -
        Life, Truth, Love. Spirit is divine Principle, and divine
330:21  Principle is Love, and Love is Mind, and
        Mind is not both good and bad, for God is
        Mind; therefore there is in reality one Mind only, be-
330:24  cause there is one God.

                              Evil obsolete

        III. The notion that both evil and good are real is a
        delusion of material sense, which Science annihilates.
330:27  Evil is nothing, no thing, mind, nor power.
        As manifested by mankind it stands for a lie,
        nothing claiming to be something, - for lust, dishonesty,
330:30  selfishness, envy, hypocrisy, slander, hate, theft, adultery,
        murder, dementia, insanity, inanity, devil, hell, with all
        the etceteras that word includes.

                            Life the creator

331:1   IV. God is divine Life, and Life is no more confined
        to the forms which reflect it than substance is in its
331:3   shadow. If life were in mortal man or mate-
        rial things, it would be subject to their limi-
        tations and would end in death. Life is Mind, the creator
331:6   reflected in His creations. If He dwelt within what He
        creates, God would not be reflected but absorbed, and the
        Science of being would be forever lost through a mortal
331:9   sense, which falsely testifies to a beginning and an
        end.

                            Allness of Spirit

        V. The Scriptures imply that God is All-in-all. From
331:12  this it follows that nothing possesses reality nor existence
        except the divine Mind and His ideas. The
        Scriptures also declare that God is Spirit.
331:15  Therefore in Spirit all is harmony, and there can be no
        discord; all is Life, and there is no death. Everything
        in God's universe expresses Him.

                           The universal cause

331:18  VI. God is individual, incorporeal. He is divine Prin-
        ciple, Love, the universal cause, the only creator, and
        there is no other self-existence. He is all-
331:21  inclusive, and is reflected by all that is real
        and eternal and by nothing else. He fills all space, and
        it is impossible to conceive of such omnipresence and in-
331:24  dividuality except as infinite Spirit or Mind. Hence all
        is Spirit and spiritual.

                             Divine trinity

        VII. Life, Truth, and Love constitute the triune Person
331:27  called God, - that is, the triply divine Principle, Love.
        They represent a trinity in unity, three in
        one, - the same in essence, though multi-
331:30  form in office: God the Father-Mother; Christ the spirit-
        ual idea of sonship; divine Science or the Holy Comforter.
        These three express in divine Science the threefold, essen-
332:1   tial nature of the infinite. They also indicate the divine
        Principle of scientific being, the intelligent relation of God
332:3   to man and the universe.

                              Father-Mother

        VIII. Father-Mother is the name for Deity, which in-
        dicates His tender relationship to His spiritual creation.
332:6   As the apostle expressed it in words which he
        quoted with approbation from a classic poet:
        "For we are also His offspring."

                             The Son of God

332:9   IX. Jesus was born of Mary. Christ is the true idea
        voicing good, the divine message from God to men speak-
        ing to the human consciousness. The Christ
332:12  is incorporeal, spiritual, - yea, the divine
        image and likeness, dispelling the illusions of the senses;
        the Way, the Truth, and the Life, healing the sick and
332:15  casting out evils, destroying sin, disease, and death. As
        Paul says: "There is one God, and one mediator between
        God and men, the man Christ Jesus." The corporeal
332:18  man Jesus was human.

                         Holy Ghost or Comforter

        X. Jesus demonstrated Christ; he proved that Christ
        is the divine idea of God - the Holy Ghost,
332:21  or Comforter, revealing the divine Principle,
        Love, and leading into all truth.

                              Christ Jesus

        XI. Jesus was the son of a virgin. He was appointed
332:24  to speak God's word and to appear to mortals in such
        a form of humanity as they could understand
        as well as perceive. Mary's conception of
332:27  him was spiritual, for only purity could reflect Truth
        and Love, which were plainly incarnate in the good and
        pure Christ Jesus. He expressed the highest type of
332:30  divinity, which a fleshly form could express in that age.
        Into the real and ideal man the fleshly element cannot
        enter. Thus it is that Christ illustrates the coincidence,
333:1   or spiritual agreement, between God and man in His
        image.

                            Messiah or Christ

333:3   XII. The word /Christ/ is not properly a synonym for
        Jesus, though it is commonly so used. Jesus was a human
        name, which belonged to him in common with
333:6   other Hebrew boys and men, for it is identical
        with the name Joshua, the renowned Hebrew leader. On
        the other hand, Christ is not a name so much as the divine
333:9   title of Jesus. Christ expresses God's spiritual, eternal
        nature. The name is synonymous with Messiah, and al-
        ludes to the spirituality which is taught, illustrated, and
333:12  demonstrated in the life of which Christ Jesus was the
        embodiment. The proper name of our Master in the
        Greek was Jesus the Christ; but Christ Jesus better sig-
333:15  nifies the Godlike.

                      The divine Principle and idea

        XIII. The advent of Jesus of Nazareth marked the
        first century of the Christian era, but the Christ is
333:18  without beginning of years or end of days.
        Throughout all generations both before and
        after the Christian era, the Christ, as the spirit-
333:21  ual idea, - the reflection of God, - has come with some
        measure of power and grace to all prepared to receive
        Christ, Truth. Abraham, Jacob, Moses, and the prophets
333:24  caught glorious glimpses of the Messiah, or Christ, which
        baptized these seers in the divine nature, the essence of
        Love. The divine image, idea, or Christ was, is, and
333:27  ever will be inseparable from the divine Principle, God.
        Jesus referred to this unity of his spiritual identity thus:
        "Before Abraham was, I am;" "I and my Father are
333:30  one;" "My Father is greater than I." The one Spirit
        includes all identities.

                            Spiritual oneness

        XIV. By these sayings Jesus meant, not that the hu-
334:1   man Jesus was or is eternal, but that the divine idea or
        Christ was and is so and therefore antedated Abraham;
334:3   not that the corporeal Jesus was one with the
        Father, but that the spiritual idea, Christ,
        dwells forever in the bosom of the Father, God, from
334:6   which it illumines heaven and earth; not that the Father
        is greater than Spirit, which is God, but greater, infinitely
        greater, than the fleshly Jesus, whose earthly career was
334:9   brief.

                            The Son's duality

        XV. The invisible Christ was imperceptible to the
        so-called personal senses, whereas Jesus appeared as a
334:12  bodily existence. This dual personality of the
        unseen and the seen, the spiritual and mate-
        rial, the eternal Christ and the corporeal Jesus manifest
334:15  in flesh, continued until the Master's ascension, when
        the human, material concept, or Jesus, disappeared,
        while the spiritual self, or Christ, continues to exist in
334:18  the eternal order of divine Science, taking away the sins
        of the world, as the Christ has always done, even before
        the human Jesus was incarnate to mortal eyes.

                         Eternity of the Christ

334:21  XVI. This was "the Lamb slain from the foundation
        of the world," - slain, that is, according to the testi-
        mony of the corporeal senses, but undying in
334:24  the deific Mind. The Revelator represents the
        Son of man as saying (Revelation i. 17, 18): "I am the
        first and the last: I am he that liveth, and was dead
334:27  [not understood]; and, behold, I am alive for evermore,
        [Science has explained me]." This is a mystical state-
        ment of the eternity of the Christ, and is also a reference
334:30  to the human sense of Jesus crucified.

                             Infinite Spirit

        XVII. Spirit being God, there is but one Spirit, for
        there can be but one infinite and therefore one God.
335:1   There are neither spirits many nor gods many. There
        is no evil in Spirit, because God is Spirit. The theory,
335:3   that Spirit is distinct from matter but must
        pass through it, or into it, to be individualized,
        would reduce God to dependency on matter, and establish
335:6   a basis for pantheism.

                           The only substance

        XVIII. Spirit, God, has created all in and of Him-
        self. Spirit never created matter. There is nothing in
335:9   Spirit out of which matter could be made,
        for, as the Bible declares, without the Logos,
        the AEon or Word of God, "was not anything made
335:12  that was made." Spirit is the only substance, the in-
        visible and indivisible infinite God. Things spiritual and
        eternal are substantial. Things material and temporal
335:15  are insubstantial.

                           Soul and Spirit one

        XIX. Soul and Spirit being one, God and Soul are
        one, and this one never included in a limited mind or a
335:18  limited body. Spirit is eternal, divine. Noth-
        ing but Spirit, Soul, can evolve Life, for Spirit
        is more than all else. Because Soul is immortal, it does
335:21  not exist in mortality. Soul must be incorporeal to be
        Spirit, for Spirit is not finite. Only by losing the false
        sense of Soul can we gain the eternal unfolding of Life as
335:24  immortality brought to light.

                           The one divine Mind

        XX. Mind is the divine Principle, Love, and can pro-
        duce nothing unlike the eternal Father-Mother, God.
335:27  Reality is spiritual, harmonious, immutable,
        immortal, divine, eternal. Nothing unspirit-
        ual can be real, harmonious, or eternal. Sin, sickness,
335:30  and mortality are the suppositional antipodes of Spirit,
        and must be contradictions of reality.

                             The divine Ego

        XXI. The Ego is deathless and limitless, for limits
336:1   would imply and impose ignorance. Mind is the I AM,
        or infinity. Mind never enters the finite. Intelligence
336:3   never passes into non-intelligence, or matter.
        Good never enters into evil the unlimited into
        the limited, the eternal into the temporal, nor the im-
336:6   mortal into mortality. The divine Ego, or individuality,
        is reflected in all spiritual individuality from the infini-
        tesimal to the infinite.

                            The real manhood

336:9   XXII. Immortal man was and is God's image or idea,
        even the infinite expression of infinite Mind, and immor-
        tal man is coexistent and coeternal with that
336:12  Mind. He has been forever in the eternal
        Mind, God; but infinite Mind can never be in man, but
        is reflected by man. The spiritual man's consciousness
336:15  and individuality are reflections of God. They are the
        emanations of Him who is Life, Truth, and Love. Im-
        mortal man is not and never was material, but always
336:18  spiritual and eternal.

                     Indivisibility of the infinite

        XXIII. God is indivisible. A portion of God could
        not enter man; neither could God's fulness be reflected
336:21  by a single man, else God would be manifestly
        finite, lose the deific character, and become
        less than God. Allness is the measure of the infinite, and
336:24  nothing less can express God.

                           God the parent Mind

        XXIV. God, the divine Principle of man, and man in
        God's likeness are inseparable, harmonious, and eternal.
336:27  The Science of being furnishes the rule of per-
        fection, and brings immortality to light. God
        and man are not the same, but in the order of divine Sci-
336:30  ence, God and man coexist and are eternal. God is the
        parent Mind, and man is God's spiritual offspring.

                      Man reflects the perfect God

        XXV. God is individual and personal in a scientific
337:1   sense, but not in any anthropomorphic sense. Therefore
        man, reflecting God, cannot lose his individuality; but as
337:3   material sensation, or a soul in the body, blind
        mortals do lose sight of spiritual individuality.
        Material personality is not realism; it is not
337:6   the reflection or likeness of Spirit, the perfect God. Sen-
        sualism is not bliss, but bondage. For true happiness,
        man must harmonize with his Principle, divine Love; the
337:9   Son must be in accord with the Father, in conformity with
        Christ. According to divine Science, man is in a degree
        as perfect as the Mind that forms him. The truth of be-
337:12  ing makes man harmonious and immortal, while error is
        mortal and discordant.

                      Purity the path to perfection

        XXVI. Christian Science demonstrates that none but
337:15  the pure in heart can see God, as the gospel
        teaches. In proportion to his purity is man
        perfect; and perfection is the order of celestial
337:18  being which demonstrates Life in Christ, Life's spiritual
        ideal.

                            True idea of man

        XXVII. The true idea of man, as the reflection of the
337:21  invisible God, is as incomprehensible to the limited senses
        as is man's infinite Principle. The visible uni-
        verse and material man are the poor counter-
337:24  feits of the invisible universe and spiritual man. Eternal
        things (verities) are God's thoughts as they exist in the
        spiritual realm of the real. Temporal things are the
337:27  thoughts of mortals and are the unreal, being the oppo-
        site of the real or the spiritual and eternal.

                           Truth demonstrated

        XXVIII. Subject sickness, sin, and death to the rule
337:30  of health and holiness in Christian Science,
        and you ascertain that this Science is demon-
        strably true, for it heals the sick and sinning as no
338:1   other system can. Christian Science, rightly under-
        stood, leads to eternal harmony. It brings to light the
338:3   only living and true God and man as made in His like-
        ness; whereas the opposite belief - that man originates
        in matter and has beginning and end, that he is both
338:6   soul and body, both good and evil, both spiritual and
        material - terminates in discord and mortality, in the
        error which must be destroyed by Truth. The mortality
338:9   of material man proves that error has been ingrafted
        into the premises and conclusions of material and mortal
        humanity.

                           Adam not ideal man

338:12  XXIX. The word /Adam /is from the Hebrew /adamah/,
        signifying the /red color of the ground, dust, nothingness/.
        Divide the name Adam into two syllables,
338:15  and it reads, /a dam/, or obstruction. This
        suggests the thought of something fluid, of mortal mind
        in solution. It further suggests the thought of that
338:18  " darkness . . . upon the face of the deep," when mat-
        ter or dust was deemed the agent of Deity in creating
        man, - when matter, as that which is accursed, stood
338:21  opposed to Spirit. Here /a dam/ is not a mere play upon
        words; it stands for obstruction, error, even the sup-
        posed separation of man from God, and the obstacle
338:24  which the serpent, sin, would impose between man and
        his creator. The dissection and definition of words,
        aside from their metaphysical derivation, is not scien-
338:27  tific. Jehovah declared the ground was accursed; and
        from this ground, or matter, sprang Adam, notwith-
        standing God had blessed the earth "for man's sake."
338:30  From this it follows that Adam was not the ideal man
        for whom the earth was blessed. The ideal man was
        revealed in due time, and was known as Christ Jesus.

                              Divine pardon

339:1   XXX. The destruction of sin is the divine method of
        pardon. Divine Life destroys death, Truth destroys
339:3   error, and Love destroys hate. Being de-
        stroyed, sin needs no other form of forgiveness.
        Does not God's pardon, destroying any one sin, prophesy
339:6   and involve the final destruction of all sin?

                        Evil not produced by God

        XXXI. Since God is All, there is no room for His
        unlikeness. God, Spirit, alone created all, and called it
339:9   good. Therefore evil, being contrary to good,
        is unreal, and cannot be the product of God.
        A sinner can receive no encouragement from the fact that
339:12  Science demonstrates the unreality of evil, for the sinner
        would make a reality of sin, - would make that real
        which is unreal, and thus heap up "wrath against the
339:15  day of wrath." He is joining in a conspiracy against
        himself, - against his own awakening to the awful un-
        reality by which he has been deceived. Only those, who
339:18  repent of sin and forsake the unreal, can fully understand
        the unreality of evil.

                     Basis of health and immortality

        XXXII. As the mythology of pagan Rome has yielded
339:21  to a more spiritual idea of Deity, so will our material
        theories yield to spiritual ideas, until the finite
        gives place to the infinite, sickness to health,
339:24  sin to holiness, and God's kingdom comes "in
        earth, as it is in heaven." The basis of all health, sin-
        lessness, and immortality is the great fact that God is
339:27  the only Mind; and this Mind must be not merely be-
        lieved, but it must be understood. To get rid of sin
        through Science, is to divest sin of any supposed mind
339:30  or reality, and never to admit that sin can have intelli-
        gence or power, pain or pleasure. You conquer error by
        denying its verity. Our various theories will never lose
340:1   their imaginary power for good or evil, until we lose our
        faith in them and make life its own proof of harmony
340:3   and God.

        This text in the book of Ecclesiastes conveys the
        Christian Science thought, especially when the word
340:6   /duty/, which is not in the original, is omitted: "Let
        us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God,
        and keep His commandments: for this is the whole
340:9   duty of man." In other words: Let us hear the con-
        clusion of the whole matter: love God and keep His
        commandments: for this is the whole of man in His
340:12  image and likeness. Divine Love is infinite. Therefore
        all that really exists is in and of God, and manifests His
        love.

340:15  "Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Exodus
        xx. 3.) The First Commandment is my favorite text.
        It demonstrates Christian Science. It inculcates the tri-
340:18  unity of God, Spirit, Mind; it signifies that man shall
        have no other spirit or mind but God, eternal good, and
        that all men shall have one Mind. The divine Principle
340:21  of the First Commandment bases the Science of being, by
        which man demonstrates health, holiness, and life eternal.
        One infinite God, good, unifies men and nations; con-
340:24  stitutes the brotherhood of man; ends wars; fulfils the
        Scripture, "Love thy neighbor as thyself;" annihilates
        pagan and Christian idolatry, - whatever is wrong in
340:27  social, civil, criminal, political, and religious codes;
        equalizes the sexes; annuls the curse on man, and leaves
        nothing that can sin, suffer, be punished or destroyed.




        CHAPTER XI - SOME OBJECTIONS ANSWERED

        And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not.
        Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth,
        why do ye not believe me? - JESUS.

        But if the spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead
        dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall
        also quicken your mortal bodies by His spirit that dwelleth
        in you. - PAUL.

341:1   THE strictures on this volume would condemn to
        oblivion the truth, which is raising up thousands
341:3   from helplessness to strength and elevating them from
        a theoretical to a practical Christianity. These criticisms
        are generally based on detached sentences or clauses sep-
341:6   arated from their context. Even the Scriptures, which
        grow in beauty and consistency from one grand root, ap-
        pear contradictory when subjected to such usage. Jesus
341:9   said, "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see
        God" [Truth].

