creatures are links; this is the staple from which they all hang. All
other being is derived, and therefore limited and changeful; this Being
is underived, absolute, self-dependent, and therefore unalterable for
evermore. Because we live we die. In living the process is going on of
which death is the end. But God lives for evermore, a flame that does
not burn out; therefore His resources are inexhaustible, His power
unwearied. He needs no rest for recuperation of wasted energy. His
gifts diminish not the store which He has to bestow. He gives, and is
none the poorer; He works, and is never weary; He operates unspent; He
loves, and He loves for ever; and through the ages the fire burns on,
unconsumed and undecayed.

O brethren! is not that a revelation--familiar as it sounds to our ears
now, blessed be God!--is not that a revelation of which, when we
apprehend the depth and the preciousness, we may well fix an
unalterable faith upon it, and feel that for us, in our fleeting days
and shadowy moments, the one means to secure blessedness, rest,
strength, life, is to grasp and knit ourselves to Him who lives for
ever, and whose love is lasting as His life? 'The eternal God, the Lord
... fainteth not, neither is weary. They that wait upon Him shall renew
their strength.'

The last thought suggested to me by this symbol is this. Regarding the
lowly thorn-bush as an emblem of Israel--which unquestionably it is,
though the fire be the symbol of God--in the fact that the symbolical
manifestation of the divine energy lived in so lowly a shrine, and
flamed in it, and preserved it by its burning, there is a great and
blessed truth.

It is the same truth which Jesus Christ, with a depth of interpretation
that put to shame the cavilling listeners, found in the words that
accompanied this vision: 'I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob.' He said to the sneering Sadducees, who, like all
other sneerers, saw only the surface of what they were sarcastic about,
'Did not Moses teach you,' in the section about the bush, 'that the
dead rise, when he said: I AM the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob.' A man, about whom it can once be said that God is his God,
cannot die. Such a bond can never be broken. The communion of earth,
imperfect as it is, is the prophecy of Heaven and the pledge of
immortality. And so from that relationship which subsisted between the
fathers and God, Christ infers the certainty of their resurrection. It
seems a great leap, but there are intervening steps not stated by our
Lord, which securely bridge the gulf between the premises and the
conclusion. Such communion is, in its very nature, unaffected by the
accident of death, for it cannot be supposed that a man who can say
that God is _His_ God can be reduced to nothingness, and such a bond be
snapped by such a cause. Therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are still
living, 'for all' those whom we call dead, as well as those whom we
call living, 'live unto Him,' and though so many centuries have passed,
God still _is_, not _was_, their God. The relation between them is
eternal and guarantees their immortal life. But immortality without
corporeity is not conceivable as the perfect state, and if the dead
live still, there must come a time when the whole man shall partake of
redemption; and in body, soul, and spirit the glorified and risen
saints shall be 'for ever with the Lord.'

That is but the fuller working out of the same truth that is taught us
in the symbol 'the bush burned and was not consumed.' God dwelt in it,
therefore it flamed; God dwelt in it, therefore though it flamed it
never flamed out. Or in other words, the Church, the individual in whom
He dwells, partakes of the immortality of the indwelling God. 'Every
one shall be salted with fire,' which shall be preservative and not
destructive; or, as Christ has said, 'Because I live ye shall live
also.'

Humble as was the little, ragged, sapless thorn-bush, springing up and
living its solitary life amidst the sands of the desert, it was not too
humble to hold God; it was not too gross to burst into flame when He
came; it was not too fragile to be gifted with undying being; like His
that abode in it. And for us each the emblem may be true. If He dwell
in us we shall live as long as He lives, and the fire that He puts in
our heart shall be a fountain of fire springing up into life
everlasting.




THE CALL OF MOSES


    'Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh,
    that thou mayest bring forth My people the children of
    Israel, out of Egypt. 11. And Moses said unto God, Who
    am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should
    bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? 12.
    And He said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this
    shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When
    thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall
    serve God upon this mountain. 13. And Moses said unto
    God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel,
    and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath
    sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is His
    name? what shall I say unto them? 14. And God said unto
    Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and He said, thus shalt thou say
    unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.
    15. And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou
    say unto the children of Israel, The Lord God of your
    fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
    God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for
    ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.
    16. Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and
    say unto them, The Lord God of your fathers, the God of
    Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me,
    saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which
    is done to you in Egypt: 17. And I have said, I will
    bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the
    land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the
    Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the
    Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.
    18. And they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt
    come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of
    Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The Lord God of the
    Hebrews hath met with us: and now let us go, we beseech
    Thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we
    may sacrifice to the Lord our God. 19. And I am sure
    that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by
    a mighty hand. 20. And I will stretch out my hand, and
    smite Egypt with all My wonders which I will do in the
    midst thereof: and after that he will let you go.'
    --EXODUS iii 10-20.

The 'son of Pharaoh's daughter' had been transformed, by nearly forty
years of desert life, into an Arab shepherd. The influences of the
Egyptian court had faded from him, like colour from cloth exposed to
the weather; nor is it probable that, after the failure of his early
attempt to play the deliverer to Israel, he nourished further designs
of that sort. He appears to have settled down quietly to be Jethro's
son-in-law, and to have lived a modest, still life of humble toil. He
had flung away fair prospects,--and what had he made of it? The world
would say 'Nothing,' as it ever does about those who despise material
advantages and covet higher good. Looking after sheep in the desert was
a sad downcome from the possibility of sitting on the throne of Egypt.
Yes, but it was in the desert that the vision of the bush burning, and
not burning out, came; and it would not have come if Moses had been in
a palace.

This passage begins in the midst of the divine communication which
followed and interpreted the vision. We note, first, the divine charge
and the human shrinking from the task. It was a startling transition
from verse 9, which declares God's pitying knowledge of Israel's
oppression, to verse 10, which thrusts Moses forward into the thick of
dangers and difficulties, as God's instrument. 'I will send thee' must
have come like a thunder-clap. The commander's summons which brings a
man from the rear rank and sets him in the van of a storming-party may
well make its receiver shrink. It was not cowardice which prompted
Moses' answer, but lowliness. His former impetuous confidence had all
been beaten out of him. Time was when he was ready to take up the
_role_ of deliverer at his own hand; but these hot days were past, and
age and solitude and communion with God had mellowed him into humility.
His recoil was but one instance of the shrinking which all true, devout
men feel when designated for tasks which may probably make life short,
and will certainly make it hard. All prophets and reformers till to-day
have had the same feeling. Men who can do such work as the Jeremiahs,
Pauls, Luthers, Cromwells, can do, are never forward to begin it.

Self-confidence is not the temper which God uses for His instruments.
He works with 'bruised reeds,' and breathes His strength into them. It
is when a man says 'I can do nothing,' that he is fit for God to
employ. 'When I am weak, then I am strong.' Moses remembered enough of
Egypt to know that it was no slight peril to front Pharaoh, and enough
of Israel not to be particularly eager to have the task of leading
them. But mark that there is no refusal of the charge, though there is
profound consciousness of inadequacy. If we have reason to believe that
any duty, great or small, is laid on us by God, it is wholesome that we
should drive home to ourselves our own weakness, but not that we should
try to shuffle out of the duty because we are weak. Moses' answer was
more of a prayer for help than of a remonstrance, and it was answered
accordingly.

God deals very gently with conscious weakness. 'Certainly I will be
with thee.' Moses' estimate of himself is quite correct, and it is the
condition of his obtaining God's help. If he had been self-confident,
he would have had no longing for, and no promise of, God's presence. In
all our little tasks we may have the same assurance, and, whenever we
feel that they are too great for us, the strength of that promise may
be ours. God sends no man on errands which He does not give him power
to do. So Moses had not to calculate the difference between his
feebleness and the strength of a kingdom. Such arithmetic left out one
element, which made all the difference in the sum total. 'Pharaoh
_versus_ Moses' did not look a very hopeful cause, but 'Pharaoh
_versus_ Moses and Another'--that other being God--was a very different
matter. God and I are always stronger than any antagonists. It was
needless to discuss whether Moses was able to cope with the king. That
was not the right way of putting the problem. The right way was, Is God
able to do it?

The sign given to Moses is at first sight singular, inasmuch as it
requires faith, and can only be a confirmation of his mission when that
mission is well accomplished. But there was a help to present faith
even in it, for the very sacredness of the spot hallowed now by the
burning bush was a kind of external sign of the promise.

One difficulty being solved, Moses raised another, but not in the
spirit of captiousness or reluctance. God is very patient with us when
we tell Him the obstacles which we seem to see to our doing His work.
As long as these are presented in good faith, and with the wish to have
them cleared up, He listens and answers. The second question asked by
Moses was eminently reasonable. He pictures to himself his addressing
the Israelites, and their question, What is the name of this God who
has sent you? Apparently the children of Israel had lost much of their
ancestral faith, and probably had in many instances fallen into
idolatry. We do not know enough to pronounce with confidence on that
point, nor how far the great name of Jehovah had been used before the
time of Moses, or had been forgotten in Egypt.

The questions connected with these points and with the history of the
name do not enter into our present purpose. My task is rather to point
out the religious significance of the self-revelation of God contained
in the name, and how it becomes the foundation of Israel's deliverance,
existence, and prerogatives. Whatever opinions are adopted as to the
correct form of the name and other grammatical and philological
questions, there is no doubt that it mainly reveals God as
self-existent and unchangeable. He draws His being from no external
source, nor 'borrows leave to be.' Creatures are what they are made or
grow to be; they are what they were not; they are what they will some
time not any more be. But He is what He is. Lifted above time and
change, self-existing and self-determined, He is the fountain of life,
the same for ever.

This underived, independent, immutable being is a Person who can speak
to men, and can say 'I am.' Being such, He has entered into close
covenant relations with men, and has permitted Himself to be called
'the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.' The name Jehovah lifts Him high
above all creatures; the name 'the God of your fathers' brings Him into
tender proximity with men, and, in combination with the former
designation, guarantees that He will forever be what He has been, even
to all generations of children's children. That mighty name is, indeed,
His 'memorial to all generations,' and is as fresh and full of
blessedness to us as to the patriarchs. Christ has made us understand
more of the treasures for heart and mind and life which are stored in
it. 'Our Father which art in heaven' is the unfolding of its inmost
meaning.

We may note that the bush burning but not consumed expressed in symbol
the same truth which the name reveals. It seems a mistake to take the
bush as the emblem of Israel surviving persecution. Rather the
revelation to the eye says the same thing as that to the ear, as is
generally the case. As the desert shrub flamed, and yet did not burn
away, so that divine nature is not wearied by action nor exhausted by
bestowing, nor has its life any tendency towards ending or extinction,
as all creatural life has.

The closing verses of this passage (vs. 16-20) are a programme of
Moses' mission, in which one or two points deserve notice. First, the
general course of it is made known from the beginning. Therein Moses
was blessed beyond most of God's servants, who have to risk much and to
labour on, not knowing which shall prosper. If we could see, as he did,
the lie of the country beforehand, our journeys would be easier. So we
often think, but we know enough of what shall be to enable us to have
quiet hearts; and it is best for us not to see what is to fail and what
to succeed. Our ignorance stimulates effort, and drives to clinging to
God's hand.

Then we may note the full assurances to be given to the 'elders of
Israel.' Apparently some kind of civic organisation had been kept up,
and there were principal people among the slaves who had to be
galvanised first into enthusiasm. So they are to be told two
things,--that Jehovah has appeared to Moses, and that He, not Moses
only, will deliver them and plant them in the land. The enumeration of
the many tribes (v. 17) might discourage, but it is intended to fire by
the thought of the breadth of the land, which is further described as
fertile. The more exalted our conceptions of the inheritance, the more
willing shall we be to enter on the pilgrimage towards it. The more we
realise that Jehovah has promised to lead us thither, the more willing
shall we be to face difficulties and dangers.

The directions as to the opening of communications with Pharaoh have
often been made a difficulty, as if there was trickery in the modest
request for permission to go three days' journey into the wilderness.
But that request was to be made, knowing that it would not be granted.
It was to be a test of Pharaoh's willingness to submit to Jehovah. Its
very smallness made it so more effectually. If he had any disposition
to listen to the voice speaking through Moses, he would yield that
small point. It is useless to speculate on what would have happened if
he had done so. But probably the Israelites would have come back from
their sacrificing.

Of more importance is it to note that the failure of the request was
foreseen, and yet the effort was to be made. Is not that the same
paradox which meets us in all the divine efforts to win over
hard-hearted men to His service? Is it not exactly what our Lord did
when He appealed to Judas, while knowing that all would be vain?

The expression in verse 19, 'not by a mighty hand,' is very obscure. It
may possibly mean that Pharaoh was so obstinate that no human power was
strong enough to bend his will. Therefore, in contrast to the 'mighty
hand' of man, which was not mighty enough for this work, God will
stretch out His hand, and that will suffice to compel obedience from
the proudest. God can force men by His might to comply with His will,
so far as external acts go; but He does not regard that as obedience,
nor delight in it. We can steel ourselves against men's power, but
God's hand can crush and break the strongest will. 'It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God.' It is a blessed thing
to put ourselves into them, in order to be moulded by their loving
touch. The alternative is laid before every soul of man.




A LAST MERCIFUL WARNING


    'And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one
    plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards
    he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he
    shall surely thrust you out hence altogether. 2. Speak
    now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow
    of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour,
    jewels of silver, and jewels of gold. 3. And the Lord
    gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians.
    Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the land of
    Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the
    sight of the people. 4. And Moses said, Thus saith the
    Lord, About midnight will I go out into the midst of
    Egypt; 5. And all the first-born in the land of Egypt
    shall die, from the first-born of Pharaoh that sitteth
    upon his throne, even unto the first-born of the
    maid-servant that is behind the mill; and all the
    first-born of beasts. 6. And there shall be a great cry
    throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there was none
    like it, nor shall be like it any more. 7. But against
    any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his
    tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that
    the Lord doth put a difference between the Egyptians and
    Israel. 8. And all these thy servants shall come down
    unto Me, and bow themselves unto Me, saying, Get Thee
    out, and all the people that follow Thee: and after that
    I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in a great
    anger. 9. And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall
    not hearken unto you; that My wonders may be multiplied
    in the land of Egypt. 10. And Moses and Aaron did all
    these wonders before Pharaoh: and the Lord hardened
    Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children
    of Israel go out of his land.'--EXODUS xi. 1-10.

The first point to be noted in this passage is that it interposes a
solemn pause between the preceding ineffectual plagues and the last
effectual one. There is an awful lull in the storm before the last
crashing hurricane which lays every obstacle flat. 'There is silence in
heaven' before the final peal of thunder. Verses 1 to 3 seem, at first
sight, out of place, as interrupting the narrative, since Moses'
denunciation and prophecy in verses 4 to 8 must have been spoken at the
interview with Pharaoh which we find going on at the end of the
preceding chapter. But it is legitimate to suppose that, at the very
moment when Pharaoh was blustering and threatening, and Moses was
bearding him, giving back scorn for scorn, the latter heard with the
inward ear the voice which made Pharaoh's words empty wind, and gave
him the assurances and commands contained in verses 1 to 3, and that
thus it was given him in that hour what he should speak; namely, the
prediction that follows in verses 4 to 8. Such a view of the sequence
of the passage makes it much more vivid, dramatic, and natural, than to
suppose that the first verses are either interpolation or an awkward
break referring to a revelation at some indefinite previous moment.
When a Pharaoh or a Herod or an Agrippa threatens, God speaks to the
heart of a Moses or a Paul, and makes His servant's face 'strong
against their faces.'

The same purpose of parting off the preceding plagues from the past
ones explains the introduction of verses 9 and 10, which stand as a
summary of the whole account of these, and, as it were, draw a line
across the page, before beginning the story of that eventful day and
night of Israel's deliverance.

Moses' conviction, which he knew to be not his own thought but God's
revelation of His purpose, pointed first to the final blow which was to
finish Pharaoh's resistance. He had been vacillating between compliance
and refusal, like an elastic ball which yields to compression and
starts back to its swelling rotundity as soon as the pressure is taken
off. But at last he will collapse altogether, like the same ball when a
slit is cut in it, and it shrivels into a shapeless lump. Weak people's
obstinate fits end like that. He will be as extreme in his eagerness to
get rid of the Israelites as he had been in his determination to keep
them. The sail that is filled one moment tumbles in a heap the next,
when the halyards are cut. It is a poor affair when a man's actions are
shaped mainly by fear of consequences. Fright always drives to
extremes. 'When he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out
hence altogether.' Many a stout, God-opposing will collapses altogether
when God's finger touches it. 'Can thy heart endure in the days that I
shall deal with thee?'

Verses 2 and 3 appear irrelevant here, but the command to collect from
the Egyptians jewels, which might be bartered for necessaries, may well
have been given to Moses simultaneously with the assurance that he
would lead forth the people after the next plague, and the particulars
of the people's favour and of Moses' influence in the eyes of the
native inhabitants, come in anticipatively to explain why the request
for such contributions was granted when made.

With the new divine command swelling in his heart, Moses speaks his
last word to Pharaoh, towering above him in righteous wrath, and
dwindling his empty threats into nothingness. What a contrast between
the impotent rage of the despot, with his vain threat, 'Thou shalt
die,' and the unblenching boldness of the man with God at his back! One
cannot but note in Moses' prediction of the last plague the solemn
enlargement on the details of the widespread calamity, which is not
unfeeling gloating over an oppressor's misery, but a yearning to save
from hideous misery by timely and plain depicting of it. There is a
flash of national triumph in the further contrast between the universal
wailing in Egypt and the untouched security of the children of Israel,
but that feeling merges at once into the higher one of 'the Lord's'
gracious action in establishing the 'difference' between them and their
oppressors. It is not safe to dwell on superiority over others, either
as to condition or character, unless we print in very large letters
that it is 'the Lord' who has made it. There is a flash, too, of
natural triumph in the picture of the proud courtiers brought down to
prostrate themselves before the shepherd from Horeb, and to pray him to
do what their master and they had so long fought against his doing. And
there is a most natural assertion of non-dependence on their leave in
that emphatic 'After that _I will_ go out.' He is not asserting himself
against God, but against the cowering courtiers. 'Hot anger' was
excusable, but it was not the best mood in which to leave Pharaoh.
Better if he had gone out unmoved, or moved only to 'great heaviness
and sorrow of heart' at the sight of men setting themselves against
God, and rushing on the 'thick bosses of the Almighty's buckler' to
their own ruin. Moses' anger we naturally sympathise with, Christ's
meekness we should try to copy.

The closing verses, as we have already noticed, are a kind of
summing-up of the whole narrative of the plagues and their effects on
Pharaoh. They open two difficult questions, as to how and why it was
that the effect of the successive strokes was so slight and transient.
They give the 'how' very emphatically as being that 'Jehovah hardened
Pharaoh's heart.' Does that not free Pharaoh from guilt? And does it
not suggest an unworthy conception of God? It must be remembered that
the preceding narrative employs not only the phrase that 'Jehovah
hardened Pharaoh's heart,' but also the expression that Pharaoh
hardened his own heart. And it is further to be noted that the latter
expression is employed in the accounts of the earlier plagues, and that
the former one appears only towards the close of the series. So then,
even if we are to suppose that it means that there was a direct
hardening action by God on the man's heart, such action was not first,
but subsequent to obstinate hardening by himself. God hardens no man's
heart who has not first hardened it himself. But we do not need to
conclude that any inward action on the will is meant. Was not the
accumulation of plagues, intended, as they were, to soften, a cause of
hardening? Does not the Gospel, if rejected, harden, making consciences
and wills less susceptible? Is it not a 'savour of death unto death,'
as our fathers recognised in speaking of 'gospel-hardened sinners'? The
same fire softens wax and hardens clay. Whosoever is not brought near
is driven farther off, by the influences which God brings to bear on us.

The 'why' is stated in terms which may suggest difficulties,--'that my
wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.' But we have to
remember that the Old Testament writers are not wont to distinguish so
sharply as more logical Westerns do between the actual result of an
event and its purpose. With their deep faith in the all-ruling power of
God, whatever had come to pass was what He had meant to come to pass.
In fact, Pharaoh's obstinacy had not thwarted the divine purpose, but
had been the dark background against which the blaze of God's
irresistible might had shone the brighter. He makes the wrath of man to
praise Him, and turns opposition into the occasion of more
conspicuously putting forth His omnipotence.




THE PASSOVER: AN EXPIATION AND A FEAST, A MEMORIAL AND A PROPHECY


    'And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land
    of Egypt, saying, 2. This month shall be unto you the
    beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the
    year to you. 3. Speak ye unto all the congregation of
    Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they
    shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the
    house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 4. And if
    the household be too little for the lamb, let him and
    his neighbour next unto his house take it according to
    the number of the souls; every man according to his
    eating shall make your count for the lamb. 5. Your lamb
    shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye
    shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats:
    6. And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of
    the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation
    of Israel shall kill it in the evening. 7. And they shall
    take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts
    and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they
    shall eat it. 8. And they shall eat the flesh in that
    night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with
    bitter herbs they shall eat it. 9. Eat not of it raw,
    nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his
    head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.
    10. And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the
    morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning
    ye shall burn with fire. 11. And thus shall ye eat it;
    with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and
    your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste:
    it is the Lord's passover. 12. For I will pass through
    the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the
    firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and
    against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment:
    I am the Lord. 13. And the blood shall be to you for a
    token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the
    blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be
    upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.
    14. And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and
    ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout your
    generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance
    for ever.'--EXODUS xii. 1-14.

The Passover ritual, as appointed here, divides itself into two main
parts--the sprinkling of the sacrificial blood on the door-posts and
lintels, and the feast on the sacrifice. These can best be dealt with
separately. They were separated in the later form of the ritual; for,
when there was a central sanctuary, the lambs were slain there, and the
blood sprinkled, as in other expiatory sacrifices, on the altar, while
the domestic feast remained unaltered. The former was more especially
meant to preserve the Israelites from the destruction of their
first-born; the latter as a permanent memorial of their deliverance.
But both have perpetual fitness as prophetic of varying aspects of the
Christian redemption.

I. The ritual of the protecting blood.

In the hurry and agitation of that eventful day, it must have seemed
strange to the excited people that they should be called upon to
observe such a service. But its institution at that crisis is in
accordance with the whole tone of the story of the Exodus, in which man
is nothing and God all. Surely, never was national deliverance effected
so absolutely without effort or blow struck. If we try to realise the
state of mind of the Israelites on that night, we shall feel how
significant of the true nature of their deliverance this summons to an
act of worship, in the midst of their hurry, must have been.

The domestic character of the rite is its first marked feature. Of
course, there were neither temple nor priests then; but that does not
wholly account for the provision that every household, unless too few
in number to consume a whole lamb, should have its own sacrifice, slain
by its head. The first purpose of the rite, to provide for the safety
of each house by the sprinkled blood, partly explains it; but the
deepest reason is, no doubt, the witness which was thereby borne to the
universal priesthood of the nation. The patriarchal order made each man
the priest of his house. This rite, which lay at the foundation of
Israel's nationality, proclaimed that a restricted priestly class was a
later expedient. The primitive formation crops out here, as witness
that, even where hid beneath later deposits, it underlies them all.

We have called the Passover a sacrifice. That has been disputed, but
unreasonably. No doubt, it was a peculiar kind of sacrifice, unlike
those of the later ritual in many respects, and scarcely capable of
being classified among them. But it is important to keep its strictly
sacrificial character in view; for it is essential to its meaning and
to its typical aspect. The proofs of its sacrificial nature are
abundant. The instructions as to the selection of the lamb; the method
of disposing of the blood, which was sprinkled with hyssop--a
peculiarly sacrificial usage; the treatment of the remainder after the
feast; the very feast itself,--all testify that it was a sacrifice in
the most accurate use of the word. The designation of it as 'a passover
to the Lord,' and in set terms as a 'sacrifice,' in verse 27 and
elsewhere, to say nothing of its later form when it became a regular
Temple sacrifice, or of Paul's distinct language in 1 Corinthians v. 7,
or of Peter's quotation of the very words of verse 5, applied to
Christ, 'a lamb without blemish,' all point in the same direction.

But if a sacrifice, what kind of sacrifice was it? Clearly, the first
purpose was that the blood might be sprinkled on the door-posts and
lintels, and so the house be safe when the destroying angel passed
through the land. Such is the explanation given in verse 13, which is
the divine declaration of its meaning. This is the centre of the rite;
from it the name was derived. Whether readers accept the doctrines of
substitution and expiation or not, it ought to be impossible for an
honest reader of these verses to deny that these doctrines or thoughts
are there. They may be only the barbarous notions of a half-savage age
and people. But, whatever they are, there they are. The lamb without
blemish carefully chosen and kept for four days, till it had become as
it were part of the household, and then solemnly slain by the head of
the family, was their representative. When they sprinkled its blood on
the posts, they confessed that they stood in peril of the destroying
angel by reason of their impurity, and they presented the blood as
their expiation. In so far, their act was an act of confession,
deprecation, and faith. It accepted the divinely appointed means of
safety. The consequence was exemption from the fatal stroke, which fell
on all homes from the palace to the slaves' hovel, where that red
streak was not found. If any son of Abraham had despised the provision
for safety, he would have been partaker of the plague.

All this refers only to exemption from outward punishment, and we are
not obliged to attribute to these terrified bondmen any higher
thoughts. But clearly their obedience to the command implied a measure
of belief in the divine voice; and the command embodied, though in
application to a transient judgment, the broad principles of
sacrificial substitution, of expiation by blood, and of safety by the
individual application of that shed blood.

In other words, the Passover is a Gospel before the Gospel. We are
sometimes told that in its sacrificial ideas Christianity is still
dressing itself in 'Hebrew old clothes.' We believe, on the contrary,
that the whole sacrificial system of Judaism had for its highest
purpose to shadow forth the coming redemption. Christ is not spoken of
as 'our Passover,' because the Mosaic ritual had happened to have that
ceremonial; but the Mosaic ritual had that ceremonial mainly because
Christ is our Passover, and, by His blood shed on the Cross and
sprinkled on our consciences, does in spiritual reality that which the
Jewish Passover only did in outward form. All other questions about the
Old Testament, however interesting and hotly contested, are of
secondary importance compared with this. Is its chief purpose to
prophesy of Christ, His atoning death, His kingdom and church, or is it
not? The New Testament has no doubt of the answer. The Evangelist John
finds in the singular swiftness of our Lord's death, which secured the
exemption of His sacred body from the violence inflicted on His
fellow-sufferers, a fulfilment of the paschal injunction that not a
bone should be broken; and so, by one passing allusion, shows that he
recognised Christ as the true Passover. John the Baptist's rapturous
exclamation, 'Behold the Lamb of God!' blends allusions to the
Passover, the daily sacrifice, and Isaiah's great prophecy. The day of
the Crucifixion, regarded as fixed by divine Providence, may be taken
as God's own finger pointing to the Lamb whom He has provided. Paul's
language already referred to attests the same truth. And even the last
lofty visions of the Apocalypse, where the old man in Patmos so
touchingly recurs to the earliest words which brought him to Jesus,
echo the same conviction, and disclose, amidst the glories of the
throne, 'a Lamb as it had been slain.'

II. The festal meal on the sacrifice.

After the sprinkling of the blood came the feast. Only when the house
was secure from the destruction which walked in the darkness of that
fateful night, could a delivered household gather round the board. That
which had become their safety now became their food. Other sacrifices
were, at a later period, modelled on the same type; and in all cases
the symbolism is the same, namely, joyful participation in the
sacrifice, and communion with God based upon expiation. In the
Passover, this second stage received for future ages the further
meaning of a memorial. But on that first night it was only such by
anticipation, seeing that it preceded the deliverance which it was
afterwards to commemorate.

The manner of preparing the feast and the manner of partaking of it are
both significant. The former provided that the lamb should be roasted,
not boiled, apparently in order to secure its being kept whole; and the
same purpose suggested the other prescriptions that it was to be served
up entire, and with bones unbroken. The reason for this seems to be
that thus the unity of the partakers was more plainly shown. All ate of
one undivided whole, and were thus, in a real sense, one. So the
Apostle deduces the unity of the Church from the oneness of the bread
of which they in the Christian Passover partake.

It was to be eaten with the accompaniments of bitter herbs, usually
explained as memorials of the bondage, which had made the lives bitter,
and the remembrance of which would sweeten their deliverance, even as
the pungent condiments brought out the savour of the food. The further
accompaniment of unleavened bread seems to have the same signification
as the appointment that they were to eat with their garments gathered
round their loins, their feet shod, and staves in hand. All these were
partly necessities in their urgent hurry, and partly a dramatic
representation for later days of the very scene of the first Passover.
A strange feast indeed, held while the beat of the pinions of the
destroying angel could almost be heard, devoured in hot haste by
anxious men standing ready for a perilous journey, the end whereof none
knew! The gladness would be strangely dashed with terror and
foreboding. Truly, though they feasted on a sacrifice, they had bitter
herbs with it, and, standing, swallowed their portions, expecting every
moment to be summoned to the march.

The Passover as a feast is a prophecy of the great Sacrifice, by virtue
of whose sprinkled blood we all may be sheltered from the sweep of the
divine judgment, and on which we all have to feed if there is to be any
life in us. Our propitiation is our food. 'Christ for us' must become
'Christ in us,' received and appropriated by our faith as the strength
of our lives. The Christian life is meant to be a joyful feast on the
Sacrifice, and communion with God based upon it. We feast on Christ
when the mind feeds on Him as truth, when the heart is filled and
satisfied with His love, when the conscience clings to Him as its
peace, when the will esteems the 'words of His mouth more than' its
'necessary food,' when all desires, hopes, and inward powers draw their
supplies from Him, and find their object in His sweet sufficiency.

Nor will the accompaniments of the first Passover be wanting. Here we
feast in the night; the dawn will bring freedom and escape. Here we eat
the glad Bread of God, not unseasoned with bitter herbs of sorrow and
memories of the bondage, whose chains are dropping from our uplifted
hands. Here we should partake of that hidden nourishment, in such
manner that it hinders not our readiness for outward service. It is not
yet time to sit at His table, but to stand with loins girt, and feet
shod, and hands grasping the pilgrim staff. Here we are to eat for
strength, and to blend with our secret hours of meditation the holy
activities of the pilgrim life.

That feast was, further, appointed with a view to its future use as a
memorial. It was held before the deliverance which it commemorated had
been accomplished. A new era was to be reckoned from it. The month of
the Exodus was thenceforward to be the first of the year. The memorial
purpose of the rite has been accomplished. All over the world it is
still observed, so many hundred years after its institution, being
thus, probably, the oldest religious ceremonial in existence. Once more
aliens in many lands, the Jewish race still, year by year, celebrate
that deliverance, so tragically unlike their homeless present, and with
indomitable hope, at each successive celebration, repeat the
expectation, so long cherished in vain, 'This year, here; next year, in
the land of Israel. This year, slaves; next year, freemen.' There can
be few stronger attestations of historical events than the keeping of
days commemorating them, if traced back to the event they commemorate.
So this Passover, like Guy Fawkes' Day in England, or Thanksgiving Day
in America, remains for a witness even now.

What an incomprehensible stretch of authority Christ put forth, if He
were no more than a teacher, when He brushed aside the Passover, and
put in its place the Lord's Supper, as commemorating His own death!
Thereby He said, 'Forget that past deliverance; instead, remember Me.'
Surely this was either audacity approaching insanity, or divine
consciousness that He Himself was the true Paschal Lamb, whose blood
shields the world from judgment, and on whom the world may feast and be
satisfied. Christ's deliberate intention to represent His death as
expiation, and to fix the reverential, grateful gaze of all future ages
on His Cross, cannot be eliminated from His founding of that memorial
rite in substitution for the God-appointed ceremonial, so hoary with
age and sacred in its significance. Like the Passover, the Lord's
Supper was established before the deliverance was accomplished. It
remains a witness at once of the historical fact of the death of Jesus,
and of the meaning and power which Jesus Himself bade us to see in that
death. For us, redeemed by His blood, the past should be filled with
His sacrifice. For us, fed on Himself, all the present should be
communion with Him, based upon His death for us. For us, freed bondmen,
the memorial of deliverance begun by His Cross should be the prophecy
of deliverance to be completed at the side of His throne, and the hasty
meal, eaten with bitter herbs, the adumbration of the feast when all
the pilgrims shall sit with Him at His table in His kingdom. Past,
present, and future should all be to us saturated with Jesus Christ.
Memory should furnish hope with colours, canvas, and subjects for her
fair pictures, and both be fixed on 'Christ our Passover, sacrificed
for us.'




THOUGHT, DEED, WORD


    'It shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and
    for a memorial between thine eyes, that the Lord's law
    may be in thy mouth.'--EXODUS xiii. 9.

The question may be asked, whether this command is to be taken
metaphorically or literally. No doubt the remembrance of the great
deliverance was intrusted to acts. Besides the annual Passover feasts,
inscriptions on the door-posts and fringes on the dress were appointed
for this purpose. And the Jews from a very early period, certainly
before our Lord's time, wore phylacteries fastened, as this and other
places prescribe, on the left arm and on the forehead, and alleged
these words as the commandment which they therein obeyed. But it seems
more probable that the meaning is metaphorical, and that what is
enjoined is rather a constant remembrance of the great deliverance, and
a constant regulation of the practical life by it. For what is it that
is to be 'a sign'? It is the Passover feast. And the 'therefore' of the
next verse seems to say that keeping this ordinance in its season is
the fulfilment of this precept. Besides, the expression 'for a sign,'
'for a memorial,' may just as well mean 'it shall serve as,' or 'it
shall be like,' as 'you shall wear.' So I think we must say that this
is a figure, not a fact; the enjoining of an object for thought and a
motive for life, not of a formal observance. And it is very
characteristic of the Jew, and of the universal tendency to harden and
lower religion into outward rites, that a command so wide and profound
