    into hell fire. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one
    of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in
    heaven their angels do always behold the face of My
    Father which is in heaven. 11. For the Son of Man is
    come to save that which was lost. 12. How think ye? if
    a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone
    astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and
    goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is
    gone astray? 13. And if so be that he find it, verily
    I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that sheep, than
    of the ninety and nine which went not astray. 14. Even
    so it is not the will of your Father which is in
    heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.'
    --MATT. xviii. 1-14.

Mark tells us that the disciples, as they journeyed, had been
squabbling about pre-eminence in the kingdom, and that this
conversation was brought on by our Lord's question as to the subject
of their dispute. It seems at first sight to argue singular
insensibility that the first effect of His reiterated announcement
of His sufferings should have been their quarrelling for the lead;
but their behaviour is intelligible if we suppose that they regarded
the half-understood prophecies of His passion as indicating the
commencement of the short conflict which was to end in His Messianic
reign. So it was time for them to be getting ready and settling
precedence. The form of their question, in Matthew, connects it with
the miracle of the coin in the fish's mouth, in which there was a
very plain assertion of Christ's royal dignity, and a distinguishing
honour given to Peter. Probably the 'then' of the question means,
Since Peter is thus selected, are we to look to him as foremost?
Their conception of the kingdom and of rank in it is frankly and
entirely earthly. There are to be graded dignities, and these are to
depend on His mere will. Our Lord not only answers the letter of
their question, but cuts at the root of the temper which inspired
it.

I. He shows the conditions of entrance into and eminence in His
kingdom by a living example. There were always children at hand
round Him, when He wanted them. Their quick instinct for pure and
loving souls drew them to Him; and this little one was not afraid to
be taken by the hand, and to be afterwards caught up in His arms,
and pressed to His heart. One does not wonder that the legend that
he was Ignatius the martyr should have been current; for surely the
remembrance of that tender clasping arm and gentle breast would not
fade nor be fruitless. The disciples had made very sure that they
were to be in the kingdom, and that the only question concerning
them was how high up in it they were each to be. Christ's answer is
like a dash of cold water to that confidence. It is, in effect,
'Greatest in the kingdom! Make sure that you go in at all, first;
which you will never do, so long as you keep your present ambitious
minds.'

Verse 3 lays down the condition of entrance into the kingdom, from
which necessarily follows the condition of supremacy in it. What a
child is naturally, and without effort or merit, by reason of age
and position, we must become, if we are to pass the narrow portal
which admits into the large room. That 'becoming' is impossible
without a revolution in us. 'Be converted' is corrected, in the
Revised Version, into 'turn,' and rightly; for there is in the word
a distinct reference to the temper of the disciples as displayed by
their question. As long as they cherished it they could not even get
inside, to say nothing of winning promotion to dignities in the
kingdom. Their very question condemned them as incapable of
entrance. So there must be a radical change, not unaccompanied, of
course, with repentance, but mainly consisting in the substitution
of the child's temper for theirs. What is the temper thus enjoined?
We are to see here neither the entirely modern and shallow
sentimental way of looking at childhood, in which popular writers
indulge, nor the doctrine of its innocence. It is not Christ's
teaching, either that children are innocent, or that men enter the
kingdom by making themselves so. But the child is, by its very
position, lowly and modest, and makes no claims, and lives by
instinctive confidence, and does not care about honours, and has
these qualities which in us are virtues, and is not puffed up by
possessing them. That is the ideal which is realised more generally
in the child than analogous ideals are in mature manhood. Such
simplicity, modesty, humility, must be ours. We must be made small
ere we can enter that door. And as is the requirement for entrance,
so is it for eminence. The child does not humble himself, but is
humble by nature; but we must humble ourselves if we would be great.

Christ implies that there are degrees in the kingdom. It has a
nobility, but of such a kind that there may be many greatest; for
the principle of rank there is lowliness. We rise by sinking. The
deeper our consciousness of our own unworthiness and weakness, the
more capable are we of receiving the divine gifts, and therefore the
more fully shall we receive them. Rivers run in the hollows; the
mountain-tops are dry. God works with broken reeds, and the princes
in His realm are beggars taken from the dunghill. A lowliness which
made itself lowly for the sake of eminence would miss its aim, for
it would not be lowliness. The desire to be foremost must be cast
out, in order that it may be fulfilled.

II. The question has been answered, and our Lord passes to other
thoughts rising out of His answer. Verses 5 and 6 set forth
antithetically our duties to His little ones. He is not now speaking
of the child who served as a living parable to answer the question,
but of men who have made themselves like the child, as is plain from
the emphatic 'one _such_ child,' and from verse 6 ('which
_believe_ on Me').

The subject, then, of these verses is the blessedness of recognising
and welcoming Christlike lowly believers, and the fatal effect of
the opposite conduct. To 'receive one such little child in My name'
is just to have a sympathetic appreciation of, and to be ready to
welcome to heart and home, those who are lowly in their own and in
the world's estimate, but princes of Christ's court and kingdom.
Such welcome and furtherance will only be given by one who himself
has the same type of character in some degree. He who honours and
admires a certain kind of excellence has the roots of it in himself.
A possible artist lies in him who thrills at the sight or hearing of
fair things painted or sung. Our admiration is an index of our
aspiration, and our aspiration is a prophecy of our attainment. So
it will be a little one's heart which will welcome the little ones,
and a lover of Christ who receives them in His name. The reception
includes all forms of sympathy and aid. 'In My name' is equivalent
to 'for the sake of My revealed character,' and refers both to the
receiver and to the received. The blessedness of such reception, so
far as the receiver is concerned, is not merely that he thereby
comes into happy relations with Christ's foremost servants, but that
he gets Christ Himself into his heart. If with true appreciation of
the beauty of such a childlike disposition, I open my heart or my
hand to its possessor, I do thereby enlarge my capacity for my own
possession of Christ, who dwells in His child, and who comes with
him where He is welcomed. There is no surer way of securing Him for
our own than the loving reception of His children. Whoso lodges the
King's favourites will not be left unvisited by the King. To
recognise and reverence the greatest in the kingdom is to be oneself
a member of their company, and a sharer in their prerogatives.

On the other hand, the antithesis of 'receiving' is 'causing to
stumble,' by which is meant giving occasion for moral fall. That
would be done by contests about pre-eminence, by arrogance, by
non-recognition. The atmosphere of carnality and selfishness in
which the disciples were moving, as their question showed, would
stifle the tender life of any lowly believer who found himself in
it; and they were not only injuring themselves, but becoming
stumbling-blocks to others, by their ambition. How much of the
present life of average Christians is condemned on the same
ground! It is a good test of our Christian character to ask--would
it help or hinder a lowly believer to live beside us? How many
professing Christians are really, though unconsciously, doing
their utmost to pull down their more Christlike brethren to their
own low level! The worldliness and selfish ambitions of the Church
are responsible for the stumbling of many who would else have been
of Christ's 'little ones.' But perhaps we are rather to think of
deliberate and consciously laid stumbling-blocks. Knowingly to try
to make a good man fall, or to stain a more than usually pure
Christian character, is surely the very height of malice, and
presupposes such a deadly hatred of goodness and of Christ that no
fate can be worse than the possession of such a temper. To be
flung into the sea, like a dog, with a stone round his neck, would
be better for a man than to live to do such a thing. The deed
itself, apart from any other future retribution, is its own
punishment; yet our Lord's solemn words not only point to such a
future retribution, which is infinitely more terrible than the
miserable fate described would be for the body, but to the
consequences of the act, as so bad in its blind hatred of the
highest type of character, and in its conscious preference of evil,
as well as so fatal in its consequences, that it were better to die
drowned than to live so.

III. Verses 10-14 set forth the honour and dignity of Christ's
'little ones.' Clearly the application of the designation in these
closing verses is exclusively to His lowly followers. The warning
not to despise them is needed at all times, and, perhaps, seldom
more, even by Christians, than now, when so many causes induce a far
too high estimate of the world's great ones, and modest, humble
godliness looks as dull and sober as some russet-coated little bird
among gorgeous cockatoos and birds of paradise. The world's standard
is only too current in the Church; and it needs a spirit kept in
harmony with Christ's spirit, and some degree of the child-nature in
ourselves, to preserve us from overlooking the delicate hidden
beauties and unworldly greatness of His truest disciples.

The exhortation is enforced by two considerations,--a glimpse into
heaven, and a parable. Fair interpretation can scarcely deny that
Christ here teaches that His children are under angel-guardianship.
We should neither busy ourselves in curious inferences from His
reticent words, nor try to blink their plain meaning, but rather
mark their connection and purpose here. He has been teaching that
pre-eminence belongs to the childlike spirit. He here opens a door
into the court of the heavenly King, and shows us that, as the
little ones are foremost in the kingdom of heaven, so the angels who
watch over them are nearest the throne in heaven itself. The
representation is moulded on the usages of Eastern courts, and
similar language in the Old Testament describes the principal
courtiers as 'the men who see the King's face continually.' So high
is the honour in which the little ones are held, that the highest
angels are set to guard them, and whatever may be thought of them on
earth, the loftiest of creatures are glad to serve and keep them.

Following the Revised Version we omit verse 11. If it were genuine,
the connection would be that such despising contradicted the purpose
of Christ's mission; and the 'for' would refer back to the
injunction, not to the glimpse into heaven which enforced it.

The exhortation is further confirmed by the parable of the ninety
and nine, which is found, slightly modified in form and in another
connection, in Luke xv. Its point here is to show the importance of
the little ones as the objects of the seeking love of God, and as so
precious to Him that their recovery rejoices His heart. Of course,
if verse 11 be genuine, the Shepherd is Christ; but, if we omit it,
the application of the parable in verse 14 as illustrating the
loving will of God becomes more direct. In that case God is the
owner of the sheep. Christ does not emphasise His own love or share
in the work, reference to which was not relevant to His purpose,
but, leaving that in shadow, casts all the light on the loving
divine will, which counts the little ones as so precious that, if
even one of them wanders, all heaven's powers are sent forth to find
and recover it. The reference does not seem to be so much to the one
great act by which, in Christ's incarnation and sacrifice, a sinful
world has been sought and redeemed, as to the numberless acts by
which God, in His providence and grace, restores the souls of those
humble ones if ever they go astray. For the connection requires that
the wandering sheep here should, when it wanders, be 'one of these
little ones'; and the parable is introduced to illustrate the truth
that, because they belong to that number, the least of them is too
precious to God to be allowed to wander away and be lost. They have
for their keepers the angels of the presence; they have God Himself,
in His yearning love and manifold methods of restoration, to look
for them, if ever they are lost, and to bring them back to the fold.
Therefore, 'see that ye despise not one of these little ones,' each
of whom is held by the divine will in the grasp of an individualising
love which nothing can loosen.




SELF-MUTILATION FOR SELF-PRESERVATION


    'If thy hand or thy foot causeth thee to stumble, cut
    it off, and  cast it from  thee.'-MATT. xviii. 8, R.V.

No person or thing can do our characters as much harm as we
ourselves can do. Indeed, none can do them any harm but ourselves.
For men may put stumbling-blocks in our way, but it is we who make
them stumbling-blocks. The obstacle in the path would do us no hurt
if it were not for the erring foot, nor the attractive prize if it
were not for the hand that itched to lay hold of it, nor the
glittering bauble if it were not for the eye that kindled at the
sight of it. So our Lord here, having been speaking of the men that
put stumbling-blocks in the way of His little ones, draws the net
closer and bids us look at home. A solemn woe of divine judgment is
denounced on those who cause His followers to stumble; let us leave
God to execute that, and be sure that we have no share in their
guilt, but let us ourselves be the executioners of the judgment upon
the things in ourselves which alone give the stumbling-blocks, which
others put before us, their fatal power.

There is extraordinary energy in these words. Solemnly they are
repeated twice here, verbatim; solemnly they are repeated verbatim
three times in Mark's edition. The urgent stringency of the command,
the terrible plainness of the alternative put forth by the lips that
could say nothing harsh, and the fact that the very same injunction
appears in a wholly different connection in the Sermon on the Mount,
show us how profoundly important our Lord felt the principle to be
which He was here laying down.

We mark these three points. First, the case supposed, 'If thy hand
or thy foot cause thee to stumble.' Then the sharp, prompt remedy
enjoined, 'Cut them off and cast them from thee.' Then the solemn
motive by which it is enforced, 'It is better for thee to enter into
life maimed than, being a whole man, to be cast into hell-fire.'

I. First, then, as to the case supposed.

Hand and foot and eye are, of course, regarded as organs of the
inward self, and symbols of its tastes and capacities. We may
perhaps see in them the familiar distinction between the practical
and the theoretical:--hand and foot being instruments of action, and
the eye the organ of perception. Our Lord takes an extreme case. If
members of the body are to be amputated and plucked out should they
cause us to stumble, much more are associations to be abandoned and
occupations to be relinquished and pleasures to be forsaken, if
these draw us away. But it is to be noticed that the whole stringency
of the commandment rests upon that _if_. '_If_ they cause thee
to stumble,' then, and not else, amputate. The powers are natural,
the operation of them is perfectly innocent, but a man may be ruined
by innocent things. And, says Christ, if that process is begun, then,
and only then, does My exhortation come into force.

Now, all that solemn thought of a possible injurious issue of
innocent occupations, rests upon the principles that our nature has
an ideal order, so as that some parts of it are to be suppressed and
some are to rule, and that there are degrees of importance in men's
pursuits, and that where the lower interfere and clog the operations
of the higher, there they are harmful. And so the only wisdom is to
excise and cut them off.

We see illustrations in abundance every day. There are many people
who are being ruined in regard to the highest purposes of their
lives, simply by an over-indulgence in lower occupations which in
themselves may be perfectly right. Here is a young woman that spends
so much of her day in reading novels that she has no time to look
after the house and help her mother. Here is a young man so given to
athletics that his studies are neglected--and so you may go all
round the circle, and find instances of the way in which innocent
things, and the excessive or unwise exercise of natural faculties,
are destroying men. And much more is that the case in regard to
religion, which is the highest object of pursuit, and in regard to
those capacities and powers by which we lay hold of God. These are
to be ministered to by the rest, and if there be in my nature or in
the order of my life something which is drawing away to itself the
energy that ought to go in that other direction, then, howsoever
innocent it may be, _per se_, it is harming me. It is a wen
that is sucking all the vital force into itself, and turning it into
poison. And there is only one cure for it, and that is the knife.

Then there is another point to be observed in this case supposed,
and that is that the whole matter is left to the determination of
personal experience. No one else has the right to decide for you
what it is safe and wise for you to do in regard to things which are
not in themselves wrong. If they are wrong in themselves, of course
the consideration of consequences is out of place altogether; but if
they be not wrong in themselves, then it is you that must settle
whether they are legitimate for you or not. Do not let your
Christian liberty be interfered with by other people's dictation in
regard to this matter. How often you hear people say, _'I_
could not do it'; meaning thereby, 'therefore _he_ ought not to
do it!' But that inference is altogether illegitimate. True, there
are limitations of our Christian liberty in regard to things
indifferent and innocent. Paul lays down the most important of these
in three sentences. 'All things are lawful for me, but all things
are not expedient.' 'All things are lawful for me, but all things
edify not';--you must think of your brethren as well as of yourself.
'All things are lawful for me, yet will I not be brought under the
power of any'; keep master of them, and rather abstain altogether
than become their slave. But these three limitations being observed,
then, in regard to all such matters, nobody else can prescribe for
you or me. 'To his own Master he standeth or falleth.'

But, on the other hand, do not you be led away into things that
damage you, because some other man does them, as he supposes,
without injury. 'Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that
thing which he alloweth.' There are some Christian people who are
simply very unscrupulous and think themselves very strong; and whose
consciences are not more enlightened, but less sensitive, than those
of the 'narrow-minded brethren' upon whom they look askance.

And so, dear friend, you ought to take the world--to inhale it, if I
may so say, as patients do chloroform; only you must be your own
doctor and keep your own fingers on your pulse, and watch the first
sign of failure there, and take no more. When the safety lamps begin
to burn blue you may be quite sure there is choke-damp about; and
when Christian men and women begin to find prayer wearisome, and
religious thoughts dull, and the remembrance of God an effort or a
pain, then, whatever anybody else may do, it is time for them to
pull up. 'If thy hand offend thee,' never mind though your brother's
hand is not offending him, do the necessary thing for your health,
'cut it off and cast it from you.'

But of course there must be caution and common-sense in the
application of such a principle. It does not mean that we are to
abandon all things that are susceptible of abuse, for everything is
so; and if we are to regulate our conduct by such a rule, it is not
the amputation of a hand that will be sufficient. We may as well cut
off our heads at once, and go out of the world altogether; for
everything is capable of being thus abused.

Nor does the injunction mean that unconditionally we are to abandon
all occupations in which there is danger. It can never be a duty to
shirk a duty because it is dangerous. And sometimes it is as much a
Christian man's duty to go into, and to stand in, positions that are
full of temptation and danger, as it is a fireman's business to go
into a burning house at the risk of suffocation. There were saints
in Caesar's household, flowers that grew on a dunghill, and they
were not bidden to abandon their place because it was full of
possible danger to their souls. Sometimes Christ sets His sentinels
in places where the bullets fly very thick; and if we are posted in
such a place--and we all are so some time or other in our lives--the
only course for us is to stand our ground until the relieving guard
comes, and to trust that He said a truth that was always to be true,
when He sent out His servants to their dangerous work, with the
assurance that if they drank any deadly thing it should not hurt
them.

II. So much, then, for the first of the points here. Now a word, in
the second place, as to the sharp remedy enjoined.

'Cut it off and cast it from thee.' Entire excision is the only
safety. I myself am to be the operator in that surgery. I am to lay
my hand upon the block, and with the other hand to grasp the axe and
strike. That is to say, we are to suppress capacities, to abandon
pursuits, to break with associates, when we find that they are
damaging our spiritual life and hindering our likeness to Jesus
Christ.

That is plain common-sense. In regard to physical intoxication, it
is a great deal easier to abstain altogether than to take a very
little and then stop. The very fumes of alcohol will sometimes drive
a reclaimed drunkard into a bout of dissipation that will last for
weeks; therefore, the only safety is in entire abstinence. The rule
holds in regard to everyday life. Every man has to give up a great
many things if he means to succeed in one, and has to be a man of
one pursuit if anything worth doing is to be done. Christian men
especially have to adopt that principle, and shear off a great deal
that is perfectly legitimate, in order that they may keep a reserve
of strength for the highest things.

True, all forms of life are capable of being made Christian service
and Christian discipline, but in practice we shall find that if we
are earnestly seeking the kingdom of God and His righteousness, not
only shall we lose our taste for a great deal that is innocent, but
we shall have, whether we lose our taste for them or not--and more
imperatively if we have not lost our taste for them than if we have--to
give up allowable things in order that with all our heart, and soul,
and strength, and mind, we may love and serve our Master. There are no
half-measures to be kept; the only thing to do with the viper is to
shake it off into the fire and let it burn there. We have to empty our
hands of earth's trivialities if we would grasp Christ with them. We
have to turn away our eyes from earth if we would behold the Master,
and rigidly to apply this principle of excision in order that we may
advance in the divine life. It is the only way to ensure progress.
There is no such certain method of securing an adequate flow of sap
up the trunk as to cut off all the suckers. If you wish to have a
current going down the main bed of the stream, sufficient to keep it
clear, you must dam up all the side channels.

But it is not to be forgotten that this commandment, stringent and
necessary as it is, is second best. The man is maimed, although it
was for Christ's sake that he cut off his hand, or put out his eye.
His hand was given him that with it he might serve God, and the
highest thing would have been that in hand and foot and eye he
should have been anointed, like the priests of old, for the service
of his Master. But until he is strong enough to use the faculty for
God, the wisest thing is not to use it at all. Abandon the outworks
to keep the citadel. And just as men pull down the pretty houses on
the outskirts of a fortified city when a siege is impending, in order
that they may afford no cover to the enemy, so we have to sweep away
a great deal in our lives that is innocent and fair, in order that
the foes of our spirit may find no lodgment there. It is second best,
but for all that it is absolutely needful. We must lay 'aside every
_weight_,' as well as 'the _sin_ which so easily besets us.' We
must run lightly if we would run well. We must cast aside all burdens,
even though they be burdens of treasure and delights, if we would 'run
with patience the race that is set before us.' 'If thy foot offend
thee,' do not hesitate, do not adopt half-measures, do not try
moderation, do not seek to sanctify the use of the peccant member;
all these may be possible and right in time, but for the present there
is only one thing to do--down with it on the block, and off with it!
'Cut it off and cast it from thee.'

III. And now, lastly, a word as to the solemn exhortation by which
this injunction is enforced.

Christ rests His command of self-denial and self-mutilation upon the
highest ground of self-interest. 'It is better for thee.' We are
told nowadays that this is a very low motive to appeal to, that
Christianity is a religion of selfishness, because it says to men,
'Your life or your death depends upon your faith and your conduct.'
Well, I think it will be time for us to listen to fantastic
objections of this sort when the men that urge them refuse to turn
down another street, if they are warned that in the road on which
they are going they will meet their death. As long as they admit
that it is a wise and a kind thing to say to a man, 'Do not go that
way or your life will be endangered,' I think we may listen to our
Master saying to us, 'Do not do that lest thou perish; do this, that
thou may'st enter into life.'

And then, notice that a maimed man may enter into life, and a
complete man may perish. The first may be a very poor creature, very
ignorant, with a limited nature, undeveloped capacities, intellect
and the like all but dormant in him, artistic sensibilities quite
atrophied, and yet he may have got hold of Jesus Christ and His
love, and be trying to love Him back again and serve Him, and so be
entering into life even here, and be sure of a life more perfect
yonder. And the complete man, cultured all round, with all his
faculties polished and exercised to the full, may have one side of
his nature undeveloped--that which connects him with God in Christ.
And so he may be like some fair tree that stands out there in the
open, on all sides extending its equal beauty, with its stem
symmetrical, cylindrical, perfect in its green cloud of foliage, yet
there may be a worm at the root of it, and it may be given up to
rottenness and destruction. Cultivated men may perish, and
uncultured men may have the life. The maimed man may touch Christ
with his stump, and so receive life, and the complete man may lay
hold of the world and the flesh and the devil with his hands, and so
share in their destruction.

Ay! and in that case the maimed man has the best of it. It is a very
plain axiom of the rudest common-sense, this of my text: 'It is
better for thee to enter into life maimed, than to go into hell-fire
with both thy hands.' That is to say, it is better to live maimed
than to die whole. A man comes into a hospital with gangrene in his
leg; the doctor says it must come off; the man says, 'It shall not,'
and he is dead to-morrow. Who is the fool--the man that says, 'Here,
then, cut away; better life than limb,' or the man that says, 'I
will keep it and I will die'?

'Better to enter into life maimed,' because you will not always be
maimed. The life will overcome the maiming. There is a wonderful
restoration of capacities and powers that have been sacrificed for
Christ's sake, a restoration even here. As crustaceans will develop
a new claw in place of one that they have thrown off in their peril
to save their lives, so we, if we have for Christ's sake maimed
ourselves, will find that in a large measure the suppression will be
recompensed even here on earth.

And hereafter, as the Rabbis used to say, 'No man will rise from the
grave a cripple.' All the limitations which we have imposed upon
ourselves, for Christ's sake, will be removed then. 'Then shall the
eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf be unstopped;
then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the dumb
shall sing.' 'Verily I say unto thee, there is no man that hath left
any' of his possessions, affections, tastes, capacities, 'for My
sake but he shall receive a hundredfold more in this life, and in
the world to come, life everlasting.' No man is a loser by giving up
anything for Jesus Christ.

And, on the other hand, the complete man, complete in everything
except his spiritual nature, is a fragment in all his completeness;
and yonder, there will for him be a solemn process of stripping.
'Take it from him, and give it to him that hath ten talents.' Ah!
how much of that for which some of you are flinging away Jesus
Christ will fade from you when you go yonder. 'His glory shall not
descend after him'; 'as he came, so shall he go.' 'Tongues, they
shall cease; knowledge, it shall vanish away'; gifts will fail,
capacities will disappear when the opportunities for the exercise of
them in a material world are at an end, and there will be little
left to the man who _would_ carry hands and feet and eyes all
into the fire and forgot the 'one thing needful,' but a thin thread,
if I may so say, of personality quivering with the sense of
responsibility, and preyed upon by the gnawing worm of a too-late
remorse.

My brother, the lips of Incarnate Love spoke those solemn words of
my text, which it becomes not me to repeat to you as if they were
mine; but I ask you to weigh this, His urgent commandment, and to
listen to His solemn assurance, by which He enforces the wisdom of
the self-suppression: 'It is better for thee to enter into life
maimed, than having two hands, to be cast into hell-fire.'

Give your hearts to Jesus Christ, and set the following in His
footsteps and the keeping of His commandments high above all other
aims. You will have to suppress much and give up much, but such
suppression is the shortest road to becoming perfect men, complete
in Him, and such surrender is the surest way to possess all things.
'He that loseth his life'--which is more than hand or eye--for
Christ's sake,' the same shall find it.'




THE LOST SHEEP AND THE SEEKING SHEPHERD


    If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone
    astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and
    goeth Into the mountains, and seeketh that which is
    gone astray!--MATT. xviii. 12.

We find this simple parable, or germ of a parable, in a somewhat more
expanded form, as the first of the incomparable three in the fifteenth
chapter of Luke's Gospel. Perhaps our Lord repeated the parable more
than once. It is an unveiling of His inmost heart, and therein a
revelation of the very heart of God. It touches the deepest things in
His relation to men, and sets forth thoughts of Him, such as man never
dared to dream. It does all this by the homeliest image and by an
appeal to the simplest instincts. The most prosaic shepherd looks for
lost sheep, and everybody has peculiar joy over lost things found.
They may not be nearly so valuable as things that were not lost. The
unstrayed may be many, and the strayed be but one. Still there is a
keener joy in the recovery of the one than in the unbroken possession
of the ninety-and-nine. That feeling in a man may be only selfishness,
but homely as it is--when the loser is God, and the lost are men, it
becomes the means of uttering and illustrating that truth concerning
God which no religion but that of the Cross has ever been bold enough
to proclaim, that He cares most for the wanderers, and rejoices over the
return of the one that went astray more than over the ninety-and-nine
who never wandered.

There are some significant differences between this edition of the
parable and the form which it assumes in the Gospel according to
Luke. There it is spoken in vindication of Christ's consorting with
publicans and sinners; here it is spoken in order to point the
lesson of not despising the least and most insignificant of the sons
of men. There the seeking Shepherd is obviously Christ; here the
seeking Shepherd is rather the Divine Father; as appears by the
words of the next verse: 'For it is not the will of your Father
which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.'
There the sheep is lost; here the sheep goes astray. There the
Shepherd seeks till He find, here the Shepherd, perhaps, fails to
find; for our Lord says, '_If so be_ that he find it.'

But I am not about to venture on all the thoughts which this parable
suggests, nor even to deal with the main lesson which it teaches. I
wish merely to look at the two figures--the wanderer and the seeker.

I. First, then, let us look at that figure of the one wanderer.

Of course I need scarcely remind you that in the immediate
application of the parable in Luke's Gospel, the ninety-and-nine
were the respectable people who thought the publicans and harlots
altogether too dirty to touch, and regarded it as very doubtful
conduct on the part of this young Rabbi from Nazareth to be mixed up
with persons whom no one with a proper regard for whited sepulchres
would have anything to do with. To them He answers, in effect--I am
a shepherd; that is my vindication. Of course a shepherd goes after
and cares for the lost sheep. He does not ask about its worth, or
anything else. He simply follows the lost because it is lost. It may
be a poor little creature after all, but it is lost, and that is
enough. And so He vindicates Himself to the ninety-and-nine: 'You do
not need Me, you are found. I take you on your own estimation of
yourselves, and tell you that My mission is to the wanderers.'

I do not suppose, however, that any of us have need to be reminded
that upon a closer and deeper examination of the facts of the case,
every hoof of the ninety-and-nine belonged to a stray sheep too; and
that in the wider application of the parable _all_ men are
wanderers. Remembering, then, this universal application, I would
point out two or three things about the condition of these strayed
sheep, which include the whole race. The ninety-and-nine may shadow
for us a number of beings, in unfallen worlds, immensely greater
than even the multitudes of wandering souls that have lived here
through weary ages of sin and tears, but that does not concern us
now.

The first thought I gather from the parable is that all men are
Christ's sheep. That sounds a strange thing to say. What? all these
men and women who, having run away from Him, are plunged in sin,
like sheep mired in a black bog, the scoundrels and the profligates,
the scum and the outcasts of great cities; people with narrow
foreheads, and blighted, blasted lives, the despair of our modern
civilisation--are they all His? And in those great wide-lying
heathen lands where men know nothing of His name and of His love,
are they all His too? Let Him answer, 'Other sheep I have'--though
they look like goats to-day--'which are not of this fold, them also
must I bring, and they shall hear My voice.' All men are Christ's,
because He has been the Agent of divine creation, and the grand
words of the hundredth Psalm are true about Him. 'It is He that hath
made us, and we are His. We are His people and the sheep of His
pasture.' They are His, because His sacrifice has bought them for
His. Erring, straying, lost, they still belong to the Shepherd.

Notice next, the picture of the sheep as wandering. The word is,
literally, 'which _goeth_ astray,' not 'which is gone astray.'
It pictures the process of wandering, not the result as accomplished.
We see the sheep, poor, silly creature, not going anywhere in
particular, only there is a sweet tuft of grass here, and it crops
that; and here is a bit of ground where there is soft walking, and it
goes there; and so, step by step, not meaning anything, not knowing
where it is going, or that it _is_ going anywhere; it goes, and
goes, and goes, and at last it finds out that it is away from its
beat on the hillside--for sheep keep to one bit of hillside generally,
as any shepherd will tell you--and then it begins to bleat, and most
helpless of creatures, fluttering and excited, rushes about amongst
the thorns and brambles, or gets mired in some quag or other, and it
will never find its way back of itself until some one comes for it.

'So,' says Christ to us, 'there are a great many of you who do not
mean to go wrong; you are not going anywhere in particular, you do
not start on your course with any intentions either way, of doing
right or wrong, of keeping near God, or going away from Him, but you
simply go where the grass is sweetest, or the walking easiest. But
look at the end of it; where you have got to. You have got away from
Him.'

Now, if you take that series of parables in Luke xv., and note the
metaphors there, you will see three different sides given of the
process by which men's hearts stray away from God. There is the
sheep that wanders. That is partly conscious, and voluntary, but in
a large measure simply yielding to inclination and temptation. Then
there is the coin that trundles away under some piece of furniture,
and is lost--that is a picture of the manner in which a man, without
volition, almost mechanically sometimes, slides into sins and
disappears as it were, and gets covered over with the dust of evil.
And then there is the worst of all, the lad that had full knowledge
of what he was doing. 'I am going into a far-off country; I cannot
stand this any longer--all restraint and no liberty, and no power of
doing what I like with my own; and always obliged to obey and be
dependent on my father for my pocket-money! Give me what belongs to
me, for good and all, and let me go!' That is the picture of the
worst kind of wandering, when a man knows what he is about, and
looks at the merciful restraint of the law of God, and says: 'No! I
had rather be far away; and my own master, and not always be
"cribbed, cabined, and confined" with these limitations.'

The straying of the half-conscious sheep may seem more innocent, but
it carries the poor creature away from the shepherd as completely as
if it had been wholly intelligent and voluntary. Let us learn the
lesson. In a world like this, if a man does not know very clearly
where he is going, he is sure to go wrong. If you do not exercise a
distinct determination to do God's will, and to follow in His
footsteps who has set us an example; and if your main purpose is to
get succulent grass to eat and soft places to walk in, you are
certain before long to wander tragically from all that is right and
noble and pure. It is no excuse for you to say: 'I never meant it';
'I did not intend any harm, I only followed my own inclinations.'
'More mischief is wrought'--to the man himself, as well as to other
people--'from want of thought than is wrought by' an evil will. And
the sheep has strayed as effectually, though, when it set out on its
journey, it never thought of straying. Young men and women beginning
life, remember! and take this lesson.

But then there is another point that I must touch for a moment. In
the Revised Version you will find a very tiny alteration in the
words of my text, which, yet, makes a large difference in the sense.
The last clause of my text, as it stands in our Bible, is, 'And
seeketh that which is _gone_ astray'; the Revised Version more
correctly reads, 'And seeketh that which _is going_ astray.'
Now, look at the difference in these two renderings. In the former
the process is represented as finished, in the correct rendering it
is represented as going on. And that is what I would press on you,
the awful, solemn, necessarily progressive character of our
wanderings from God. A man never gets to the end of the distance
that separates between him and the Father, if his face is turned
away from God. Every moment the separation is increasing. Two lines
start from each other at the acutest angle and diverge more the
further they are produced, until at last the one may be away up by
the side of God's throne, and the other away down in the deepest
depths of hell. So accordingly my text carries with solemn pathos,
in a syllable, the tremendous lesson: 'The sheep is not gone, but
_going_ astray.' Ah! there are some of my hearers who are daily
and hourly increasing the distance between themselves and their
merciful Father.

Now the last thing here in this picture is the contrast between the
description given of the wandering sheep in our text, and that in
St. Luke. Here it is represented as wandering, there it is
represented as lost. That is very beautiful and has a meaning often
not noticed by hasty readers. Who is it that has lost it? We talk
about the lost soul and the lost man, as if it were the man that had
lost _himself_, and that is true, and a dreadful truth it is.
But that is not the truth that is taught in this parable, and meant
by us to be gathered from it. Who is it that has lost it? He to whom
it belonged.

That is to say, wherever a heart gets ensnared and entangled with
the love of the treasures and pleasures of this life, and so departs
in allegiance and confidence and friendship from the living God,
there God the Father regards Himself as the poorer by the loss of
one of His children, by the loss of one of His sheep. He does not
care to possess you by the hold of mere creation and supremacy and
rule. He desires you to love Him, and then He deems that He has you.
And if you do not love Him, He deems that He has lost you. There is
something in the divine heart that goes out after His lost property.
We touch here upon deep things that we cannot speak of intelligently;
only remember this, that what looks like self-regard in man is the
purest love in God, and that there is nothing in the whole revelation
which Christianity makes of the character of God more wonderful than
this, that He judges that He has lost His child when His child has
forgotten to love Him.

II. So much, then, for one of the great pictures in this text. I can
spare but a sentence or two for the other--the picture of the
Seeker.

I said that in the one form of the parable it was more distinctly
the Father, and in the other more distinctly the Son, who is
represented as seeking the sheep. But these two do still coincide in
substance, inasmuch as God's chief way of seeking us poor wandering
sheep is through the work of His dear Son Jesus, and the coming of
Christ is the Father's searching for His sheep in the 'cloudy and
dark day.'

According to my text God leaves the ninety-and-nine and goes into
the mountains where the wanderer is, and seeks him. And this,
couched in veiled form, is the great mystery of the divine love, the
incarnation and sacrifice of Jesus Christ our Lord. Here is the
answer by anticipation to the sarcasm that is often levelled at
evangelical Christianity: 'You must think a good deal of human
nature, and must have a very arrogant notion of the inhabitant of
this little speck that floats in the great sea of the heavens, if
you suppose that with all these millions of orbs he is so important
that the divine Nature came down upon this little tiny molehill, and
took his nature and died.'

'Yes!' says Christ, 'not because man was so great, not because man
was so valuable in comparison with the rest of creation--he was but
one amongst ninety-nine unfallen and unsinful--but because he was so
wretched, because he was so small, because he had gone so far away
from God; _therefore_, the seeking love came after him, and
would draw him to itself.' That, I think, is answer enough to the
cavil.

And then, there is a difference between these two versions of the
Parable in respect to their representation of the end of the seeking.
The one says 'seeks until He finds.' Oh! the patient, incredible
inexhaustibleness of the divine love. God's long-suffering, if I may
take such a metaphor, like a sleuth-hound, will follow the object
of its search through all its windings and doublings, until it comes
up to it. So that great seeking Shepherd follows us through all the
devious courses of our wayward, wandering footsteps doubling back
upon themselves, until He finds us. Though the sheep may increase its
distance, the Shepherd follows. The further away we get the more
tender His appeal; the more we stop our ears the louder the voice
with which He calls. You cannot wear out Jesus Christ, you cannot
exhaust the resources of His bounteousness, of His tenderness.
However we may have been going wrong, however far we may have
been wandering, however vehemently we may be increasing, at every
moment, our distance from Him, He is coming after us, serene, loving,
long-suffering, and will not be put away.

Dear friend! would you only believe that a loving, living Person is
