TRANSLATION AND ELISHA'S DEATHBED (2 Kings ii. 12; Kings xiii. II)
GENTLENESS SUCCEEDING STRENGTH (2 Kings ii. 13-22) WHEN THE OIL FLOWS
(2 Kings iv. 6) A MIRACLE NEEDING EFFORT (2 Kings iv. 25-37) NAAMAN'S
WRATH (2 Kings v. 10, 11) NAAMAN'S IMPERFECT FAITH (2 Kings v. 15-27)
SIGHT AND BLINDNESS (2 Kings vi. 3-18) 'IMPOSSIBLE,--ONLY I SAW IT' (2
Kings vii. 1-16) SILENT CHRISTIANS (2 Kings vii. 9)




THE SECOND BOOK OF SAMUEL




THE BRIGHT DAWN OF A REIGN

'And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the Lord,
saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the Lord
said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And He
said, Unto Hebron. 2. So David went up thither, and his two wives also,
Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail, Nabal's wife, the Carmelite. 3.
And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his
household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron. 4. And the men of
Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah.
And they told David, saying, That the men of Jabesh-gilead were they
that buried Saul. 5. And David sent messengers unto the men of
Jabesh-gilead, and said unto them, Blessed be ye of the Lord, that ye
have shewed this kindness unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have
buried him. 6. And now the Lord shew kindness and truth unto you: and I
also will requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.
7. Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for
your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me
king over them. 8. But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host,
took Ishb-osheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim; 9.
And he made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over
Jezreel, and over Ephraim,  and over Benjamin, and over all Israel. 10.
Ish-bosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign over
Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.
11. And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah
was seven years and six months.'--2 SAMUEL ii. 1-11.


The last stage of David's wanderings had brought him to Ziklag, a
Philistine city. There he had been for over a year, during which he had
won the regard of Achish, the Philistine king of Gath. He had, at
Achish's request, accompanied him with his contingent, in the invasion
of Israel, which crushed Saul's house at Gilboa; but jealousy on the
part of the other Philistine leaders had obliged his patron to send him
back to Ziklag. He found it a heap of ashes. An Amalekite raid had
carried off all the women and children, and his soldiers were on the
point of mutiny. His fortunes seemed desperate, but his courage and
faith were high, and he paused not a moment for useless sorrow, but
swept after the robbers, swooped down on them like a bolt out of the
blue, and scattered them, recovering the captives and spoil. He went
back to the ruins which had been Ziklag, and three days after heard of
Saul's death.

The lowest point of his fortunes suddenly turned into the highest, for
now the path to the throne was open. But the tidings did not move him
to joy. His first thought was not for himself, but for Saul and
Jonathan, whose old love to him shone out again, glorified by their
deaths. Swift vengeance from his hand struck Saul's slayer; the lovely
elegy on the great king and his son eased his heart. Then he turned to
front his new circumstances, and this passage shows how a God-fearing
man will meet the summons to dignity which is duty. It sets forth
David's conduct in three aspects-his assumption of his kingdom, his
loving regard for Saul's memory, and his demeanour in the face of
rebellion.

I. David was now about thirty years old, and had had his character
tested and matured by his hard experiences. He 'learned in suffering
what he taught in song.' Exile, poverty, and danger are harsh but
effectual teachers, if accepted by a devout spirit, and fronted with
brave effort. The fugitive's cave was a good preparation for the king's
palace. The throne to which he was called was no soft seat for repose.
The Philistine invasion had torn away all the northern territory. He
took the helm in a tempest. What was he to do? Ziklag was untenable;
where was he to take his men? He could not stop in the Philistine
territory, and he saw no way clear.

God's servants generally find that their promotion means harder duties
and multiplied perplexities. 'Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.'
David did what we shall do, if we are wise--he asked God to guide him.
How that guidance was asked and given we are not here told; but the
analogy of 1 Samuel xxx. 7, 8, suggests that it was by the Urim and
Thummim, interpreted by the high-priest. The form of inquiry seems to
have been that a course of action, suggested by the inquirer, was
decided for him by a 'Yes' or a 'No.' So that there was the exercise of
common-sense and judgment in formulating the proposed course, as well
as that of God's direction in determining it.

That is how we still get divine direction. Bring your own wits to bear
on your action, and then do not obstinately stick to what seems right
to you, but ask God to negative it if it is wrong, and to confirm you
in it if it is right. If we humbly ask Him, 'Am I to go, or not to go?'
we shall not be left unanswered. We note the contrast between David's
submission to God's guidance and Saul's self-willed taking his own way,
in spite of Samuel. He began right, and, in the main, he continued as
he began. Self-will is sin and ruin. Submission is joy, and peace, and
success. God's kings are viceroys. They have to rule themselves and the
world, but they have to be ruled by His will. If they faithfully
continue as His servants, they are masters of all besides.

Hebron was a good capital for the new king, for it was a defensible
position, in the centre of his own tribe, and sacred by association
with the patriarchs. Established there, David was recognised as king by
his fellow-tribesmen, and by them only. No doubt, tribal jealousy was
partly the cause of this limited recognition, but probably the
confusion incident to the Philistine victory contributed to it. The
result was that, though David's designation by Samuel to the kingship
was universally known, and his candidature had been popular, he had
seven years of precarious sway over this mere fraction of the nation.
We read of no impatience on his part. He let events shape themselves,
or, rather, he let God shape events.

Passiveness is not always indolence. There are two ways of compassing
our desires. One is that which David himself tells us is the 'young
lions' way, of struggling and fighting, and that often ends in 'lacking
and suffering hunger'; the other is that of waiting on the Lord, and
that always ends in 'not lacking any good.' If we are sure that God has
promised us anything, and if He does not seem to have yet opened the
way to obtaining it, our 'strength is to sit still.' If He has given us
Hebron, we can be patient till He please to give us Jerusalem.

II. Another side of David's character comes beautifully out in his
treatment of the men of Jabesh-gilead. That town owed much to Saul (1
Samuel xi.), and its gratitude lasted, and dared much for him. It was a
brave dash that they made across Jordan to carry off Saul's corpse from
its ignominious exposure; for it both defied the Philistines, and might
be construed as hostile to David. But his heart was too true to ancient
friendship to do anything but glow with admiring sympathy at that
exhibition of affectionate remembrance. Reconciling death had swept
away all memories of Saul's insane jealousy, and he owned a brother in
every one who showed kindness to the unfortunate king.

If the Jabesh-Gileadites are a pattern of long-memoried gratitude,
David's commendation of them is a model of love which survives
injuries, and of forgivingness which forgets them. It was as politic as
it was generous. Nothing could have been better calculated to attach
Saul's most devoted partisans to him than showing that he honoured
their faithful attachment to Saul, and nothing could have more clearly
defined his own position during his wanderings as being no rebel. The
dictates of true policy and those of devout generosity always coincide.
It is ever a blunder to be unforgiving, and mercifulness is always
expedient.

But David did not hide his claim to the allegiance of these true
hearts. He called on them to transfer their loyalty to himself, and he
asserted, not his anointing by Samuel, but his recognition by Judah,
the premier tribe, as the motive. No doubt the divine appointment is
implied, as it was generally known, but Judah's action is put forward
as showing the beginning of the realisation of the divine designation.
The men of Jabesh needed to 'be valiant' if they were to acknowledge
him; for it was a far cry to Hebron, and the forces of the rival son of
Saul were overrunning the northern districts.

We have to take our sides in the age-long and worldwide warfare between
God's King and the pretenders to His throne, and it often wants much
courage to do so when surrounded by antagonists. It seems a long way
off to the true monarch, and Abner's army is a very solid reality, and
very near. But it is safest to take the side of the distant, rightful
king.

III. David's bearing in the face of opposition and rebellion comes out
in verses 8-11. Abner, Saul's cousin, who had been in high position
when the stripling from Bethlehem fought Goliath, was not capable of
the self-effacement involved in acquiescing in David's accession,
though he knew that the Lord had 'sworn to David.' So he set up a 'King
Do-nothing' in the person of a weak lad, the only survivor of Saul's
sons. A strange state of mind that, which struggles against a
recognised divine appointment!

But is it only Abner who knew that he was trying to thwart God's will?
Thousands of us are doing the same, and the attempt answers as well as
it did in his case.

The puppet king is named Ishbosheth in the lesson, but I Chronicles
viii. 33 and ix. 39 show that his real name was Esh-baal. The former
word means 'The man of shame'; the latter, 'The man of Baal.' The
existence of Baal as an element in names seems to indicate the
incompleteness of the emancipation from idolatry in Saul's time, and
the change will then indicate the keener monotheistic conscience of
later days. Another explanation is that Baal (' Lord') was in these
cases used as a name for Jehovah, and was 'changed at a later period
for the purpose of avoiding what was interpreted then as a compound of
the name of the Phoenician deity Baal' (Driver, _Notes on Hebrew Text
of the Books of Samuel_).

Abner set up his tool in Mahanaim, sacred for its associations with
Jacob, but, no doubt, recommended to him rather by its position on the
east side of Jordan, safe from the attacks of the victorious
Philistines. From that fastness he made raids to recover the territory
which the victory at Gilboa had won for them. First Gilead, on the same
side of the river as Mahanaim; then the territory of the
'Ashurites'--probably a scribe's error for 'Asherites,' the most
northern tribe; and then, coming southward, the great plain, with its
cities, Ephraim and Benjamin,--in fact, all Israel except Judah's
country was reconquered for Saul's house.

The account of the distribution of territory between the two monarchies
is broken by the parenthesis in verse 10, which, both by its awkward
interposition in the middle of a sentence and by its difficult
chronological statements, looks like a late addition.

For seven and a half years David reigned in Hebron, but was rather shut
up there than ruling thence. The most noteworthy fact is that he,
soldier as he was, took no steps to put down Abner's rebellion. He
defended himself when attacked, but that was all. The three figures of
David, Ishbosheth, and Abner point lessons. Silent, still, trustful,
and therefore patient, David shows us how faith in God can lead to
possessing one's soul in patience till 'the vision' comes. We may have
to wait for it, but 'it will surely come,' and what is time enough for
God should be time enough for us. Saul's son was a poor, weak creature,
who would never have thought of resisting David but for the stronger
will behind him. To be weak is, in this world full of tempters, to
drift into being wicked. We have to learn betimes to say 'No,' and to
stick to it. Moral weakness attracts tempters as surely as a camel
fallen by the caravan track draws vultures from every corner of the
sky. The fierce soldier who fought for his own hand while professing to
be moved by loyalty to the dead king, may stand as a type of the
self-deception with which we gloss over our ugliest selfishness with
fine names, and for an instance of the madness which leads men to set
themselves against God's plans, and therefore to be dashed in pieces,
as some slim barrier reared across the track of a train would be. To
'rush against the thick bosses of the Almighty's buckler' does no harm
to the buckler, but kills the insane assailant.




ONE FOLD AND ONE SHEPHERD

'Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake,
saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. 2. Also in time past,
when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and
broughtest in Israel: and the Lord said to thee, Thou shalt feed My
people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel. 3. So all the
elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a
league with them in Hebron before the Lord: and they anointed David
king over Israel. 4. David was thirty years old when he began to reign;
and he reigned forty years. 5. In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven
years and six months; and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three
years over all Israel and Judah, 6. And the king and his men went to
Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land; which spake
unto David, saying, Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou
shalt not come in hither: thinking, David cannot come in hither. 7.
Nevertheless, David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the city
of David. 8. And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the
gutter, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind, that are
hated of David's soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they
said, The blind and the lame shall not come into the house. 9. So David
dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And David built
round about from Millo and inward. 10. And David went on, and grew
great, and the Lord God of hosts was with him. 11. And Hiram king of
Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and carpenters, and
masons: and they built David an house. 12. And David perceived that the
Lord had established him king over Israel, and that He had exalted his
kingdom for His people Israel's sake.'--2 SAMUEL v. 1-12.


The dark day on Gilboa put the Philistines in possession of most of
Saul's kingdom. Only in the south David held his ground, and Abner had
to cross Jordan to find a place of security for the remnants of the
royal house. The completeness of the Philistine conquest is marked, not
only by Abner's flight to Mahanaim, but by the reckoning that David
reigned for seven and a half years and Ishbosheth two; for these
periods must be supposed to have ended very nearly at the same time,
and thus there would be about five years before the invaders were so
far got rid of that Ishbosheth exercised sovereignty over his part of
Israel. It is singular that David should have been left unattacked by
the Philistines, and it is probably to be explained by the friendly
relations which had sprung up between Achish, king of Gath, and him (1
Samuel xxix.). However that may be, his power was continually
increasing during his reign at Hebron over Judah, and at last Abner's
death and the assassination of the poor phantom king, Ishbosheth,
brought about the total collapse of opposition.

I. This passage deals first with the submission of the tribes and the
reunion of the divided kingdom. A comparison of verse I with verse 3
shows that a formal delegation of elders from all the tribes which had
held by Ishbosheth, came to Hebron with their submission. The account
in I Chronicles is a _verbatim_ copy of this one, with the addition of
a glowing picture of the accompanying feasting and joy. It also places
much emphasis on the sincerity of David's new subjects, which needed
some endorsement; for loyalty which has been disloyal as long as it
durst, may be suspected. The elders have their mouths full of excellent
reasons for recognising David's kingship,--he is their brother; he was
their true leader in war, even in Saul's time; he has been appointed by
God to be king and commander. Unfortunately, it had taken the elders
seven and a half years to feel the force of these reasons, and probably
their perceptions would still have remained dull if Abner and
Ishbosheth had lived. But David is both magnanimous and politic, and
neither bloodshed nor reproaches mar the close of the strife. Seldom
has so formidable a civil war been ended with so complete an amnesty.
Observe the expression that David 'made a league with them... before
the Lord.' The Israelitish monarch was no despot, but, in modern
language, a constitutional king, between whom and his subjects there
was a compact, which he as well as they had to observe. In what sense
was it made 'before the Lord'? The ark was not at Hebron, though the
priests were; and the phrase is at once a testimony to the religious
character of the 'league' and to the consciousness of God's presence,
apart from the symbol of His presence. It points to a higher conception
than that which brought the ark to Ebenezer, and dreamed that the ark
had brought God to the army. Modern theories of the religious
development of the Old Testament ask us to recognise these two
conceptions as successive. The fact is that they were contemporaneous,
and that the difference between them is not one of time, but of
spiritual susceptibility. Who anointed David for this third time?
Apparently the elders, for priests are not mentioned. Samuel had
anointed him, as token of the divine choice and symbol of the divine
gifts for his office. The men of Judah had anointed him, and finally
the elders did so, in token of the popular confirmation of God's choice.

So David has reached the throne at last. Schooled by suffering, and in
the full maturity of his powers, enriched by the singularly varied
experiences of his changeful life, tempered by the swift alternations
of heat and cold, polished by friction, consolidated by heavy blows, he
has been welded into a fitting instrument for God's purposes. Thus does
He ever prepare for larger service. Thus does He ever reward patient
trust. Through trials to a throne is the law for all noble lives in
regard to their earthly progress, as well as in regard to the relation
between earth and heaven. But David is not only a pattern instance of
how God trains His servants, but he is a prophetic person; and in his
progress to his kingdom we have dimly, but really, shadowed the path by
which his Son and Lord attains to His,--a path thickly strewn with
thorns, and plunging into 'valleys of the shadow of death' compared
with which David's darkest hour was sunny. The psalms of the persecuted
exile have sounding through them a deeper sorrow; for they 'testified
beforehand the sufferings of Christ.' 'No cross, no crown,' is the
lesson of David's earlier life.

II. We have, next, the first victory of the reunited nation. Hebron was
too far south for the capital of the whole kingdom. Jerusalem was more
central, and, from its position, surrounded on three sides with steep
ravines, was a strong military post. David's soldier's eye saw its
advantages; and he, no doubt, desired to weld the monarchy together by
participation in danger and triumph. The new glow of national unity
would seek some great exploit, and would resent as an insult the
presence of the Jebusites in their stronghold. The attack on it
immediately follows the recognition of David's kingship. It is not
necessary here to discuss the difficulties in verses 6-8; but we note
that they give, first, the insolent boast of the besieged, then the
twofold answer to it in fact and in word, and last, the memorial of the
victory in a proverb. Apparently the Jebusites' taunt is best
understood as in the margin of the Revised Version,' Thou shalt not
come in hither, but the blind and the lame shall turn thee away,' They
were so sure that their ravines made them safe, that they either
actually manned their walls with blind men and cripples, or jeeringly
shouted to the enemy across the valley that these would do for a
garrison. The other possible meaning of the words as they stand in the
Authorised Version would make 'the blind and lame' refer to David's
men, and the taunt would mean, 'You will have to weed out your men. It
will take sharper eyes and more agile limbs than theirs to clamber up
here'; but the former explanation is the more probable. Such braggart
speeches were quite in the manner of ancient warfare.

Verse 7 tells what the answer to this mocking shout from the ramparts
was, David did the impossible, and took the city. Courage built on
faith has a way of making the world's predictions of what it cannot do
look rather ridiculous. David wastes no words in answering the taunt;
but it stirs him to fierce anger, and nerves him and his men for their
desperate charge. The obscure words in verse 8, which he speaks to his
soldiers, do not need the supplement given in the Authorised Version.
The king's quick eye had seen a practical path for scaling the cliffs
up some watercourse, where there might be projections or vegetation to
pull oneself up by, or shelter which would hide the assailants from the
defenders; and he bids any one who would smite the Jebusites take that
road up, and, when he is up, 'smite.' He heartens his men for the
assault by his description of the enemy. They had talked about 'blind
and lame'; that is what they really are, or as unable to stand against
the Israelites' fierce and sudden burst as if they were: and
furthermore, they are' hated of David's soul.' It is a flash of the
rage of battle which shows us David in a new light. He was a born
captain as well as king; and here he exhibits the general's power to
see, as by instinct, the weak point and to hurl his men on it. His
swift decision and fiery eloquence stir his men's blood like the sound
of a trumpet. The proverb that rose from the capture is best read as in
the Revised Version: 'There are the blind and the lame; he cannot come
into the house.' The point of it seems to be that, notwithstanding the
bragging Jebusites, he did 'come into the house'; and so its use would
be to ridicule boasting confidence that was falsified by events, as the
Jebusites' had been. It was worth while to record the boast and its
end; for they teach the always seasonable lesson of the folly of
over-confidence in apparently impregnable defences. It is a lesson of
worldly prudence, but still more of religion. There is always some
'watercourse' overlooked by us, up which the enemy may make his way.
Overestimate of our own strength and its companion folly, flippant
underestimate of the enemy's power, are, in all worldly affairs, the
sure precursors of disaster; and in the Christian life the only safe
temper is that of the man who 'feareth always,' as knowing his own
weakness and the strength of his foe, and thereby is driven to that
trust which casts out fear.

On the other hand, David's exploit reads us anew the lesson that to the
Christian soldier there is nothing impossible, with Jesus Christ for
our Captain. There are many unconquered fortresses of evil still to be
carried by assault, and they look steep and inaccessible enough; but
there is some way up, and He will show it us. For our own personal
struggle with sin, and for the Church's conflict with social evils,
this story is an encouragement and a prophecy.

Jerusalem was captured by a reunited nation with its king at its head.
As long as our miserable divisions weaken and disgrace us, the Church
fights at a disadvantage; and the hoary fortresses of the foe will not
be won till Judah ceases to vex Ephraim, and Ephraim no more envies
Judah, but all Christ's servants in one host, with the King known by
each to be with them, make the assault.

III. We have, lastly, the growth of the kingdom. I pass over
topographical questions, which need not concern us here. The points
recorded are David's establishment in the stronghold, his additions to
the city, his increasing greatness and its reason in the presence and
favour of 'the God of hosts,' the special instance of this in the
friendly intercourse with Hiram of Tyre and the employment of Tyrian
workmen, and the recognition of the source and the purpose of his
prosperity by the devout king. We see here the conditions of true
success,--'The Lord, the God of hosts, was with him.' We see also the
right use of it,--'David perceived that the Lord had established him
king.' He was not puffed up into self-importance by his elevation, but
devoutly and clearly saw who had set him in his lofty place. And, as he
traced his royalty to God, so he recognised that he had received it,
not for himself, but as a trust to be used, not in self-indulgence, but
for the national good,--'and that He had exalted his kingdom for His
people Israel's sake.' Whosoever holds firmly by these two thoughts,
and lives them, will adorn his position, whatever it may be, and will
be one of God's crowned kings, however obscure his lot and small his
duties. He who lacks them will misuse his gifts and mar his life, and
the more splendid his endowments and the higher his position, the more
conspicuous will be his ruin and the heavier his guilt.




DEATH AND LIFE FROM THE ARK

'Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty
thousand. 2. And David arose, and went with all the people that were
with him from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God,
whose name is called by the name of the Lord of hosts that dwelleth
between the cherubims. 3. And they set the ark of God upon a new cart,
and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and
Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave the new cart. 4. And they
brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at Gibeah,
accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark. 5. And David
and all the house of Israel played before the Lord on all manner of
instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on psalteries, and on
timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals. 6. And when they came to
Nachon's thrashing-floor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God,
and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it. 7. And the anger of the
Lord was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error;
and there he died by the ark of God. 8. And David was displeased,
because the Lord had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name
of the place Perez-uzzah to this day. 9. And David was afraid of the
Lord that day, and said, How shall the ark of the Lord come to me? 10.
So David would not remove the ark of the Lord unto him into the city of
David: but David carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the
Gittite. 11. And the ark of the Lord continued in the house of
Obed-edom the Gittite three months: and the Lord blessed Obed-edom, and
all his household. 12. And it was told king David, saying, The Lord
hath blessed the house of Obed-edom and all that pertaineth unto him,
because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God
from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David with gladness.'-2
SAMUEL vi. 1-12.


I. The first section (verses 1-5) describes the joyful reception and
procession. The parallel account in 1 Chronicles states that Baalah, or
Baale, was Kirjath-jearim. Probably the former was the more ancient
Canaanitish name, and indicates that it had been a Baal sanctuary. If
so, the presence of the ark there was at once a symbol and an omen,
showing Jehovah's conquest over the obscene and bloody gods of the
land, and forecasting His triumph over all the gods of the nations.
Every Baale shall one day be a resting-place of the ark of God. The
solemn designation of the ark, as 'called by the Name, the name of the
Lord of Hosts, that dwelleth between the cherubim,' is significant on
this, its reappearance after so long eclipse, and, by emphasising its
awful sanctity, prepares for the incidents which are to follow. The
manner of the ark's transport was irregular; for the law strictly
enjoined its being carried by the Levites by means of bearing-poles
resting on their shoulders; and the copying of the Philistines' cart,
though a new one was made for the purpose, indicates the desuetude into
which the decencies of worship had fallen in seventy years. In 1
Chronicles, the singular words in verse 5, which describe David as
playing before the Lord on the very unlikely things for such a
purpose,' all manner of instruments of fir wood,' become 'with all
their might: even with songs' which seems much more reasonable. A
slight alteration in three letters and the transposition of two would
bring our text into conformity with I Chronicles, and the conjectural
emendation is tempting. Who ever heard of fir-wood musical instruments?
The specified ones which follow were certainly not made of it, and
songs could scarcely fail to be mentioned.

At all events, we see the glad procession streaming out of the little
city buried among its woods; the cart drawn by meek oxen, and loaded
with the unadorned wooden chest, in the midst; the two sons or
descendants of its faithful custodian honoured to be the teamsters; the
king with the harp which had cheered him in many a sad hour of exile;
and the crowd 'making a joyful noise before the Lord,' which might
sound discord in our ears, as some lifted up shrill songs, some touched
stringed instruments, some beat on timbrels, some rattled metal rods
with movable rings, and some clashed cymbals together. It was a wild
scene, in which there was a dangerous resemblance to the frantic
jubilations of idolatrous worship. No doubt there were true hearts in
that crowd, and none truer than David's. No doubt we have to beware of
applying our Christian standards to these early times, and must let a
good deal that is sensuous and turbid pass, as, no doubt, God let it
pass. But confession of sin in leaving the ark so long forgotten would
have been better than this tumultuous joy; and if there had been more
trembling in it, it would not have passed so soon into wild terror.
Still, on the other hand, that rejoicing crowd does represent, though
in crude form, the effect which the consciousness of God's presence
should ever have. His felt nearness should be, as the Psalmist says,
'the gladness of my joy.' Much of our modern religion is far too
gloomy, and it is thought to be a sign of devotion and
spiritual-mindedness to be sad and of a mortified countenance.
Unquestionably, Christianity brings men into the continual presence of
very solemn truths about themselves and the world which may well sober
them, and make what the world calls mirth incongruous.

             'There is no music in the life
              That rings with idiot laughter solely.'

But the Man of Sorrows said that His purpose for us was that 'His joy
might remain in us, and that our joy might be full'; and we but
imperfectly apprehend the gospel if we do not feel that its joys 'much
more abound' than its sorrows, and that they even burn brightest, like
the lights on safety-buoys, when drenched by stormy seas.

II. The second section contains the dread vindication of the sanctity
of the ark, which changed joy into terror, and silenced the songs. At
some bad place in the rocky and steep track, the oxen stumbled or were
restive. The spot is called in Samuel 'the threshing-floor of Nachon,'
but in Chronicles the owner is named 'Chidon.' As the former word means
'a stroke' and the latter 'destruction,' they are probably not to be
taken as proper names, but as applied to the place after this event.
The name given by David, however--Perez-uzzah--proved the more
permanent 'to this day.' Uzzah, who was driving while his brother went
in front to pilot the way, naturally stretched out his hand to steady
his freight, just as if it had been a sack of corn; and, as if he had
touched an electric wire, fell dead, as the story graphically says, 'by
the ark of God.' What confusion and panic would agitate the joyous
singers, and how their songs would die on their lips!

What harm was there in Uzzah's action? It was most natural, and, in one
point of view, commendable. Any careful waggoner would have done the
same with any valuable article he had in charge. Yes; that was just the
point of his error and sin, that he saw no difference between the ark
and any other valuable article. His intention to help was right enough;
but there was profound insensibility to the awful sacredness of the
ark, on which even its Levitical bearers were forbidden to lay hands.
All his life Uzzah had been accustomed to its presence. It had been one
of the familiar pieces of furniture in Abinadab's house, and, no doubt,
familiarity had had its usual effect. Do none of us ministers,
teachers, and others, to whom the gospel and the worship and ordinances
of the Church have been familiar from infancy, treat them in the same
fashion? Many a hand is laid on the ark, sometimes to keep it from
falling, with more criminal carelessness of its sacredness than Uzzah
showed. Note, too, how swiftly an irreverent habit of treating holy
things grows. The first error was in breaking the commanded order for
removal of the ark by the Levites. Once in the cart, the rest follows.
The smallest breach in the feeling of awe and reverence will soon lead
to more complete profanation. There is nothing more delicate than the
sense of awe. Trifled with ever so little, it speedily disappears.
There is far too little of it in our modern religion. Perfect love
casts out fear and deepens awe which hath not torment.

Was not the punishment in excess of the sin? We must remember the
times, the long neglect of the ark, the decay of religion in Saul's
reign, the critical character of the moment as the beginning of a new
era, when it was all-important to print deep the impression of
sanctity, and the rude material which had to be dealt with; and we must
not forget that God, in His punishments, does not adopt men's ideas of
death as such a very dreadful thing. Many since have followed in
David's wake, and been 'displeased, because the Lord broke forth upon
Uzzah'; but he and they have been wrong. He ought to have known better,
and to have understood the lesson of the solemn corpse that lay there
by the ark; instead of which he gives way to mere terror, and was
'afraid of the Lord.' David afraid of the Lord! What had become of the
rapturous love and strong trust which ring clear through his psalms? Is
this the man who called God his rock and fortress and deliverer, his
buckler and the horn of his salvation and his high tower, and poured
out his soul in burning words, which glow yet through all the centuries
and the darkness of earth? It was ill for David to fall thus below
himself, but well for us that the eclipse of his faith and love should
be recorded, to hearten us, when the like emotions fall asleep in our
souls. His consciousness of impurity was wholesome and sound, but his
cowering before the ark, as if it were the seat of arbitrary anger,
which might flame out destruction for no discernible reason, was a
woful darkening of his loving insight into the heart of God.

III. The last section (verses 10-12) gives us the blessings on the
house of Obed-edom and the glad removal of the ark to Jerusalem.
Obed-edom is called a 'Gittite,' or man of Gath; but he does not appear
to have been a Philistine immigrant, but a native of another Gath, a
Levitical city, and himself a Levite. There is an Obededom in the lists
of David's Levites in Chronicles who is probably the same man. He did
not fear to receive the ark, and, worthily received, the presence which
had been a source of disaster and death to idolaters, to profanely
curious pryers into its secret, and to presumptuous irreverence, became
a fountain of unbroken blessing. This twofold effect of the same
presence is but a symbol of a solemn law which runs through all life,
and is especially manifest in the effects of Christ's work upon men.
Everything has two handles, and it depends on ourselves by which of
them we lay hold of it, and whether we shall receive a shock that
kills, or blessings. The same circumstances of poverty, or wealth, or
sorrow, or temptation, make one man better and another worse. The same
presence of God will be to one man a joy; to another, a terror. 'What
maketh heaven, that maketh hell.' The same gospel received is the
fountain of life, purity, peace; and, rejected or neglected, is the
source of harm and death. Jesus Christ is 'set for the fall and rising
again of many.' Either He is the savour of life unto life, the rock on
which we build, or He is the savour of death unto death, the stone on
which we stumble and break our limbs.




THE ARK OF THE HOUSE OF OBED-EDOM

'The ark of the Lord continued in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite
three months; and the Lord blessed Obed-edom, and all his household.'-2
SAMUEL vi.11.


Nearly seventy years had elapsed since the capture of the ark by the
Philistines on the fatal field of Aphek. They had carried it and set it
in insolent triumph in the Temple of Dagon, as if to proclaim that the
Jehovah of Israel was the conquered prisoner of the Philistine god. But
the morning showed Dagon's stump prone on the threshold. And so the
terrified priests got rid of their dangerous trophy as swiftly as they
could. From one Philistine city to another it passed, and everywhere
its presence was marked by disease and calamity. So at last they
huddled it into some rude cart, leaving the draught-oxen to drag it
whither they would. They made straight for the Judaean hills, and in
the first little village were welcomed by the inhabitants at their
harvest, as they saw them coming across the plain. But again death
attended the Presence, and curiosity, which was profanity, was
punished. So the villagers were as eager to get rid of the ark as they
had been to welcome it, and they passed it on to the little city of
_Kirjath-jearim_,'the city of the woods,' as the name means, or, as we
might say, 'Woodville.' And there it lay, neglected and all but
forgotten, for nearly seventy years. But as soon as David was
established in his newly-won capital he set himself to reorganise the
national worship, which had fallen into neglect and almost into disuse.
The first step was to bring the ark. And so he passed with a joyful
company to _Kirjath._ But again swift death overtakes Uzzah with his
irreverent hand. And David shrinks, in the consciousness of his
impurity, and bestows the symbol of the awful Presence in the house of
Obed-edom. As we have already noted, he was probably not a Philistine,
as the name 'Gittite' at first sight suggests. There is an Obed-edom in
the lists of David's Levites, who was an inhabitant of another Gath,
and himself of the tribe of Levi.

He was not afraid to receive the ark. There were no idols, no
irreverent curiosity, no rash presumption in his house. He feared and
served the God of the ark, and so the Presence, which had been a source
of disaster to the unworthy, was a source of unbroken blessing to him
and to his household.

I have been the more particular in this enumeration of the wanderings
of the ark and the opposite effects which its presence produced
according to the manner of its reception, because these effects are
symbols of a great truth which runs all through human life, and is most
especially manifested in the message and the mission of Jesus Christ.

Let us, then, just trace out two or three of the spheres in which we
may see the application of this great principle, which makes life so
solemn and so awful, which may make it so sad or so glad, so base or so
noble.

I. First, then, note the twofold operation of all God's outward
dealings.

Everything that befalls us, every object with which we come in contact,
all the variety of condition, all the variations of our experience,
have one distinct and specific purpose. They are all meant to tell upon
character, to make us better in sundry ways, to bring us closer to God,
and to fill us more full of Him. And that one effect may be produced by
the most opposite incidents, just as in some great machine you may have
two wheels turning in opposite ways, and yet contributing to one
resulting motion; or, just as the summer and the winter, with all their
antitheses, have a single result in the abundant harvest. One force
attracts the planet to the sun, one force tends to drive it out into
the fields of space; but the two, working together, make it circle in
its orbit around its centre. And so, by sorrow and by joy, by light and
by dark, by giving and withholding, by granting and refusing, by all
the varieties of our circumstances, and by everything that lies around
us, God works to prepare us for Himself and to polish His instruments,
sometimes plunging the iron into 'baths of hissing tears,' and
sometimes heating it 'hot with hopes and fears,' and sometimes
'battering' it 'with the shocks of doom,' but all for the one
purpose--that it may be a polished shaft in His quiver.

And whilst, thus, the most opposite things may produce the same effect,
the same thing will produce opposite effects according to the way in
which we take it. There is nothing that can be relied upon to do a man
only good; there is nothing about which we need fear that its mission
is only to do evil. For all depends on the recipient, who can make
everything to fulfil the purpose for which God has sent him everything.

Here are two men tried by the same poverty. It beats the one down,
makes him squalid, querulous, faithless, irreligious, drives him to
drink, crushes him; and the other man it steadies and quiets and
hardens, and teaches him to look beyond the things seen and temporal to
the exceeding riches at God's right hand.

Here are two men tried by wealth; the gold gets into the one man's
veins and makes him yellow as with jaundice, and kills him, destroying
all that is noble, generous, impulsive, quenching his early dreams and
enthusiasms, closing his heart to sweet charity, puffing him up with a
false sense of Importance, and laying upon him the dreadful
responsibility of misused and selfishly employed possessions. And the
other man, tried in the same fashion, out of his wealth makes for
himself friends that welcome him into everlasting habitations, and lays
up for himself treasures in heaven. The one man is damned and the other
man is saved by their use of the same thing.

Here are two men subjected to the same sorrows; the one is absorbed by
his selfish regard to his own misery, blinded to all the blessings that
still remain, made negligent of tasks and oblivious of the plainest
duty. And he goes about saying, 'Oh, if thou hadst been here!' or if,
if something else had happened, then this would not have happened. And
the other man, passing through the same circumstances, finds that, when
his props are taken away, he flings himself on God's breast, and, when
the world becomes dark and all the paths dim about him, he looks up to
a heaven that fills fuller of meek and swiftly gathering stars as the
night falls, and he says, 'It is the Lord; let Him do what seemeth Him
good.'

Here are two men tried by the same temptation; it leads the one man
away captive 'with a dart through his liver'; the other man by God's
grace overcomes it, and is the stronger and the sweeter and the gentler
and the humbler because of the dreadful fight. And so you might go the
whole round of diverse circumstances, and about each of them find the
same double result. Nothing is sure to do a man good; nothing
necessarily does him hurt. All depends upon the man himself, and the
use he makes of what God in His mercy sends. Two plants may grow in the
same soil, be fed by the same dews and benediction from the heavens, be
shone upon by the same sunshine, and the one of them will elaborate
from all, sweet juices and fragrance, and the other will elaborate a
deadly poison. So, my brother, life is what you and I will to make it,
and the events which befall us are for our rising or our falling
according as we determine they shall be, and according as we use them.

Think, then, how solemn, how awful, how great a thing it is to stand
here a free agent, able to determine my character and my condition,
surrounded by all these circumstances and the subject of all these wise
and manifold divine dealings, in each of which there lie dormant, to be
evoked by me, tremendous possibilities of elevation even to the very
presence of God, or of sinking into the depths of separation from Him.
The ark of God, that overthrew Dagon and smote Uzzah, was nothing but a
fountain of blessing in the household of Obed-edom.

II. Secondly, note the twofold operation of God's character and
presence.

The ark was the symbol of a present God, and His presence is meant to
be the life and joy of all creatures, and the revelation of Him is
meant to be only for our good, giving strength, righteousness, and
peace. But the same double possibility which I have been pointing out
as inherent in all externals belongs here too, and a man can determine
to which aspect of the many-sided infinitude of the divine nature he
shall stand in relation. The glass in stained windows is so coloured as
that parts of it cut off, and prevent from passing through, different
rays of the pure white light. And men's moral natures, the inclination
of their hearts, and the set of their wills and energies, cut off, if I
may say so, parts of the infinite, white light of the many-sided divine
character, and put them into relations only with some part and aspect
of that great whole which we call God. The man that loves the world,
the man that is living for self, still more the man that is embruted in
the pig-sty of sensuality and vice, cannot see the God whom the pure
heart, which loves Him and is purified by its faith, discerns at the
centre of all things. But the lower man sees either some very far-off
Awfulness, in which he hopes vaguely that there is a kind of good
nature that will let him off; or, if he has been shaken out of that
superficial creed, which is only a creed for men whose consciences have
not been touched, then he can see only a God whose love darkens into
retribution, and who is the Judge and the Avenger. And no man can say
that such a conception is not part of the truth; but, alas! he on whom
the form of such a God glares has incapacitated himself, by his misuse
of his powers and of God's world, from seeing the beauty of the love of
the Father of us all, the righteous Father who in Christ loves every
man.

And thus the thought of God, the consciousness of His Presence, may be
like the ark which was its symbol, either dreadful and to be put away,
or to be welcomed and blessing to be drawn from it. To many of us I am
sure--though I do not know anything about many of you--that thought,'
Thou God seest me,' breeds feelings like the uneasy discomfort of a
prisoner when he knows that somewhere in the wall there is a spy-hole
at which at any moment a warder's eye may be. And to some of us,
blessed be His name, that same thought, 'Thou art near me,' seems to
bathe the heart in a sea of sweet rest, and to bring the assurance of a
divine Companion that cheers all the solitude. And why is the
difference? There are two people sitting in one pew; to the one man the
thought of God is his ghastliest doubt, to the other it is his deepest
joy. Wherefore? And which is it to me?

Then, again, this same duality of aspect attaches to the character and
presence of God in another way. Because, according to the variety of
men's characters, God is obliged to treat them as standing in different
relations. He must manifest His judgment, His justice, His punitive
justice. There is a solemn verse in one of the Psalms which I may quote
in lieu of all words of my own of this matter. 'With the merciful Thou
wilt show Thyself merciful, with the pure Thou wilt show Thyself pure,
with the froward Thou wilt show Thyself froward.' The present God has
to modify His dealings according to the characters of men.

And so, dear friends, for the present life, and, as I believe, for the
next life in a far more emphatic and awful way, the same thing makes
blessedness and misery, the same thing makes life and death. The
sunshine will kill and wither the slimy plants that grow in the dark
recesses of some dripping cave; and if you take a fish out of the
water, the air clogs its gills and it dies. Bring a man, such as some
of you are, into a close, constant contact with the consciousness of
the divine righteousness and presence, and you want nothing else to
make a hell. The ark of the Lord will flash out its lightnings and
Uzzah will die. That great Infinite Being, before whom we stand, holds
in His right hand blessings beyond count or price, even the gift of
Himself, and in His left His lightnings and His arrows. On which hand
are you standing?

III. Lastly, note the twofold operation of God's gospel.

His dealings, His character and presence, and, most markedly and
eminently of all, the gospel that is treasured in Jesus Christ and
proclaimed amongst us, have this twofold operation. God sent His Son to
be the Saviour of the world. It was meant that His mission and message
should only be for life, and that with ever-increasing abundance. But
God cannot save men by magic, nor by indiscriminate bestowment of
spiritual blessings. It is not in His power to force His salvation upon
any one, and whether the Gospel shall turn out to be a man's salvation
or his ruin depends on the man himself. The preaching of the gospel and
your contact with it, if you have ever come into contact with it really
