they astonished simple people, and gained power over them, and set
up for wise men and teachers to their own profit and glory,
pampering their own luxury and self-conceit.  And all St. Paul gave
them, seemed to them mere foolishness.  He could have argued with
these Greeks on those deep matters; for he was a great scholar, and
a true philosopher, and could speak wisdom among those who were
perfect:  but he would not.  He determined to know nothing among
them but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and he told them, You
disputers of this world, while you are deceiving simple souls with
enticing words of man's wisdom and philosophy, falsely so called,
you are trifling away your own souls and your hearers' into hell.
What you need, and what they need, is not philosophy, but a new
heart and a right spirit.  Sin is your disease; and you know that it
is so, in the depth of your hearts.  Then know this, that God so
loved you, sinners as you are, that he condescended to become mortal
man, and to give himself up to death, even the shameful and horrible
death of the cross, that he might save you from your sins; and he
that would be saved now, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow him.  And to that, those proud Greeks answered,--That is
a tale unworthy of philosophers.  The Cross?  It is a death of
shame--the death of slaves and wretches.  Tell your tale to slaves,
not to us.  To give himself up to the death of the cross is
foolishness, and not the wisdom which we want.  Then answered St.
Paul and said,--True.  The cross is a slave's and a wretch's death;
and therefore slaves and wretches will hear me, though you will not.
'For you see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called:  but
God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and
things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which
are not, to bring to nought things that are:  that no flesh should
glory in his presence.'  For the foolishness of God is wiser than
all the wisdom of men.  You Greeks, with all your philosophy and
your wisdom, have been trying, for hundreds of years, to find out
the laws of heaven and earth, and to set the world right by them;
and you have not done it.  You have not found out the secrets of the
world.  You have not set the world right.  You have not even set
your own hearts and lives right.  But what your seeming wisdom
cannot do, the seeming foolishness of Christ on his cross will do.
Does it seem to you foolish of him, to believe that he could save
the world, by giving himself up to a horrible and shameful death?
Does it seem to you foolishness in me, to preach nothing but him
crucified, and to say, Behold God dying for men?  Then know, that
what seems to you foolishness, is the very wisdom of God.  That God
knows the secret of touching, convincing, and converting the hearts
of men, though you do not.  That God knows how the world is made,
and how to set it right, though you do not.  That God knows the law
which keeps all heaven and earth in order, though you do not; and
that that law is charity,--self-sacrificing love, which shines out
from the cross of Christ.  Know, that when all your arguments and
philosophies have failed to teach men what they ought to do, one
earnest penitent look at Christ upon his cross will teach them.
That their hearts will leap up in answer, and cry, If this be God, I
can believe in him.  If this be God, I can trust him.  If this be
God, I can obey him.  That one look at Christ upon his cross will
make them--what you could never make them--new men, filled with a
new thought; the thought that God is love, and that he who dwelleth
in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him; and that the poor slaves
and wretches, whom you despise, will look unto the cross and be
saved, and become new men, and lead new lives, and rise to be saints
and martyrs to God and to his Christ, giving themselves up to
torments and death, as Christ did before them; and that out of them
shall spring that church of Christ, which shall reign over all the
world, when you and your philosophies have crumbled into dust.

My friends, let us look, earnestly, humbly, and solemnly this day,
at Christ upon his cross.  Let us learn that love, the utter self-
sacrificing love which Christ shewed on his cross, is stronger than
all pomp and might, all armies, riches, governments; aye, that it is
the very power of God, by which all things consist, which holds
together heaven and earth and all that is therein.

Let us learn that love, the utter self-sacrificing love which Christ
shewed on his cross, is wiser than all arguments, doctrines,
philosophies, whether they be true or false; aye, that it is the
very wisdom of God, by which he convinces and converts all hearts
and souls; and let us look to the cross, and see there the wisdom of
God, and the power of God, mighty to save to the uttermost all who
come through Christ to him.

And let us remember this, that whenever we fancy ourselves to be
strong and powerful, and think to aggrandize ourselves at our
neighbour's expense, and to crush those who are weaker than
ourselves, then we are forgetting the lesson of Good Friday; that
whenever we fancy that the way to be wise is, to use our wit and our
knowledge for our own glory, and by them to manage our fellow-men,
and make them admire us and bow down to us, then we forget the
lesson of Good Friday.  For whosoever gives himself up to selfish
ambition, or to selfish cunning, charges Christ upon his cross with
weakness and with foolishness, and denies the Lord who bought him
with his blood.

My friends, I have no more to say.  Much more I might say.  For Good
Friday has many other meanings, and all the sermons of a lifetime
would not exhaust them all.

But one thing seemed to me fit to be said, and I say it again, and
entreat you to carry it home with you, and live by the light of it
all the year round.

Do you wish to be powerful?  Then look at Christ upon his cross; at
what seems to men his weakness; and learn from him how to be strong.
Do you wish to be wise?  Then look at Christ upon the cross; and at
what seemed to men his folly; and learn from him how to be wise.
For sooner or later, I hope and trust, you will find that true,
which St. Buonaventura (wise and strong himself) used to say,--That
all the learning in the world had never taught him so much as the
sight of Christ upon the cross.



SERMON XXXV. THE ETERNAL MANHOOD



(First Sunday after Easter.)

John xx. 29.  Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen
me, thou hast believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet
have believed.

The eighth day after the Lord Jesus rose from the dead, he appeared
a second time to his disciples.  On this day he strengthened St.
Thomas's weak faith, by giving him proof, sensible proof, that he
was indeed and really the very same person who had been crucified,
wearing the very same human nature, the very same man's body.

'Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed.'  You
have not seen.  You have never beheld with your bodily eyes, or
touched with your bodily hand, as St. Thomas did, the Lord Jesus
Christ.  And yet you may be more blessed now, this day, than St.
Thomas was then.  We are too apt to fancy, that, to have seen the
Lord with our eyes, to have walked with him, and talked with him, as
the apostles did, was the greatest honour and blessing which could
happen to man.  We fancy, perhaps, at times, that if the Lord Jesus
were to come visibly among us now, we should want nothing more to
make us good:  that we could not help listening to him, obeying him,
loving him.

But the Scriptures prove to us that it was not so.  The Scribes and
Pharisees saw him and talked with him; yet they hated him.  Judas
Iscariot, yet he betrayed him.  Pilate, yet he condemned him.  The
word preached profited them nothing, not being mixed with faith in
those who heard him.  Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, came and
preached himself to them; declared to them who he was, proved who he
was by his mighty works of love and mercy, and by fulfilling all the
prophecies of Scripture which spoke of him; and yet they did not
believe him, they hated him, they crucified him; because they had no
faith.

You see, therefore, that something more than seeing him with our
bodily eyes is wanted to make us believe in the Lord Jesus Christ;
something more than seeing him with our bodily eyes is wanted to
make us blessed.  St. Thomas saw him; St. Thomas was allowed, by the
boundless condescension and mercy of the Lord Jesus, to put his hand
into his side.  And yet the Lord does not say to him,--See how
blessed thou art; see how honoured thou art, by being allowed to
touch me.  No; our Lord rather rebukes him for requiring such a
proof.

There are those who will not believe without seeing; who say, I must
have proof.  What I hear in church is too much for me to believe
without many more reasons than are given for it all.  Many people,
for instance, stumble at the stumbling-block of the cross, and
cannot bring themselves to believe that God would condescend to
suffer and to die for men.  Others cannot make up their minds about
the resurrection.  It seems to them a strange and impossible thing
that Jesus' body should have risen from the grave and ascended to
heaven, and that our bodies should rise also.  That was the great
puzzle to the Greeks, who thought themselves very learned and
cunning, and were great arguers and disputers about all deep matters
in heaven and earth.  When St. Paul preached to them on Mars' Hill,
they heard him patiently enough, till he spoke of Jesus rising from
the dead; and then they mocked; laughed at the notion as absurd.
And we find that the Corinthians, even after they were converted and
baptised Christians, were puzzled about this same matter.  They
could not understand how the dead were raised, and with what body
they would come.

With such the Lord is not angry.  If they really wish to know what
is true, and to do what is right; if they really are, as St. Paul
says, 'feeling after the Lord, if haply they may find him;' then the
Lord will give them light in due time, and shew them what they ought
to believe, and give them the sort of proof which they want.  All
such he treats as he did Thomas, when he said, in his great
condescension, 'Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not
faithless but believing.'

So the Lord sent to those Corinthians the very sort of proof which
they wanted, by the hand of the learned apostle, St. Paul.  They
were great observers of the works of nature, of the strange movement
and change, birth and death, which goes on in beasts, and in plants,
and in the clouds, and the rivers, and the very stones under our
feet.  And they said, We cannot believe in the resurrection of the
dead, because we see nothing like it in the world around us.  And
St. Paul was sent to tell them.  No:  you do see something like it.
If you will look deeper into the working of the world around you,
you will see that the rising again of the dead, instead of being an
unnatural or an absurd thing, is the most reasonable and natural
thing, the perfect fulfilment, and crowning wonder of wonderful laws
which are working round you in every seed which you sow; in the
flesh of beasts and fishes; in bodies celestial and bodies
terrestrial:  and so in that glorious chapter which we read in the
Burial Service, St. Paul tells the Corinthians, who went altogether
by sense, and reasoning about the things which they could see and
handle, that sense and reasoning were on his side, on God's side;
and that the mysteries of faith, like the resurrection of the body,
were not contrary to reason, but agreed with it.

So does the Lord clear up the doubts of his people, in the way which
is best for them.  But he does not call them as blessed as others.
There is a higher faith than that.  There is a better part.  The
same part which Mary chose.  The same faith of which our Lord says,--
'Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed.'  The
faith of the heart; the childlike, undoubting, ready, willing faith,
which welcomes the news of the Lord; which runs to meet it, and is
not astonished at it; and, if it ever doubts for a moment, only
doubts for very joy and delight; and feeling that the news of the
gospel is good news, cannot help feeling now and then that it is too
good news to be true; shewing its love and its faith in its very
hesitation.  This is the childlike heart, whereof it is written,
'Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall in
no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven.'

The hearts of little children; the hearts which begin by faith and
love toward God himself; the hearts which know God; the hearts to
whom God has revealed himself, and taught them, they know not how,
that he is love.  They are so sure of God's goodness, so sure of his
power, so sure of his love, his willingness to have mercy, and to
deliver poor creatures, that they find nothing strange, nothing
difficult, in the mysteries of faith.  To them it is not a thing
incredible, that God should have come down and died upon the cross.
When they hear the good news of him who gave his own life for them,
it seems a natural thing to them, a reasonable thing:  not of course
a thing which they could have expected; but yet not a thing to doubt
of or to be astonished at.  For they know that God is love.

And now some of you may say, 'Then are we more blessed than Thomas?
We have not seen, and yet we have believed.  We never doubted.  We
never wanted any arguments, or learned books, or special inward
assurances.  From the moment that we began to learn our catechisms
at school we believed it, of course, every word of it.  Do we not
say the Creed every Sunday; I believe in--and so forth?'  O my
friends, do you believe indeed?  If you do, blessed are you.  But
are you sure that you speak truth?

You may believe it.  But do you believe in it?  Have you faith in
it?  Do you put your trust in it?  Is your heart in it?  Is it in
your heart?  Do you love it, rejoice in it, delight to think over
it; to look forward to it, to make yourselves ready and fit for it.
Do you believe in it, in short, or do you only believe it, as you
believe that there is an Emperor of China, or that there is a
country called America, or any other matter with which you have
nothing to do, for which you care nothing, and which would make no
difference at all to you, if you found out to-morrow that it was not
so.  That is mere dead belief; faith without works, which is dead,
the belief of the brains, not the faith of the heart and spirit.

Oh, do you really believe the good news of this text, in which the
Son of God himself said to mortal men like ourselves, 'Handle me and
see that it is I, indeed; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as
ye see me have.'  Do you believe that there is a Man evermore on the
right hand of God?  That now as we speak a man is offering up before
the Father his perfect and all-cleansing sacrifice?  That, in the
midst of the throne of God, is he himself who was born of the Virgin
Mary, and crucified under Pontius Pilate?  Do you wish to find out
whether you believe that or not?  Then look at your own hearts.
Look at your own prayers.  Do you think of the Lord Jesus Christ, do
you pray to the Lord Jesus Christ, as a man, very man, born of
woman?  Do you pray to him as to one who can be touched with the
feeling of your infirmities, because he has been tempted in all
things like as you are, yet without sin?  When you are sad,
perplexed, do you take all your sorrows and doubts and troubles to
the Lord Jesus, and speak them all out to him honestly and frankly,
however reverently, as a man speaketh to his friend?  Do you really
cast all your care on him, because you believe that he careth for
you?  If you do, then indeed you believe in the resurrection of the
Lord Jesus Christ; and you will surely have your reward in a peace
of mind, amid all the chances and changes of this mortal life, which
passes man's understanding.  That blessed knowledge that the Lord
knows all, cares for all, condescends to all--That thought of a
loving human face smiling upon your joys, sorrowing over your
sorrows, watching you, educating you from youth to manhood, from
manhood to the grave, from the grave to eternities of eternities--
Whosoever has felt that, has indeed found the pearl of great price,
for which, if need be, he would give up all else in earth or heaven.

Or do you say to yourselves at times, I must not think too much
about the Lord Jesus's being man, lest I should forget that he is
God?  Do you shrink from opening your heart to him?  Do you say
within yourself, He is too great, too awful, to condescend to listen
to my little mean troubles and anxieties?  Besides, how can I expect
him to feel for them; I, a mean, sinful man, and he the Almighty
God?  How do I know that he will not despise my meanness and
paltriness?  How do I know that he will not be angry with me?  I
must be more reverent to him, than to trouble him with very petty
matters.  He was a man once when he was upon earth:  but now that he
is ascended up on high, Very God of Very God, in the glory which he
had with the Father before the worlds were made, I must have more
awful and solemn thoughts about him, and keep at a more humble
distance from him.

Do you ever have such thoughts as those come over you, my friends,
when you are thinking of the Lord Jesus, and praying to him?  If you
do, shall I tell you what to say to them when they arise in your
minds, 'Get thee behind me, Satan.'  Get thee away, thou accusing
devil, who art accusing my Lord to me, and trying to make me fancy
him less loving, less condescending, less tender, less
understanding, than he was when he wept over the grave of Lazarus.
Get thee away, thou lying hypocritical devil, who pretendest to be
so very humble and reverent to the godhead of the Lord Jesus, in
order that thou mayest make me forget what his godhead is like,
forget what God's likeness is, forget that it was in his manhood, in
his man's words, his man's thoughts, his man's actions, that he
shewed forth the glory of God, the express image of his person, and
fulfilled the blessed words, 'And God said, Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness.'  Get thee behind me, Satan.  I believe
in the good news of Easter Day, and thou shall not rob me of it.  I
believe that he who died upon the Cross, rose again the third day,
as very and perfect man then and now, as he was when he bled and
groaned on Calvary, and shuddered at the fear of death, in the
garden of Gethsemane.  Thou shalt not make my Lord's incarnation,
his birth, his passion, his resurrection, all that he did and
suffered in those thirty-three years, of none effect to me.  Thou
shalt not take from me the blessed message of my Bible, that there
is a man in heaven in the midst of the throne of God.  Thou shalt
not take from me the blessed message of the Athanasian Creed, that
in Christ the manhood is taken into God.  Thou shalt not take from
me the blessed message of Holy Communion, which declares that the
very human flesh and blood of him who died on the Cross is now
eternal in the heavens, and nourishes my body and soul to
everlasting life.  Thou shalt not, under pretence of voluntary
humility and will-worship, tempt me to go and pray to angels or to
saints, or to the Blessed Virgin, because I choose to fancy them
more tender, more loving and condescending, more loving, more human,
than the Lord himself, who gave himself to death for me.  If the
Lord God, the Son of the Father, is not ashamed to be man for ever
and ever, I will not be ashamed to think of him as man; to pray to
him as man; to believe and be sure that he can be touched with the
feeling of my infirmities; to entreat him, by all that he did and
suffered as a man, to deliver me from those temptations which he
himself has conquered for himself; and to cry to him in the
smallest, as well as in the most important matters--'By the mystery
of thy holy incarnation; by thine agony and bloody sweat; by thy
cross and passion; by thy precious death and burial; by thy glorious
resurrection and ascension;' by all which thou hast done, and
suffered, and conquered, as a man upon this earth of ours, good
Lord, deliver us!



SERMON XXXVI.  THE BATTLE WITHIN



(Fourteenth Sunday after Trinity, 1858.)

Galatians, v. 16, 17.  This I say then, Walk in the spirit, and ye
shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.  For the flesh lusteth
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh:  and these are
contrary the one to the other:  so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would.

Does this text seem to any of you difficult to understand?  It need
not be difficult to you; for it does not speak of anything which you
do not know.  It speaks of something which you have all felt, which
goes on in you every day of your lives.  It speaks of something,
certainly, which is very curious, mysterious, difficult to put into
words:  but what is not curious and mysterious?  The commonest
things are usually the most curious?  What is more wonderful than
the beating of your heart; your pulse which beats all day long,
without your thinking of it?

Just so this battle, this struggle, which St. Paul speaks of in this
text, is going on in us all day long, and yet we hardly think of it.
Now what is this battle?  What are these things which are fighting
continually in your mind and in mine?  St. Paul calls them the flesh
and the spirit.  'The flesh,' he says, 'lusts against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh.'  They pull opposite ways.  One
wants to do one thing, and the other the other.  But if so, one of
them must be in the right, and the other in the wrong.  Now, St.
Paul says, when these two fall out with each other, the spirit is in
the right, and the flesh in the wrong.  And therefore, the secret of
life is, to walk in the spirit, and so not to fulfil the lusts of
the flesh.

But if so, it must be worth our while to find out which is flesh,
and which is spirit in us, that we may know the foolish part of us
from the wise.  What the flesh is, we may see by looking at a dumb
beast, which is all flesh, and has no immortal soul.  It may be very
cunning, brave, curiously formed, beautiful, but one thing you will
always see, that a beast does what it likes, and only what it likes.
And this is the mark of the flesh, that it does what it likes.  It
is selfish, and self-indulgent, cares for nothing but itself, and
what it can get for itself.

True, you may raise a dumb beast above that, by taming and training
it.  You may teach a horse or dog to do what it does _not_ like, and
give it a sense of duty, and as it were awaken a soul in it.  That
is very wonderful, that we should be able to do so.  It is a sign
that man is made in God's likeness.  But I cannot stay to speak of
that now.  I say our flesh, our animal nature, is selfish and self-
indulgent.  I do not say, therefore, that it is bad:  God forbid.
God made our bodies and brains, as well as our souls; and God makes
nothing bad.  It is blasphemous to say that he does.  No, our bodies
as bodies are good; the flesh as flesh is good, when it is in its
right place; and its right place is to be servant, not master.  We
are not to walk after the flesh, says St. Paul:  but the flesh is to
walk after the spirit--in English, our bodies are to obey our
spirits, our souls.  For man has something higher than body in him.
He has a spirit in him; and it is just having this spirit which
makes him a man.  For this spirit cares about higher things than
mere gain and comfort.  It can feel pity and mercy, love and
generosity, justice and honour; and when a man not only feels them,
but obeys them, then he is a true man--a Christian man:  but, on the
other hand, if a man does not; if he be a man in whom there is no
mercy or pity, no generosity, no benevolence, no justice or honour;
who cares for nothing and no one but himself, and filling his own
stomach and his own pulse, and pleasing his own brute appetites in
some way, what should you say of that man?  You would say, he is
like a brute beast--and you would say right--you would say just what
St. Paul says.  St. Paul would say, that man is fulfilling the lusts
of the flesh; and you and St. Paul would mean just the same thing.
Now, St. Paul says, 'The flesh in us lusts against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh.'  And what do we gain by the spirit in
us lusting against the flesh, and pulling us the opposite way?  We
gain this, St. Paul says, 'that we cannot do the things that we
would.'

Does that seem no great gain to you?  Let me put it a little
plainer.  St. Paul means this, and just this, that you may not do
whatever you like.  St. Paul thought it the very best thing for a
man not to be able to do whatever he liked.  As long, St. Paul says,
as a man does whatever he likes, he lives according to the flesh,
and is no better than a dumb beast:  but as soon as he begins to
live according to the spirit, and does not do whatever he likes, but
