titles of distinction: do thou listen to them: Thou art devoted to
_Brahma_, begotten of Brahma, and versed in the mysteries of _Brahma_.
Thou art called _Brahmasaya_, and thou art the foremost of those who are
possessed of _Brahma_. Thou art fond of _Brahma_, thou art austere like
the Brahmanas and art versed in the great mystery of _Brahma_ and the
leader of the Brahmanas. Thou art _Swaha_, thou art _Swadha_, and thou
art the holiest of the holy, and art invoked in hymns and celebrated as
the six-flamed fire. Thou art the year, thou art the six seasons, thou
art the months, the (lunar) half months, the (solar) declinations, and
the cardinal points of space. Thou art lotus-eyed. Thou art possessed of
a lily-like face. Thou hast a thousand faces and a thousand arms. Thou
art the ruler of the universe, thou art the great Oblation, and thou art
the animating spirit of all the gods and the _Asuras_. Thou art the
great leader of armies. Thou art _Prachanda_ (furious), thou art the
Lord, and thou art the great master and the conqueror of thine enemies.
Thou art _Sahasrabhu_ (multiform), _Sahasratusti_ (a thousand times
content), _Sahasrabhuk_ (devourer of everything), and _Sahasrapad_ (of a
thousand legs), and thou art the earth itself. Thou art possessed of
infinite forms and thousand heads and great strength. According to thine
own inclinations thou hast appeared as the son of Ganga, Swaha, Mahi, or
Krittika. O six-faced god, thou dost play with the cock and assume
different forms according to thy will. Thou art Daksha, Soma, the
Maruta, Dharma, Vayu, the prince of mountains, and Indra, for all time.
Thou art mighty, the most eternal of all eternal things, and the lord of
all lords. Thou art the progenitor of Truth, the destroyer of Diti's
progeny (_Asuras_), and the great conqueror of the enemies of the
celestials. Thou art the personation of virtue and being thyself vast
and minute, thou art acquainted with the highest and lowest points of
virtuous acts, and the mysteries of _Brahma_. O foremost of all gods and
high-souled lord of the Universe, this whole creation is over-spread
with thy energy! I have thus prayed to thee according to the best of my
power. I salute thee who art possessed of twelve eyes and many hands.
Thy remaining attributes transcend my powers of comprehension!'

"'The Brahmana who with due attention readeth this story of the birth of
Skanda, or relateth it unto Brahmanas, or hears it narrated by
regenerate men, attaineth to wealth, long life, fame, children, as also
victory, prosperity and contentment, and the companionship of Skanda.'"


SECTION CCXXXI

(_Draupadi-Satyabhama Samvada_)

Vaisampayana said, "After those Brahmanas and the illustrious sons of
Pandu had taken their seats, Draupadi and Satyabhama entered the
hermitage. And with hearts full of joy the two ladies laughed merrily
and seated themselves at their ease. And, O king, those ladies, who
always spake sweetly to each other, having met after a long time, began
to talk upon various delightful topics arising out of the stories of the
Kurus and the Yadus. And the slender-waisted Satyabhama, the favourite
wife of Krishna and the daughter of Satrajit, then asked Draupadi in
private, saying, 'By what behaviour is it, O daughter of Drupada, that
thou art able to rule the sons of Pandu--those heroes endued with
strength and beauty and like unto the _Lokapalas_ themselves? Beautiful
lady, how is it that they are so obedient to thee and are never angry
with thee? Without doubt the sons of Pandu, O thou of lovely features,
are ever submissive to thee and watchful to do thy bidding! Tell me, O
lady, the reason of this. Is it practice of vows, or asceticism, or
incantation or drug at the time of the bath (in season) or the efficacy
of science, or the influence of youthful appearance, or the recitation
of particular formulae, or _Homa_, or collyrium and other medicaments?
Tell me now, O princess of Panchala, of that blessed and auspicious
thing by which, O Krishna, Krishna may ever be obedient to me.'

"When the celebrated Satyabhama, having said this, ceased, the chaste
and blessed daughter of Drupada answered her, saying, 'Thou askedest me,
O Satyabhama, of the practices of women that are wicked. How can I
answer thee, O lady, about the cause that is pursued by wicked females?
It doth not become thee, lady, to pursue the questions, or doubt me,
after this, for thou art endued with intelligence and art the favourite
wife of Krishna. When the husband learns that his wife is addicted to
incantations and drugs, from that hour he beginneth to dread her like a
serpent ensconced in his sleeping chamber. And can a man that is
troubled with fear have peace, and how can one that hath no peace have
happiness? A husband can never be made obedient by his wife's
incantations. We hear of painful diseases being transmitted by enemies.
Indeed, they that desire to slay others, send poison in the shape of
customary gifts, so that the man that taketh the powders so sent, by
tongue or skin, is, without doubt, speedily deprived of life. Women have
sometimes caused dropsy and leprosy, decrepitude and impotence and
idiocy and blindness and deafness in men. These wicked women, ever
treading in the path of sin, do sometimes (by these means) injure their
husbands. But the wife should never do the least injury to her lord.
Hear now, O illustrious lady, of the behaviour I adopt towards the
high-souled sons of Pandu. Keeping aside vanity, and controlling desire
and wrath, I always serve with devotion the sons of Pandu with their
wives. Restraining jealousy, with deep devotion of heart, without a
sense of degradation at the services I perform, I wait upon my husbands.
Ever fearing to utter what is evil or false, or to look or sit or walk
with impropriety, or cast glances indicative of the feelings of the
heart, do I serve the sons of Pritha--those mighty warriors blazing like
the sun or fire, and handsome as the moon, those endued with fierce
energy and prowess, and capable of slaying their foes by a glance of the
eye. Celestial, or man, or Gandharva, young or decked with ornaments,
wealthy or comely of person, none else my heart liketh. I never bathe or
eat or sleep till he that is my husband hath bathed or eaten or
slept,--till, in fact, our attendants have bathed, eaten, or slept.
Whether returning from the field, the forest, or the town, hastily
rising up I always salute my husband with water and a seat. I always
keep the house and all household articles and the food that is to be
taken well-ordered and clean. Carefully do I keep the rice, and serve
the food at the proper time. I never indulge in angry and fretful
speech, and never imitate women that are wicked. Keeping idleness at
distance I always do what is agreeable. I never laugh except at a jest,
and never stay for any length of time at the house-gate. I never stay
long in places for answering calls of nature, nor in pleasure-gardens
attached to the house. I always refrain from laughing loudly and
indulging in high passion, and from everything that may give offence.
Indeed, O Satyabhama, I always am engaged in waiting upon my lords. A
separation from my lords is never agreeable to me. When my husband
leaveth home for the sake of any relative, then renouncing flowers and
fragrant paste of every kind, I begin to undergo penances. Whatever my
husband drinketh not, whatever my husband eateth not, whatever my
husband enjoyeth not, I ever renounce. O beautiful lady, decked in
ornaments and ever controlled by the instruction imparted to me, I
always devotedly seek the good of my lord. Those duties that my
mother-in-law had told me of in respect of relatives, as also the duties
of alms-giving, of offering worship to the gods, of oblations to the
diseased, of boiling food in pots on auspicious days for offer to
ancestors and guests of reverence and service to those that deserve our
regards, and all else that is known to me, I always discharge day and
night, without idleness of any kind. Having with my whole heart recourse
to humility and approved rules I serve my meek and truthful lords ever
observant of virtue, regarding them as poisonous snakes capable of being
excited at a trifle. I think that to be eternal virtue for women which
is based upon a regard for the husband. The husband is the wife's god,
and he is her refuge. Indeed, there is no other refuge for her. How can,
then, the wife do the least injury to her lord? I never, in sleeping or
eating or adorning any person, act against the wishes of my lord, and
always guided by my husbands, I never speak ill of my mother-in-law. O
blessed lady, my husbands have become obedient to me in consequence of
my diligence, my alacrity, and the humility with which I serve
superiors. Personally do I wait every day with food and drink and
clothes upon the revered and truthful Kunti--that mother of heroes.
Never do I show any preference for myself over her in matters of food
and attire, and never do I reprove in words that princess equal unto the
Earth herself in forgiveness. Formerly, eight thousand Brahmanas were
daily fed in the palace of Yudhishthira from off plates of gold. And
eighty thousand Brahmanas also of the _Snataka_ sect leading domestic
lives were entertained by Yudhishthira with thirty serving-maids
assigned to each. Besides these, ten thousand _yatis_ with the vital
seed drawn up, had their pure food carried unto them in plates of gold.
All these Brahmanas that were the utterers of the _Veda_, I used to
worship duly with food, drink, and raiment taken from stores only after
a portion thereof had been dedicated to the Viswadeva.[42] The
illustrious son of Kunti had a hundred thousand well-dressed
serving-maids with bracelets on arms and golden ornaments on necks, and
decked with costly garlands and wreaths and gold in profusion, and
sprinkled with sandal paste. And adorned with jewels and gold they were
all skilled in singing and dancing. O lady, I knew the names and
features of all those girls, as also what they are and what they were,
and what they did not. Kunti's son of great intelligence had also a
hundred thousand maid-servants who daily used to feed guests, with
plates of gold in their hands. And while Yudhishthira lived in
Indraprastha a hundred thousand horses and a hundred thousand elephants
used to follow in his train. These were the possessions of Yudhishthira
while he ruled the earth. It was I however, O lady, who regulated their
number and framed the rules to be observed in respect of them; and it
was I who had to listen to all complaints about them. Indeed, I knew
everything about what the maid-servants of the palace and other classes
of attendants, even the cow-herds and the shepherds of the royal
establishment, did or did not. O blessed and illustrious lady, it was I
alone amongst the Pandavas who knew the income and expenditure of the
king and what their whole wealth was. And those bulls among the
Bharatas, throwing upon me the burden of looking after all those that
were to be fed by them, would, O thou of handsome face, pay their court
to me. And this load, so heavy and incapable of being borne by persons
of evil heart, I used to bear day and night, sacrificing my ease, and
all the while affectionately devoted to them. And while my husbands were
engaged in the pursuit of virtue, I only supervised their treasury
inexhaustible like the ever-filled receptacle of Varuna. Day and night
bearing hunger and thirst, I used to serve the Kuru princes, so that my
nights and days were equal to me. I used to wake up first and go to bed
last. This, O Satyabhama, hath ever been my charm for making my husbands
obedient to me! This great art hath ever been known to me for making my
husbands obedient to me. Never have I practised the charms of wicked
women, nor do I ever wish to practise them.'"

    [42] The word in the text is "Agrahara," which, as Nilakantha
    explains, means here, "That which is first taken from a heap
    after the dedication of a portion to the Viswadevas." What
    Draupadi means to say is, that she always took care to feed
    those Brahmanas with food "first" taken from the stores,
    without, in fact, having taken anything there from the use of
    anybody else.

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing those words of virtuous import uttered
by Krishna, Satyabhama, having first reverenced the virtuous princess of
Panchala, answered saying, 'O princess of Panchala, I have been guilty,
O daughter of Yajnasena, forgive me! Among friends, conversations in
jest arise naturally, and without premeditation.'"


SECTION CCXXXII

"Draupadi said, 'I shall now indicate to thee, for attracting the heart
of thy husbands a way that is free from deceit. By adopting it duly,
dear friend, thou will be able to draw away thy lord from other females.
In all the worlds, including that of the celestials, there is no god
equal, O Satyabhama, unto the husband. When he is gratified with thee,
thou mayst have (from thy husband) every object of desire; when he is
angry, all these may be lost. It is from her husband that the wife
obtaineth offspring and various articles of enjoyment. It is from thy
husband that thou mayst have handsome beds and seats, and robes and
garlands, and perfumes, and great fame and heaven itself hereafter. One
cannot obtain happiness here by means that are easy. Indeed, the woman
that is chaste, obtains weal with woe. Always adore Krishna, therefore,
with friendship and love physical sufferings. And do thou also act in a
way, by offering handsome seats and excellent garlands and various
perfumes and prompt service, that he may be devoted to thee, thinking,
"_I am truly loved by her!_" Hearing the voice of thy lord at the gate,
rise thou up from thy seat and stay in readiness within the room. And as
soon as thou seest him enter thy chamber, worship him by promptly
offering him a seat and water to wash his feet. And even when he
commands a maidservant to do anything, get thou up and do it thyself.
Let Krishna understand this temper of thy mind and know that thou
adorest him with all thy heart. And, O Satyabhama, whatever thy lord
speaketh before thee, do not blab of it even if it may not deserve
concealment,--for if any of thy co-wives were to speak of it unto
Vasudeva, he might be irritated with thee. Feed thou by every means in
thy power those that are dear and devoted to thy lord and always seek
his good. Thou shouldst, however, always keep thyself aloof from those
that are hostile to and against thy lord and seek to do him injury, as
also from those that are addicted to deceit. Foregoing all excitement
and carelessness in the presence of men, conceal thy inclinations by
observing silence, and thou shouldst not stay or converse in private
even with thy sons, Pradyumna and Samva. Thou shouldst form attachments
with only such females as are high-born and sinless and devoted to their
lords, and thou shouldst always shun women that are wrathful, addicted
to drinks, gluttonous, thievish, wicked and fickle. Behaviour such as
this is reputable and productive of prosperity; and while it is capable
of neutralising hostility, it also leadeth to heaven. Therefore, worship
thou thy husband, decking thyself in costly garlands and ornaments and
smearing thyself with unguents and excellent perfumes.'"


SECTION CCXXXIII

Vaisampayana said, "Then Kesava, the slayer of Madhu, also called
Janardana, having conversed on various agreeable themes with the
illustrious sons of Pandu and with those Brahmanas that were headed by
Markandeya and having bid them farewell, mounted his car and called for
Satyabhama. And Satyabhama then, having embraced the daughter of
Drupada, addressed her in these cordial words expressive of her feelings
towards her: 'O Krishna, let there be no anxiety, no grief, for thee!
Thou hast no cause to pass thy nights in sleeplessness, for thou wilt
surely obtain back the earth subjugated by thy husbands, who are all
equal unto the gods. O thou of black eyes, women endued with such
disposition and possessed of such auspicious marks, can never suffer
misfortune long. It hath been heard by me that thou shall, with thy
husbands, certainly enjoy this earth peacefully and freed from all
thorns! And, O daughter of Drupada, thou shalt certainly behold the
earth ruled by Yudhishthira after the sons of Dhritarashtra have been
slain and the deeds of their hostility avenged! Thou wilt soon behold
those wives of the Kurus, who, deprived of sense by pride, laughed at
thee while on thy way to exile, themselves reduced to a state of
helplessness and despair! Know them all, O Krishna, that did thee any
injury while thou wert afflicted, to have already gone to the abode of
Yama. Thy brave sons, Prativindhya by Yudhishthira and Sutasoma by
Bhima, and Srutakarman by Arjuna, and Satanika by Nakula, and Srutasena
begot by Sahadeva, are well and have become skilled in weapons. Like
Abhimanyu they are all staying at Dwaravati, delighted with the place.
And Subhadra also, cheerfully and with her whole soul, looketh after
them like thee, and like thee joyeth in them and deriveth much happiness
from them. Indeed, she grieveth in their griefs and joyeth in their
joys. And the mother of Pradyumna also loveth them with her whole soul.
And Kesava with his sons Bhanu and others watcheth over them with
especial affection. And my mother-in-law is ever attentive in feeding
and clothing them. And the Andhakas and Vrishnis, including Rama and
others, regard them with affection. And, O beautiful lady, their
affection for thy sons is equal unto what they feel for Pradyumna.'

"Having said these agreeable and truthful and cordial words, Satyabhama
desired to go to Vasudeva's car. And the wife of Krishna then walked
round the queen of the Pandavas. And having done so the beautiful
Satyabhama mounted the car of Krishna. And the chief of the Yadavas,
comforting Draupadi with a smile and causing the Pandavas to return, set
out for his own city, with swift horses (yoked unto his car)."


SECTION CCXXXIV

(_Ghosha-yatra Parva_)

Janamejaya said, "While those foremost of men--the sons of Pritha--were
passing their days in the forest exposed to the inclemencies of the
winter, the summer, the wind and the sun, what did they do, O Brahmana,
after they had reached the lake and woods going by the name of Dwaita?"

Vaisampayana said, "After the sons of Pandu had arrived at that lake,
they chose a residence that was removed from the habitations of men. And
they began to roam through delightful woods and ever charming mountains
and picturesque river-valleys. And after they had taken up their
residence there, many venerable ascetics endued with Vedic lore often
came to see them. And those foremost of men always received those
_Veda_-knowing _Rishis_ with great respect. And one day there came unto
the Kaurava princes a certain Brahmana who was well known on earth for
his powers of speech. And having conversed with the Pandavas for a
while, he went away as pleased him to the court of the royal son of
Vichitravirya. Received with respect by that chief of the Kurus, the old
king, the Brahmana took his seat; and asked by the monarch he began to
talk of the sons of Dharma, Pavana, Indra and of the twins, all of whom
having fallen into severe misery, had become emaciated and reduced owing
to exposure to wind and sun. And that Brahmana also talked of Krishna
who was overwhelmed with suffering and who then had become perfectly
helpless, although she had heroes for her lords. And hearing the words
of that Brahmana, the royal son of Vichitravirya became afflicted with
grief, at the thought of those princes of royal lineage then swimming in
a river of sorrow. His inmost soul afflicted with sorrow and trembling
all over with sighs, he quieted himself with a great effort, remembering
that everything had arisen from his own fault. And the monarch said,
'Alas, how is it that Yudhishthira who is the eldest of my sons, who is
truthful and pious and virtuous in his behaviour, who hath not a foe,
who had formerly slept on beds made of soft _Ranku_ skins, sleepeth now
on the bare ground! Alas, wakened formerly by _Sutas_ and _Magadhas_ and
other singers with his praises, melodiously recited every morning, that
prince of the Kuru race, equal unto Indra himself, is now waked from the
bare ground towards the small hours of the night by a multitude of
birds! How doth Vrikodara, reduced by exposure to wind and sun and
filled with wrath, sleep, in the presence of the princess of Panchala,
on the bare ground, unfit as he is to suffer such lot! Perhaps also, the
intelligent Arjuna, who is incapable of bearing pain, and who, though
obedient to the will of Yudhishthira, yet feeleth himself to be pierced
over all by the remembrance of his wrongs, sleepeth not in the night!
Beholding the twins and Krishna and Yudhishthira and Bhima plunged in
misery, Arjuna without doubt, sigheth like a serpent of fierce energy
and sleepeth not from wrath in the night! The twins also, who are even
like a couple of blessed celestials in heaven sunk in woe though
deserving of bliss, without doubt pass their nights in restless
wakefulness restrained (from avenging their wrongs) by virtue and truth!
The mighty son of the Wind-god, who is equal to the Wind-god himself in
strength, without doubt, sigheth and restraineth his wrath, being tied
through his elder brother in the bonds of truth! Superior in battle to
all warriors, he now lieth quiet on the ground, restrained by virtue and
truth, and burning to slay my children, he bideth his time. The cruel
words that Dussasana spoke after Yudhishthira had been deceitfully
defeated at dice, have sunk deep into Vrikodara's heart, and are
consuming him, like a burning bundle of straw consuming a fagot of dry
wood! The son of Dharma never acteth sinfully; Dhananjaya also always
obeyeth him; but Bhima's wrath, in consequence of a life of exile, is
increasing like a conflagration assisted by the wind! That hero, burning
with rage such as that, squeezeth his hands and breatheth hot and fierce
sighs, as if consuming therewith my sons and grandsons! The wielder of
the _Gandiva_ and Vrikodara, when angry, are like Yama and Kala
themselves; scattering their shafts, which are like unto thunder-bolts,
they exterminate in battle the ranks of the enemy. Alas Duryodhana, and
Sakuni, and the _Suta's_ son, and Dussasana also of wicked soul, in
robbing the Pandavas of their kingdom by means of dice, seem to behold
the honey alone without marking the terrible ruin. A man having acted
rightly or wrongly, expecteth the fruit of those acts. The fruit,
however, confounding him, paralyses him fully. How can man, thereof,
have salvation? If the soil is properly tilled, and the seed sown
therein, and if the god (of rain) showereth in season, still the crop
may not grow. This is what we often hear. Indeed, how could this saying
be true unless, as I think, it be that everything here is dependent on
Destiny? The gambler Sakuni hath behaved deceitfully towards the son of
Pandu, who ever acteth honestly. From affection for my wicked sons I
also have acted similarly. Alas, it is owing to this that the hour of
destruction hath come for the Kurus! Oh, perhaps, what is inevitable
must happen! The wind, impelled or not, will move. The woman that
conceives will bring forth. Darkness will be dispelled at dawn, and day
disappear at evening! Whatever may be earned by us or others, whether
people spend it or not, when the time cometh, those possessions of ours
do bring on misery. Why then do people become so anxious about earning
wealth? If, indeed, what is acquired is the result of fate, then should
it be protected so that it may not be divided, nor lost little by
little, nor permitted to flow out at once, for if unprotected, it may
break into a hundred fragments. But whatever the character of our
possessions, our acts in the world are never lost. Behold what the
energy of Arjuna is, who went into the abode of Indra from the woods!
Having mastered the four kinds of celestial weapons he hath come back
into this world! What man is there who, having gone to heaven in his
human form, wisheth to come back? This would never have been but because
he seeth innumerable Kurus to be at the point of death, afflicted by
Time! The bowman is Arjuna, capable of wielding the bow with his left
hand as well! The bow he wieldeth is the _Gandiva_ of fierce impetus. He
hath, besides, those celestial weapons of his! Who is there that would
bear the energy of these three!'

"Hearing these words of the monarch, the son of Suvala, going unto
Duryodhana, who was then sitting with Karna, told them everything in
private. And Duryodhana, though possessed of little sense, was filled
with grief at what he heard."


SECTION CCXXXV

Vaisampayana said, "Hearing those words of Dhritarashtra, Sakuni, when
the opportunity presented itself, aided by Karna, spoke unto Duryodhana
these words, 'Having exiled the heroic Pandavas by thy own prowess, O
Bharata, rule thou this earth without a rival like the slayer of Samvara
ruling the heaven! O monarch, the kings of the east, the south, the
west, and the north, have all been made tributary to thee! O lord of
earth, that blazing Prosperity which had before paid her court to the
sons of Pandu, hath now been acquired by thee along with thy brothers!
That blazing Prosperity, O king, which we not many days ago saw with
heavy hearts in Yudhishthira at Indraprastha, is today seen by us to be
owned by thee, she having, O mighty-armed monarch, been snatched by thee
from the royal Yudhishthira by force of intellect alone. O slayer of
hostile heroes, all the kings of the earth now living in subjection to
thee, await thy commands, as they did before under Yudhishthira,
awaiting his. O monarch, the goddess Earth with her boundless extent
with girth of seas, with her mountains and forests, and towns and cities
and mines, and decked with woodlands and hills is now thine! Adored by
the Brahmanas and worshipped by the kings, thou blazest forth, O king,
in consequence of thy prowess, like the Sun among the gods in heaven!
Surrounded by the Kurus, O king, like Yama by the Rudra, or Vasava by
the Maruts, thou shinest, O monarch, like the Moon among the stars! Let
us, therefore, O king, go and look at the sons of Pandu--them who are
now divested of prosperity, them who never obeyed commands, them who
never owed subjection! It hath been heard by us, O monarch, that the
Pandavas are now living on the banks of the lake called _Dwaitavana_,
with a multitude of Brahmanas, having the wilderness for their home. Go
thither, O king, in all thy prosperity, scorching the son of Pandu with
a sight of thy glory, like the Sun scorching everything with his hot
rays! Thyself a sovereign and they divested of sovereignty, thyself in
prosperity and they divested of it, thyself possessing affluence and
they in poverty, behold now, O king, the sons of Pandu. Let the sons of
Pandu behold thee like Yayati, the son of Nahusha, accompanied by a
large train of followers and enjoying bliss that is great. O king, that
blazing Prosperity which is seen by both one's friends and foes, is
regarded as well-bestowed! What happiness can be more complete than that
which he enjoyeth who while himself in prosperity, looketh upon his foes
in adversity, like a person on the hill top looking down upon another
crawling on the earth? O tiger among kings, the happiness that one
derives from beholding his foes in grief, is greater than what one may
derive from the acquisition of offering or wealth or kingdom! What
happiness will not be his who, himself in affluence, will cast his eyes
on Dhananjaya attired in barks and deer-skins? Let thy wife dressed in
costly robes look at the woeful Krishna clad in barks and deer-skins,
and enhance the latter's grief! Let the daughter of Drupada reproach
herself and her life, divested as she is of wealth, for the sorrow that
she will feel upon beholding thy wife decked in ornaments will be far
greater than what she had felt in the midst of the assembly (when
Dussasana had dragged her there)!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having thus spoken unto the king, Karna and
Sakuni both remained silent, O Janamejaya, after their discourse was
over."


SECTION CCXXXVI

Vaisampayana said, "Having heard these words of Karna, king Duryodhana
became highly pleased. Soon after, however, the prince became melancholy
and addressing the speaker said, 'What thou tellest me, O Karna, is
always before my mind. I shall not, however, obtain permission to repair
to the place where the Pandavas are residing. King Dhritarashtra is
always grieving for those heroes. Indeed, the king regarded the sons of
Pandu to have become more powerful than before in consequence of their
ascetic austerities. Or, if the king understands our motives, he will
never, having regard to the future, grant us permission, for, O thou of
great effulgence, we can have no other business in the woods of
_Dwaitavana_ than the destruction of the Pandavas in exile! Thou knowest
the words that Kshatri spoke to me, to thyself, and to the son of
Suvala, at the time of the match at dice! Reflecting upon all those
words as also upon all those lamentations (that he and others indulged
in), I cannot make up my mind as to whether I should or should not go! I
shall certainly be highly pleased if I cast my eyes on Bhima and
Phalguna passing their days in pain with Krishna in the woods. The joy
that I may feel in obtaining the sovereignty of the entire earth is
nothing to that which will be mine upon beholding the sons of Pandu
attired in barks of trees and deer-skins. What joy can be greater, O
Karna, that will be mine upon beholding the daughter of Drupada dressed
in red rags in the woods? If king Yudhishthira and Bhima, the sons of
Pandu, behold me graced with great affluence, then only shall I have
attained the great end of my life! I do not, however, see the means by
which I may repair to those woods, by which, in fact, I may obtain the
king's permission to go thither! Contrive thou, therefore, some skilful
plan, with Suvala's son and Dussasana, by which we may go to those
woods! I also, making up my mind today as to whether I should go or not,
approach the presence of the king tomorrow. And when I shall be sitting
with Bhishma--that best of the Kurus--thou wilt, with Sakuni propose the
pretext which thou mayst have contrived. Hearing then the words of
Bhishma and of the king on the subject of our journey, I will settle
everything beseeching our grandfather.'

"Saying 'So be it,' they then all went away to their respective
quarters. And as soon as the night had passed away, Karna came to the
king. And coming to him, Karna smilingly spoke unto Duryodhana, saying,
'A plan hath been contrived by me. Listen to it, O lord of men! Our
herds are now waiting in the woods of _Dwaitavana_ in expectation of
thee! Without doubt, we may all go there under the pretext of
supervising our cattle stations, for, O monarch, it is proper that kings
should frequently repair to their cattle stations. If this be the motive
put forth, thy father, O prince, will certainly grant thee permission!'
And while Duryodhana and Karna were thus conversing laughingly, Sakuni
addressed them and said, 'This plan, free from difficulties, was what I
also saw for going thither! The king will certainly grant us permission,
or even send us thither of his own accord. Our herds are now all waiting
in the woods of _Dwaitavana_ expecting thee. Without doubt, we may all
go there under the pretext of supervising our cattle stations!'

"They then all three laughed together, and gave their hands unto one
another. And having arrived at that conclusion, they went to see the
chief of Kurus."


SECTION CCXXXVII

Vaisampayana said, "They then all saw king Dhritarashtra, O Janamejaya,
and having seen him, enquired after his welfare, and were, in return,
asked about their welfare. Then a cow-herd named Samanga, who had been
instructed beforehand by them, approaching the king, spoke unto him of
the cattle. Then the son of Radha and Sakuni, O king, addressing
Dhritarashtra, that foremost of monarchs, said, 'O Kaurava, our
cattle-stations are now in a delightful place. The time for their tale
as also for marking the calves hath come. And, O monarch, this also is
an excellent season for thy son to go ahunting! It behoveth thee,
therefore, to grant permission to Duryodhana to go thither.'

"Dhritarashtra replied, 'The chase of the deer, as also the examination
of cattle is very proper, O child! I think, indeed, that the herdsmen
are not to be trusted. But we have heard that those tigers among men,
the Pandavas, are now staying in the vicinity of those cattle stations.
I think, therefore, ye should not go thither yourselves! Defeated by
deceitful means they are now living in the deep forest in great
suffering. O Radheya, they are mighty warriors and naturally able, they
are now devoted to ascetic austerities. King Yudhishthira will not
suffer his wrath to be awakened, but Bhimasena is naturally passionate.
The daughter of Yajnasena is energy's self. Full of pride and folly, ye
are certain to give offence. Endued with ascetic merit she will
certainly consume you, or perhaps, those heroes, armed with swords and
weapons! Nor, if from force of numbers, ye seek to injure them in any
respect, that will be a highly improper act, although, as I think, ye
will never be able to succeed. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya hath returned
thence to the forest. While unaccomplished in arms, Vivatsu had
subjugated the whole earth before. A mighty warrior as he is and
accomplished in arms now, will he not be able to slay you all? Or, if in
obedience to my words, ye behave carefully having repaired thither, ye
will not be able to live happily there in consequence of the anxiety ye
will feel owing to a state of continued trustlessness. Or, some soldier
of yours may do some injury to Yudhishthira, and that unpremeditated act
will be ascribed to your fault. Therefore, let some faithful men proceed
there for the work of tale. I do not think it is proper for thee,
Bharata, to go thither thyself.'

"Sakuni said, 'The eldest of the sons of Pandu is cognisant of morality.
He pledged in the midst of the assembly, O Bharata, that he would live
for twelve years in the forest. The other sons of Pandu are all virtuous
and obedient to Yudhishthira. And Yudhishthira himself, the son of
