to their will. They have gotten what they asked, but at the sacrifice of
their most fondly cherished national tradition and with an awful heritage.
Pilate has yielded, but held them by the throat in doing it to compel
words that savagely wounded their pride to utter. The savage duel is over.



<u>Victory.</u>


Jesus is turned over to the soldiers for the execution of the sentence.
His own garments are replaced, and once more He is the central figure in a
street procession, this time carrying the cross to which He has been
condemned. His physical strength seems in danger of giving way under the
load, after the terrible strain of that long night. The soldiers seize a
man from the country passing by and force him to carry the cross. As they
move along, the crowd swells to a great multitude, including many women.
These give expression to their pitying regard for Jesus.

Turning about, Jesus speaks to them in words that reveal the same clear
mind and masterly control as ever. "Daughters of Jerusalem, be weeping for
yourselves and your babes, rather than for Me. The days are coming when
it shall be said, 'Blessed are the barren, and the womb that never bare,
and the breasts that never gave suck.' If they have done these things
while the sap of national life still flows, what will be done to them when
the dried-up, withered stage of their national life is reached!"

Now the chosen place is reached, outside the city wall, probably a rise of
ground, like a mound or small hill. And the soldiers settle down to their
work. There are to be two others crucified at the same time. A drink of
stuff meant to stupefy and so ease the pain of torture was offered Jesus,
but refused. And now the cross is gotten ready. The upright beam is laid
upon the ground handy to the hole in which the end of it will slip, and
the cross-piece is nailed in place. Jesus is stripped and laid upon the
cross with His arms, outstretched on the cross-piece. A sharp-pointed
spike is driven through the palm of each hand and through the feet. The
hands are also tied with ropes as additional security. There is a small
piece half-way up the upright where some of the body's weight may be
supported.

As the soldiers drive the nails, Jesus' voice is heard in prayer, "Father,
forgive them; they know not what they do." Then strong arms seize the
upper end, and, lifting, shift the end of the cross into the hole, and so
steady it into an upright position. It is nine o'clock, and the deed has
been done. The soldiers, having finished their task, now go after their
pay. Jesus' garments are divided up among them, but when the outer coat
is reached it is found to be an unusually good garment, woven in one
piece. It was the love gift of some friend likely. So they pitch dice, and
in a few moments one of them is clutching it greedily as his own.

As quickly as the cross is in position the crowds are reading the
inscription which has been nailed to the top to indicate the charge
against the man. It was in three languages, Latin the official tongue,
Greek the world tongue, and Aramaic the native tongue. Every man there
read in one or other of these tongues, "_The King of the Jews_."
Instantly the Jewish leaders object, but Pilate contemptuously dismisses
their objection. This inscription was his last fling at them. And so Jesus
was crucified as a King. There He is up above them all, while the great
multitude stands gazing.

Now begins the last, coarse, derisive jeering. Some of the crowd call out
to Jesus, "Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days,
save Thyself; if Thou art the Son of God, come down from the cross." The
chief priests have dignified the occasion with their presence. Now they
mockingly sneer out their taunts, "He saved others; but He can't save
Himself. He is the King of Israel. Let Him come down from the cross and we
will believe on Him." The two others hanging by His side, in their pain
and distress, join in the taunting cries, and the soldiers add their
jibes.

But through it all Jesus is silent. There He hangs with those eyes
watching the people to whom His great heart was going out, for whom His
great life was going out, calm, majestic, masterful, tender. The sight
affects at least one of those before unfriendly. The man hanging by His
side is caught by this face and spirit. He rebukes the other criminal,
reminding him that they were getting their just deserts, but "This Man
hath done nothing amiss." Then turning so far as he could to Jesus, he
said, with a simplicity of faith that must have been so grateful to Jesus,
"Jesus, remember me when Thou comest in Thy kingdom." Instantly comes the
reply, "Verily, I say unto thee, to-day shalt thou be with Me in
Paradise."

In the crowds were many of Jesus' personal acquaintances, including women
from Galilee. Close by the cross stood His mother and aunt and faithful
John and a few others of those dear to Him. Most likely John is supporting
Jesus' mother with his arms. Turning His eyes toward the group, Jesus
speaks to His mother in tones revealing His love, "Woman, behold thy son;"
and then to John, "Behold thy mother." _So_ He gives His mother a son to
take His own place in caring for her, and to His friend John this heritage
of love. John understands, and from that hour the ties between these two
were of the closest and tenderest sort.

So the hours drag along until noon. And now a strange thing occurs that
must have had a startling effect. At the time of day when the sunlight is
brightest a strange darkness came over all the scene, the sun's light
being obscured or failing wholly. And for three hours this strange, weird
spectacle continues. Then the hushed silence is broken by an agonizing cry
from the lips of Jesus, "My God--My God--why--didst--Thou--forsake--Me?"
One of the bewildered bystanders thinks He is calling for Elijah, and
another wonders if something startling will yet occur.

Jesus speaks again--"I--thirst" and some one near by with sponge and stick
reaches up to moisten His lips. Then a shout, a loud cry of _victory_
bursts in one word from those lips, "_It is finished_." Then softly
breathing out the last words, "Father, into Thy hands I commend My
spirit," and bowing His head, Jesus, masterful, kingly to the last,
_yielded up_ His spirit.




The Resurrection: Gravity Upward



<u>A New Morning.</u>


It was near the dawning of a new morning, the morning of a new day
destined to be a great day. While yet dark there come a number of women
out of the city gate toward the tomb where Jesus' body had been laid. They
carry spices and ointment. With woman's ever tender thoughtfulness they
are bent upon some kindly service for that precious body. They had
followed up the burial and noted the arrangements with a view to this
morning's early service. Their whole thought is absorbed with a tomb and a
body and a bit of loving attention. They wonder as they come along whom
they can get to roll the heavy stone over into its groove at the side of
the opening. Mary Magdalene is in the lead. With her in the darkness is
her friend Mary, the mother of John and James. Others come along a little
behind, in small groups.

As they get near to the place the keen eyes of Mary Magdalene notice at
once with a quick start that the stone is rolled away. Somebody has been
tampering with the tomb in the night. Leaving her companion, she starts
back on a run into the city and finds Peter, and tells him that the Lord
has been taken away, and they don't know where He has been laid. Peter,
too, is startled. He gets John, and the two start back on a run.

Meanwhile the other women have gone on toward the tomb. As they approach
they are startled and awed to find a man there, with the glorious
appearance of an angel, sitting upon the stone. To these awe-stricken
women this angel being quietly said, "Do not be afraid. I know you are
looking for Jesus who was crucified. He is not here. He is risen, as He
told you. Come and see the place where He lay." And as they gaze with wide
open eyes, he adds, "Go quickly and tell His disciples, and be sure you
tell Peter, that He is risen from the dead, and lo, He goeth before you
into Galilee. You will meet Him there. Lo, I have told you." But the women
were panic-stricken, and ran away down the road, and told no one except
some of the apostles. And to them their story seemed ridiculous. They
refused to believe such talk.

And now Peter and John come breathless to the tomb. John is in the lead.
Either he is younger or swifter of foot. As he comes up he stops at the
opening of the tomb, and, with a bit of reverential awe, gazes within. He
can see the linen cloths lying; but the body they had encased is clearly
not in them. Peter comes up, and steps at once inside for a closer
inspection. There the linen cloths are, just as they had enswathed the
body, but flattened down, showing the absence of anything inside their
folds. The napkin that had been about the head was folded up neatly and
laid over to one side. Then John enters, and as he continues looking
conviction comes to him that Jesus has indeed risen. Wondering greatly at
this thing, wholly unexpected by them, they go off to their homes in the
city.

And now another little group of the women come up, and are perplexed in
turn as the others, the stone away, the body of Jesus not there. As they
stand with staring eyes and fearing hearts, two men unexpectedly appear in
clothing that dazzles the women's eyes. Frightened, they bow down before
these men, who seem to be angels. But the men quickly reassure them with
their words. Why were they seeking a living One in a tomb? Jesus was not
there. He was risen. And they remind the women of Jesus' own words about
being killed and then rising again. As the men talk the women remember the
Master's words, and wonderingly see their meaning now, and hurry away to
tell their friends the great news.



<u>Jesus Seeking Out Peter.</u>


And now Mary Magdalene has gotten back to the tomb. In her zeal for the
safety of that precious body, she had made quite a journey into the city
and back. Her zeal took her quickly to Peter. Her sorrow makes the way
back longer. She had been first to come, but had not heard the news that
came to her companions. Now she stands at the open tomb weeping. She
stoops and looks in to see if it can be really true that _He_ is not
there. To her surprise two angel beings are seated, one at each end of
where Jesus' body had been lying. They say to her, "Why are you weeping?"
She replies, "Because they have taken away _my Lord_, and I know not where
they have laid Him." Turning back in her grief as the words are spoken,
she sees some one else standing. Again the same question by this One. Why
was she weeping? Whom was she looking for? Her eyes are blinded with the
rain of tears. This is likely the man in charge of the garden wherein this
family tomb was.

With earnest tones she says, "Sir, if _thou_ didst carry Him away, tell me
where thou didst lay Him and _I_ will have Him taken away." Then that one
word came to her ears, her name, in that unmistakable voice, "Mary."
Quicker than a flash came the response, "_Oh, my Master_!" That same
wondrous, quiet voice continues, "Do not continue to be clinging to Me. I
am not yet ascended to my Father. Be going to my brethren and tell them I
ascend to My Father and your Father, My God and your God." And Mary
quickly departs on her glad errand for Him. She was the first to see His
face and hear His voice, and have her hand upon His person, and do
something at His bidding.

And now the other women who had been at the tomb in the garden and fled
away are on the road approaching the city. As they hurry along, to their
utter amazement--here is Jesus in the road approaching them. With a glad
smile in His eyes, the old, sweet voice speaks out in rich tones the usual
simple salutation of greeting, "Good morning." At once they are down on
their knees and faces, holding His feet and worshipping. And Jesus softly
says, "Do not be afraid. Go tell my brethren to meet Me in Galilee, up by
the old blue waters of the sea."

While these incidents were occurring, all in such short time, something
else is going on of a different sort. The Roman soldiers guarding that
tomb had had a great shock. They had been suddenly displaced by another
guard. The sacred Roman seal had been ruthlessly broken, the stone rolled
back from the opening, and some one sat upon it. Their bewildered,
stupefied senses heard the movements and were aware of a strange, blinding
light. Then they knew that the body they were to guard was no longer
within. That was about as much as they could get together. They hurry to
town and tell the chief priests. Quickly the chief priests gather their
clique to confer about this new phase. Was there ever such mulish
obstinacy? No thought of candid investigation seems to enter their mind.
The way of covering this new difficulty is after all easy. Money will buy
the soldiers, and they will do as they are bid. It took a good bit of
gold. The soldiers probably were keen to know how to work so good a mine.
And the story was freely circulated that the body was stolen while the
soldiers slept.

Peter has gone down the road from the garden toward the city after having
satisfied Himself that Jesus was not in the tomb. He was _wondering_ what
all this meant. John, lighter of foot, had hurried ahead to his home in
the city, very likely to tell the news to Jesus' mother, his own new
mother. Peter plods slowly along. There is no need of haste now. He is
thinking, wondering, thinking. It was still early morning, with the sweet
dew on the ground, and the air so still. Down past some big trees maybe he
was walking, deeply absorbed, when--Somebody is by his side. It is the
Master! But we must leave them alone together. That was a sacred
interview, meant only for Peter.



<u>Made Known in the Breaking of Bread.</u>


The news now quickly spread; the two stories, that of the soldiers, that
of the disciples. Folks listened to the one they preferred. Everybody was
discussing this new startling appendix to the crucifixion. A bit later in
the day two others were walking along one of the country roads leading out
of the city, toward a village a few miles away. They jog along slowly as
men who are heavy footed with disappointment. They are intently absorbed
in conversation, eagerly discussing and questioning about something that
clearly puzzled them.

A Stranger, unrecognized, overtakes them and joins in their conversation.
He asks, "What is this that you are so concerned about?" So absorbed are
they with their thoughts, that at His question they stand still, looking
sad and unable for a moment to answer. Where would they begin where there
was so much? Then one of them says, "Do you lodge by yourself in the city,
and even then do not know the things that have been going on there?" The
Stranger draws them out. "What things?" He says. Thus encouraged, they
find relief in unburdening their hearts. It was all about Jesus, a man of
great power in word and deed, before God and all the people; the great
cruelty with which the rulers had secured a sentence of death for
Him--and--crucified--Him.

"We were, however, hoping," they said, "that He was the One who was about
to redeem the nation. And now it is the third day since these things
occurred. And most surprising word was brought by certain women that has
greatly stirred us. They went early to the tomb, and did not find His
body, but saw a vision of angels who positively said that He was alive.
And some of our party went there and found it true as the women said.
But--they did not see _Him_."

Then the Stranger began speaking in a quiet, earnest way that caught them
at once. "O foolish men, so slow you are in heart to believe the messages
of the old prophets! Was it not needful that the Christ should suffer
these very things and to enter into His glory?" Then He began freely to
quote passages from all through their sacred writings. As they walk along
listening to this wonderful explanation, which now sounds so simple from
this Man's lips, they come up to their home in the village. The Stranger
seemed inclined to go on. But they earnestly urge Him to come in and get
some refreshment and stay over night. He may talk more. They have heard no
such winsome talk since Jesus was with them.

He yields. And, as they gather over the simple evening meal, the Stranger
picks up the loaf, and looking up repeats the simple grace, and breaking
the loaf reaches the pieces over. But as their hands go out for the bread,
their eyes turn toward the Stranger's face. Instantly they are
spell-bound--_that face_--why--it is the _Master!!_ Then He is not there.
And they said to each other, "Did you ever hear such talking?" "My heart
was burning all the time He was talking." "And mine, too." Then they
hasten back to the city. Those miles are so much shorter now! They go
straight to the house where they have been meeting.

"_Even So Send I You_."

Here were gathered most of the apostles and several others. Eagerly they
were discussing the exciting news of the day. Some _know_ that Jesus has
risen. Mary Magdalene, with eyes dancing, says, "I _saw_ Him." But some
are full of doubt and questionings. How _could_ it be? The door is
guarded, for if the frenzy of the national leaders should spread, _they_
come next. There's a knock at the door. Cautiously it is opened. Two dusty
but radiant faces appear. "The Lord is risen _indeed_," they exclaim. And
then they tell the story of the afternoon and His wondrous explanation and
of that meal.

As they are talking, all at once--who's that?--right in their midst. It
looks like Jesus. There is that face with those unmistakable marks. And
you can see their eyes quickly searching between the sandal straps. Yes,
it looks like Him. But it can't be. Their eyes befool them. It's been a
hard day for them. It must be a spirit. As they start back, there comes in
that voice they can never forget, the old quiet "Good evening."--"Peace
unto you." Then He holds out His hands and feet, saying, "Do not be
troubled--it is I Myself--handle Me, and make sure. A spirit does not have
flesh and bones as you see that I have." Then He said, "Have you something
to eat?" and He ate a bit of broiled fish.

Reassured by such simple practical evidence, a glad peace fills their
hearts and faces. They talk together a bit. Then Jesus rising, said again,
"Peace unto you--as the Father hath sent Me, even so send I you." Then He
breathed strongly upon them, saying in very quiet, solemn tones, "Receive
ye the Holy Spirit--Whosesoever sins ye forgive they are forgiven.
Whosesoever ye retain they are retained." And again, as they look, He is
not there.

But one man was absent that new Sabbath evening hour. Thomas simply could
not believe, and would not, without the most sane, common-sense evidence.
He missed much by not being at that meeting. The next Sabbath evening he
is present with the others. Again the Master comes as before, unexpectedly
standing in their midst, as they talk together about Him. And now Thomas
is fully satisfied after his week of doubting. Some of us folks will
always be grateful for Thomas.

Some time later, there occurs that second wondrous draught of fishes, at
the command of the unrecognized Stranger, one morning at the breaking of
the day, and the talk with Peter and the others as they walk along the old
shore of the sea. And to James, who seems to have been a leader by dint of
a strong personality, He appears.

And one day when there was an unusually large meeting of His followers, as
many as five hundred, He came as before and was recognized. And then at
the last upon Olives' top came the goodbye meeting and message.

It is surely worthy of remark that the Bethany home is not represented at
either cross or tomb. Many of His dear friends are named in connection
with both, but not these. Here are some of those dearest to Him, and to
whom He is most dear. Here is one, a woman, who had discerned more keenly
ahead than any other that He was to die and why. She had understood the
minor strains of the old Hebrew oratorio as none other. She had learned
at His feet. And here, too, was one who knew death, and the life beyond,
and then a return again to this life. It was not indifference that kept
them away. They loved tenderly, and were tenderly loved. Their absence is
surely most significant. Mary's ointment had already been used. This
morning in glad ecstasy of spirit she and her brother and sister wait.
_They know._



<u>Gravity Upward.</u>


Two things stand out very clearly about Jesus' resurrection. It was not
expected by these followers, but received at first with incredulity and
doubt and stubborn unwillingness to accept it without clear undisputable
proof. And then that they were thoroughly satisfied that He was actually
back again with them, with His personal identity thoroughly established;
