earth looked beautiful by being scattered all over with human trunks
mangled by shafts, and arms having bows in their grasp and hands decked
with ornaments. And, O bull of the Bharata race, in consequence of heads
cut off by whetted shafts ceaselessly falling on the ground, it seemed
as if a shower of stones fell from the sky. And that Partha of
formidable prowess, displaying his fierceness, now ranged the field of
battle, pouring the terrible fire of his wrath upon the sons of
Dhritarashtra. And beholding the fierce prowess of Arjuna who thus
scorched the hostile host, the Kuru warriors, in the very presence of
Duryodhana, became dispirited and ceased to fight. And, O Bharata,
having struck terror into that host and routed those mighty
car-warriors, that fore-most of victors, ranged on the field. And the
son of Pandu then created on the field of battle a dreadful river of
blood, with waving billows, like unto the river of death that is created
by Time at the end of the _Yuga_, having the dishevelled hair of the
dead and the dying for its floating moss and straw, with bows and arrows
for its boats, fierce in the extreme and having flesh and animal juices
for its mire. And coats of mail and turbans floated thick on its
surface. And elephants constituted its alligators and the cars its
rafts. And marrow and fat and blood constituted its currents. And it was
calculated to strike terror into the hearts of the spectators. And
dreadful to behold, and fearful in the extreme, and resounding with the
yells of ferocious beasts, keen edged weapons constituted its
crocodiles. And _Rakshasas_ and other cannibals haunted it from one end
to the other. And strings of pearls constituted its ripples, and various
excellent ornaments, its bubbles. And having swarms of arrows for its
fierce eddies and steeds for its tortoises, it was incapable of being
crossed. And the mighty car warrior constituted its large island, and it
resounded with the blare of conchs and the sound of drums. And the river
of blood that Partha created was incapable of being crossed. Indeed, so
swift-handed was Arjuna that the spectators could not perceive any
interval between his taking up an arrow, and fixing it on the
bow-string, and letting it off by a stretch of the _Gandiva_."


SECTION LXIII

Vaisampayana said, "Then while a great havoc was being made among the
Kurus, Santanu's son, Bhishma, and grandsire of the Bharatas rushed at
Arjuna, taking up an excellent bow adorned with gold, and many arrows
also of keen points and capable of piercing into the very vitals of the
foe and afflicting him sorely. And in consequence of a white umbrella
being held over his head, that tiger among men looked beautiful like
unto a hill at sunrise. And the son of Ganga, blowing his conch cheered
the sons of Dhritarashtra, and wheeling along his right came upon
Vibhatsu and impeded his course. And that slayer of hostile heroes, the
son of Kunti, beholding him approach, received him with a glad heart,
like a hill receiving a rain-charged cloud. And Bhishma, endued with
great energy, pierced Partha's flag-staff with eight arrows. The arrows
reaching the flag-staff of Pandu's son, struck the blazing ape and those
creatures also stationed in the banner-top. And then the son of Pandu,
with a mighty javelin of sharp edge cut of Bhishma's umbrella which
instantly fell on the ground. And then the light-handed son of Kunti
struck his adversary's flag-staff also with many shafts, and then his
steeds and then the couple of drivers that protected Bhishma's flanks.
And unable to bear this, Bhishma though cognisant of the Pandava's
might, covered Dhananjaya with a powerful celestial weapon. And the son
of Pandu, of immeasurable soul, hurling in return a celestial weapon at
Bhishma, received that from Bhishma like a hill receiving a deep mass of
clouds. And the encounter that took place between Partha and Bhishma,
was fierce and the Kaurava warriors with their troops stood as lookers
on. And in the conflict between Bhishma and the son of Pandu, shafts
striking against shafts shone in the air like fireflies in the season of
rains. And, O king, in consequence of Partha's shooting arrows with both
his right and left hands, the bent _Gandiva_ seemed like a continuous
circle of fire. And the son of Kunti then covered Bhishma with hundreds
of sharp and keen-edged arrows, like a cloud covering the
mountain-breast with its heavy downpour. And Bhishma baffled with his
own arrows that arrowy shower, like the bank resisting the swelling sea,
and covered the son of Pandu in return. And those warriors, cut into a
thousand pieces in battle, fell fast in the vicinity of Phalguna's car.
And then there was a downpour, from the car of Pandu's son, of arrows
furnished with golden wing, and raining through the sky like a flight of
locusts. And Bhishma again repelled that arrowy shower with hundreds of
whetted shafts shot by him. And then the Kauravas exclaimed.--
'Excellent! Excellent!--Indeed, Bhishma hath performed an exceedingly
difficult feat inasmuch as he hath fought with Arjuna. Dhananjaya is
mighty and youthful, and dexterous and swift of hand. Who else, save
Bhishma, the son of Santanu, or Krishna, the son of Devaki, or the
mighty son of Bharadwaja, the foremost of preceptors, is able to bear
the impetus of Partha in battle?' And repelling weapons with weapons,
those two bulls of the Bharata race, both endued with great might,
fought on playfully and infatuated the eyes of all created beings. And
those illustrious warriors ranged on the field of battle, using the
celestials weapons obtained from _Prajapati_ and _Indra_, and _Agni_ and
the fierce _Rudra_, and _Kuvera_, and _Varuna_, and _Yama_, and _Vayu_.
And all beings were greatly surprised, upon beholding those warriors
engaged in combat. And they all exclaimed,--_Bravo Partha of long arms!
Bravo Bhishma! Indeed, this application of celestial weapons that is
being witnessed in the combat between Bhishma and Partha_ is rare among
human beings."

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus raged that conflict with weapons between
those warriors conversant with all weapons. And when that conflict of
celestial weapons ceased, then commenced a conflict with arrows. And
Jishnu approaching his opponent, cut off with an arrow sharp like a
razor the gold-decked bow of Bhishma. Within the twinkling of the eye,
however, Bhishma, that mighty-armed and great car-warrior, took up
another bow and stringed it. And inflamed with wrath, he showered upon
Dhananjaya a cloud of arrows. And Arjuna, too, endued with great energy,
rained upon Bhishma innumerable sharp-pointed and keen-edged arrows. And
Bhishma also shot clouds of arrows upon Pandu's son. And conversant with
celestial weapons and engaged in shooting and each other, arrows of keen
points, no distinction, O king, could then be perceived between those
illustrious warriors. And that mighty car-warrior, Kunti's son, covered
with a diadem, and the heroic son of Santanu, obscured the ten
directions with their arrows. And the Pandava covered Bhishma, and
Bhishma also covered the Pandava, with clouds of shafts. And, O king,
wonderful was this combat that took place in this world of men. And the
heroic warriors that protected Bhishma's car, slain by the son of Pandu,
fell prostrate, O monarch, beside the car of Kunti's son. And the
feathery arrows of Swetavahana, shot from the _Gandiva_, fell in all
directions as if with the object of making a wholesale slaughter of the
foe. And issuing forth from his car those blazing arrows furnished with
golden wings looked like rows of swans in the sky. And all the
celestials with Indra, stationed in the firmament, gazed with wonder
upon another celestial weapon hurled with great force by that wonderful
archer Arjuna. And beholding that wonderful weapon of great beauty, the
mighty _Gandiva_, Chitrasena, highly pleased, addressed the lord of
celestials, saying, 'Behold these arrows shot by Partha coursing through
the sky in one continuous line. Wonderful is the dexterity of Jishnu in
evolving this celestial weapon! Human beings are incapable of shooting
such a weapon, for it does not exist among men. How wonderful again is
this concourse of mighty weapons existing from days of old! No interval
can be perceived between his taking up the arrows, fixing them on the
bow-string, and letting them off by stretching the _Gandiva_. The
soldiers are incapable of even looking at the son of Pandu, who is like
unto the midday sun blazing in the sky. So also none ventures to look at
Bhishma, the son of Ganga. Both are famous for their achievements, and
both are of fierce prowess. Both are equal in feats of heroism, and both
are difficult of being vanquished in battle.'

"Thus addressed by the _Gandharva_ about that combat between Partha and
Bhishma, the lord of the celestials, O Bharata, paid proper respect unto
both by a shower of celestial flowers. Meanwhile, Bhishma, the son of
Santanu, assailed Arjuna on the left side, while that drawer of the bow
with either hands was on the point of piercing him. And at this,
Vibhatsu, laughing aloud, cut off with an arrow of keen edge and
furnished with vulturine wings, the bow of Bhishma, that hero of solar
effulgence. And then Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, pierced Bhishma in
the breast with ten shafts although the latter was contending with all
his prowess. And sorely afflicted with pain Ganga's son of mighty arms
and irresistible in battle, stood for a long time leaning on the pole of
his car. And beholding him deprived of consciousness the driver of his
car-steeds, calling to mind the instructions about protecting the
warriors when in a swoon, led him away for safety."


SECTION LXIV

Vaisampayana said, "After Bhishma had fled, leaving the van of battle,
the illustrious son of Dhritarashtra hoisting high flag approached
Arjuna, bow in hand and setting up a loud roar. And with a spear-headed
shaft shot from his bow stretched to the ear, he pierced on the forehead
of that terrible bowman of fierce prowess, Dhananjaya, ranging amidst the
foes. And pierced with that keen shaft of golden point on the forehead,
that hero of famous deeds looked resplendent, O king, like unto a
beautiful hill with a single peak. And cut by that arrow, the warm
life-blood gushed out profusely from the wound. And the blood trickling
down his body shone beautifully like a wreath of golden flowers. And
struck by Duryodhana with the shaft, the swift-handed Arjuna of
unfailing strength, swelling with rage, pierced the king in return,
taking up arrows that were endued with the energy of snakes of virulent
poison. And Duryodhana of formidable energy attacked Partha, and Partha
also, that foremost of heroes, attacked Duryodhana. And it was that
those foremost of men, both born in the race of Ajamida, struck each
other alike in the combat. And then (seated) on an infuriate elephant
huge as a mountain and supported by four cars, Vikarna rushed against
Jishnu, the son of Kunti. And beholding that huge elephant, advancing
with speed, Dhananjaya struck him on the head between the temples with
an iron arrow of great impetus shot from the bow-string stretched to the
ear. And like the thunderbolt hurled by Indra splitting a mountain, that
arrow furnished with vulturine wings, shot by Partha, penetrated, up to
the very feathers, into the body of that elephant huge as hill. And
sorely afflicted by the shaft, that lord of the elephant species began
to tremble, and deprived of strength fell down on the ground in intense
anguish, like the peak of mountain riven by thunder. And that best of
elephants falling down on the earth, Vikarna suddenly alighting in great
terror, ran back full eight hundred paces and ascended on the car of
Vivingsati. And having slain with that thunder-like arrow that elephant
huge as a mighty hill and looking like a mass of clouds, the son of
Pritha smote Duryodhana in the breast with another arrow of the same
kind. And both the elephant and the king having thus been wounded, and
Vikarna having broken and fled along with the supporters of the king's
car, the other warriors, smitten with the arrows shot from the
_Gandiva_, fled from the field in panic. And beholding the elephant
slain by Partha, and all the other warriors running away, Duryodhana,
the foremost of the Kurus, turning away his car precipitately fled in
that direction where Partha was not. And when Duryodhana was fast
running away in alarm, pierced by that arrow and vomitting forth blood,
Kiritin, still eager for battle and capable of enduring every enemy,
thus censured him from wrath, 'Sacrificing thy great fame and glory, why
dost thou fly away, turning thy back? Why are not those trumpets sounded
now, as they were when thou hadst set out from thy kingdom? Lo, I am an
obedient servant of Yudhishthira, myself being the third son of Pritha,
standing here for battle. Turn back, show me thy face, O son of
Dhritarashtra, and bear in thy mind the behaviour of kings. The name
_Duryodhana_ bestowed on thee before is hereby rendered meaningless.
When thou runnest away, leaving the battle, where is thy persistence in
battle? Neither do I behold thy body-guards, O Duryodhana, before nor
behind. O foremost of men, fly thou away and save thy life which is dear
from the hands of Pandu's son.'"


SECTION LXV

Vaisampayana said, "Thus summoned to battle by the illustrious hero,
Dhritarashtra's son turned back stung by those censures, like an
infuriate and mighty elephant pricked by a hook. And stung by those
reproaches and unable to bear them, that mighty and brave car-warrior
endued with great swiftness, turned back on his car, like a snake that
is trampled under foot. And beholding Duryodhana turn back with his
wounds, Karna, that hero among men, decked with a golden necklace,
stopped the king on the way and soothing him, himself proceeded along
the north of Duryodhana's car to meet Partha in battle. And the
mighty-armed Bhishma also, the son of Santanu, turning back his steeds
decked with gold, enormous in size, and of tawny hue, rushed bow in
hand, for protecting Duryodhana from Partha's hand. And Drona and Kripa
and Vivingsati and Duhsasana and others also, quickly turning back,
rushed forward with speed with drawn bows and arrows fixed on the
bow-strings, for protecting Duryodhana. And beholding those divisions
advance towards him like the swelling surges of the ocean, Dhananjaya,
the son of Pritha, quickly rushed at them like a crane rushing at a
descending cloud. And with celestial weapons in their hands, they
completely surrounded the son of Pritha and rained on him from all sides
a perfect shower of shafts, like clouds showering on the mountain breast
a heavy downpour of rain. And warding off with weapons, all the weapons
of those bulls among the Kurus, the wielder of the _Gandiva_ who was
capable of enduring all foes, evolved another irresistible weapon
obtained from Indra, called _Sanmohana_. And entirely covering the
cardinal and other directions with sharp and keen-edged arrows furnished
with beautiful feathers, that mighty hero stupefied their senses with
the twang of the _Gandiva_. And once more, taking up with both his hands
that large conch of loud blare, Partha, that slayer of foes, blew it
with force and filled the cardinal and other points, the whole earth,
and sky, with that noise. And those foremost of the Kuru heroes were all
deprived of their senses by the sound of that conch blown by Partha. And
all of them stood still, their bows, from which they were never
separated, dropping down from their hands. And when the Kuru army became
insensible, Partha calling to mind the words of Uttara, addressed the
son of the Matsya king, saying, 'O best of men, go thou among the Kurus,
so long as they remain insensible, and bring away the white garments of
Drona and Kripa, and the yellow and handsome ones of Karna, as also the
blue ones of the king and Drona's son. Methinks, Bhishma is not
stupefied, for he knoweth how to counteract this weapon of mine. So,
pass thou on, keeping his steeds to thy left; for those that are
sensible should thus be avoided.' Hearing these words, the illustrious
son of Matsya, giving up the reins of the steeds, jumped down from the
car and taking off the garments of the warriors, came back to his place.
And the son of Virata then urged the four handsome steeds with flanks
adorned with golden armours. And those white steeds, urged on, took
Arjuna away from the midst of battle-field and beyond the array of the
infantry bearing standards in their hands. And, Bhishma, beholding that
best of men thus going away, struck him with arrows. And Partha, too,
having slain Bhishma's steeds, pierced him with ten shafts. And
abandoning Bhishma on the field of battle, having first slain his
car-driver, Arjuna with a good-looking bow in hand came out of that
multitude of cars, like the sun emerging from the clouds. And
Dhritarashtra's son, that foremost of heroes among the Kurus, recovering
his senses, saw the son of Pritha standing like the lord of the
celestials, alone on the battle-field. And he said in hurry (unto
Bhishma), 'How hath this one escape from thee? Do thou afflict him in
such a way that he may not escape.' And at this, Santanu's son, smiling,
said unto him, 'Where had been this sense of thine, and where had been
thy prowess too, when thou hadst been in a state of unconsciousness
renouncing thy arrows and handsome bow? Vibhatsu is not addicted to the
commission of atrocious deeds; nor is his soul inclined to sin. He
renounceth not his principles even for the sake of the three worlds. It
is for this only that all of us have not been slain in this battle. O
thou foremost of Kuru heroes, go back to the city of the Kurus, and let
Partha also go away, having conquered the kine. Do thou never foolishly
throw away thy own good. Indeed, that which leadeth to one's welfare
ought to be accomplished.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having listened to the words of the grandsire
that tended to his own welfare, the wrathful king Duryodhana no longer
eager for battle, drew a deep sigh and became silent. And reflecting
that the advice of Bhishma was beneficial and seeing that the Pandavas
gaining in strength, the other warriors also, desirous of protecting
Duryodhana, resolved to return. And beholding those foremost of Kuru
heroes departing for their city, Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, with a
cheerful heart followed them for a while, desirous of addressing and
worshipping them. And having worshipped the aged grandsire--the son of
Santanu, as also the preceptor Drona, and having saluted with beautiful
arrows Drona's son and Kripa and other venerable ones among the Kurus,
the son of Pritha broke into fragments Duryodhana's crown decked with
precious gems, with another arrow. And having saluted all the venerable
and brave warriors thus, he filled the three worlds with the twang of
the _Gandiva_. And suddenly blowing his conch called _Devadatta_, the
hero pierced the hearts of all his foes. And having humbled the hostile,
he looked resplendent on his car decked with a handsome flag. And
beholding the Kurus depart, Kiritin cheerfully said unto Matsya's son,
'Turn back thy steeds; thy kine have been recovered; the foe is going
away and do thou also return to thy city with a cheerful heart.' And the
celestials also, having witnessed that most wonderful encounter between
Phalguna and the Kurus, were highly delighted, and went to their
respective abodes, reflecting upon Partha's feats."


SECTION LXVI

Vaisampayana said, "Having vanquished the Kurus in battle, that one with
eyes like those of a bull brought back that profuse cattle wealth of
Virata. And while the Dhritarashtra, after their rout, were going away,
a large number of Kuru-soldiers issuing out of the deep forest appeared
with slow steps before Partha, their hearts afflicted with fear. And
they stood before him with joined palms and with hair dishevelled. And
fatigued with hunger and thirst, arrived in a foreign land, insensible
with terror, and confused in mind, they all bowed down unto the son of
Pritha and said,--_We are thy slaves_.'

"Arjuna said, 'Welcome, blessed be ye. Go ye away. Ye have no cause of
fear. I will not take the lives of them that are afflicted. Ye have my
assurance of protection.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of assurance, the assembled
warriors greeted him with benedictions in praise of his achievements and
fame and wishing him long life. And the Kauravas were unable to confront
