

In our last lesson (the Tenth Lesson) we called your attention to the
wonderful work of the sub-conscious regions of mentation in the direction
of the performance of Intellectual work. Great as are the possibilities
of this field of mentation in the direction named, they are equaled by
the possibilities of building up character by similar methods.

Every one realizes that one may change his character by a strenuous
course of repression and training, and nearly all who read these lines
have modified their characteristics somewhat by similar methods. But it
is only of late years that the general public have become aware that
Character might be modified, changed, and sometimes completely altered by
means of an intelligent use of the sub-conscious faculties of the mind.

The word "Character" is derived from ancient terms meaning "to mark," "to
engrave," etc., and some authorities inform us that the term originally
arose from the word used by the Babylonian brickmakers to designate the
trade mark impressed by them upon their bricks, each maker having his own
mark. This is interesting, in view of the recent theories regarding the
cultivation of characteristics which may be found in the current Western
works on psychology. But these theories are not new to the Yogi teachers
of the East, who have employed similar methods for centuries past in
training their students and pupils. The Yogis have long taught that a
man's character was, practically, the crude character-stuff possessed by
him at his birth, modified and shaped by outside influences in the case
of the ordinary man, and by deliberate self-training and shaping by the
wise man. Their pupils are examined regarding their characteristics, and
then directed to repress the undesirable traits, and to cultivate the
desirable ones.

The Yogi practice of Character Building is based upon the knowledge of
the wonderful powers of the sub-conscious plane of the mind. The pupil is
not required to pursue strenuous methods of repression or cultivation,
but, on the contrary, is taught that such methods are opposed to nature's
plans, and that the best way is to imitate nature and to gradually unfold
the desired characteristics by means of focusing the will-power and
attention upon them. The weeding out of undesirable characteristics is
accomplished by the pupil cultivating the characteristics directly
opposed to the undesirable ones. For instance, if the pupil desires to
overcome Fear, he is not instructed to concentrate on Fear with the idea
of killing it out, but, instead, is taught to mentally deny that he has
Fear, and then to concentrate his attention upon the ideal of Courage.
When Courage is developed, Fear is found to have faded away. The positive
always overpowers the negative.

In the word "ideal" is found the secret of the Yogi method of
sub-conscious character building. The teachings are to the effect that
"ideals" may be built up by the bestowal of attention upon them. The
student is given the example of a rose bush. He is taught that the plant
will grow and flourish in the measure that care and attention is bestowed
upon it and _vice versa_. He is taught that the ideal of some desired
characteristic is a mental rosebush, and that by careful attention it
will grow and put forth leaves and flowers. He is then given some minor
mental trait to develop, and is taught to dwell upon it in thought--to
exercise his imagination and to mentally "see" himself attaining the
desired quality. He is given mantrams or affirmation to repeat, for the
purpose of giving him a mental center around which to build an ideal.
There is a mighty power in words, used in this way, providing that the
user always thinks of the meaning of the words, and makes a mental
picture of the quality expressed by them, instead of merely repeating
them parrot fashion.

The Yogi student is trained gradually, until he acquires the power of
conscious direction of the sub-conscious mind in the building up process,
which power comes to anyone--Oriental or Occidental--who will take the
trouble to practice. In fact, nearly everyone possesses and actively uses
this power, although he may not be aware of it. One's character is
largely the result of the quality of thoughts held in the mind, and of
the mental pictures or ideals entertained by the person. The man who
constantly sees and thinks of himself as unsuccessful and down-trodden
is very apt to grow ideals of thought forms of these things until his
whole nature is dominated by them, and his every act works toward the
objectification of the thoughts. On the contrary, the man who makes an
ideal of success and accomplishment finds that his whole mental nature
seems to work toward that result--the objectification of the ideal. And
so it is with every other ideal. The person who builds up a mental ideal
of Jealousy will be very apt to objectify the same, and to unconsciously
create condition that will give his Jealousy food upon which to feed. But
this particular phase of the subject, properly belongs to our next
lesson. This Eleventh Lesson is designed to point out the way by which
people may mould their characters in any way they desire--supplanting
undesirable characteristics by desirable ones, and developing desirable
ideals into active characteristics. The mind is plastic to him who knows
the secret of its manipulation.

The average person recognizes his strong and weak points of character,
but is very apt to regard them as fixed and unalterable, or practically
so. He thinks that he "is just as the Lord made him," and that is the end
of it. He fails to recognize that his character is being unconsciously
modified every day by association with others, whose suggestions are
being absorbed and acted upon. And he fails to see that he is moulding
his own character by taking interest in certain things, and allowing his
mind to dwell upon them. He does not realize that he himself is really
the maker of himself, from the raw and crude material given him
at his birth. He makes himself negatively or positively. Negatively, if
he allows himself to be moulded by the thoughts and ideals of others,
and positively, if he moulds himself. Everyone is doing one or the
other--perhaps both. The weak man is the one who allows himself to be
made by others, and the strong man is the one who takes the building
process in his own hands.

The process of Character-building is so delightfully simple that its
importance is apt to be overlooked by the majority of persons who are
made acquainted with it. It is only by actual practice and the
experiencing of results that its wonderful possibilities are borne home
to one.

The Yogi student is early taught the lesson of the power and importance
of character building by some strong practical example. For instance, the
student is found to have certain tastes of appetite, such as a like for
certain things, and a corresponding dislike for others. The Yogi teacher
instructs the student in the direction of cultivating a desire and taste
for the disliked thing, and a dislike for the liked thing. He teaches the
student to fix his mind on the two things, but in the direction of
imagining that he likes the one thing and dislikes the other. The student
is taught to make a mental picture of the desired conditions, and to say,
for instance, "I loathe candy--I dislike even the sight of it," and, on
the other hand, "I crave tart things--I revel in the taste of them,"
etc., etc., at the same time trying to reproduce the taste of sweet
things accompanied with a loathing, and a taste of tart things,
accompanied with a feeling of delight. After a bit the student finds that
his tastes are actually changing in accordance with his thoughts, and in
the end they have completely changed places. The truth of the theory is
then borne home to the student, and he never forgets the lesson.

In order to reassure readers who might object to having the student left
in this condition of reversed tastes, we may add that the Yogi teachers
then teach him to get rid of the idea of the disliked thing, and teach
him to cultivate a liking for all wholesome things, their theory being
that the dislike of certain wholesome eatables has been caused by some
suggestion in childhood, or by some prenatal impression, as wholesome
eatables are made attractive to the taste by Nature. The idea of all this
training, however, is not the cultivation of taste, but practice in
mental training, and the bringing home to the student the truth of the
fact that his nature is plastic to his Ego, and that it may be moulded at
will, by concentration and intelligent practice. The reader of this
lesson may experiment upon himself along the lines of the elementary Yogi
practice as above mentioned, if he so desires. He will find it possible
to entirely change his dislike for certain food, etc., by the methods
mentioned above. He may likewise acquire a liking for heretofore
distasteful tasks and duties, which he finds it necessary to perform.

The principle underlying the whole Yogi theory of Character Building by
the sub-conscious Intellect, is that the Ego is Master of the mind, and
that the mind is plastic to the commands of the Ego. The Ego or "I" of
the individual is the one real, permanent, changeless principle of the
individual, and the mind, like the body, is constantly changing, moving,
growing, and dying. Just as the body may be developed and moulded by
intelligent exercises, so may the mind be developed and shaped by the Ego
if intelligent methods are followed.

The majority of people consider that Character is a fixed something,
belonging to a man, that cannot be altered or changed. And yet they show
by their everyday actions that at heart they do not believe this to be a
fact, for they endeavor to change and mould the characters of those
around them, by word of advice, counsel, praising or condemnation, etc.

It is not necessary to go into the matter of the consideration of
the causes of character in this lesson. We will content ourselves by
saying that these causes may be summed up, roughly, as follows: (1)
Result of experiences in past lives; (2) Heredity; (3) Environment;
(4) Suggestion from others; and (5) Auto-suggestion. But no matter how
one's character has been formed, it may be modified, moulded, changed,
and improved by the methods set forth in this lesson, which methods are
similar to what is called by Western writers, "Auto-suggestion."

The underlying idea of Auto-suggestion is the "willing" of the individual
that the changes take place in his mind, the willing being aided by
intelligent and tried methods of creating the new ideal or thought-form.
The first requisite for the changed condition must be "desire" for the
change. Unless one really desires that the change take place, he is
unable to bring his Will to bear on the task. There is a very close
connection between Desire and Will. Will is not usually brought to bear
upon anything unless it is inspired by Desire. Some people connect the
word Desire with the lower inclinations, but it is equally applicable to
the higher. If one fights off a low inclination or Desire, it is because
he is possessed of a higher inclination or Desire. Many Desires are
really compromises between two or more conflicting Desires--a sort of
average Desire, as it were.

Unless one desires to change his character he will not make any move
toward it. And in proportion to the strength of the desire, so will be
the amount of will-power that is put in the task. The first thing for
one to do in character building is to "want to do it." And if he finds
that the "want" is not sufficiently strong to enable him to manifest the
perseverance and effort necessary to bring it to a successful conclusion,
then he should deliberately proceed to "build up the desire."

Desire may be built up by allowing the mind to dwell upon the subject
until a desire is created. This rule works both ways, as many people have
found out to their sorrow and misery. Not only may one build up a
commendable desire in this way, but he may also build up a reprehensible
one. A little thought will show you the truth of this statement. A young
man has no desire to indulge in the excesses of a "fast" life. But after
a while he hears, or reads something about others leading that sort of
life, and he begins to allow his mind to dwell upon the subject, turning
it around and examining it mentally, and going over it in his
imagination. After a time he begins to find a desire gradually sending
forth roots and branches, and if he continues to water the thing in his
imagination, before long he will find within himself a blossoming
inclination, which will try to insist upon expression in action. There is
a great truth behind the words of the poet:

"Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
That to be hated needs but to be seen.
Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face,
We first endure, then pity, and then embrace."

And the follies and crimes of many a man have been due to the growing of
desire within his mind, through this plan of planting the seed, and then
carefully watering and tending to it--this cultivation of the growing
desire. We have thought it well to give this word of warning because it
will throw light upon many things that may have perplexed you, and
because it may serve to call your attention to certain growing weeds of
the mind that you have been nourishing.

But remember, always, that the force that leads downward may be
transmuted and made to lead upward. It is just as easy to plant and grow
wholesome desires as the other kind. If you are conscious of certain
defects and deficiencies in your character (and who is not?) and yet find
yourself not possessed of a strong enough desire to make the changes
necessary, then you should commence by planting the desire seed and
allowing it to grow by giving it constant care and attention. You should
picture to yourself the advantages of acquiring the desirable traits of
character of which you have thought. You should frequently go over and
over them in your mind, imaging yourself in imagination as possessing
them. You will then find that the growing desire will make headway and
that you will gradually begin to "want to" possess that trait of
character more and more. And when you begin to "want to" hard enough, you
will find arising in your consciousness a feeling of the possession of
sufficient Will-power to carry it through. Will follows the Desire.
Cultivate a Desire and you will find back of it the Will to carry it
through. Under the pressure of a very strong Desire men have accomplished
feats akin to miracles.

If you find yourself in possession of desires that you feel are hurtful
to you, you may rid yourself of them by deliberately starving them to
death, and at the same time growing opposite desires. By refusing to
think of the objectionable desires you refuse them the mental food upon
which alone they can thrive. Just as you starve a plant by refusing it
nourishing soil and water, so may you starve out an objectionable
desire by refusing to give it mental food. _Remember this, for it is most
important_. Refuse to allow the mind to dwell upon such desires, and
resolutely turn aside the attention, _and, particularly, the
imagination_, from the subject. This may call for the manifestation of a
little will-power in the beginning, but it will become easier as you
progress, and each victory will give you renewed strength for the next
fight. But do not temporize with the desire--do not compromise with
it--refuse to entertain the idea. In a fight of this kind each victory
gives one added strength, and each defeat weakens one.

And while you are refusing to entertain the objectionable guest you must
be sure to grow a desire of an entirely opposite nature--a desire
directly opposed to the one you are starving to death. Picture the
opposite desire, and think of it often. Let your mind dwell upon it
lovingly and let the imagination help to build it up into form. Think of
the advantages that will arise to you when you fully possess it, and let
the imagination picture you as in full possession of it, and acting out
your new part in life strong and vigorous in your new found power.

All this will gradually lead you to the point where you will "want to"
possess this power. Then you must be ready for the next step which is
"Faith" or "Confident Expectation."

Now, faith or confident expectation is not made to order in most persons,
and in such cases one must acquire it gradually. Many of you who read
these lines will have an understanding of the subject that will give you
this faith. But to those who lack it, we suggest that they practice on
some trivial phases of the mental make-up, some petty trait of character,
in which the victory will be easy and simple. From this stage they should
work up to more difficult tasks, until at last they gain that faith or
confident expectation that comes from persevering practice.

The greater the degree of faith or confident expectation that one carries
with him in this task of character building, the greater will be his
success. And this because of well established psychological laws. Faith
or confident expectation clears away the mental path and renders the work
easier, while doubt or lack of faith retards the work, and acts as
obstacles and stumbling blocks. Strong Desire, and Faith, or confident
expectation are the first two steps. The third is Will-power.

By Will-power we do not mean that strenuous,
clenching-of-fist-and-frowning-brow thing that many think of
when they say "Will." Will is not manifested in this way. The
true Will is called into play by one realizing the "I" part of
himself and speaking the word of command from that center of
power and strength. It is the voice of the "I." And it is needed
in this work of character building.

So now you are ready for work, being possessed of (1) Strong Desire;
(2) Faith or Confident Expectation; and (3) Will-power. With such a
triple-weapon nothing but Success is possible.

Then comes the actual work. The first thing to do is to lay the track for
a new Character Habit. "Habit?" you may ask in surprise. Yes, Habit! For
that word gives the secret of the whole thing. Our characters are made up
of inherited or acquired habits. Think over this a little and you will
see the truth of it. You do certain things without a thought, because you
have gotten into the habit of doing them. You act in certain ways because
you have established the habit. You are in the habit of being truthful,
honest, virtuous, because you have established the habit of being so. Do
you doubt this? Then look around you--or look within your own heart, and
you will see that you have lost some of your old habits of action, and
have acquired new ones. The building up of Character is the building up
of Habits. And the changing of Character is the changing of Habits. It
will be well for you to settle this fact in your own mind, for it will
give you the secret of many things connected with the subject.

And, remember this, that Habit is almost entirely a matter of the
sub-conscious mentality. It is true that Habits originate in the
conscious mind, but as they are established they sink down into the
depths of the sub-conscious mentality, and thereafter become "second
nature," which, by the way, is often more powerful than the original
nature of the person. The Duke of Wellington said that habit was as
strong as ten natures, and he proceeded to drill habits into his army
until they found it natural to act in accordance with the habits pounded
into them during the drills. Darwin relates an interesting instance of
the force of habit over the reason. He found that his habit of starting
back at the sudden approach of danger was so firmly established that no
will-power could enable him to keep his face pressed up against the cage
of the cobra in the Zoological Gardens when the snake struck at him,
although he knew the glass was so thick that there could be no danger,
and although he exerted the full force of his will. But we venture to say
that one could overcome even this strongly ingrained habit, by gradually
training the sub-conscious mentality and establishing a new habit of
thought and action.

It is not only during the actual process of "willing" the new habit that
the work of making the new mental path goes on. In fact, the Yogis
believe that the principal part of the work goes on sub-consciously
between the intervals of commend, and that the real progress is made in
that way, just as the real work of solving the problem is performed
sub-consciously, as related in our last lesson. As an example, we may
call your attention to some instances of the cultivation of physical
habits. A physical task learned in the evening is much easier to perform
the following-morning than it was the night before, and still easier
the following Monday morning than it was on the Saturday afternoon
previous. The Germans have a saying that "we learn to skate in summer,
and to swim in winter," meaning that the impression passed on to the
subconscious mentality deepens and broadens during the interval of rest.
The best plan is to make frequent, sharp impressions, and then to allow
reasonable periods of rest in order to give the sub-conscious mentality
the opportunity to do its work. By "sharp" impressions we mean
impressions given under _strong attention_, as we have mentioned in some
of the earlier lessons of this series.

A writer has well said: "Sow an act, reap a habit; sow a habit, reap a
character; sow a character, reap a destiny," thus recognizing habit as
the source of character. We recognize this truth in our training of
children, forming goods habits of character by constant repetition, by
watchfulness, etc. Habit acts as a _motive_ when established, so that
while we think we are acting without motive we may be acting under the
strong motive power of some well established habit. Herbert Spencer has
well said: "The habitually honest man does what is right, not consciously
because he 'ought' but with simple satisfaction; and is ill at ease till
it is done." Some may object that this idea of Habit as a basis of
Character may do away with the idea of a developed moral
conscientiousness, as for instance, Josiah Royce who says: "The
establishment of organized habit is never in itself enough to ensure
the growth of an enlightened moral conscientiousness" but to such we
would say that one must "want to" cultivate a high character before he
will create the habits usual to the same, and the "want to" is the
sign of the "moral conscientiousness," rather than the habit. And the
same is true of the "ought to" side of the subject. The "ought to" arises
in the conscious mind in the beginning, and inspires the cultivation
of the habit, although the latter after a while becomes automatic, a
matter of the sub-conscious mentality, without any "ought to" attachment.
It then becomes a matter of "like to."

Thus we see that the moulding, modifying, changing, and building of
Character is largely a matter of the establishing of Habits. And what is
the best way to establish Habits? becomes our next question. The answer
of the Yogi is: "Establish a Mental Image, and then build your Habit
