and working of the universe which is regarded not as an example of
capricious, ironical, inscrutable action, but rather as manifesting
easy, joyous movement and the exuberant rhythm of a dance executed for
its own sake. The European can hardly imagine a sensible person doing
anything without an object: he thinks it almost profane to ascribe
motiveless action to the Creator: he racks his brain to discover any
purpose in creation which is morally worthy and moderately in accord
with the facts of experience. But he can find none. The Hindu, on the
contrary, argues that God being complete and perfect cannot be
actuated by aims or motives, for all such impulses imply a desire to
obtain something, whereas a perfect and complete being is one which by
its very definition needs neither change nor addition. Therefore,
whatever activity is ascribed to the creator must not be thought of as
calculating, purposeful endeavour, but as spontaneous, exultant
movement, needing and admitting no explanation, and analogous to sport
and play rather than to the proceedings of prudent people. This view
of the divine activity is expounded by so serious a writer as Sankara
in his commentary on the Vedanta Sutras, and it also finds
mythological expression in numerous popular legends. The Tamil
Puranas describe the sixty-four miracles of Siva as his amusements:
his laughter and joyous movements brighten all things, and the street
minstrels sing "He sports in the world. He sports in the soul."[434]
He is supposed to dance in the Golden Hall of the temple at
Chidambaram and something of the old legends of the Satarudriya hangs
about such popular titles as the Deceiver and the Maniac (_Kalvar_)
and the stories of his going about disguised and visiting his
worshippers in the form of a mendicant. The idea of sport and
playfulness is also prominent in Vishnuism. It is a striking feature
in the cultus of both the infant and the youthful Krishna, but I
have not found it recorded in the severer worship of Rama.

Another feature of Hindu sects is the extravagant respect paid to
Gurus or teachers. The sanctity of the Guru is an old conviction in
India. By common consent he is entitled to absolute obedience and
offences against him are heinous crimes. But in sectarian literature
there appears a new claim, namely, that the Guru in some way is or
represents the god whose worship he teaches. If the deity is thought
of primarily as a saviour, the Guru is said to deliver from suffering
and hell: if he requires surrender and sacrifice, then person and
possessions must be dedicated to the Guru. Membership of a sect can
be attained only by initiation at the hands of a Guru who can teach a
special mantra or formula of which each sect has its own. In some of
the more modern sects the Guru need not be a Brahman, but if he cannot
be venerated for his caste, the deficiency is compensated by the
respect which he receives as a repository of oral teaching. The
scriptural basis of many sects is dubious and even when it exists,
many of the devout (especially women) have not the inclination or
ability to read and therefore take their religion from the lips of the
Guru, who thus becomes an oracle and source of truth. In Bengal, the
family Guru is a regular institution in respectable castes. In many
sects the founder or other prominent saint is described as an
incarnation and receives veneration after death.[435]

This veneration or deification of the Guru is found in most sects and
assumes as extreme a form among the Saivas as among the Vaishnavas.
The Saiva Siddhanta teaches that divine instruction can be received
only from one who is both god and man, and that the true Guru is an
incarnation of Siva. Thus the works of Manikka-Vacagar and Umapati
speak of Siva coming to his devotees in the form of the Guru. In the
sects that worship Krishna the Gurus are frequently called Gosain
(Goswami).[436] Sometimes they are members of a particular family, as
among the Vallabhacaryas. In other sects there is no hereditary
principle and even a Sudra is eligible as Guru.

One other feature of Sectarian Hinduism must be mentioned. It may be
described as Tantrism or, in one of its aspects, as the later Yoga and
is a combination of practices and theories which have their roots in
the old literature and began to form a connected doctrine at least as
early as the eighth century A.D. Some of its principal ideas are as
follows: (i) Letters and syllables (and also their written forms and
diagrams) have a potent influence both for the human organism and for
the universe. This idea is found in the early Upanishads[437] and is
fully developed in the later Sectarian Upanishads. (ii) The human
organism is a miniature copy of the universe.[438] It contains many
lines or channels (nadi) along which the nerve force moves and also
nervous centres distributed from the hips to the head, (iii) In the
lowest centre resides a force identical with the force which creates
the universe.[439] When by processes which are partly physical it is
roused and made to ascend to the highest centre, emancipation and
bliss are obtained. (iv) There is a mysterious connection between the
process of cosmic evolution and sound, especially the sacred sound
_Om._

These ideas are developed most thoroughly in Saktist works, but are by
no means peculiar to them. They are found in the Pancaratra and the
later Puranas and have influenced almost all modern sects, although
those which are based on emotional devotion are naturally less
inclined to favour physical and magical means of obtaining salvation.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 401: The population of India (about 315 millions) is larger
than that of Europe without Russia.]

[Footnote 402: But compare the English poet

    "Flower in the crannied wall,
    I pluck you out of the crannies,
    ... but if I could understand
    What you are, root and all, and all in all
    I should know what God and man is."]

[Footnote 403: Efforts are now being made by Hindus to suppress this
institution.]

[Footnote 404: In the Vedic funeral ceremonies the wife lies down by
her dead husband and is called back to the world of the living which
points to an earlier form of the rite where she died with him. But
even at this period, those who did not follow the Vedic customs may
have killed widows with their husbands (see too Ath. Veda, XII. 3),
and later, the invaders from Central Asia probably reinforced the
usage. The much-abused Tantras forbid it.]

[Footnote 405: For the history of the Ramayana and Mahabharata and
the dates assignable to the different periods of growth, see
Winternitz, _Gesch. Ind. Lit._ vol. I. p. 403 and p. 439. Also
Hopkins' _Great Epic of India_, p. 397. The two poems had assumed
something like their present form in the second and fourth centuries
A.D. respectively. These are probably the latest dates for any
substantial additions or alterations and there is considerable
evidence that poems called Bharata and Ramayana were well known early
in the Christian era. Thus in Asvaghosha's Sutralankara (story XXIV)
they are mentioned as warlike poems inculcating unbuddhist views. The
Ramayana is mentioned in the Mahavibhasha and was known to Vasubandhu
(_J.R.A.S._ 1907, p. 99). A Cambojan inscription dating from the first
years of the seventh century records arrangements made for the
recitation of the Ramayana, Purana and complete (asesha) Bharata,
which implies that they were known in India considerably earlier. See
Barth, _Inscrip. Sanscrites de Cambodge_, pp. 29-31. The Mahabharata
itself admits that it is the result of gradual growth for in the
opening section it says that the Bharata consists of 8,800 verses,
24,000 verses and 100,000 verses.]

[Footnote 406: Hardy, _Indische Religionsgeschichte_, p. 101.]

[Footnote 407: But some of these latter sacrifice images made of dough
instead of living animals.]

[Footnote 408: It is said that the Agnishtoma was performed in Benares
in 1898, and in the last few years I am told that one or two Vedic
sacrifices have been offered annually in various parts of southern
India. I have myself seen the sites where such sacrifices were offered
in 1908-9 in Mysore city and in Chidambaram, and in 1912 at Wei near
Poona. The most usual form of sacrifice now-a-days is said to be the
Vajapeya. Much Vedic ritual is still preserved in the domestic life of
the Nambathiri and other Brahmans of southern India. See Cochin,
_Tribes and Castes_, and Thurston, _Castes and Tribes of southern
India._]

[Footnote 409: The outline of a stupa may be due to imitation of
houses constructed with curved bamboos as Vincent Smith contends
(_History of Fine Art_, p. 17). But this is compatible with the view
that stone buildings with this curved outline had come to be used
specially as funeral monuments before Buddhism popularized in India
and all Eastern Asia the architectural form called stupa.]

[Footnote 410: The temple of Aihole near Badami seems to be a
connecting link between a Buddhist stupa with a pradakshina path and
a Hindu shrine.]

[Footnote 411: In most temples (at least in southern India) there are
two images: the _mula-vigraha_ which is of stone and fixed in the
sanctuary, and the _utsava-vigraha_ which is smaller, made of metal
and carried in processions.]

[Footnote 412: Thus Bhattacharya (_Hindu Castes and Sects_, p. 127)
enumerates eleven classes of Brahmans, who "have a very low status on
account of their being connected with the great public shrines," and
adds that mere residence in a place of pilgrimage for a few
generations tends to lower the status of a Brahmanic family.]

[Footnote 413: Thus in Bengal there is a special class, the Barna
Brahmans, who perform religious rites for the lower castes, and are
divided into six classes according to the castes to whom they
minister. Other Brahmans will not eat or intermarry with them or even
take water from them.]

[Footnote 414: This is extraordinarily like the temple ritual of the
ancient Egyptians. For some account of the construction and ritual of
south Indian temples see Richards in _J. of Mythic Soc_. 1919, pp.
158-107.]

[Footnote 415: But Vedic mantras are used in these ceremonies. The
libations of water or other liquids are said to be accompanied by the
mantras recited at the Soma sacrifice.]

[Footnote 416: At these sacrifices there is no elaborate ritual or
suggestion of symbolism. The animal is beheaded and the inference is
that Kali likes it. Similarly simple is the offering of coco-nuts to
Kali. The worshipper gives a nut to the pujari who splits it in two
with an axe, spills the milk and hands back half the nut to the
worshipper. This is the sort of primitive offering that might be made
to an African fetish.]

[Footnote 417: See especially the Ambattha Sutta (Dig. Nik. 3) and
Rhys Davids's introduction.]

[Footnote 418: See Weber, _Die Vajrasuchi_ and Nanjio, Catal. No.
1303. In Ceylon at the present day only members of the higher castes
can become Bhikkhus.]

[Footnote 419: But it is said that in Southern India serious questions
of caste are reported to the abbot of the Sringeri monastery for his
decision.]

[Footnote 420: The modern Lingayats demur to the statement that their
founder rejected caste.]

[Footnote 421: So too in the cakras of the Saktists all castes are
equal during the performance of the ceremony.]

[Footnote 422: Some (Khandelwals, Dasa Srimalis and Palliwals) include
both Jains and Vaishnavas: the Agarwals are mostly Vaishnavas but some
of them are Jains and some worship Siva and Kali. Jogendra Nath
Bhattacharya, _Hindu Castes and Sects_, pp. 205 ff.]

[Footnote 423: The names used are not the same. The four Vedic castes
are called _Varna_: the hundreds of modern castes are called _Jati._]

[Footnote 424: Sampradaya seems to be the ordinary Sanskrit word for
sectarian doctrine. It means traditional teaching transmitted from one
teacher to another.]

[Footnote 425: I am discussing elsewhere the possible debt which
Christianity and Hinduism may owe to one another.]

[Footnote 426: Panini, IV. 3. 95-98.]

[Footnote 427: Katha Up. I. 1. 2, 23.]

[Footnote 428: R.V. X. 125.]

[Footnote 429: Compare too the hymns of the R.V. to Varuna as a
rudimentary expression of Bhakti from the worshipper's point of view.]

[Footnote 430: _E.g._ Theragatha, 818-841 and 1231-1245.]

[Footnote 431: I. 2.]

[Footnote 432: They are called the Sandilya Sutras and appear to be
not older than about the twelfth century A.D., but the tradition which
connects them with the School of Sandilya may be just, for the
teaching of this sage (Chandog. Up. III. 14) lays stress on will and
belief. Ramanuja (Sribhashya, II. 2. 43) refers to Sandilya as the
alleged author of the Pancaratra. There are other Bhakti sutras called
Naradiya and ascribed to Narada, published and translated in _The
Sacred Books of the Hindus_, No. 23. They consist of 84 short
aphorisms. Raj. Mitra in his notices of Sanskrit MSS. describes a
great number of modern works dealing with Bhakti.]

[Footnote 433: Yet it is found in Francis Thompson's poem called _Any
Saint_

        So best
        God loves to jest
    With children small, a freak
    Of heavenly hide and seek
        Fit
    For thy wayward wit.]

[Footnote 434: Pope, _The History of Manikka-Vacagar_, p. 23. For the
64 sports of Siva see Siddhanta Dipika, vol. IX.]

[Footnote 435: _E.g._ Ramanuja, Nammarvar, Basava.]

[Footnote 436: Apparently meaning "possessor of cows," and originally
a title of the youthful Krishna. It is also interpreted as meaning
Lord of the Vedas or Lord of his own senses.]

[Footnote 437: _E.g._ the beginning of the Chand. Up. about the syllable
_Om._ See too the last section of the Aitareya Aran. The Yoga
Upanishads analyse and explain _Om_ and some Vishnuite Upanishads
(Nrisimha and Ramata-paniya) enlarge on the subject of letters and
diagrams.]

[Footnote 438: The same idea pervades the old literature in a slightly
different form. The parts of the sacrifice are constantly identified
with parts of the universe or of the human body.]

[Footnote 439: The cakras are mentioned in Act V of Malati and Madhava
written early in the eighth century. The doctrine of the nadis occurs
in the older Upanishads (_e.g._ Chand. and Maitrayana) in a rudimentary
form.]




CHAPTER XXVII

THE EVOLUTION OF HINDUISM. BHAGAVATAS AND PASUPATAS


1


India is a literary country and naturally so great a change as the
transformation of the old religion into theistic sects preaching
salvation by devotion to a particular deity found expression in a long
and copious literature. This literature supplements and supersedes the
Vedic treatises but without impairing their theoretical authority,
and, since it cannot compare with them in antiquity and has not the
same historic interest, it has received little attention from
Indianists until the present century. But in spite of its defects it
is of the highest importance for an understanding of medieval and
contemporary Hinduism. Much of it is avowedly based on the principle
that in this degenerate age the Veda is difficult to understand,[440]
and that therefore God in His mercy has revealed other texts
containing a clear compendium of doctrine. Thus the great Vishnuite
doctor Ramanuja states authoritatively "The incontrovertible fact then
is as follows: The Lord who is known from the Vedanta texts ...
recognising that the Vedas are difficult to fathom by all beings other
than himself ... with a view to enable his devotees to grasp the true
meaning of the Vedas, himself composed the Pancaratra-Sastra."[441]

This later sectarian literature falls into several divisions.

A. Certain episodes of the Mahabharata. The most celebrated of these
is the Bhagavad-gita, which is probably anterior to the Christian era.
Though it is incorporated in the Epic it is frequently spoken of as an
independent work. Later and less celebrated but greatly esteemed by
Vishnuites is the latter part of book XII, commonly known as
Narayaniya.[442] Both these episodes and others[443] are closely
analogous to metrical Upanishads. The Mahabharata even styles itself
(I. 261) the Veda of Krishna (Karshna).

The Ramayana does not contain religious episodes comparable to those
mentioned but the story has more than once been re-written in a religious
and philosophic form. Of such versions the Adhyatma-Ramayana[444] and
Yoga-vasishtha-Ramayana are very popular.

B. Though the Puranas[445] are not at all alike, most of them show
clear affinity both as literature and as religious thought to the
various strata of the Mahabharata, and to the Law Books, especially
the metrical code of Manu. These all represent a form of orthodoxy
which while admitting much that is not found in the Veda is still
Brahmanic and traditionalist. The older Puranas (_e.g._ Matsya, Vayu,
Markandeya, Vishnu), or at least the older parts of them, are the
literary expression of that Hindu reaction which gained political
power with the accession of the Gupta dynasty. They are less
definitely sectarian than later works such as the Narada and Linga
Puranas, yet all are more or less sectarian.

The most influential Purana is the Bhagavata, one of the great
scriptures for all sects which worship Krishna. It is said to have
been translated into every language of India and forty versions in
Bengali alone are mentioned.[446] It was probably composed in the
eighth or ninth century.[447] A free translation of the tenth book
into Hindi, called the Prem Sagar or Ocean of Love, is greatly revered
in northern India.[448] Other sectarian Puranas are frequently read
at temple services. Besides the eighteen great Puranas there are many
others, and in south India at any rate they were sometimes composed in
the vernacular, as for instance the Periya Purana (_c._ 1100 A.D.).
These vernacular Puranas seem to be collections of strangely
fantastic fairy tales.

C. The word Tantra originally meant a manual giving the essentials of
a subject but later usage tends to restrict it to works, whether Hindu
or Buddhist, inculcating the worship of Siva's spouse. But there are
exceptions to this restriction: the Panca-tantra is a collection of
stories and the Lakshmi-tantra is a Vishnuite work.[449]

The fact is that a whole class of Sanskrit religious literature is
described by the titles Tantra, Agama and Samhita,[450] which taken
in a wide sense are practically synonymous, though usage is inclined
to apply the first specially to Saktist works, the second to Sivaite
and the third to Vishnuite. The common character of all these
productions is that they do not attempt to combine Vedic rites and
ideas with sectarian worship, but boldly state that, since the
prescriptions of the Veda are too hard for this age, some generous
deity has revealed an easier teaching. This teaching naturally varies
in detail, but it usually comprises devotion to some special form of
the godhead and also a special ceremonial, which commences with
initiation and includes the use of mystic formulae, letters and
diagrams. Tantras, Agamas and Samhitas all treat of their
subject-matter in four divisions[451] the first of which relates to
the great problems of philosophy, the second to the discipline
necessary for uniting the self and God; the third and fourth to
ceremonial.

These works have another feature in common, namely that they are
little known except to those Hindus who use them for religious
purposes and are probably not very anxious to see them published.
Though they are numerous, few of them have been printed and those few
have not been much studied by European scholars. I shall say something
more about them below in treating of the various sects. Some are of
respectable antiquity but it is also clear that modern texts pass
under ancient names. The Pancaratram and Pasupatam which are Vishnuite
and Sivaite Samhitas are mentioned in the Mahabharata, and some
extant Vishnuite Samhitas were perhaps composed in the fourth century
A.D.[452] Ramanuja as quoted above states that the Pancaratra-sastra
(apparently the same as the Pancaratra-tantra which he also mentions)
was composed by Vasudeva himself and also cites as scripture the
Sattvata, Paushkara and Parama Samhitas. In the same context he
speaks of the Mahabharata as Bharata-Samhita and the whole passage is
interesting as being a statement by a high authority of the reasons
for accepting a non-Vedic work like the Pancaratra as revealed
scripture.

As already indicated European usage makes the words Tantra, Tantrism
and tantric refer to the worship of goddesses. It would be better to
describe this literature and worship as Saktism and to use Tantrism
for a tendency in doctrine and ceremonial which otherwise has no
special name. I have been informed by Tamil Pandits that at the
present day the ritual in some temples is smarta or according to
Smriti, but in the majority according to the Agamas or tantric. The
former which is followed by many well-known shrines (for instance in
Benares and in the great temples of south India) conforms to the
precepts of the Puranas, especially on festival days. The officiants
require no special initiation and burnt offerings are presented. But
the Agamic ritual can be performed only by priests who have received
initiation, burnt offerings rarely form part of the ceremony and
vernacular hymns are freely used.[453]

Such hymns however as well as processions and other forms of worship
which appeal directly to the religious emotions are certainly not
tantric. Tantrism is a species of religious magic, differing from the
Vedic sacrifices in method rather than principle.[454] For all that,
it sets aside the old rites and announces itself as the new
dispensation for this age. Among its principal features are the
following. The Tantras are a scripture for all, and lay little stress
on caste: the texts and the ritual which they teach can be understood
only after initiation and with the aid of a teacher: the ritual
consists largely in the correct use of spells, magical or sacramental
syllables and letters, diagrams and gestures: its object is less to
beseech than to compel the god to come to the worshipper: another
object is to unite the worshipper to the god and in fact transform him
into the god: man is a microcosm corresponding to the macrocosm or
universe: the spheres and currents of the universe are copied in
miniature in the human body and the same powers rule the same parts in
the greater and the lesser scheme. Such ideas are widely disseminated
in almost all modern sects,[455] though without forming their
essential doctrine, but I must repeat that to say all sects are
tantric does not mean that they are all Saktist. But Saktist sects
are fundamentally and thoroughly tantric in their theory and
practice.

D. Besides the Sanskrit books mentioned above numerous vernacular
works, especially collections of hymns, are accepted as authoritative
by various sects, and almost every language has scriptures of its own.
In the south two Tamil hymnals, the Devaram of the Sivaites and
Nalayira Prabandham of the Vishnuites, are recited in temples and are
boldly stated to be revelations equivalent to the Veda. In northern
India may be mentioned the Hindi Ramayana of Tulsi Das, which is
almost universally venerated, the Bhaktamala of Nabha Das,[456] the
Sur-sagar of Surdas and the Prem Sagar. In Assam the Nam Gosha of
Madhab Deb is honoured with the same homage as a sacred image. The
awkwardness of admitting direct inspiration in late times is avoided
by the theory of spiritual descent, that is to say of doctrinal
transmission from teacher to teacher, the divine revelation having
been made to the original teacher at a discreetly remote epoch.


2


In considering the evolution of modern Hinduism out of the old Vedic
religion, three of the many factors responsible for this huge and
complicated result deserve special attention. The first is the unusual
intensity and prevalence of the religious temperament. This has a
double effect, both conservative and alterative: ancient customs
receive an unreasonable respect: they are not abolished for their
immorality or absurdity; but since real interest implies some measure
of constructive power, there is a constant growth of new ideas and
reinterpretations resulting in inconsistent combinations. The second
is the absence of hierarchy and discipline. The guiding principle of
the Brahmans has always been not so much that they have a particular
creed to enforce, as that whatever is the creed of India they must be
its ministers. Naturally every priest is the champion of his own god
or rite, and such zeal may lead to occasional conflicts. But though
the antithesis between the ritualism of the older Brahmanism and the
faith or philosophy of Sivaism and Vishnuism may remind us of the
differences between the Catholic Church and Protestant reformers, yet
historically there is no resemblance in the development of the
antithesis. To some extent Hinduism showed a united front against
Buddhism, but the older Brahmanism had no organization which enabled
it to stand as a separate Church in opposition to movements which it
disliked. The third factor is the deeply rooted idea, which reappears
at frequent intervals from the time of the Upanishads until to-day,
that rules and rites and even creeds are somehow part of the lower and
temporal order of things which the soul should transcend and leave
