ecclesiastics of the ages, on the scene and at the time when the alleged
acts had taken place, and with the assistance of innumerable sworn
witnesses. The judges had no motive whatever to desire the condemnation
of the accused, and as conviction would be followed by fearful death,
they had the strongest motives to exercise their power with caution and
deliberation. The whole force of public opinion was directed constantly
and earnestly to the question for many centuries, and although there was
some controversy concerning the details of witchcraft, the fact of its
existence was long considered undoubted.

For many centuries the ablest men were not merely unwilling to repudiate
the superstition, but they often pressed forward earnestly and with the
utmost conviction to defend it. Indeed, during the period when
witchcraft was most prevalent there were few writers of real eminence
who did not, on some occasion, take especial pains to throw the weight
of their authority into the scales.

St. Thomas Aquinas was probably the ablest writer of the thirteenth
century, and he assures us that diseases and tempests are often the
direct act of the Devil; and the Devil can transform men into any shape
and transport them through the air.

Gerson, the chancellor of the University of Paris, and, as many think,
the author of "The Imitation," is justly regarded as one of the master
minds of his age; he too, wrote in defense of this belief. "These men,"
he wrote, "should be treated with scorn, and indeed, sternly corrected,
who ridicule theologians whenever they speak of demons, or attribute to
demons any effects, as if these things were entirely fabulous. This
error has arisen among some learned men, partly through want of faith,
and partly through weakness and imperfection of intellect."

Bodin was unquestionably the most original political philosopher who had
arisen since Machiavelli, and he devoted all his learning and acuteness
to crushing the rising scepticism on the subject of witches. The truth
is that in those ages ability was no guarantee against error; for the
single employment of the reason was to develop and expand premises that
were furnished by the Church. And this statement is as valid today as it
was three hundred years ago.

Bodin was esteemed, by many of his contemporaries, the ablest man who
had then arisen in France, and the verdict has been but little
qualified by later writers. Amid all the distractions of a dissipated
and an intriguing court, and all the labors of a judicial position, he
had amassed an amount of learning so vast and so various as to place him
in the very first rank of the scholars of his nation. He has also the
greater merit of being one of the chief founders of political philosophy
and political history, and of having anticipated on these subjects many
of the conclusions of our own day. In his judicial capacity he had
presided at some trials of witchcraft. He had brought all the resources
of his scholarship to bear upon the subject, and he had written a great
part of his "Demonomanie des Sorciers" before the appearance of the last
work of Wier.

John Wier was a physician of Cleves who had in 1563 published a work
which he called, "De Praestigus Daemonum." He was quite convinced that the
world was peopled by crowds of demons, who were constantly working
miracles among mankind; and his only object was to reconcile his sense
of their ubiquity with his persuasion that some of the phenomena that
were deemed supernatural arose from disease.

"Wier," said Bodin, "had armed himself against God. His book was a
tissue of 'horrible blasphemies.' For the word of God is very certain
that he who suffers a man worthy of death to escape, draws the
punishment upon himself, as the prophet said to King Ahab, that he would
die for having pardoned a man worthy of death. For no one had ever heard
of pardon accorded to sorcerers."

Such were the opinions which were promulgated towards the close of the
sixteenth century by one of the most advanced intellects of one of the
leading nations of Europe at that time; promulgated, too, with a tone of
confidence and of triumph that shows how fully the writer could count
upon the religious sympathies of his readers: the "Demonomanie des
Sorciers" appeared in 1581.

With a man of the caliber of Bodin writing the above, it is not to be
wondered at that the mobs were so active in the "Witch Hunt." For as
Lecky cites, "Although the illiterate cannot follow the more intricate
speculations of their teachers, they can catch the general tone and
character of thought which these speculations produce, and they readily
apply them to their own sphere of thought."

In 1587, Montaigne published the first great sceptical work in the
French language. The vast mass of authority which those writers loved to
array, and by which they shaped the whole course of their reasoning, is
calmly and unhesitatingly discarded. The passion for the miraculous, the
absorbing sense of diabolical capacities, have all vanished like a
dream. The old theological measure of probability has completely
disappeared, and is replaced by a shrewd secular common sense. The
statements of the witches were pronounced intrinsically incredible. The
dreams of a disordered imagination, or the terrors of the rack, would
account for many of them; but even when it is impossible to explain the
evidence, it is quite unnecessary to believe it. "After all," Montaigne
said, "it is setting a high value upon our opinions to roast men alive
on account of them."

"It was the merit of Montaigne to rise, by the force of his masculine
genius, into the clear world of reality; to judge the opinions of his
age, with an intellect that was invigorated but not enslaved by
knowledge; and to contemplate the systems of the past, without being
dazzled by the reverence that had surrounded them. He was the first
great representative of the modern secular and rationalistic spirit. The
strong predisposition of Montaigne was to regard witchcraft as the
result of natural causes, and therefore, though he did not attempt to
explain all the statements which he had heard, he was convinced that no
conceivable improbability could be as great as that which would be
involved in their reception." (_Lecky._)

Thirteen years after Montaigne, Charron wrote his famous treatise on
Wisdom. In this work he systematized many of the opinions of Montaigne.

Voltaire treated the whole subject with a scornful ridicule and observed
that, "Since there had been philosophers in France, witches had become
proportionately rare."

In 1681, Joseph Glanvil, a divine who in his day was very famous, took
up the defense of the dying belief. "The Sadducismus Triumphatus," which
he published, is probably the ablest book ever published in defense of
the superstition, and although men of the ability of Henry More, the
famous philosopher Casaubon, the learned Dean of Canterbury, Boyle and
Cudworth, came to his defense, the delusion was fast losing ground.
Lecky points out that by this time, "The sense of the improbability of
witchcraft became continually stronger, till any anecdote which involved
the intervention of the Devil was on that account generally ridiculed.
This spirit was exhibited especially among those whose habits of thought
were most secular, and whose minds were least governed by authority."

But the belief did not become extinguished immediately. In France, in
1850, the Civil Tribunal of Chartres tried a man and woman named
Soubervie for having caused the death of a woman called Bedouret. They
believed she was a witch, and declared that the _priest_ had told them
she was the cause of an illness under which the woman Soubervie was
suffering. They accordingly drew Bedouret into a private room, held her
down upon some burning straw, and placed a red-hot iron across her
mouth. The unhappy woman soon died in extreme agony. The Soubervies
confessed, and indeed, exulted in their act. At their trials they
obtained the highest possible characters. It was shown that they had
been actuated solely by superstition, and it was urged that they only
followed the highest ecclesiastical precedent. The jury recommended them
to mercy, and they were only sentenced to pay twenty-five francs a year
to the husband of the victim, and to be imprisoned for four months. In
1850!!

A great many may remember the "Hex" murder case near Lancaster,
Pennsylvania, in 1930! This is scarcely different from an incident which
had occurred in 1892 in Wemding, Germany: An hysterical woman was
"exorcised" by the Capuchin Father Aurelian, who accused a peasant woman
of bewitching him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The foregoing has shown that witchcraft is not an isolated incident in
the history of Christianity, as the ecclesiastics would have us believe,
but is a vital part of their religion. Witchcraft bears the same
relation to Christianity that an arm bears to the body; neither can be
removed without destroying the symmetrical aspect of the whole.

Witchcraft is an integral part of the Christian religion, but its
falsity has become so obvious that even the most devout have had to
abandon it. Yet the other precepts are still maintained; and in the
Bible which is claimed to be infallible, something is forgotten and
discarded, something is declared to be ridiculous. And yet they call the
Bible infallible. Again, if witchcraft is given up, why not the chief
witch of the Bible, the Devil? Yet if this be yielded, then the idea of
Atonement, the central doctrine of the Christian Church, must also go.

"Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live." If this be God's word, did God
err when He said it? If He erred, He probably did so in many other
things; if He did not Christians must either still maintain the
Witchcraft Delusion or deny the Bible Delusion.

The Witchcraft Delusion is denied and forgotten, and no one thinks of
quoting, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live." But the Bible Delusion
despite all manner of ecclesiastical sophistry still maintains that man
was created miraculously some 6000 years ago from the dust of the earth,
that woman was made from a bone taken from the side of man, that
language came into existence in the course of a single night, that God
instituted a horrible massacre of the people by drowning because they
did not come up to his expectations. It maintains miracles, virgin
births, resurrections from the dead, and a literal heaven and hell.

Again, in the New Testament, Matthew tells how the chief magician of the
New Testament, Jesus, exorcised the devils from men and drove them into
swine. What could be more explicit? If men were possessed of devils in
Jesus' time, what has happened to these devils now? Surely, Jesus could
not misinterpret his own words or deeds, if the religionists contend
that we are now misinterpreting the Bible? If they state that his
recorders were in error, then they admit the error of the entire Bible,
for it is illogical for one part to be true and another to be false,
when both are components of an infallible statement.

"But they who abandon belief in maleficent demons and in witches as
also, for this follows, in beneficent agents, such as angels, find
themselves in a serious dilemma. For to this are such committed: If
Jesus who came that he might destroy the Devil, and who is reported,
among other proofs of his divine ministry, to have cast out demons from
the 'possessed human beings,' and in one case, to have permitted a
crowd of infernal agents to enter into a herd of swine; if he verily
believed that he did these things, and if it be true that the belief is
a superstition limited to the ignorant or barbaric mind, then what value
can be attached to any statement that Jesus is reported to have made
about the spiritual world?" (_Edward Clodd: "Pioneers of Evolution."_)

The old adage that a chain is just as strong as its weakest link is very
apt in this case. A belief in witches is part of the Bible; and if the
civilized world rejects that concept, it must reject the Bible, for it
is no longer infallible, since it is in error.

Disregarding the internal evidence which declares the Bible to be
spurious, and the scientific advances which have proven the Bible to be
a myth and a fable, if man still insists on "revealed religion" he must
admit that sorcery and witchcraft are an integral part of the Bible
teaching. He must still either believe in witchcraft or disbelieve all
of the Bible. For again, one part cannot be true and another false of an
infallible statement.

I thoroughly and emphatically agree with John Wesley who, in 1769,
wrote, "The English in general, and indeed most of the men of learning
in Europe, have given up all accounts of witches and apparitions as mere
old wives' fables. I am sorry for it, and I willingly take this
opportunity of entering my solemn protest against this violent
compliment which so many that believe in the Bible pay to those who do
not believe it. I owe them no such service. I take knowledge that these
are at the bottom of the outcry which has been raised, and with such
insolence spread through the land, in direct opposition, not only to the
Bible, but to the suffrage of the wisest and best of men in all ages and
nations. They well know (whether Christians know it or not) _that the
giving up of witchcraft is in effect giving up the Bible_."

Lecky, in that masterful work, "The Rise and Influence of Rationalism in
Europe," from which I have so freely quoted, states, "A disbelief in
ghosts and witches was one of the most prominent characteristics of
Scepticism in the seventeenth century. Yet, for more than fifteen
hundred years it was universally believed that the Bible established in
the clearest manner, the validity of the crime, and that an amount of
evidence, so varied and so ample as to preclude the very possibility of
doubt, attested its continuance and its prevalence.... In our own day,
it may be said with confidence, that it would be altogether impossible
for such an amount of evidence to accumulate around a conception which
has no substantial basis in fact."

And yet today, in the twentieth century, we do have an amount of
"evidence" accumulated around a conception which had no substantial
basis of fact. What a perfect analogy presents itself between one
precept of revealed religion and religion in its entirety. In the
seventeenth century, scepticism confined itself to a disbelief in
witchcraft, one particular of revealed religion; in the twentieth
century, scepticism expands and reveals the absurdity of all revealed
religion. Just as when we read the annals of witchcraft today we sicken
with the horror of this insane conception, so will posterity in the none
too distant future, perhaps three more centuries, do for _all religion_
what three centuries did for witchcraft. Just so will they regard
revealed religion in its entirety as we look upon the one factor, the
_Witchcraft Delusion_.

Men came gradually to disbelieve in witchcraft because they learned
gradually to look upon it as absurd. This new tone of thought appeared
first of all in those who were least subject to theological influences,
and soon spread through the educated laity, and last of all, took
possession of the clergy. So shall it be with all religions.

A belief that was held for 1500 years, in the comparatively
insignificant period of 100 years, sinks into oblivion; for the last
judicial execution occurred in Switzerland in 1782; and the last law on
the subject, the Irish Statute, was repealed in 1821. It is not,
therefore, too much of a stretch of the imagination to conceive what the
inhabitants of this planet will think of all religion 300 years from
now. We have the sterling example of the Witchcraft Delusion before us.
Yes, despite the otherwise brilliant men of today who still maintain the
Bible Delusion, and the "Hedgers," that group of religious apologists
who form those various sects, such as the Unitarians, the Humanists,
etc. They are but the middle ground; they are but the intermediate
between the delusionists and those that maintain the philosophy that
eventually must triumph, the philosophy of atheism. When we think back
to that group of capable men headed by Bodin, Gerson, and Joseph
Glanvil, who turned their ability and learning to the defense of the
Witchcraft Delusion, we find the answer to that ever-present response
which the confused of this age give when confronted with the
incompatabilities in their religion, namely, "Oh, well, more brilliant
men than I believe in this delusion."

Bodin, Gerson, and Glanvil could not bolster up a dying belief; and the
Bodins, Gersons, and Glanvils of today cannot long bolster up the dying
belief in all religions ... no matter what their ability or capacities
may be. The handwriting is on the wall; the past teaches us what the
future may be, but there is still much work to be done.




CHAPTER XIII

RELIGION AND MORALITY

    _The current religion is indirectly adverse to morals, because it is
    adverse to the freedom of the intellect. But it is also directly
    adverse to morals by inventing spurious and bastard virtues._

    WINWOOD READE, "Martyrdom of Man."


It had been formerly asserted by theologians that our moral laws were
given to man by a supernatural intuitive process. However, Professor E.
A. Westermarck's "Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas," and
similar researches, give a comprehensive survey of the moral ideas and
practices of all the backward fragments of the human race and
conclusively prove the social nature of moral law. The moral laws have
evolved much the same as physical man has evolved. There is no
indication whatsoever that the moral laws came from any revelation since
the sense of moral law was just as strong amongst civilized peoples
beyond the range of Christianity, or before the Christian era. Joseph
McCabe, commenting on Professor Westermarck's work states, "All the fine
theories of the philosophers break down before this vast collection of
facts. There is no intuition whatever of an august and eternal law, and
the less God is brought into connection with these pitiful blunders and
often monstrous perversions of the moral sense, the better. What we see
is just man's mind in possession of the idea that his conduct must be
regulated by law, and clumsily working out the correct application of
that idea as his intelligence grows and his social life becomes more
complex. It is not a question of the mind of the savage imperfectly
seeing the law. It is a plain case of the ideas of the savage reflecting
and changing with his environment and the interest of his priests."

Justice is a fundamental and essential moral law because it is a vital
regulation of social life and murder is the greatest crime because it is
the greatest social delinquency; and these are inherent in the social
nature of moral law. "Moral law slowly dawns in the mind of the human
