Jabrians. The Mutazilite doctrines are looked upon as quite heretical.

No subject has been more warmly discussed in Islam than that of
predestination. The following abstract of some lengthy discussions will
present the points of difference.

The Ash'arians, who in this matter represent in the main orthodox views,
formulate their objections to the Mutazilite system thus:--

(i). If man is the causer of an action by the force of his own will, then
he should also have the power of controlling the result of that action.

(ii). If it be granted that man has the power to _originate_ {175} an act
it is necessary that he should know all acts, because a creator should be
independent in act and choice. Intention must be conditioned by knowledge.
To this the Mutazilites well reply that a man need not know the length of a
road before he walks, or the structure of the throat before he talks.

(iii). Suppose a man wills to move his body and God at the same time wills
it to be steady, then if both intentions come to pass there will be a
collection of opposites; if neither, a removal of opposites; if the
exaltation of the first, an unreasonable preference.

(iv). If man can create an act, some of his works will be better than some
of the works of God, _e.g._ a man determines to have faith: now faith is a
better thing than reptiles, which are created by God.

(v). If man is free to act, why can he not make at once a human body; why
does he need to thank God for grace and faith?

(vi). But better far than all argument, the orthodox say, is the testimony
of the Book. "All things have we created under a fixed decree." (Sura liv.
49). "When God created you and _that ye make_." (Sura xxxvii. 94). "Some of
them there were whom God guided and there were others decreed to err."
(Sura xvi. 38). As God decrees faith and obedience He must be the causer of
it, for "on the hearts of these hath God graven the Faith." (Sura lviii.
22). "It is he who causeth you to laugh and weep, to die and make alive."
(Sura liii. 44). "If God pleased He would surely bring them, one and all,
to the guidance." (Sura vi. 36). "Had God pleased, He had guided you all
aright." (Sura vi. 150). "Had the Lord pleased, He would have made mankind
of one religion." (Sura xi. 120). "God will mislead whom he pleaseth, and
whom He pleaseth He will place upon the straight path." (Sura vi. 39.)
Tradition records that the Prophet said: "God is the maker of all makers
and of their actions."[169]

{176}

The Mutazilites took up the opposite side of this great question and
said:--

(i). If man has no power to will or to do, then what is the difference
between praising God and sinning against Him; between faith and infidelity;
good and evil; what is the use of commands and prohibitions; rewards and
punishments; promises and threats; what is the use of prophets, books, &c.

(ii). Some acts of men are bad, such as tyranny and polytheism. If these
are created by God, it follows that to tyrannise and to ascribe plurality
to the Deity is to render obedience. To this the Ash'arians reply that
orders are of two kinds, immediate and mediate. The former which they call
"Amr-i-takwiti," is the order, "Be and it was." This comprehends all
existences, and according to it whatever is ordered must come to pass. The
latter they call "Amr-i-tashri'i," an order given in the Law. This comes to
men through prophets and thus is to be obeyed. True obedience is to act
according to that which is revealed, not according to the secret intentions
of God, for that we know not.

(iii). If God decrees the acts of men, He should bear the name of that
which he decrees. Thus the causer of infidelity is an infidel; of tyranny a
tyrant, and so on; but to speak thus of God is blasphemy.

(iv). If infidelity is decreed by God He must wish it; but a prophet
desires faith and obedience and so is opposed to God. To this the orthodox
reply, that God knows by His eternal knowledge that such a man will die an
infidel. {177} If a prophet intends by bringing the message of salvation to
such an one to make God's knowledge become ignorance, he would be doing
wrong; but as he does not know the secret decrees of God, his duty is to
deliver his message according to the Hadis: "A prophet has only to deliver
the clear message."

(v). The Mutazilites claimed as on their side all verses of the Quran, in
which the words to do, to construct, to renew, to create, &c., are applied
to men. Such are the verses: "Whatever is in the heavens and in the earth
is God's that He may reward those who _do_ evil according to their deeds:
and those who _do_ good will He reward with good things." (Sura liii. 32).
"Whoso shall have _wrought_ evil shall not be recompensed but with its
like: but whoso shall have _done_ the things that are right, whether male
or female and is a believer, these shall enter Paradise." (Sura xl. 43).
Say: "the truth is from the Lord; let him then who will believe; and let
him who will, be an infidel." (Sura xviii. 28).[170] "Those who add Gods to
God will say: 'If God had pleased neither we nor our fathers had given Him
companions.' Say: 'Verily ye follow only a conceit, ye utter lies.'" (Sura
vi. 149). The Hadis is also very plain. "All good is in Thy hands and evil
is not to Thee." (Al-khair kuluhu fi yadaika wash-sharru laisa 'alaika.)

The Ash'arians have one famous text which they bring to bear against all
this reasoning and evidence. It is: "This truly is a warning; and whoso
willeth, taketh the way of his Lord; but _will it ye shall not_, unless God
will it, for God is knowing, wise." (Sura lxxvi. 29, 30). To the Hadis they
reply (1) that there is a difference between acquiescence in evil and
decreeing it. Thus the expression "God willeth not tyranny for His
servants," does not mean {178} that God hath not decreed it, but that
tyranny is not one of His attributes: so "evil is not to Thee" means it is
not an attribute of God; and (2) the Hadis must be explained in accordance
with the teaching of the Quran.

The Muslim philosophers tried to find a way out of the difficulty. Averhoes
says: "We are free to act in this way or that, but our will is always
determined by some exterior cause. For example, we see something which
pleases us, we are drawn to it in spite of ourselves. Our will is thus
bound by exterior causes. These causes exist according to a certain order
of things which is founded on the general laws of nature. God alone knows
before hand the necessary connection which to us is a mystery. The
connection of our will with exterior causes is determined by the laws of
nature. It is this which in theology we call, 'decrees and
predestination.'"[171]

I have already shown how, as Islam grew into a system, the Muslims fell
into a Cabbalism, and a superstitious reverence for the mere letters and
words of the Quran. With this declension came a still more distorted view
of the character of God. The quotations made from the Quran in the last few
pages will have shown that whilst some passages seem to attribute freedom
to man and speak of his consequent responsibility, others teach a clear and
distinct fatalism. The great strength of Islam lay in the energy with which
Muhammad preached the doctrine that God was a divine Ruler, one who would
deal righteous judgment, who "taught man that which he knew not." As the
system became more complex and dogmatic--a very necessary result of its
first principles--men lost the sense of the nearness of God. He became an
unapproachable being. A harsh unfeeling Fate took the place of the
Omnipotent Ruler. It is this dark fatalism which, whatever the Quran may
teach on the subject, is the ruling principle in all Muslim {179}
communities. It is this which makes all Muhammadan nations decay. Careless
of self-improvement,[172] heedless of the need of progress, the Muslim
nations, still independent, are in all that relates to the higher aspects
of intellectual and civilized life far behind the nations of the west.

The subject of _'Ilm-i-Aqaid_, or the science of dogma properly ends here,
but most Muslim treatises include in this branch of the subject a few
practical remarks. I therefore add a summary of them here. The believer who
commits murder, fornication, &c., does not cease to be a Muslim provided
that he does not say that these are allowed: should he die unrepentant, God
can punish him for a while in hell, or forgive him without punishment. The
Hadd, a punishment based on a Zahir, or obvious sentence of the Quran
requires that a Muslim who apostatizes shall be put to death.[173] In the
case of an apostate woman, Imam Abu Hanifa ruled that she should be
imprisoned and beaten every day. The other three Imams, Malik, Shafa'i and
Hanbal said that she should be put to death in accordance with the
Tradition which says: "He who changes his religion, kill." The Arabic word
"man," usually translated "He who" is of common gender, and so these Imams
include women in the list of those who, after apostasy, are to be
killed.[174] God does not pardon polytheism and infidelity; but He can, if
He willeth, pardon all other crimes. If any one is asked, "dost thou
believe?" he should reply, "I am truly a believer," and not say: "If God
{180} willeth."[175] If any one says to him: "Wilt thou die in the faith?"
he should reply: "I do not know, God knows." Except when speaking of
prophets, or of those of whom the Prophets have spoken, such as Abu Bakr,
Omar, Osman and 'Ali, it must not be said of any one, "he is gone to
Paradise," for God only knows his state. Prayer should be made for a
deceased Muslim whether he was a good or bad man. To give alms, to read the
Quran, to perform other good works, and to apply the merit thus gained to
the souls of the dead is a pious and beneficial act.

{181}

    NOTE TO CHAPTER IV.

    MUSLIM PHILOSOPHY.

    I have shown in the preceding chapter how the earlier scholastics, or
    the Mutazilites, as they are called, were finally crushed by the
    orthodox party. The later scholastics, or the philosophers, form the
    subject of this note. The Khalif Mamun (813-833 A.D.), a notorious
    free-thinker, was the first to give an impulse to philosophic
    researches. It was then that Greek philosophical works were translated
    into Arabic. The Greek author most patronized was Aristotle, partly,
    because his empirical method accorded with the positive tendencies of
    the Arab mind better than the pure idealism of Plato; and, partly,
    because his system of logic was considered an useful auxiliary in the
    daily quarrels between the rival theological schools. It was quite
    natural that Aristotle should be thus followed. "The Musalman mind was
    trained in habits of absolute obedience to the authority of fixed
    dogmas. The Muslims did not so much wish to discover truth as to
    cultivate their own intellect. For that purpose, a sharp and subtle
    systematist like Aristotle was the very man they required."[176] Some
    idea of the range of subjects then discussed may be gained from an
    account given by the Arab historian, Masoudi, of a meeting held under
    the Presidentship of Yahya, one of the famous Barmecide family.[177]
    Yahya thus addressed the meeting: "You have discussed at length the
    theory of concealment (Al-Kumun) and manifestation (Al-Zahur), of
    pre-existence and creation, of duration and stability, of movement and
    quiescence, of the union and separation (of the Divine substance), of
    existence and non-existence, of bodies and accidents, of the approval
    and the refutation (of the Isnads of the Traditions), of the absence or
    the existence of attributes in God, of potential and active force, of
    substance, quantity, modality and relation, of life and annihilation.
    You have examined the question as to whether the Imam rules by divine
    right, or by popular election; you have had an exhaustive discussion on
    metaphysical subjects, in their principles and corollaries. Occupy
    yourselves to-day with the subject of love," &c.

    The translation of the works of Aristotle, as indeed of all the Greek
    authors, was made by Syrian and Chaldean Christians, and {182}
    especially by the Nestorians who, as physicians, were in high favour
    with the liberal Khalifs of the 'Abbasside dynasty. In some cases the
    translation into Arabic was made from Syriac versions, for in the time
    of the Emperor Justinian many Greek works had been translated into the
    latter language. The most celebrated translator was the historian
    physician Honein-Ibn-Ishak (died 876 A.D.), a man profoundly acquainted
    with the Syriac, Greek and Arabic languages. He was at the head of a
    school of interpreters in Baghdad, to which his son Ishak-ben-Honein
    and his nephew Hobeisch-Al-Asam also belonged. In the tenth century
    (A.D.) Yahya-ben-Adi and Isa-ben-Zara'a translated some works and
    corrected earlier translations of others. It is to these men that the
    Arabs owe their chief acquaintance with Plato.

    The study of Aristotle spread rapidly amongst the Muslim people,
    especially amongst the heretical sects. The orthodox looked with grave
    suspicion on the movement, but could not for a while stay the impulse.
    The historian Makrizi says: "The doctrine of the Philosophers has
    worked amongst the Muslims evils most fatal. It serves only to augment
    the errors of the heretics and to increase their impiety."[178] It came
    into contact with Muslim dogmas in such subjects as the creation of the
    world, the special providence of God and the nature of the divine
    attributes. To a certain extent the Mutazilites were supported by the
    philosophical theories they embraced, but this did not diminish the
    disfavour with which the orthodox looked upon the study of philosophy.
    Still it grew, and men in self defence had to adopt philosophic
    methods. Thus arose a later system of scholasticism. The earlier system
    was confined mainly to matters of religion; the later school occupied
    itself with the whole range of philosophic investigation, and thus went
    farther and farther away from orthodox Islam.

    The Muslims themselves did not write books on philosophy in the earlier
    period. Men of liberal tendencies imbibed its teaching, but orthodoxy
    finally gained the day over the earlier scholastics, and in the form
    known as that of the Ash'arian School became again supreme.[179] The
    great intellectual movement of the Philosophers proper, the later
    scholastics (Mutakalliman), lasted longer, but by the end of the
    twelfth century (A.D.) the whole Muhammadan world had again become
    orthodox. Salah-ud-din (Saladin) and his successors in Egypt were
    strong supporters of the Ash'arians.

    {183}

    The period now under review was one prolific of authors on grammar,
    rhetoric, logic, exegesis, traditions and the various branches of
    philosophy; but the men who stand out most prominently as philosophers
    were then, and are now, considered heretics.[180]

    Al-Kendi, was born at Basra, on the Persian Gulf. He died about 870
    A.D. He was a very scientific man, but a thorough rationalist in
    theology. He composed commentaries on the logic of Aristotle. In his
    great work on the unity of God he has strayed far away from Muslim
    dogmas.

    Al Farabi, another philosopher patronized by the 'Abbassides, seems to
    have denied not only the rigid and formal Islamic view of inspiration,
    but any objective revelation at all. He held that intuition was a true
    inspiration, and that all who had acquired intuitive knowledge were
    real prophets. This is the only revelation he admits. He received his
    philosophical training at Baghdad, where for a while he taught; but
    finally he went to Damascus, where he died 950 A.D.

    Ibn Sina, better known as Avicenna, a man of Persian origin, was a
    Philosopher of great note, but of him it is said that in spite of the
    concessions he made to the religious ideas of his age, he could not
    find favour for his opinions, which ill accord with the principles of
    Islam. He was born near Bukhara, in the year 980 A.D. For a while he
    taught medicine and philosophy in Ispahan.

    Ibn Badja, (Avempace) was one of the most celebrated Muslim
    Philosophers of Spain. He was born at Saragossa towards the end of the
    eleventh century. He is distinguished for having opposed the mystical
    tendencies of the teaching of Al-Ghazzali, and for maintaining that
    speculative science alone was capable of leading man to a true
    conception of his own proper nature. He was violently attacked by the
    orthodox divines who declared that all philosophical teaching was "a
    calamity for religion and an affliction to those who were in the good
    way."

    Al-Ghazzali was born A.D. 1059 in Khorasan. He was a famous Muslim
    divine. He adopted scholastic methods. For a while he was President of
    the Nizamiah College at Baghdad. He travelled much, and wrote many
    books to prove the superiority of Islam over all other religions and
    over philosophy. The first result of his wide and extensive study of
    the writings of the philosophers, and of the heretics was that he fell
    into a state of scepticism with regard to religion and philosophy. From
    this he emerged into Sufiism, in {184} which his restless spirit found
    satisfaction. On Sufiism, however, he exercised no very notable
    influence; but the scepticism which he still retained as regards
    philosophy rendered him a very formidable opponent to those who were
    trying to bring Islam into accord with philosophic theories. His works,
    "Tendency of Philosophers," and "Destruction of the Philosophers" had
    an immense influence. In the preface to the latter book, he speaks of
    "those who arrogate to themselves a superior intelligence, and who, in
    their pride, mistaking the precepts of religion, take as a guide the
    authority of certain great men, instead of revealed religion." It is,
    however, and with some show of reason supposed that Al-Ghazzali did not
    really object to all that he condemned, but that to gain the orthodox
    he wrote what he did. Indeed, Moses of Narbonne states that Ghazzali
    later on in life wrote a book, circulated only amongst a few select
    friends, in which he withdrew many of the objections he had raised in
    the "Destruction of Philosophers." Be that as it may, it is
    acknowledged that he dealt a blow to philosophy from which in the East
    it has never recovered; that is, as far as the Muslim world is
    concerned. His course marks a reaction of the exclusively religious
    principle of Islam against philosophical speculation, which in spite of
    all accommodation never made itself orthodox.

    In Spain philosophy still found an ardent defender in Ibn Rashid,
    better known as Averhoes. This celebrated man was born at Cordova in
    the year 1126 A.D., or about 520 of the Muhammadan era. He came of a
    noble and learned family, whilst he himself must ever occupy a
    distinguished place amongst the Muslim Philosophers. "Without dispute
    he was one of the most learned men of the Muslim world, and one of the
    profoundest commentators of Aristotle. He knew all the sciences then
    accessible to the Muslims and was a most prolific writer."[181] One of
    his most famous works was the "Refutation of the destruction of
    Philosophers." Notwithstanding his philosophical opinions Averhoes
    claimed to pass for a good Muslim. He held that the philosophic truths
    are the highest object of research; but that only a few men could by
    speculation arrive at them, and that, therefore, a divine revelation
    through the medium of prophets was necessary for spreading amongst men
    the eternal verities which are proclaimed alike by philosophy and
    religion. He held, it is true, that the orthodox had paid too much
    attention to the letter, and too little to the spirit, and that false
    interpretations had educed principles not really to be found in
    religion. This {185} profession and a rigid adherence to outward forms
    of worship, however, did not save him from suspicion. He was accused of
    preaching philosophy and the ancient sciences to the detriment of
    religion. He was deprived of his honours and banished by the Khalif
    Al-Mansur to Lucena, near Cordova. In his disgrace he had to suffer
    many insults from the orthodox. One day on entering the mosque with his
    son he was forcibly expelled by the people. He died at Morocco in 1198
    A.D. Thus passed away in disgrace the last of the Muslim Philosophers
    worthy of the name.[182] In Spain a strict prohibition was issued
    against the study of Greek philosophy, and many valuable works were
    committed to the flames. Soon after the rule of the Moors in Spain
    began to decline. The study of philosophy came to an end, and liberal
    culture sank under the pressure of the hard and fast dogmatic system of
    Islam. In Spain,[183] as in Baghdad, orthodoxy gained the day. There
