while in England, though the Spanish Match which he favoured was
broken off, he succeeded in securing some respite for the persecuted
Catholics.

In the conclave that followed upon the death of Gregory XV. Cardinal
Barberini received the support of the electors and was proclaimed Pope
as Urban VIII. (1623-44). The new Pope was a man of exemplary life
whose greatest fault was his excessive partiality towards his
relatives, though it must be said that some of the relatives on whom
he bestowed favours were by no means unworthy of them. As a native of
Florence he seems to have caught up something of the spirit of
classical learning for which that city had been so renowned, as was
shown unfortunately too clearly in the Breviary that he published in
1632. He issued the Bull, /In Coena Domini/ in its final form, founded
a national college in Rome for students from Ireland, and issued a
series of strict and minute regulations on canonisation and
beatification, many of which remain in force till the present time.
The interests of the foreign missions were specially dear to the heart
of Urban VIII. To provide a supply of priests for them he established
the celebrated /Collegium Urbanum/ (1627), and established there a
printing-press for the use of the missionaries. He reduced the number
of holidays of obligation, opened China and Japan, till then reserved
for the Jesuits, to all missionaries, and forbade slavery of
whatsoever kind in Paraguay, Brazil and the West Indies.

For many reasons the political policy of Urban VIII. has been
criticised very severely. Too much money was wasted by him in
fortifying the Papal States and on the disastrous war with the Duke of
Parma (1641-44). He has been blamed also for his failure to support
Ferdinand II. more energetically during the Thirty Years' War, but in
reality this hostile view is based largely on a distorted view of the
war itself and of the policy of the Pope. It is not true that the Pope
sympathised with Gustavus Adolphus or that he grieved over his death.
Neither is it true that he procured the dismissal of Wallenstein from
the imperial service. It is a fact undoubtedly that he did not take
energetic measures to prevent the French from assisting the Protestant
princes and the Swedes against the Emperor, but it remains to be
proved that any remonstrances from the Pope, however strong, would
have proved effectual in the circumstances. In the later stages at any
rate the war could not be regarded at first sight as a religious one,
but at the same time it is to be regretted that Urban VIII. did not
recognise that the triumph of the enemies of the Emperor meant a
triumph for Lutheranism. In the war between Spain and Portugal
consequent upon the proclamation of the Duke of Braganza he
endeavoured to preserve an attitude of neutrality by refusing to
appoint to episcopal sees in Portugal the candidates presented by the
new king. The policy of Urban VIII. in regard to England and Ireland
will be dealt with under these countries.

When the conclave met to elect a successor to Urban VIII. it was soon
discovered that some of the cardinals wished to elect a Pope friendly
to Spain, wile others favoured a pro-French Pope. At length, as
neither party was sufficiently strong to ensure the required majority
for its nominee, a more or less neutral candidate was found in the
person of Cardinal Pamfili who took the title of Innocent X. (1644-
55).[12] He was a man of advanced years, who had served in many
offices with success, and who possessed many of the qualifications
required in a good ruler of the Church. Unfortunately, his flagrant
nepotism did him much harm and gave occasion to ugly rumours utterly
devoid of truth. Finding the papal treasury empty after his election
and believing that the relatives of the late Pope were responsible for
this, he took steps to secure a return from them; but they fled to
France, where they placed themselves under the protection of Cardinal
Mazarin, who succeeded in bringing about a reconciliation. Innocent X.
restored order in the Papal States, punished the Duke of Parma for his
crimes, especially for his supposed connexion with the murder of the
Bishop of Castro, and maintained friendly relations with Venice, which
he assisted against the Turks. He was deeply pained by the terms of
the Peace of Westphalia (1648) against which his representatives had
protested in vain, and which he condemned in the Bull, /Zelus Domus
Dei/ published in November 1648.
                              ----------

[1] /Catena, Vita del gloriossisimo Papa Pio V./, 1587. Gabutius, /De
    Vita et rebus gestis Pii V./, 1605. Antony, /Saint Pius V./, 1911.
    Grente, /Saint Pie V./, ("/Les Saints/"), 1914.

[2] Julien, /Papes et Sultans/, 1880. De la Graviere, /La Guerre de
    Chypre et la bataille de Lepante/, 1888.

[3] Pieper, /Zur Enstehungsgeschichte der standigen Nuntiaturem/,
    1894.

[4] Pierling, /Gregoire XIII. et Ivan le Terrible/ (/Revue des Quest.
    Histor./, 1886).

[5] Hubner, /Sixte-Quint/, 3 vols., 1870.

[6] /Bullar. Rom./, iv. 4, 392.

[7] Wadding, /Vita Clementis VIII./, Rome, 1723.

[8] McIntyre, /Giordano Bruno/, 1903.

[9] Bzovius, /Vita Pauli V./, 1625.

[10] Campbell, /Vita di Fra Paolo Sarpi/, 1875. /Irish Ecc. Record/
    xv., 524-40.

[11] /Bullar. Romanum/ (xii., 662 sqq.).

[12] Chinazzi, /Sede vacante per la morte del papa Urbano VIII. e
    conclave di Innocenzo X./, 1904.


        (c) The Religious Orders and the Counter-Reformation.

  Helyot, /Histoire des ordres monastiques religieux/, etc., 8
  vols., 1714-19. Heimbucher, /Die Orden und Kongregationen der
  Katholischen Kirche/, 1907-8. Mabillon, /Annales Ordinis Sancti
  Benedicti/, 1703-39. Albers, /Zur Reformgeschichte des
  Benediktiner-ordens im 16 Jahrhundert/ (/Stud. u-Mitteil/, 1900,
  1901). Daurignac, /Histoire de la comp. de Jesus/, 1862.
  Cretineau-Joly, /Histoire religieuse, politique et litteraire de
  la comp. de Jesus/, 1859. Huber, /Der Jesuitenorden Duhr,
  Jesuitenfabeln/, 1904. Abelly, /Vie de Ven. serviteur de Dieu,
  Vincent de Paul/, 1891. Bougaud-Brady, /History of St. Vincent de
  Paul, etc./, 1908. Boyle, /St. Vincent de Paul, and the
  Vincentians in Ireland, Scotland, and England/, 1909.

The religious orders, like most other institutions of the age
preceding the Reformation, stood badly in need of re-organisation and
reform. Various causes had combined to bring about a relaxation of the
discipline prescribed by their holy founders, and to introduce a
spirit of worldliness, that boded ill both for the individual members
as well as for the success of the work for which these orders had been
established. The interference of outside authorities lay or
ecclesiastical in the appointment of superiors, the union of several
houses under one superior, the accumulation of wealth, the habitual
neglect of the superiors to make their visitations, and a general
carelessness in the selection and training of the candidates to be
admitted into the various institutions, were productive of disastrous
results. It is difficult, however, to arrive at a correct estimate as
to the extent of the evil, because the condition of affairs varied
very much in the different religious orders and in the different
provinces and houses of the same order. At all times a large
proportion of the religious of both sexes recognised and deplored the
spirit of laxity that had crept in, and laboured strenuously for a
return to the old ideals long before the Lutheran campaign had made it
necessary to choose between reform and suppression.

The Benedictines, who had done excellent work for the promotion of the
spiritual and temporal welfare of the people amongst whom they
laboured, suffered more than any other body from the interference of
lay patrons in the appointment of abbots, as well as from the want of
any central authority capable of controlling individual houses and of
insisting upon the observance of the rules and constitution. Various
efforts were made, however, to introduce reforms during the sixteenth
century. In France the most important of these reforms was that begun
in the abbey of St. Vannes by the abbot, Didier de la Cour.
Recognising the sad condition of affairs he laboured incessantly to
bring about a return to the strict rule of St. Benedict. His efforts
were approved by Clement VIII. in 1604. Many houses in France having
accepted the reform, it was resolved to unite them into one
congregation under the patronage of St. Maur, the disciple of St.
Benedict.[1] The new congregation of St. Maur was sanctioned by Louis
XIII. and by Pope Gregory XV. (1621). The Maurists devoted themselves
to the study of the sacred sciences, more especially to history,
liturgy and patrology, and set an example of thorough scholarship
which won for them the praise of both friends and foes. The names of
D'Achery, Mabillon, Ruinart, Martene, Thierry, Lami and Bouquet are
not likely to be forgotten so long as such works as the /Amplissima
Collectio Veterum Scriptorum/, /Thesaurus Anecdotorum/, /Gallia
Christiana/, /Histoire Litteraire de la France/, /De Re Diplomatica/,
/L'Art de verifier les dates/, the /Receuil des historiens des
Gaules/, etc., survive to testify to the labours and research of the
Congregation of St. Maur.[2]

The reform movement among the Dominicans had made itself manifest from
the days of Raymond of Capua (1390), who ordered that in every
province there should be at least one house where the rule of St.
Dominic might be observed in its original strictness. The success of
the reform varied in the different countries and even in the different
houses of the same province, but in the sixteenth century the general
tendency was undoubtedly upwards. The religious rebellion inflicted
serious losses on the order and led to the almost complete extinction
of provinces that once were flourishing; but the Spanish and
Portuguese discoveries in America and the spread of the missionary
movement opened up for the order new fields, where its members were
destined to do lasting service to religion and to win back in the New
World more than they had lost in the Old. Discipline among the
Cistercians, too, had become relaxed, but a general improvement set in
which led to the formation of new congregations, the principal of
which were the Congregation of the Feuillants approved by Sixtus V.
(1587), and of the Trappists, which take their name from the monastery
of La Trappe and owe their origin to the zealous efforts of the Abbot
de Rance (1626-1700).

The Franciscans were divided already into the Observants and the
Conventuals, but even among the Observants the deteriorating influence
of the age had made itself felt. Matteo di Bassi set himself in the
convent of Monte Falco to procure a complete return to the original
rule of St. Francis, and proceeded to Rome to secure the approbation
of Clement VII. In 1528 by the Bull, /Religionis Zelus/ the Pope
permitted himself and his followers to separate from the Observants,
to wear the hood (/cappuccio/, hence the name Capuchins[3]) which
Matteo claimed to have been the dress of St. Francis, to wear the
beard, to found separate houses in Italy, and to preach to the people.
Soon the Capuchins spread through Italy, and so popular did they
become that Gregory XIII. withdrew the regulations by which they were
forbidden to found separate houses outside of Italy. The new order
suffered many trials more especially after the apostasy of its vicar-
general Ochino in 1544, but with the blessing of God these
difficulties were overcome. The Capuchins rendered invaluable service
to religion by their simple straightforward style of preaching so
opposed as it was to the literary vapourings that passed for sermons
at the time, by their familiar intercourse with the poor whom they
assisted in both spiritual and temporal misfortunes, by their
unswerving loyalty to the Pope and by the work they accomplished on
the foreign missions, more especially in those lands which had once
been the glory of the Church but where religion had been extinguished
almost completely by the domination of the Saracen.

The revival was not confined, however, merely to a reform of the older
religious orders. The world had changed considerably since the
constitutions of these bodies had been formulated by their holy
founders. New conditions and new dangers necessitated the employment
of new weapons and new methods for the defence of religion.
Fortunately a band of zealous men were raised up by God to grapple
with the problems of the age, and to lay the foundation of religious
societies, many of which were destined to confer benefits on religion
hardly less permanent and less valuable than had been conferred in
other times by such distinguished servants of God as St. Benedict, St.
Dominic, and St. Francis of Assisi.

The Theatines, so called from Chieti (Theate) the diocese of Peter
Caraffa, had their origin in a little confraternity founded by Gaetano
di Tiene[4] a Venetian, who gathered around him a few disciples, all
of them like himself zealous for the spiritual improvement of both
clergy and people (1524). During a visit to Rome Gaetano succeeded in
eliciting the sympathy of Peter Caraffa (then bishop of Theate and
afterwards cardinal and Pope) and in inducing him to become the first
superior of the community. The institution was approved by Clement
VII. in 1524. Its founders aimed at introducing a higher standard of
spiritual life amongst both clergy and laity by means of preaching and
by the establishment of charitable institutions. The order spread
rapidly in Italy, where it did much to save the people from the
influence of Lutheranism, in Spain were it was assisted by Philip II.,
in France where Cardinal Mazarin acted as its patron, and in the
foreign missions, especially in several parts of Asia, the Theatines
won many souls to God.

The Regular Clerics of St. Paul, better known as the Barnabites from
their connexion with the church of St. Barnabas at Milan, were founded
by Antony Maria Zaccaria[5] of Cremona, Bartholomew Ferrari and Jacopo
Morigia. Shocked by the low state of morals then prevalent in so many
Italian cities, these holy men gathered around them a body of zealous
young priests, who aimed at inducing the people by means of sermons
and instructions to take advantage of the sacrament of Penance. The
order was approved by Clement VII. in 1533, and received many
important privileges from his successors. Its members worked in
complete harmony with the secular clergy and in obedience to the
commands of the bishops. They bound themselves not to seek or accept
any preferment or dignity unless at the express direction of the Pope.
In Milan they were beloved by St. Charles Borromeo who availed himself
freely of their services, and they were invited to Annecy by St.
Francis de Sales. Several houses of the Barnabites were established in
Italy, France, and Austria. In addition to their work of preaching and
instructing the people they established many flourishing colleges, and
at the request of the Pope undertook charge of some of the foreign
missions.

The founder of the Oblates was St. Charles Borromeo[6] (1538-84) who
was created cardinal by his uncle Pius IV., at the age of twenty-
three, and who during his comparatively short life did more for the
reform of the Church and for the overthrow of Protestantism than any
individual of his age. It was due mainly to his exertions that the
Council of Trent was re-convoked, and to his prudent advice that it
was carried to a successful conclusion. Once the decrees of the
Council had received the approval of the Pope St. Charles spared no
pains to see that they were put into execution not only in his own
diocese of Milan but throughout the entire Church. For a long time
personal government of his diocese was impossible as his presence in
Rome was insisted upon by the Pope; but as soon as he could secure
permission he hastened to Milan, where he repressed abuses with a
stern hand, introduced regular diocesan and provincial synods, visited
in person the most distant parts of the diocese, won back thousands
who had gone over to heresy in the valleys of Switzerland, and
defended vigorously the rights and the liberties of the Church against
the Spanish representatives. In all his reforms he was supported
loyally by the religious orders, more especially by the Jesuits and
the Barnabites, with whom he maintained at all times the most friendly
relations. At the same time he felt the need of a community of secular
priests, who while remaining under the authority of the bishop would
set an example of clerical perfection, and who would be ready at the
request of the bishop to volunteer for the work that was deemed most
pressing. he was particularly anxious that such a body should
undertake the direction of the diocesan seminary, and should endeavour
to send forth well educated and holy priests. With these objects in
view he established the Oblates in 1578, and the community fully
justified his highest expectations.

The Oratorians[7] were established by St. Philip Neri (1515-95) the
reformer and one of the patrons of Rome. He was a native of Florence,
who when still a young man turned his back upon a promising career in
the world in order to devote himself entirely to the service of God.
Before his ordination he laboured for fifteen years visiting the sick
in the hospitals, assisting the poorer pilgrims, and instructing the
young. He formed a special confraternity, and gathered around him a
body of disciples both cleric and lay. After his ordination they were
accustomed to hold their conferences in a little room (/Oratorium/,
Oratory) over the church of St. Girolmao. Here sermons and
instructions were given on all kinds of subjects, particularly on the
Sacred Scriptures, the writings of the Fathers, and the leading events
in the history of the Church. The society was approved by Gregory
XIII. (1575) under the title of the Congregation of the Oratory. It
was to be composed of secular priests living together under a rule,
but bound by no special vows. St. Philip Neri was convinced that the
style of preaching in vogue at the time was responsible in great
measure for the decline of religion and morality. Being a man of sound
education himself he insisted that his companions should devote
themselves to some particular department of ecclesiastical knowledge,
and should give the people the fruits of their study. Baronius, for
example, the author of the celebrated /Annales Ecclesiastici/, is said
to have preached for thirty years on the history of the Church. In
this way St. Philip provided both for sound scholarship and useful
instruction. Many branches of the Oratory were founded in Italy,
Spain, Portugal, and in the Spanish and Portuguese colonies in South
America.

Recognising the need for an improvement in the education and lives of
the French clergy and mindful of the benefits conferred on Rome by the
community of St. Philip Neri, the Abbe, afterwards Cardinal, Pierre de
Berulle determined to found an Oratory in Paris.[8] The Paris
Oratorians were a community of secular priests bound by no special
vows, but living under a common rule with the object of fulfilling as
perfectly as possible the obligations they had undertaken at their
ordination. The project received the warm support of Cardinal
Richelieu and was approved by Paul V. in 1613. At the time clerical
education in Paris and throughout France was in a condition of almost
hopeless confusion. The French Oratorians, devoted as they were
themselves to study, determined to organise seminaries on the plan
laid down by the Council of Trent, and to take charge of the
administration of such institutions. In philosophy the Oratory
produced scholars such as Malebranche, in theology Thomassin and
Morin, in Scripture Houbigant and Richard Simon, and in sacred
eloquence such distinguished preachers as Lajeune and Massillon. The
Oratorians survived the stormy days of the Jansenist struggle though
the peace of the community was disturbed at times by the action of a
few of its members, but it went down before the wild onslaught of the
Revolution. It was revived, however, by Pere Gratry in 1852.

The Brothers of Charity were founded by a Portuguese,[9] who having
been converted by a sermon of St. John d'Avila, devoted himself to the
relief of human suffering in every form. On account of his great
charity and zeal for souls he received the surname, St. John of God.
He gathered around him a band of companions who assisted him in caring
for the sick in the hospital he had founded at Granada. After his
death in 1550 the work that he had begun was carried on by his
disciples, whose constitutions were approved by Pius V. in 1572. Soon
through the generosity of Philip II. and of the Spanish nobles
hospitals were established in various cities of Spain, and placed
under the control of the Brothers of St. John of God. They were
invited by the Pope to open a house in Rome, and they went also to
Paris on the invitation of the queen (1601). At the time of the French
Revolution they had charge of forty hospitals, from all of which they
were expelled. The founder was canonised in 1690, and named as patron
of hospitals by Leo XIII. in 1898.

The Piarists or Patres Piarum Scholarum were founded by St. Joseph
Calazansa[10] (1556-1648), who had been vicar-general of the diocese
of Urgel in Spain, an office which he resigned in order to betake
himself to Rome. Here he began to gather the poorer children for
instruction, and as the teachers were unwilling to assist him unless
they were given extra remuneration, he opened a free school in Rome in
1597. The school was taught by himself and two or three priests whom
he had interested in the work. From these unpretentious beginnings
sprang the society of the Fathers of the Pious Schools. The object of
the society, which was composed of priests, was the education of the
young both in primary and secondary schools. The society was approved
by Paul V., and established finally as a recognised institution by
Gregory XV. (1621). It spread rapidly into Italy, Austria, and Poland.
Somewhat akin to the Piarists were the Fathers of Christian Doctrine,
founded by Caesar de Bus for the purpose of educating the young. The
society was composed of priests, and received the approval of Clement
VIII. in 1597. Later on it united with the Somaschans, who had been
established by St. Jerome Aemilian with a similar purpose, but on
account of certain disputes that arose the two bodies were separated
in 1647.

The Brothers of the Christian Schools were founded by John Baptist de
la Salle[11] (1651-1719). The founder was a young priest of great
ability, who had read a distinguished course in arts and theology
before his ordination. Having been called upon to assist in conducting
a free school opened at Rheims in 1679 he threw himself into the work
with vigour, devoting nearly all his energies to the instruction of
the teachers. These he used to gather around him after school hours to
encourage them to their work, to suggest to them better methods of
imparting knowledge and generally to correct any defects that he might
have noticed during the course of his daily visits to the schools. In
this way he brought together a body of young men interested in the
education of the children of the poor, from which body were developed
the Brothers of the Christian Schools. At first he intended that some
of the congregation should be priests, but later on he changed his
mind, and made it a rule that none of the Brothers should become
priests, nor should any priest be accepted as a novice. For a long
time the holy founder was engaged in an uphill struggle during which
the very existence of the institute was imperilled. Distrusted by some
of the ecclesiastical authorities, attacked by enemies on all side,
deserted by a few of his own most trusted disciples, a man of less
zeal and determination would have abandoned the project in despair.
But de la Salle was not discouraged. He composed a constitution for
his followers, and in 1717 he held a general chapter, in which he
secured the election of a superior-general. From this time the
Institute of Christian Brothers progressed by leaps and bounds. The
holy founder of the society was a pioneer in the work of primary
education. In teaching, in the grading of the pupils, and in
constructing and furnishing the schools new methods were followed;
more liberty was given in the selection of programmes to suit the
districts in which schools were opened; normal schools were
established to train the young teachers for their duties, and care was
taken that religious and secular education should go forward hand in
hand. The society spread rapidly in France, more especially after it
had received the approval of Louis XV., and had been recognised as a
religious congregation by Benedict XIII. (1725). During the Revolution
the society was suppressed, and the Brothers of the Christian Schools
suffered much rather than prove disloyal to the Pope. In 1803 the
institute was re-organised, and since that time houses have been
opened in nearly every part of the world. John Baptist de la Salle was
canonised by Leo XIII. in 1900.

The Congregation of the Priests of the Mission, better known as
Lazarists from the priory of St. Lazare which they occupied in Paris,
and as Vincentians from the name of their founder, St. Vincent de
Paul, was established in 1624. St. Vincent was born at Pouy in Gascony
in 1576, received his early education at a Franciscan school, and
completed his theological studies at the University of Toulouse, where
he was ordained in 1600. Four years later the ship on which he
journeyed from Marseilles having been attacked by Barbary pirates, he
was taken prisoner and brought to Tunis, where he was sold as a slave.
He succeeded in making his escape from captivity (1607) by converting
his master, a Frenchman who had deserted his country and his religion.
He went to Rome, from which he was despatched on a mission to the
French Court, and was appointed almoner to queen Margaret of Valois.
Later on he became tutor to the family of the Count de Gondi, the
master of the French galleys. During his stay there St. Vincent found
time to preach to the peasants on the estate of his employer, and to
visit the prisoners condemned to the galleys. The splendid results of
his labours among these classes bore such striking testimony to the
success of his missions that St. Vincent was induced to found a
congregation of clergymen for this special work. Something of this
kind was required urgently in France at this period. The absence of
seminaries and the want of any properly organised system of clerical
education had produced their natural consequences on the clergy. In
the country districts particularly, the priests had neither the
knowledge nor the training that would enable them to discharge their
sacred functions. From this it followed that the people were not
instructed, and the sacraments were neglected.

By opening a house in Paris in 1624 St. Vincent took the first
practical step towards the foundation of a religious congregation,
that was destined to renew and to strengthen religion in France. Later
on the society received the sanction of the Archbishop of Paris,[12]
and of Louis XIII., and finally it was approved by Urban VIII. in the
Bull, /Salvatoris Nostri/, dated 12th January 1632. In the same year
St. Vincent took possession of the priory of St. Lazare placed at his
disposal by the canons regular of St. Victor. The Congregation of the
Mission was to be a congregation of secular clergymen, bound by simple
religious vows. Its principal work, besides the sanctification of its
own members, was to give missions to the poor particularly in country
districts, and to promote a high standard of clerical life. The
bishops of France were delighted with the programme of the new
congregation. Invitations poured in from all sides on the disciples of
St. Vincent asking them to undertake missions, and wherever they went
their labours were attended with success. As a rule St. Vincent
established a confraternity of charity in the parishes that he visited
to help the poor and above all to look after the homeless orphans.[13]

It was not long until he discovered that, however successful his
missions might be, they could effect little permanent good unless the
priests in charge of the parishes were determined to continue the work
that had been begun, and to reap the harvest which the missioners had
planted. At that time there were no seminaries in France, so that
candidates for the priesthood were ordained on the completion of their
university course without any special training for their sacred
