    Their eyes are black, and green their hair--
      They lurk in sedgy shores."

            Mathisson.



River Nymphs

Besides Elf or Elb, the water sprite who gave its name to the Elbe
River in Germany, the Neck, from whom the Neckar derives its name,
and old Father Rhine, with his numerous daughters (tributary streams),
the most famous of all the lesser water divinities is the Lorelei,
the siren maiden who sits upon the Lorelei rock near St. Goar, on
the Rhine, and whose alluring song has enticed many a mariner to
death. The legends concerning this siren are very numerous indeed,
one of the most ancient being as follows:



Legends of the Lorelei

Lorelei was an immortal, a water nymph, daughter of Father Rhine;
during the day she dwelt in the cool depths of the river bed, but
late at night she would appear in the moonlight, sitting aloft upon
a pinnacle of rock, in full view of all who passed up or down the
stream. At times, the evening breeze wafted some of the notes of
her song to the boatmen's ears, when, forgetting time and place in
listening to these enchanting melodies, they drifted upon the sharp
and jagged rocks, where they invariably perished.


    "Above the maiden sitteth,
      A wondrous form, and fair;
    With jewels bright she plaiteth
      Her shining golden hair:
    With comb of gold prepares it,
      The task with song beguiled;
    A fitful burden bears it--
      That melody so wild.

    "The boatman on the river
      Lists to the song, spell-bound;
    Oh! what shall him deliver
      From danger threat'ning round?
    The waters deep have caught them,
      Both boat and boatman brave;
    'Tis Loreley's song hath brought them
      Beneath the foaming wave."

            Song, Heine (Selcher's tr.).


One person only is said to have seen the Lorelei close by. This was
a young fisherman from Oberwesel, who met her every evening by the
riverside, and spent a few delightful hours with her, drinking in her
beauty and listening to her entrancing song. Tradition had it that ere
they parted the Lorelei pointed out the places where the youth should
cast his nets on the morrow--instructions which he always obeyed,
and which invariably brought him success.

One night the young fisherman was seen going towards the river,
but as he never returned search was made for him. No clue to his
whereabouts being found, the credulous Teutons finally reported that
the Lorelei had dragged him down to her coral caves that she might
enjoy his companionship for ever.

According to another version, the Lorelei, with her entrancing
strains from the craggy rocks, lured so many fishermen to a grave in
the depths of Rhine, that an armed force was once sent at nightfall
to surround and seize her. But the water nymph laid such a powerful
spell upon the captain and his men that they could move neither hand
nor foot. While they stood motionless around her, the Lorelei divested
herself of her ornaments, and cast them into the waves below; then,
chanting a spell, she lured the waters to the top of the crag upon
which she was perched, and to the wonder of the soldiers the waves
enclosed a sea-green chariot drawn by white-maned steeds, and the
nymph sprang lightly into this and the magic equipage was instantly
lost to view. A few moments later the Rhine subsided to its usual
level, the spell was broken, and the men recovered power of motion,
and retreated to tell how their efforts had been baffled. Since then,
however, the Lorelei has not been seen, and the peasants declare that
she still resents the insult offered her and will never again leave
her coral caves.






CHAPTER XXI: BALDER


The Best Loved

To Odin and Frigga, we are told, were born twin sons as dissimilar
in character and physical appearance as it was possible for two
children to be. Hodur, god of darkness, was sombre, taciturn, and
blind, like the obscurity of sin, which he was supposed to symbolise,
while his brother Balder, the beautiful, was worshipped as the pure
and radiant god of innocence and light. From his snowy brow and golden
locks seemed to radiate beams of sunshine which gladdened the hearts
of gods and men, by whom he was equally beloved.


    "Of all the twelve round Odin's throne,
    Balder, the Beautiful, alone,
    The Sun-god, good, and pure, and bright,
    Was loved by all, as all love light."

            Valhalla (J. C. Jones).


The youthful Balder attained his full growth with marvellous rapidity,
and was early admitted to the council of the gods. He took up his
abode in the palace of Breidablik, whose silver roof rested upon
golden pillars, and whose purity was such that nothing common or
unclean was ever allowed within its precincts, and here he lived in
perfect unity with his young wife Nanna (blossom), the daughter of Nip
(bud), a beautiful and charming goddess.

The god of light was well versed in the science of runes, which were
carved on his tongue; he knew the various virtues of simples, one of
which, the camomile, was called "Balder's brow," because its flower
was as immaculately pure as his forehead. The only thing hidden from
Balder's radiant eyes was the perception of his own ultimate fate.


            "His own house
    Breidablik, on whose columns Balder graved
    The enchantments that recall the dead to life.
    For wise he was, and many curious arts,
    Postures of runes, and healing herbs he knew;
    Unhappy! but that art he did not know,
    To keep his own life safe, and see the sun."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).



Balder's Dream

As it was so natural for Balder the beautiful to be smiling and
happy, the gods were greatly troubled when on a day they began to
notice a change in his bearing. Gradually the light died out of his
blue eyes, a careworn look came into his face, and his step grew
heavy and slow. Odin and Frigga, seeing their beloved son's evident
depression, tenderly implored him to reveal the cause of his silent
grief. Balder, yielding at last to their anxious entreaties, confessed
that his slumbers, instead of being peaceful and restful as of yore,
had been strangely troubled of late by dark and oppressive dreams,
which, although he could not clearly remember them when he awoke,
constantly haunted him with a vague feeling of fear.


    "To that god his slumber
    Was most afflicting;
    His auspicious dreams
    Seemed departed."

            Lay of Vegtam (Thorpe's tr.).


When Odin and Frigga heard this, they were very uneasy, but declared
that nothing would harm their universally beloved son. Nevertheless,
when the anxious parents further talked the matter over, they
confessed that they also were oppressed by strange forebodings, and,
coming at last to believe that Balder's life was really threatened,
they proceeded to take measures to avert the danger.

Frigga sent her servants in every direction, with strict charge to
prevail upon all living creatures, all plants, metals, stones--in
fact, every animate and inanimate thing--to register a solemn vow
not to harm Balder. All creation readily took the oath, for there was
nothing on earth which did not love the radiant god. So the servants
returned to Frigga, telling her that all had been duly sworn save
the mistletoe, growing upon the oak stem at the gate of Valhalla,
and this, they added, was such a puny, inoffensive thing that no harm
could be feared from it.


    "On a course they resolved:
    That they would send
    To every being,
    Assurance to solicit,
    Balder not to harm.
    All species swore
    Oaths to spare him;
    Frigg received all
    Their vows and compacts."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Frigga now resumed her spinning in great content, for she felt assured
that no harm could come to the child she loved above all.



The Vala's Prophecy

Odin, in the meantime, had resolved to consult one of the dead Vala
or prophetesses. Mounted upon his eight-footed steed Sleipnir, he rode
over the tremulous bridge Bifroest and over the weary road which leads
to Giallar and the entrance of Nifl-heim, where, passing through the
Helgate and by the dog Garm, he penetrated into Hel's dark abode.


    "Uprose the king of men with speed,
    And saddled straight his coal-black steed;
    Down the yawning steep he rode,
    That leads to Hela's drear abode."

            Descent of Odin (Gray).


Odin saw to his surprise that a feast was being spread in this dark
realm, and that the couches had been covered with tapestry and rings of
gold, as if some highly honoured guest were expected. But he hurried on
without pausing, until he reached the spot where the Vala had rested
undisturbed for many a year, when he began solemnly to chant a magic
spell and to trace the runes which had the power of raising the dead.


    "Thrice pronounc'd, in accents dread,
    The thrilling verse that wakes the dead:
    Till from out the hollow ground
    Slowly breath'd a sullen sound."

            Descent of Odin (Gray).


Suddenly the tomb opened, and the prophetess slowly rose, inquiring
who had dared thus to trouble her long rest. Odin, not wishing her to
know that he was the mighty father of gods and men, replied that he
was Vegtam, son of Valtam, and that he had awakened her to inquire for
whom Hel was spreading her couches and preparing a festive meal. In
hollow tones, the prophetess confirmed all his fears by telling him
that the expected guest was Balder, who was destined to be slain by
Hodur, his brother, the blind god of darkness.


    "Hodur will hither
    His glorious brother send;
    He of Balder will
    The slayer be,
    And Odin's son
    Of life bereave.
    By compulsion I have spoken;
    Now I will be silent."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Despite the Vala's evident reluctance to speak further, Odin was not
yet satisfied, and he prevailed upon her to tell him who would avenge
the murdered god and call his slayer to account. For revenge and
retaliation were considered as a sacred duty by the races of the North.

Then the prophetess told him, as Rossthiof had already predicted,
that Rinda, the earth-goddess, would bear a son to Odin, and that
Vali, as this child would be named, would neither wash his face nor
comb his hair until he had avenged upon Hodur the death of Balder.


    "In the caverns of the west,
    By Odin's fierce embrace comprest,
    A wondrous boy shall Rinda bear,
    Who ne'er shall comb his raven hair,
    Nor wash his visage in the stream,
    Nor see the sun's departing beam,
    Till he on Hoder's corse shall smile
    Flaming on the fun'ral pile."

            Descent of Odin (Gray).


When the reluctant Vala had thus spoken, Odin next asked: "Who would
refuse to weep at Balder's death?" This incautious question showed a
knowledge of the future which no mortal could possess, and immediately
revealed to the Vala the identity of her visitor. Therefore, refusing
to speak another word, she sank back into the silence of the tomb,
declaring that none would be able to lure her out again until the
end of the world was come.


    "Hie thee hence, and boast at home,
    That never shall inquirer come
    To break my iron sleep again,
    Till Lok has burst his tenfold chain;
    Never, till substantial Night
    Has reassum'd her ancient right:
    Till wrapt in flames, in ruin hurl'd,
    Sinks the fabric of the world."

            Descent of Odin (Gray).


Odin having learned the decrees of Orlog (fate), which he knew could
not be set aside, now remounted his steed, and sadly wended his
way back to Asgard, thinking of the time, not far distant, when his
beloved son would no more be seen in the heavenly abodes, and when
the light of his presence would have vanished for ever.

On entering Glads-heim, however, Odin was somewhat reassured by
the intelligence, promptly conveyed to him by Frigga, that all
things under the sun had promised that they would not harm Balder,
and feeling convinced that if nothing would slay their beloved son he
must surely continue to gladden gods and men with his presence, he cast
care aside and resigned himself to the pleasures of the festive board.



The Gods at Play

The playground of the gods was situated on the green plain of Ida,
and was called Idavold. Here the gods would resort when in sportive
mood, and their favourite game was to throw their golden disks, which
they could cast with great skill. They had returned to this wonted
pastime with redoubled zest since the cloud which had oppressed their
spirits had been dispersed by the precautions of Frigga. Wearied at
last, however, of the accustomed sport, they bethought them of a new
game. They had learned that Balder could not be harmed by any missile,
and so they amused themselves by casting all manner of weapons, stones,
etc., at him, certain that no matter how cleverly they tried, and
how accurately they aimed, the objects, having sworn not to injure
him, would either glance aside or fall short. This new amusement
proved to be so fascinating that soon all the gods gathered around
Balder, greeting each new failure to hurt him with prolonged shouts
of laughter.



The Death of Balder

These bursts of merriment excited the curiosity of Frigga, who sat
spinning in Fensalir; and seeing an old woman pass by her dwelling,
she bade her pause and tell what the gods were doing to provoke such
great hilarity. The old woman was none other than Loki in disguise,
and he answered Frigga that the gods were throwing stones and other
missiles, blunt and sharp, at Balder, who stood smiling and unharmed
in their midst, challenging them to touch him.

The goddess smiled, and resumed her work, saying that it was quite
natural that nothing should harm Balder, as all things loved the light,
of which he was the emblem, and had solemnly sworn not to injure
him. Loki, the personification of fire, was greatly chagrined upon
hearing this, for he was jealous of Balder, the sun, who so entirely
eclipsed him and who was generally beloved, while he was feared and
avoided as much as possible; but he cleverly concealed his vexation,
and inquired of Frigga whether she were quite sure that all objects
had joined the league.

Frigga proudly answered that she had received the solemn oath of
all things, a harmless little parasite, the mistletoe, which grew on
the oak near Valhalla's gate, only excepted, and this was too small
and weak to be feared. This information was all that Loki wanted,
and bidding adieu to Frigga he hobbled off. As soon as he was safely
out of sight, however, he resumed his wonted form and hastened to
Valhalla, where, at the gate, he found the oak and mistletoe as
indicated by Frigga. Then by the exercise of magic arts he imparted
to the parasite a size and hardness quite unnatural to it.

From the wooden stem thus produced he deftly fashioned a shaft with
which he hastened back to Idavold, where the gods were still hurling
missiles at Balder, Hodur alone leaning mournfully against a tree the
while, and taking no part in the game. Carelessly Loki approached
the blind god, and assuming an appearance of interest, he inquired
the cause of his melancholy, at the same time artfully insinuating
that pride and indifference prevented him from participating in
the sport. In answer to these remarks, Hodur pleaded that only his
blindness deterred him from taking part in the new game, and when Loki
put the mistletoe-shaft in his hand, and led him into the midst of the
circle, indicating the direction of the novel target, Hodur threw his
shaft boldly. But to his dismay, instead of the loud laughter which
he expected, a shuddering cry of horror fell upon his ear, for Balder
the beautiful had fallen to the ground, pierced by the fatal mistletoe.


    "So on the floor lay Balder dead; and round
    Lay thickly strewn swords, axes, darts, and spears,
    Which all the Gods in sport had idly thrown
    At Balder, whom no weapon pierced or clove;
    But in his breast stood fixed the fatal bough
    Of mistletoe, which Lok, the Accuser, gave
    To Hoder, and unwitting Hoder threw--
    'Gainst that alone had Balder's life no charm."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).


In dire anxiety the gods crowded around their beloved companion,
but alas! life was quite extinct, and all their efforts to revive the
fallen sun-god were unavailing. Inconsolable at their loss, they now
turned angrily upon Hodur, whom they would there and then have slain
had they not been restrained by the law of the gods that no wilful
deed of violence should desecrate their peace-steads. The sound of
their loud lamentation brought the goddesses in hot haste to the
dreadful scene, and when Frigga saw that her darling was dead, she
passionately implored the gods to go to Nifl-heim and entreat Hel to
release her victim, for the earth could not exist happily without him.



Hermod's Errand

As the road was rough and painful in the extreme, none of the gods
would volunteer at first to go; but when Frigga promised that she
and Odin would reward the messenger by loving him above all the AEsir,
Hermod signified his readiness to execute the commission. To enable
him to do so, Odin lent him Sleipnir, and the noble steed, who was
not wont to allow any but Odin upon his back, set off without demur
upon the dark road which his hoofs had beaten twice before.

Meantime, Odin caused the body of Balder to be removed to Breidablik,
and he directed the gods to go to the forest and cut down huge pines
wherewith to build a worthy pyre.


    "But when the Gods were to the forest gone,
    Hermod led Sleipnir from Valhalla forth
    And saddled him; before that, Sleipnir brook'd
    No meaner hand than Odin's on his mane,
    On his broad back no lesser rider bore;
    Yet docile now he stood at Hermod's side,
    Arching his neck, and glad to be bestrode,
    Knowing the God they went to seek, how dear.
    But Hermod mounted him, and sadly fared
    In silence up the dark untravell'd road
    Which branches from the north of Heaven, and went
    All day; and daylight waned, and night came on.
    And all that night he rode, and journey'd so,
    Nine days, nine nights, toward the northern ice,
    Through valleys deep-engulph'd by roaring streams.
    And on the tenth morn he beheld the bridge
    Which spans with golden arches Giall's stream,
    And on the bridge a damsel watching, arm'd,
    In the straight passage, at the further end,
    Where the road issues between walling rocks."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).



The Funeral Pyre

While Hermod was speeding along the cheerless road which led to
Nifl-heim, the gods hewed and carried down to the shore a vast amount
of fuel, which they piled upon the deck of Balder's dragon-ship,
Ringhorn, constructing an elaborate funeral pyre. According to custom,
this was decorated with tapestry hangings, garlands of flowers,
vessels and weapons of all kinds, golden rings, and countless objects
of value, ere the immaculate corpse, richly attired, was brought and
laid upon it.

One by one, the gods now drew near to take a last farewell of their
beloved companion, and as Nanna bent over him, her loving heart broke,
and she fell lifeless by his side. Seeing this, the gods reverently
laid her beside her husband, that she might accompany him even in
death; and after they had slain his horse and hounds and twined
the pyre with thorns, the emblems of sleep, Odin, last of the gods,
drew near.

