operation, full of the Spirit of the Lord. The power of God, which is the
might of his love, comprehends, incloses, and replenishes all things, but
is comprehended by none. Ps. 139:2, etc.

5. As high as God is over all things, so deeply also is he in all things,
and all things are in him, according to St. Paul, who says, "Of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things" (Rom. 11:36); and again, "Who is
above all, and through all, and in you all." Eph. 4:6.

6. Since God is so great and over all things, nothing surely can be equal
to him; and he that will be so, makes himself a god, commits the greatest
sin, and falls into the pit of perdition. And since God is all, all that
is without him must be as nothing. Therefore from God's omnipotence, man
learns to know his own nothingness, and to fear God, who delights in them
only that "humble themselves under his mighty hand." 1 Peter 5:6.

7. Now as great and high as God is in his omnipotence, even so low is he
made by his love. Behold our Lord Jesus Christ, the living Son, the
powerful arm of God, by whom were all things created, and by whom all
things consist (1 Col. 1:16, 17); how deeply has he descended by his love,
and how lowly and humble has he made himself among all creatures!

8. Therefore, even as we cannot fathom, much less express in words, the
omnipotence of God; so neither can we fathom with our thoughts the
humility and lowliness of Christ. Nevertheless, as deep as is his descent,
so high is also his ascent far above all heavens. Eph. 4:10. Unto him be
honor and praise to all eternity. Amen.

                  -------------------------------------

O God! O Jesus! O blessed Spirit! Thou unchangeable mind! Thou
inextinguishable light! Thou Peace which cannot be disturbed! Thou
indivisible unity! Thou infallible truth! Thou ineffable bounty! Thou
immeasurable might! Thou infinite wisdom! Thou incomprehensible Goodness!
Thou omnipresent eternity! Thou Life of all the living! Do Thou enlighten
me, do Thou sanctify me, do Thou quicken me!




Chapter XXXII.


  Showing How The Loving Soul Knows God As The Highest Righteousness And
                                Holiness.


    _Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are
    a great deep._--PS. 36:6.


All who love God acknowledge him to be the highest and most holy
righteousness, which pervades all, and is over all. This in God is his
most holy will; in angels holy obedience; in man, the testimony of his
conscience; in all creatures, it is the order of nature, whereby God has
ordered all things in number, weight, and measure. All that is done
against this order, is contrary to God and nature.

2. All sins, therefore, in the world, are committed against God's
righteousness, and the sinner thereby offends all creatures, even all the
angels in heaven, and his own conscience, and sets them in hostility
against himself. For when God is offended and provoked to anger, all
creatures are also offended and made angry; so, too, when God is
reconciled, all creatures are reconciled also, and rejoice over such a
man. Hence St. Paul says, that all things are reconciled by Christ,
whether they be "things in earth or things in heaven" (Col. 1:20): and
this, because God is reconciled through him. Therefore the Lord says,
"There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that
repenteth." Luke 15:10. The angels rejoice for man's own sake.

3. But if God be not reconciled to man, all creatures, angels, and nature
itself, execute vengeance upon him. Hence come the dreadful judgments of
God: and it is impossible to avert such vengeance and judgments. "Thou art
to be feared, O God; and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art
angry? Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth
feared, and was still." Ps. 76:7, 8. Thus may we see in the plagues of
Egypt how all creatures executed vengeance upon the wicked.

4. From the most holy righteousness of God, when offended, proceeds also
the curse; as Moses, the man of God, witnesses, when he speaks of the
transgression of the divine law. Deut. 27:15, etc.

5. It is a curse when the justice of God executes such vengeance, that the
cursed cannot enjoy any good, either from God or the creature, but is made
an "abhorring unto all flesh." Isa. 66:24. "A curse is a liableness and
condemnation unto eternal misery." Therefore a curse is terrible and
dreadful unto all creatures, so that they cannot endure it. And this is
the highest vengeance of the justice of God.

6. From the most holy righteousness of God proceed also those wonderful,
unsearchable, secret, dreadful judgments, whereof David says, "Thy
judgments are a great deep" (Ps. 36:7); and St. Paul, "How unsearchable
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" Rom. 11:33.

7. When, therefore, we consider them, we see therein the righteousness of
God, of which the man of God, Moses, says, "To me belongeth vengeance, and
recompense," saith the Lord. "If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand
take hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will
reward them that hate me. Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people! for he
will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his
adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land and to his people." Deut.
32:35, 41, 43.

8. In these words, Moses declares the vengeance of God upon all the
wicked, who resist the righteousness of God. Against them God will whet
his glittering sword; that is, his dreadful sentence and judgment, at
which the earth feareth, and is still. Ps. 76:8. And him, upon whom God
executes his vengeance and judgment, all the world cannot save; according
to the words of the Psalm: "O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O
God, to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thyself. Lift up thyself, thou
Judge of the earth; render a reward to the proud." Ps. 94:1, 2. Here we
read that although the Lord God is a gracious, loving, kind, merciful,
long-suffering God, to all them that fear him, he is nevertheless a just
judge, according to his righteousness, of all the wicked that transgress
against his righteousness.

9. He, therefore, sets before us in his word, not only instances of his
grace and mercy, but also of his justice and vengeance; such as those of
the deluge, Sodom and Gomorrah, Pharaoh in Egypt, and in the Red Sea;
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram; Saul, Ahithophel, Ahab, Jezebel,
Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Sennacherib; and in the New Testament, Herod,
and many more; in every one of whom, we may see the wonderful judgment and
vengeance of God. Therefore he is called, a _God of vengeance_, "unto whom
vengeance belongeth," because he is the most holy, and the most righteous
God; nay, righteousness itself. Therefore, the saints (Rev. 6:10) appeal
to the justice of God with a loud voice, saying: "How long, O Lord, holy
and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth?"

10. Such judgments of God are executed daily, but are rightly understood
only by believing and holy souls, according to the words of the Psalm:
"With thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked." Ps.
91:8. This saying is not to be understood according to carnal passions and
affections, but it is to be considered spiritually; for it imports that we
are to give unto the Lord our God, the praise of his righteousness; and to
say, "Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments" (Ps.
119:137); and "The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works." Ps. 145:17. Thus holy and believing souls delight to see the
wonderful judgments of God; yet not according to the flesh, so as to
rejoice over the destruction and perdition of the wicked (which would
proceed from self-revenge); but, according to the spirit, they take
delight, that is, they acknowledge and praise the righteousness of God,
who fulfilleth his word, and is a righteous God. And at the same time,
they lament and weep over the perdition of the wicked, even as our Saviour
wept over Jerusalem (Luke 19:41); and as David wept over Absalom. 2 Sam.
18:33.

11. So, then, we are here to have a twofold respect, namely, to God and to
men. If we look upon the destruction of men, we are justly to be
sorrowful; but if we look upon God, we are to praise his justice, for he
doeth wrong unto none. Ps. 92:15.




Chapter XXXIII.


     Showing How The Loving Soul Considers God As The Eternal Wisdom.


    _Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the
    world._--ACTS 15:18.


God ordains, governs, moves, and regulates all things according to his
unsearchable wisdom, as it is written (Isa. 45:4-12): "I have even called
thee by thy name; I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me. I
am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God besides me.--I form
the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord
do all these things.--Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the
potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him
that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands? Woe
unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to the woman,
What hast thou brought forth? Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel,
and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning
the work of my hands command ye me. I have made the earth, and created man
upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their
host have I commanded."

2. This is a powerful testimony concerning the eternal wisdom, and the
wondrous, incomprehensible government of Almighty God, which may be first
observed in this, that he has called every one of us by his name, and has
surnamed us, though we did not know him, and were not yet in being. This
our name by which God calleth us, is our faith, our outward calling, and
our whole course of life. There we are inclosed in, or surrounded with,
God's eternal wisdom and providence, as it respects our whole life, its
beginning, middle, and end (Ps. 139:16), or as to our going out and coming
in. Ps. 121:8. "He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by
their names" (Ps. 147:4); that is, he gives them their courses, powers,
and operations. How much more doth he so in reference to men! God forms
the light and creates darkness. He makes peace, and creates evil; that is,
as to the evil of punishment, the just reward of sin; this he creates and
permits; nay, he calls the sword, and causes an alarm of war to be heard.
Jer. 49:2.

3. In a word, he ordains all things wisely. He sees and hears all things
before, according to the words of the Psalmist: "Understand, ye brutish
among the people: and ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? He that
chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? He that teacheth man
knowledge, shall not he know?" Ps. 94:8-10.

4. Here king David teaches us that God has laid a mirror of his
omniscience and eternal wisdom into man, into the hearing ear, and seeing
eye, those two wonderful powers of the human body.

5. It is extremely offensive to a man, to hear and see anything unjust or
unreasonable; how much more to God, who has an all-seeing eye and an
all-hearing ear, must men's ingratitude be offensive; he having ordained
all things by his wisdom, in order to be serviceable unto men. He has made
the sun by his wisdom to give light, not unto itself, but to us; the water
affords drink, not to itself, but unto us; the earth brings forth fruits,
not for itself but for us; the fire warms, not for itself, but for us; the
air gives breath, not to itself, but to us; the bread feeds, not itself,
but us; the herbs do not heal themselves, but us.

6. The eternal wisdom of God has planted so many powers in the creatures,
and has so wisely distributed them, that they are, as it were, so many
hands through which the wisdom and goodness of God divide these treasures
among us, according to the words of Job: "Who knoweth not in all these,
that the hand of the Lord hath wrought this? In whose hand is the soul of
every living thing, and the breath of all mankind." Job 12:9, 10. And "Ask
now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and
they shall tell thee" (Ver. 7); that "with God is wisdom and strength, he
hath counsel and understanding. Behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot be
built again: he shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening." Ver. 13,
14. "He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the
earth upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds, and the
cloud is not rent under them." Job 26:7, 8.

7. Since then the Lord our God ordaineth all things by his wisdom, he
ordaineth all our crosses; and therefore we are not to murmur, but to
praise his wisdom, and to learn patience; for things cannot proceed
otherwise than as they are ordained by God. But not only the things that
befall us in particular, are the most wise order of God; but also all
great national plagues, famine, pestilence, wars, and revolutions of
states. And although we may think that these are nothing but confusion,
perdition, and destruction, yet there reigns the wisest order of God. This
we may gather from the histories of Holy Writ, where famine, wars,
pestilence, desolations of the kingdoms of the world, the destruction of
the Jewish kingdom, and of empires, the Babylonian Captivity, and many
similar events, are described. "I know," saith Solomon (Eccles. 3:14),
"that whatsoever God doeth, it shall be forever: nothing can be put to it,
nor anything taken from it: and God doeth it, that men should fear before
him."

8. And again, "Consider the work of God; for who can make that straight,
which he hath made crooked?" Eccles. 7:13.

9. If we consider it aright, we must own that God could not have ordered
things more wisely. So we may say also, with reference to the persecutions
of the saints, both in the Old and New Testament; to our Lord Jesus
Christ; the holy Gospel; the holy martyrs; and all other things. In our
sight, these all seem to be absurd, and foolish, and yet they are the
highest wisdom of God.

10. As then we are to give unto God the praise of righteousness, in all
his wonderful judgments; so we are also to give unto him the praise of
wisdom, in all the wonderful changes of the world, and in all our crosses
and sufferings; knowing that he can direct all evils to a good end, and
out of evil derive good: so that in all things, how confused soever they
may appear unto us, there shineth forth his wisdom, even as his
righteousness doth in all his judgments.

11. But the loving soul sees the wisdom of God especially in the
restoration and redemption of the human race, and in the renovation of the
soul and the faculties thereof. For so it pleased the wisdom of God, that
the corrupt image of God in man, should be renewed by the divine
substantial image of God, that is, by Christ. After man had lost by sin
that blessed wisdom, that glorious light of his _intellect_, by which he
knew God aright, and so had fallen into the utmost blindness, nay, into
eternal darkness, wherein he must have dwelt forever; the Son of God, who
is the eternal wisdom of the Father, became man, and a light of life unto
men (John 1:4), that he might bring back those that had gone astray; that
he might teach the ignorant; call to himself the sinners; and rekindle in
them the light of the knowledge of God by faith and the Holy Ghost; nay,
that he might unite himself to the soul of man, and might shine forth
therein.

12. Secondly: after the _will_ of man was entirely turned away from God,
perverted, and wholly changed into disobedience, striving against God in
all things; the Son of God was made man, that he might be unto us a
pattern of perfect obedience; that he might heal our evil will; implant
his good will in our hearts; renew our will through the Holy Ghost; and
make us partakers of his holy obedience by faith; according to those words
of Scripture (Gal. 3:14), "That we might receive the promise of the Spirit
through faith;" nay, that he might unite himself to us, and live in us,
that so our will also might be made conformable unto God.

13. Thirdly: because the _affections_ of our hearts, and all our
faculties, were in contrariety to God, and "every imagination of the
thoughts of our hearts, was only evil continually" (Gen. 6:5); the Son of
God, who is love itself, became man, that he might give us a heart wholly
new; that he might plant therein the love of God, and sincere humility and
meekness; that he might take from us the old carnal heart, and unite
himself with us, that so we might be made of one heart, mind, and spirit
with him; all which are the fruits of his most holy incarnation wrought in
us.

14. And this is the highest wisdom of God, that by his dear Son, He thus
reneweth man. For as God has created man by his wisdom, after his perfect
image; so He hath also, by his dear Son, who is eternal wisdom, and who
was made man, created man anew, and regenerated him to a new image of God,
wherein his wisdom, glory, and righteousness should shine forth forever.
It is in this chiefly that the image of God consists.

15. Thus the corrupt image of God in man, is renewed by the substantial
image of God, which is Christ.




Chapter XXXIV.


Showing How A Man Should Seek The Wisdom Of God By Prayer; Containing Also
A Useful Treatise On Prayer, Wherein The Reader Is Taught How The Heart Is
To Be Moved Unto Prayer, And Brought Into A Quiet Sabbath, So That Prayer
  May Be Wrought In Us By The Lord; The Whole Being Set Forth In Twelve
                                Sections.



Section I.


 All That We Have Lost In Adam We Recover Fully And Completely In Christ.


    _In Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
    knowledge._--COL. 2:3.


In the beginning God formed man out of the dust of the earth, and breathed
into him the breath of life, and man became a living and immortal soul,
adorned with perfect wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and blessedness,
after the image of his Creator. For where there is divine wisdom, there is
blessedness; and where there is blessedness there is divine wisdom. Man,
therefore, wanted nothing in Paradise to make him completely happy. But
when, being seduced by the temptation of the serpent, he turned away from
God, and fell into sin, then was this divine image in man effaced, and he
became subject to the devil, to death, and to misery. For as soon as this
divine image was defaced in him by sin, he could discover nothing in
himself but misery, blindness, and the curse.

2. But in order that Adam, that is, all men in Adam, might not utterly
perish, God himself was made man; that is, he was pleased to send his Son
to take our nature upon him, and to be born of a virgin. The Son of God
has, by his holy life and doctrine, as by a pattern, shown us again the
way of wisdom and salvation in which we are to walk. For he has not only
delivered us from our sins by his most bitter death, but has moreover
given us a commandment, that "we should walk, even as he also walked." 1
John 2:6.

3. We are, therefore, begotten again by him, through faith, to be the sons
of God; nay, we are made sons of God in and with his own Son. For "as he
is, so are we also in this world." 1 John 4:17.

4. In this Son "all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden." For
whatsoever was lost in Adam, is perfectly to be found in Christ. Rom.
5:18, 19.

5. If we would, in this life, have a foretaste of these great and glorious
treasures, it must be obtained by prayer, diligent searching, and
continual knocking. For no man can have admission into the kingdom of God,
unless he walk in the new birth, and seek it earnestly of God. No man can
be delivered from the power of sin and the devil, unless he repent, and
offer up his prayers in the name of Christ. For though Christ has
purchased for us all good things, yet without faith no man can be partaker
of them; in and by faith he must also pray, seek, and knock. In a word, it
is by prayer only that we can obtain those "good and perfect gifts which
come down from above, from the Father of lights." James 1:17.

A PRAYER.

O Eternal God and Father, teach me, I beseech thee, by thy Holy Spirit,
that even as I have lost all by dying in Adam, so I may recover all by
being made alive again in Christ. Grant that I may daily die to myself, by
continual mortification and repentance, and devote and give myself up
entirely to thee; that so all the good things which I have lost may be
restored to me, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.



Section II.


               The Evils That Follow The Neglect Of Prayer.


    _Ye have not, because ye ask not._--JAMES 4:2.


1. The neglect of prayer is a violation of the _commandments_ of Christ,
who commands us to "pray without ceasing" (Matt. 7:7; Luke 18:1), not for
His sake, for he well knows what we stand in need of (Matt. 6:32); but for
our own, that we may have a portion of the treasures and inheritance of
God. He that lives in the neglect of prayer is a breaker of the first and
second commandments, even as to blaspheme God is to bring voluntary
destruction upon himself.

2. He that neglects the duty of prayer is a despiser of the _promises_
annexed to the performance of that duty. "Call upon me, and I will deliver
thee" (Ps. 50:15); "Ask, and ye shall receive" (John 16:24); for he
thereby represents God as unmindful of his promises, or as not able to
fulfil them.

3. By the neglect of prayer, our faith, which is the great treasure and
foundation of the inward man, by degrees decays and perishes. For not by
the arm or power of flesh, but by faith in Christ, can we conquer sin,
death, and the devil. 1 John 5:4. Prayer is the nourishment of faith; and
this is that wisdom and eternal life which we must seek for by diligent
prayer.

4. The Lord Jesus departs from them that despise prayer; so that they are
blinded and walk in darkness, knowing neither themselves nor God, but are
strangers to his will. They shut the kingdom of heaven against themselves;
and, being destitute of light to know the will of God, they fall into many
dangers and temptations, and sometimes into despair: whereas, on the
contrary, where there are the Holy Spirit and faith, there the world is
overcome.

5. He that neglects prayer enters into a state of carnal security, and
every kind of iniquity. Such a man is not sensible how deeply he is
engaged in sin; but rushes into all the avenues of destruction which lie
open to receive him. The good things of this world which God has given
him, such as health and riches, he regards as things that come by chance,
or are secured by his own labor; and upon that account he has no gratitude
to his Creator and Benefactor.

6. As man, since his fall, is exposed to continual dangers, both of body
and soul, so is he particularly in danger from the devil, evil spirits,
and wicked men, who, like the devil, are continually plotting the
destruction of the righteous. Whosoever, therefore, neglects prayer, will
be, in the midst of these temptations, like a ship tost in a storm,
without help or hopes of escape.

7. Such a one also leads a most unhappy life; he is in continual
difficulties and fears, being perplexed, doubtful, and uneasy about the
success of his affairs. His head and hands are full of business; yet he
sees but little fruit of his labors, and even that little is in the end
unblessed. Therefore, though the Scripture says that "the wicked may be
seen in great power," yet it adds, "they pass away, and are not." Ps.
37:35, 36. They are "like the chaff which the wind driveth away." Ps. 1:4.
On the other hand, they that seek unto God by prayer "shall flourish like
a palm tree, and grow like a cedar in Lebanon." Ps. 92:12. And "though
many are the afflictions of the righteous" (Ps. 34:19), yet the wicked
undergo more pain and trouble to go to hell than the righteous do to
obtain heaven.

A PRAYER.

Most merciful and compassionate Father, thou knowest that man renders
himself miserable by his own negligence and sloth, whilst he transgresses
thy commands, and neglects the duty of prayer, contemning and slighting
thy most certain and faithful promises. But because thou lovest thy
creatures, and art not willing that any should perish, therefore it is
that thou dost so earnestly invite us to the exercise of prayer. Give me
grace to lay this continually to heart, that I may be able to offer up my
prayers aright, through thy Son Jesus Christ, and be delivered from the
punishments and miseries due to the despisers of that holy duty. Amen.



Section III.


                    The Benefits Of Continual Prayer.


    _Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full._--JOHN
    16:24.


1. Man, since his fall, is become slothful and inactive in everything that
is good. He, therefore, that would escape this unhappy state, and the
destruction that will certainly attend it, must stir himself up by prayer;
and by holy meditation conquer his aversion to divine things, and devoutly
consider with himself the advantages of prayer. Let him reflect, that he
thereby praises, honors, and adores the eternal, living, and true God;
that he does not worship any strange God; but offers up his most earnest
supplications to the only one and true God, whose commands, like an
obedient child, he ought to obey, and show forth the praises of his
Creator, Father, and Saviour.

2. He that prays does not despise the promises of God, but testifies by
his prayers that he sets a just value upon them, acknowledging that God is
true, and that he neither can nor will lie.

3. Prayer is the life of faith, causing it to flourish and prosper like a
tree by the river side, and faith is the root of all that is good in us.
Faith is our power, our spiritual consolation, our strength against all
our enemies and temptations, yea, faith is our "victory that overcometh
the world" (1 John 5:4); and consequently everything else that opposes and
hinders us in our spiritual warfare.

4. By prayer, we receive the Holy Spirit. Luke 11:13; Zech. 12:10. By
prayer, we make room for the Holy Spirit to work and exert his power in
us, and by this means to come and make his abode with us. John 14:23. By
prayer, we obtain the true light and knowledge of God, so as perfectly to
understand his will; and, by prayer, we abide in his kingdom, and are
partakers of the blessings of heaven.

5. By prayer, we shake off carnal security, resist sin, and, by
vanquishing flesh and blood, "fight the good fight, and hold faith and a
good conscience." 1 Tim. 1:19; 6:12.

6. By prayer, we oppose temptations, dangers, afflictions, the devil, and
wicked men. For prayer is a strong tower of defence against our enemies,
and the holy fortress to which we must have recourse (Eph. 6:18; Prov.
18:10; Ps. 31:3); and though the devil and wicked men raise the greatest
opposition, yet "all things work together for good to them that love God."
Rom. 8:28.

7. Lastly, he that continually watches unto prayer may always thankfully
rejoice in the Holy Ghost; according to the doctrine of St. Paul, "Rejoice
evermore; pray without ceasing; in everything give thanks." 1 Thess.
5:16-18. For the comfortable addresses made to God, the eternal King, by
prayer, are an effectual remedy against sorrow, trouble, misery, and
affliction; and produce joy, peace, and tranquillity in the hearts of the
faithful; and when our prayers are right, we are assured that all our
righteous designs shall prosper in our hands "whilst we cast our care upon
God." 1 Pet. 5:7. "The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing." Phil.
4:5, 6. "Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass." Ps. 37:5. For all solicitude arises from a distrust of
God, which naturally proceeds from the neglect of prayer. On the contrary,
faith and prayer give us confidence towards God, and are the proper
antidote against all anxiety and trouble of mind.

A PRAYER.

Help me, O Lord my God, that I may continually call to mind, that it is
for my own sake that thou invitest and urgest me to the exercise of
prayer. Do thou rouse me, and I shall arise; awaken thou me, and I shall
awake, and follow Christ alone. Amen.



Section IV.


The True Christian Chooses The Narrow Way In Christ, Rather Than The Broad
                               Way In Adam.


    _We glory in tribulations._--ROM. 5:3.


1. The Scripture teaches us that when Adam was placed in Paradise, God
showed him the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and forbade him to
eat of it (Gen. 2:9, 17); so that Adam was thus placed between time and
eternity. Life and death, light and darkness (Deut. 30:15), were set
before him, that he might qualify himself for eternal glory in the narrow
way. Our case is just the same. For since the fall of Adam, Christ comes
to us, and endeavors to draw us from the broad way in Adam, to the narrow
way, which is himself; and this he does gently and without violence,
resolving to force no man either to his salvation or his condemnation. He
shows us the way by his prevenient grace, which is bestowed on all men
without exception. Christ now says, "Enter ye in at the strait gate; for
wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction; and
many there be that go in thereat. Because strait is the gate, and narrow
is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." Matt.
7:13, 14.

2. Here we plainly see two paths set before us: the one is the way of the
world, in which many walk, because they continue in Adam, and refuse
Christ; the other is the way of God, in which few walk, because they
prefer the broad way in Adam. Many are the difficulties which attend both
these paths. If you conform yourself to the world, you will meet with many
troubles and vexations; and, not being established in the truth of God,
your lot finally is eternal damnation. But if you enter into the way of
God through Christ, and persevere in prayer, you must expect to suffer
with Christ, from the opposition of this evil world: but, at the same
time, your heart shall be constantly filled with the refreshing
consolations of the Spirit of truth, and in the end, you shall obtain
everlasting life. 2 Tim. 2:11, 12; 3:12.

3. He that prays, fights against the devil and his own corrupt nature;
overcomes himself, the devil, and all the enemies of his salvation; and
shall at last with Christ, the Captain of his salvation (Heb. 2:10), enter
into everlasting rest.

4. But he that lives in the neglect of prayer, makes no progress in the
conquest of his spiritual enemies; but is a miserable slave of the world,
and shall at last, with the prince of darkness, be condemned to
everlasting misery.

5. It is better to fight now, and to enter triumphantly into everlasting
glory, than not to fight, and yet endure many afflictions, and at last be
doomed to everlasting destruction.

A PRAYER.

Oh that men would but consider these things! They would then loathe and
despise this present world; would hate and deny themselves, and would
follow Christ alone, in the narrow way of the cross. That we may,
therefore, seriously lay these things to heart; that we may renounce the
old Adam within us, and put on the new man, Christ Jesus: and at last,
through the narrow way, enter into everlasting life, may God of his
infinite mercy grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.



Section V.


Considerations Which Should Move The Heart To Commune With God In Prayer.


    _Am I a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God afar off_?--JER.
    23:23.


1. It is of great use to us, to have before us certain heads which may
serve as encouragements to the exercise of earnest prayer, which is that
worship in spirit and in truth, which God requires of all his servants.

2. I. First, then, we must consider that "God knows what things we have
need of, before we ask him." Matt. 6:8.

3. II. That God draws, invites, and encourages us to the exercise of
prayer, and assuredly promises that he will hear our prayers. Ps. 50:15.

4. III. That God is no respecter of persons, but has an equal regard for
all mankind. Acts 10:34.

5. IV. That he is as sinful who presumes to pray upon the opinion of his
own righteousness, merit, and holiness, as he that is afraid to pray out
of a sense of his own sins and unworthiness. Luke 18:11, 14.

6. V. That God is not confined to any certain place, where only we ought
to worship him; but that he is everywhere to be found, and is always "nigh
to them that call upon him." John 4:21, 22; Ps. 145:18.

7. VI. That God is, in his own eternity, unchangeable, and not confined to
any certain time; but is always attentive to the prayers of his servants.
1 Thess. 5:17.

8. VII. That God anticipates our prayers, and gives us both natural and
supernatural blessings, which yet, without prayer, nobody can truly enjoy.

9. These considerations will renew and awaken every soul that shall duly
attend to them (Eph. 5:14): they will cleanse them from darkness and
error; establish them on the foundation of truth; elevate them towards
God; and inflame them with a lively devotion. For from them flow the
following lessons:

10. I. That God commands and encourages us to pray, not for His own sake,
as if He were ignorant of our wants, but for our sakes, that being
quickened by prayer we might know and acknowledge them ourselves.

11. II. That God does not stand in need of any minute declarations of our
necessities, but knows, even before we ask him, what things we have need
of. Isa. 65:24; Ps. 139:2.

12. III. That God, who never slumbereth nor sleepeth, needs not to be
awakened by our cries, fastings, and watchings; but that these exercises
are profitable for man, to awaken and rouse him from the sleep of sin. Ps.
33:18; 34:15.

13. IV. That God is a thousand times more ready to give, than man is to
receive. Jer. 32:41.

14. V. That the goodness and mercy of God towards mankind are infinite
(Ps. 103:12), but that the negligence and sloth of men in praying,
seeking, and knocking, are excessive. Matt. 7:7.

15. VI. That God is impartial and just in all his works, and is by no
means the cause of our blindness, infirmities, ignorance, or miseries; but
that wretched man himself is in fault, by neglecting to pray or to seek.
Deut. 32:4; Ps. 92:15.

16. VII. That the true worshipper may at all times and in all places,
offer up his prayers in spirit and in truth to God the Father, through
Christ, provided he do not hinder himself. John 4:21, 23; Luke 18:1, etc.

17. VIII. That whosoever neglects prayer, deprives himself of the blessed
opportunities of speaking to God. Ps. 19:14. Thus the sinner inflicts
punishment on himself.

18. IX. That the diligent worshipper doeth good to himself; not of himself
but by the prevenient grace of God, which is freely given to all men
without exception.

19. Let him that is unacquainted with the preceding heads of meditation,
know that he is still far from Christ, and has tasted but little of the
truth. He who knows them, and believes them not, is guilty of a very great
sin; and, lastly, he that believes them and yet is inactive, and does not
stir up himself to the practice of them, but, on the other hand, lives on
from day to day, in a state of doubt and indifference, is a great sinner,
and shall be beaten with many more stripes than he who knew not his Lord's
will, and therefore did it not. Luke 12:47. Let the one last mentioned
look carefully to himself, that he may be seriously converted, and not
perish in his sins.

A PRAYER.

O Lord, and merciful Father, awaken me by thy Holy Spirit, that I may not
only know those things, but may practise them by a lively faith, and
become a true worshipper in spirit and in truth. Amen.



Section VI.


  The Omniscient God Knows What We Stand In Need Of, Before We Ask Him.


    _Thou understandest my thought afar off._--PS. 139:2.


1. The truth of these words is confirmed by our blessed Saviour: "Your
Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him" (Matt.
6:8); and by David: "He that planted the ear, shall he not hear?" (Ps.
94:9); and by St. Paul: "He is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of
the heart." Heb. 4:12. For our God is not as man, who stands in need of a
long account of our necessities. All the possible successions of time are
in his sight but as one single moment, in which all things, both past and
to come, are beheld as actually present. Therefore, he numbered the hairs
of our heads before we were born, and understands all our thoughts before
we pray. In a word, all things are naked and open in his sight. Heb. 4:
13. These and similar meditations may be of use, for the encouragement of
those who begin the exercise of prayer; so that they may always have
certain sentences of Scripture ready at hand, upon which they may
meditate, and which they may apply to themselves, by comprising the sense
of them in a short prayer. This will be easily understood by those that
are exercised herein.

2. A man that walks abroad in an open spacious field, and in a clear day,
finds himself encompassed with light; which light, if it were spiritual,
instead of being natural, would even penetrate the spirit itself. Just so
are all creatures, visible and invisible, in the sight of God. He discerns
and comprehends all things, and nothing can be hidden from him. "The
darkness hideth not from him; but the night shineth as the day." Ps.
139:12. He himself is the all-seeing eye, to whom all things are as clear
as a mote in transparent crystal would be to our bodily eyes.

3. This consideration is of great use to the inexperienced, in order to
purge their hearts from the thick clouds of darkness and error, and to
quicken them in prayer; by which, when truly roused and awakened, we
discover many great and noble truths that had hitherto been hidden from
our eyes. Many are apt to think, that God knows and sees no more than they
themselves do; which is the effect of egregious blindness and ignorance,
and will merit a proportionable punishment. Ps. 7:9.

A PRAYER.

Almighty and everlasting God and Father, the Searcher of hearts, and the
Judge of all our secret thoughts, who seest, knowest, and hearest all our
designs and purposes before they are brought to pass! Behold, I appear
before thee, to confess my necessities, not with any design to awaken thee
by my cries, as if thou wert ignorant of me, or of my concerns; but to
stir up myself to know and consider, that thou knowest all my necessities,
and that the very hairs of my head are numbered by thee. Assist me, Holy
Father, that I may truly know and consider these things, that my soul may
joyfully submit to thy good pleasure, and that I may wait upon thee in
true resignation and obedience. Amen.



Section VII.


   That God Invites And Engages All Men To The Exercise Of Prayer, And
                    Promises To Hear Their Petitions.


    _Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be
    delivered._--JOEL 2:32.


1. These words ought to be carefully considered; for it is not sufficient
to believe that God knows all things; we must also remember that God
commands us to pray, and promises to hear us. Thus, "Whatsoever ye shall
ask the Father in my name, he will give it you." John 16:23. "Everyone
that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that
knocketh, it shall be opened." Matt. 7:8. "Men ought always to pray, and
not to faint." Luke 18:1. "If any one lack wisdom, let him ask of God,
that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given him." James 1:5. "If we ask any thing according to his will, he
heareth us." 1 John 5:14. "All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
believing, ye shall receive." Matt. 21:22. In all these places, both a
command and a promise are expressed; which must needs make an impression
upon every man that has not a heart of stone; and he that does not believe
them, is in a desperate state, and deserves not the name of a man. But if
these things are true, and acknowledged to be so, why do we not believe
them? Why do we not pray? Why are not our prayers heard? Why do we not
receive the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit? Verily, because we do not
pray _with faith_, nor wait upon God with _constancy and patience_. For
the property of true faith is to submit ourselves to God, in a quiet and
peaceful resignation of mind; but he that wavers, is unfaithful and
inconstant, and makes his own prayers void. Moreover, he denies the truth
and power of God, making him either unable or unwilling to supply our
wants. Both these are signs of a perverse spirit.

2. On the other hand, faith gives quietness to the soul, and makes it
capable of divine grace. God requires nothing from man but that he should
be quiet, and rest from all his works, and especially from himself. The
spirit and mind of man are like waters, upon which the Spirit of God is
perpetually moving. Gen. 1:2. So soon as our spirit is quiet, and at rest
from the impetuous motions of worldly thoughts, then God rests upon it,
and speaks forth the word of his power into such quiet and still waters;
and the moment of this divine influx is of more value than the whole
world. Still waters are easily warmed by the sun, but violent and rapid
streams seldom or never. Unbelief sacrilegiously robs God of his honor,
destroying the very names of faith and truth. This changes the Christian
into a heathen and atheist, and, unless repented of, will lead to his
everlasting destruction.

A PRAYER.

O Eternal, faithful, and righteous God, who canst not lie; I know that
thou dost graciously invite, encourage, and impel all men, for their own
infinite advantage, to pray unto thee; and dost offer thy grace and mercy
equally to them all, without distinction or partiality. Grant, I beseech
thee, Holy Father, that I may seriously lay these things to heart, and
attain a true, firm, and upright faith, and not be deaf to the invitations
of thy infinite mercy; but may constantly and cheerfully submit myself to
thee, and expect with patience thy light within my soul. Amen.



Section VIII.


  God Is No Respecter Of Persons, But Has An Impartial Love For All His
                                Creatures.


    _The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his
    works._--PS. 145:9.


1. I am now indeed convinced (some one may say), that God knows my
necessities better than I can discover them to him; that he has commanded
prayer, and promised to hear it: but I am not yet fully satisfied, whether
I in particular am not excluded from the benefit of these promises?--Come,
then, and let us now show that God is no respecter of persons, in
opposition to those blind guides, who, by their false interpretations of
some places of Holy Scripture, particularly Rom. 9:13, Mal. 1:2, and the
like, have endeavored to prove that God has an aversion to some particular
persons, and a partial fondness for others; contrary to the plain and
indisputable testimonies of Holy Scripture, which we ought firmly to fix
in our minds, that we may not be perverted by the false glosses of
unreasonable men.

"Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: but in every
nation, he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with
him." Acts 10:34, 35.

"The Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a
mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward. He
doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the
stranger, in giving him food and raiment." Deut. 10:17, 18.

"God accepteth no man's person." Gal. 2:6.

"There is no respect of persons with God." Col. 3:25.

"As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live.--As for the
wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he
turneth from his wickedness.--None of his sins that he hath committed shall
be mentioned unto him." Ezek. 33:11, 12, 16.

"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Howbeit,
for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show
forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter
believe on him to life everlasting." 1 Tim. 1:15, 16.

"God will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the
truth." 1 Tim. 2:4.

"God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance." 2 Pet. 3:9.

These and such testimonies of Scripture ought to be deeply imprinted on
our minds, that every one may know, that all men are equally dear to God;
that all men were created by him according to his image, and redeemed by
Jesus Christ. Moreover, God has sworn by himself, that he desires not the
death of a sinner. Hence God assists us all by his prevenient grace, not
waiting till we are worthy to receive it. He comes to us, before we come
to him; he knew us, before we knew him; he loveth us, before we love him;
he loved us while we were yet his enemies. Rom. 5:10. He, therefore, is
blind and impious, who dares assert that God does not love all men alike.
Such a one scorns the God of heaven, accuses him of injustice, and makes
him a respecter of persons.

2. But when it is said that God loved Jacob, and hated Esau (Rom. 9:13),
such language is not to be understood of them personally, or as indicating
only hatred, but refers to the exclusion from the inheritance in the land
of promise--not to a hatred which refuses salvation, but to the refusal of
temporal blessings. And though we are all sinners, yet God has a greater
regard for those that love him than for those that continue in their sins
and blindness, neither acknowledging God for their Father, nor bringing
forth the fruits of repentance. God takes no pleasure in the wickedness of
these men; but rather desires that all should be saved. And whereas it is
said that "he hath mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he
hardeneth" (Rom. 9:18); we must know that he hardeneth none but those who
by their unbelief and impenitence have hardened themselves. These, indeed,
he does at length, with reluctance, leave to themselves; and being thus
forsaken, they naturally fall into a state of entire obduracy. And whereas
it is said, that "it is not of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth
mercy" (Rom. 9:16); it is plain that God doth elect and anticipate us by
his grace, and not we ourselves, and that he is the Author and Giver of
all our graces; so that whatsoever good we do, is owing to him, and not to
ourselves.

3. This is the true interpretation of those places, which some perverse
minds have interpreted, as if God had decreed to damn a great part of
mankind (as the poets feigned of Saturn, who hated and devoured his own
children). This is a doctrine that tends directly to subvert our faith,
and to precipitate men into despair, or into a rude, lawless and Epicurean
mode of life, as appears by woful experience. From all which snares, and
deceits of the devil, may the Lord deliver us! Amen.

A PRAYER.

O Eternal and most righteous God, who acceptest not the persons of men;
but art so just in thy dispensations towards us all, as to anticipate us
with thy grace and favor, not waiting till we are already worthy, but
bestowing thy prevenient grace to make us so; teach me, by thy Holy
Spirit, gratefully to acknowledge thy boundless mercy towards us. Let thy
light arise in my heart, that I may not, with the wicked world, disown
that grace which thou hast already bestowed upon me, which is that
treasure hidden in the field, the earnest of the inheritance of the
saints; but may diligently search after it, find it, taste it, and enjoy
it. Amen.



Section IX.


 Showing That It Is Equally Sinful To Pray To God Upon The Presumption Of
      Our Own Merit, And To Forbear On Account Of Our Unworthiness.


    _Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no
    more worthy to be called thy son._--LUKE 15:21.


1. He that prays upon the presumption of his own holiness and piety,
walketh not in the direct and plain path of the children of God; but turns
to the right hand, outruns his Saviour, and, like a sacrilegious robber,
deprives him of the honor due unto him (since He alone is our
righteousness, our holiness, and our sanctification, 1 Cor. 1:30), and
depends entirely upon his own unprofitable works; not acknowledging the
merit of Christ alone, but depending upon human righteousness, and
believing that God hears our prayers, not for the sake of Jesus Christ,
but for the sake of man's good works. But this is directly contrary to
Scripture. "If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall
stand?--But with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous
redemption." Ps. 130:3, 7. A man may as well say, that the operation of
his eyes causes the light of the sun, as that his own righteousness is the
cause of his receiving the grace of God. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Elias,
&c., were all saved by grace; all joining in that petition, "Enter not
into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, &c." Ps. 143:2.

2. He, on the other hand, that neglects to pray from a sense of his
manifold transgressions, judging himself upon that account unworthy to
speak to God, turns to the left hand, and sinks in his own misery and
unworthiness, affronting the Son of God, and (without repentance) running
into despair; whilst he thinks that the passion and death of Christ are
