                           Supported by facts

        In Christian Science mere opinion is valueless. Proof
341:12  is essential to a due estimate of this subject. Sneers at
        the application of the word/ Science /to Chris-
        tianity cannot prevent that from being scien-
341:15  tific which is based on divine Principle, demonstrated ac-
        cording to a divine given rule, and subjected to proof.
        The facts are so absolute and numerous in support of
341:18  Christian Science, that misrepresentation and denuncia-
342:1   tion cannot overthrow it. Paul alludes to "doubtful dis-
        putations." The hour has struck when proof and demon-
342:3   stration, instead of opinion and dogma, are summoned to
        the support of Christianity, "making wise the simple."

                            Commands of Jesus

        In the result of some unqualified condemnations of
342:6   scientific Mind-healing, one may see with sorrow the sad
        effects on the sick of denying Truth. He that
        decries this Science does it presumptuously,
342:9   in the face of Bible history and in defiance of the direct
        command of Jesus, "Go ye into all the world, and preach
        the gospel," to which command was added the promise
342:12  that his students should cast out evils and heal the sick.
        He bade the seventy disciples, as well as the twelve,
        heal the sick in any town where they should be hospitably
342:15  received.

                         Christianity scientific

        If Christianity is not scientific, and Science is not of
        God, then there is no invariable law, and truth becomes
342:18  an accident. Shall it be denied that a system
        which works according to the Scriptures has
        Scriptural authority?

                         Argument of good works

342:21  Christian Science awakens the sinner, reclaims the
        infidel, and raises from the couch of pain the helpless
        invalid. It speaks to the dumb the words of
342:24  Truth, and they answer with rejoicing. It
        causes the deaf to hear, the lame to walk, and the blind
        to see. Who would be the first to disown the Christli-
342:27  ness of good works, when our Master says, "By their
        fruits ye shall know them"?

        If Christian Scientists were teaching or practising
342:30  pharmacy or obstetrics according to the common theo-
        ries, no denunciations would follow them, even if their
        treatment resulted in the death of a patient. The people
343:1   are taught in such cases to say, Amen. Shall I then be
        smitten for healing and for teaching Truth as the Prin-
343:3   ciple of healing, and for proving my word by my deed?
        James said: "Show me thy faith without thy works, and
        I will show thee my faith by my works."

                           Personal experience

343:6   Is not finite mind ignorant of God's method? This
        makes it doubly unfair to impugn and misrepresent the
        facts, although, without this cross-bearing,
343:9   one might not be able to say with the apostle,
        "None of these things move me." The sick, the halt,
        and the blind look up to Christian Science with blessings,
343:12  and Truth will not be forever hidden by unjust parody
        from the quickened sense of the people.

                           Proof from miracles

        Jesus strips all disguise from error, when his teachings
343:15  are fully understood. By parable and argument he ex-
        plains the impossibility of good producing evil;
        and he also scientifically demonstrates this great
343:18  fact, proving by what are wrongly called miracles, that
        sin, sickness, and death are beliefs - illusive errors -
        which he could and did destroy.
343:21  It would sometimes seem as if truth were rejected be-
        cause meekness and spirituality are the conditions of its
        acceptance, while Christendom generally demands so
343:24  much less.

                        Example of the disciples

        Anciently those apostles who were Jesus' students,
        as well as Paul who was not one of his students, healed
343:27  the sick and reformed the sinner by their
        religion. Hence the mistake which allows
        words, rather than works, to follow such examples!
343:30  Whoever is the first meekly and conscientiously to press
        along the line of gospel-healing, is often accounted a
        heretic.

                             Strong position

344:1   It is objected to Christian Science that it claims God
        as the only absolute Life and Soul, and man to be His
344:3   idea, - that is, His image. It should be
        added that this is claimed to represent the
        normal, healthful, and sinless condition of man in divine
344:6   Science, and that this claim is made because the Scrip-
        tures say that God has created man in His own image
        and after His likeness. Is it sacrilegious to assume that
344:9   God's likeness is not found in matter, sin, sickness, and
        death?

                        Efficacy may be attested

        Were it more fully understood that Truth heals and
344:12  that error causes disease, the opponents of a demonstrable
        Science would perhaps mercifully withhold
        their misrepresentations, which harm the sick;
344:15  and until the enemies of Christian Science test its efficacy
        according to the rules which disclose its merits or de-
        merits, it would be just to observe the Scriptural precept,
344:18  "Judge not."

                          The one divine method

        There are various methods of treating disease, which
        are not included in the commonly accepted systems; but
344:21  there is only one which should be presented
        to the whole world, and that is the Christian
        Science which Jesus preached and practised and left to us
344:24  as his rich legacy.

        Why should one refuse to investigate this method
        of treating disease? Why support the popular systems
344:27  of medicine, when the physician may perchance be an
        infidel and may lose ninety-and-nine patients, while
        Christian Science cures its hundred? Is it because
344:30  allopathy and homoeopathy are more fashionable and
        less spiritual?

                          Omnipotence set forth

        In the Bible the word /Spirit /is so commonly applied
345:1   to Deity, that Spirit and God are often regarded as syn-
        onymous terms; and it is thus they are uniformly used
345:3   and understood in Christian Science. As it
        is evident that the likeness of Spirit cannot be
        material, does it not follow that God cannot be in His
345:6   unlikeness and work through drugs to heal the sick?
        When the omnipotence of God is preached and His ab-
        soluteness is set forth, Christian sermons will heal the
345:9   sick.

                        Contradictions not found

        It is sometimes said, in criticising Christian Science,
        that the mind which contradicts itself neither knows
345:12  itself nor what it is saying. It is indeed no
        small matter to know one's self; but in this
        volume of mine there are no contradictory
345:15  statements, - at least none which are apparent to those
        who understand its propositions well enough to pass
        judgment upon them. One who understands Christian
345:18  Science can heal the sick on the divine Principle of Chris-
        tian Science, and this practical proof is the only feasible
        evidence that one does understand this Science.

345:21  Anybody, who is able to perceive the incongruity be-
        tween God's idea and poor humanity, ought to be able
        to discern the distinction (made by Christian Science)
345:24  between God's man, made in His image, and the sinning
        race of Adam.

        The apostle says: "For if a man think himself to be
345:27  something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself."
        This thought of human, material nothingness, which
        Science inculcates, enrages the carnal mind and is the
345:30  main cause of the carnal mind's antagonism.

                        God's idea the ideal man

        It is not the purpose of Christian Science to "educate
        the idea of God, or treat it for disease," as is alleged
346:1   by one critic. I regret that such criticism confounds /man/
        with Adam. When man is spoken of as made in God's
346:3   image, it is not sinful and sickly mortal man
        who is referred to, but the ideal man, reflecting
        God's likeness.

                          Nothingness of error

346:6   It is sometimes said that Christian Science teaches the
        nothingness of sin, sickness, and death, and then teaches
        how this nothingness is to be saved and healed.
346:9   The nothingness of nothing is plain; but we
        need to understand that error is nothing, and that its
        nothingness is not saved, but must be demonstrated in
346:12  order to prove the somethingness - yea, the allness -
        of Truth. It is self-evident that we are harmonious only
        as we cease to manifest evil or the belief that we suffer
346:15  from the sins of others. Disbelief in error destroys error,
        and leads to the discernment of Truth. There are no
        vacuums. How then can this demonstration be "fraught
346:18  with falsities painful to behold"?

                          Truth antidotes error

        We treat error through the understanding of Truth,
        because Truth is error's antidote. If a dream ceases, it
346:21  is self-destroyed, and the terror is over. When
        a sufferer is convinced that there is no reality
        in his belief of pain, - because matter has no sensation,
346:24  hence pain in matter is a false belief, - how can he suffer
        longer? Do you feel the pain of tooth-pulling, when you
        believe that nitrous-oxide gas has made you unconscious?
346:27  Yet, in your concept, the tooth, the operation, and the
        forceps are unchanged.

                           Serving two masters

        Material beliefs must be expelled to make room for
346:30  spiritual understanding. We cannot serve both
        God and mammon at the same time; but is
        not this what frail mortals are trying to do? Paul says:
347:1   "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
        the flesh." Who is ready to admit this?

347:3   It is said by one critic, that to verify this wonderful
        philosophy Christian Science declares that whatever is
        mortal or discordant has no origin, existence, nor real-
347:6   ness. Nothing really has Life but God, who is infinite
        Life; hence all is Life, and death has no dominion. This
        writer infers that if anything needs to be doctored, it
347:9   must be the one God, or Mind. Had he stated his syllo-
        gism correctly, the conclusion would be that there is noth-
        ing left to be doctored.

                    Essential element of Christianity

347:12  Critics should consider that the so-called mortal man
        is not the reality of man. Then they would behold the
        signs of Christ's coming. Christ, as the spir-
347:15  itual or true idea of God, comes now as of
        old, preaching the gospel to the poor, heal-
        ing the sick, and casting out evils. Is it error which
347:18  is restoring an essential element of Christianity, -
        namely, apostolic, divine healing? No; it is the Science
        of Christianity which is restoring it, and is the light
347:21  shining in darkness, which the darkness comprehends
        not.

        If Christian Science takes away the popular gods, -
347:24  sin, sickness, and death, - it is Christ, Truth, who de-
        stroys these evils, and so proves their nothingness.

        The dream that matter and error are something
347:27  must yield to reason and revelation. Then mortals
        will behold the nothingness of sickness and sin, and
        sin and sickness will disappear from consciousness.
347:30  The harmonious will appear real, and the inharmo-
        nious unreal. These critics will then see that error
        is indeed the nothingness, which they chide us for
348:1   naming nothing and which we desire neither to honor
        nor to fear.

348:3   Medical theories virtually admit the nothingness of
        hallucinations, even while treating them as disease; and
        who objects to this? Ought we not, then, to approve
348:6   any cure, which is effected by making the disease appear
        to be - what it really is - an illusion?

                         All disease a delusion

        Here is the difficulty: it is not generally understood how
348:9   one disease can be just as much a delusion as another. It
        is a pity that the medical faculty and clergy
        have not learned this, for Jesus established
348:12  this foundational fact, when devils, delusions, were cast
        out and the dumb spake.

                         Elimination of sickness

        Are we irreverent towards sin, or imputing too much
348:15  power to God, when we ascribe to Him almighty Life
        and Love? I deny His cooperation with evil,
        because I desire to have no faith in evil or in
348:18  any power but God, good. Is it not well to eliminate from
        so-called mortal mind that which, so long as it remains in
        mortal mind, will show itself in forms of sin, sickness, and
348:21  death? Instead of tenaciously defending the supposed
        rights of disease, while complaining of the suffering, dis-
        ease brings, would it not be well to abandon the defence,
348:24  especially when by so doing our own condition can be im-
        proved and that of other persons as well?

                        Full fruitage yet to come

        I have never supposed the world would immediately
348:27  witness the full fruitage of Christian Science, or that sin,
        disease, and death would not be believed for
        an indefinite time; but this I do aver, that,
348:30  as a result of teaching Christian Science, ethics and
        temperance have received all impulse, health has been
        restored, and longevity increased. If such are the pres-
349:1   ent fruits, what will the harvest be, when this Science is
        more generally understood?

                             Law and gospel

349:3   As Paul asked of the unfaithful in ancient days, so
        the rabbis of the present day ask concerning our heal-
        ing and teaching, "Through breaking the law,
349:6   dishonorest thou God?" We have the gospel,
        however, and our Master annulled material law by heal-
        ing contrary to it. We propose to follow the Master's
349:9   example. We should subordinate material law to spirit-
        ual law. Two essential points of Christian Science are,
        that neither Life nor man dies, and that God is not the
349:12  author of sickness.

                           Language inadequate

        The chief difficulty in conveying the teachings of divine
        Science accurately to human thought lies in this, that like
349:15  all other languages, English is inadequate to
        the expression of spiritual conceptions and
        propositions, because one is obliged to use material terms
349:18  in dealing with spiritual ideas. The elucidation of Chris-
        tian Science lies in its spiritual sense, and this sense must
        be gained by its disciples in order to grasp the meaning of
349:21  this Science. Out of this condition grew the prophecy
        concerning the Christian apostles, "They shall speak with
        new tongues."

349:24  Speaking of the things of Spirit while dwelling on
        a material plane, material terms must be generally em-
        ployed. Mortal thought does not at once catch the
349:27  higher meaning, and can do so only as thought is edu-
        cated up to spiritual apprehension. To a certain extent
        this is equally true of all learning, even that which is
349:30  wholly material.

                           Substance spiritual

        In Christian Science, substance is understood to be
        Spirit, while the opponents of Christian Science believe
350:1   substance to be matter. They think of matter as some-
        thing and almost the only thing, and of the things which
350:3   pertain to Spirit as next to nothing, or as very
        far removed from daily experience. Christian
        Science takes exactly the opposite view.

                          Both words and works

350:6   To understand all our Master's sayings as recorded
        in the New Testament, sayings infinitely important,
        his followers must grow into that stature of
350:9   manhood in Christ Jesus which enables them
        to interpret his spiritual meaning. Then they know
        how Truth casts out error and heals the sick. His
350:12  words were the offspring of his deeds, both of which
        must be understood. Unless the works are com-
        prehended which his words explained, the words are
350:15  blind.

        The Master often refused to explain his words, because
        it was difficult in a material age to apprehend spiritual
350:18  Truth. He said: "This people's heart is waxed gross,
        and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they
        have closed; lest at any time they should see with their
350:21  eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand
        with their heart, and should be converted, and I should
        heal them."

                          The divine life-link

350:24  "The Word was made flesh." Divine Truth must be
        known by its effects on the body as well as on the mind,
        before the Science of being can be demon-
350:27  strated. Hence its embodiment in the incar-
        nate Jesus, - that life-link forming the connection through
        which the real reaches the unreal, Soul rebukes sense, and
350:30  Truth destroys error.

                          Truth a present help

        In Jewish worship the Word was materially explained,
        and the spiritual sense was scarcely perceived. The
351:1   religion which sprang from half-hidden Israelitish history
        was pedantic and void of healing power. When we lose
351:3   faith in God's power to heal, we distrust the
        divine Principle which demonstrates Christian
        Science, and then we cannot heal the sick. Neither can
351:6   we heal through the help of Spirit, if we plant ourselves
        on a material basis.

        The author became a member of the orthodox Con-
351:9   gregational Church in early years. Later she learned
        that her own prayers failed to heal her as did the prayers
        of her devout parents and the church; but when the
351:12  spiritual sense of the creed was discerned in the Science
        of Christianity, this spiritual sense was a/ present help/. It
        was the living, palpitating presence of Christ, Truth, which
351:15  healed the sick.

                             Fatal premises

        We cannot bring out the practical proof of Christianity,
        which Jesus required, while error seems as potent and
351:18  real to us as Truth, and while we make a per-
        sonal devil and an anthropomorphic God our
        starting-points, - especially if we consider Satan as a
351:21  being coequal in power with Deity, if not superior to Him.
        Because such starting-points are neither spiritual nor
        scientific, they cannot work out the Spirit-rule of Christian
351:24  healing, which proves the nothingness of error, discord,
        by demonstrating the all-inclusiveness of harmonious
        Truth.

                            Fruitless worship

351:27  The Israelites centred their thoughts on the material
        in their attempted worship of the spiritual. To them
        matter was substance, and Spirit was shadow.
351:30  They thought to worship Spirit from a ma-
        terial standpoint, but this was impossible. They might
        appeal to Jehovah, but their prayer brought down no
352:1   proof that it was heard, because they did not sufficiently
        understand God to be able to demonstrate His power
352:3   to heal, - to make harmony the reality and discord the
        unreality.

                           Spirit the tangible

        Our Master declared that his material body was not
352:6   spirit, evidently considering it a mortal and material be-
        lief of flesh and bones, whereas the Jews took
        a diametrically opposite view. To Jesus, not
352:9   materiality, but spirituality, was the reality of man's ex-
        istence, while to the rabbis the spiritual was the intangi-
        ble and uncertain, if not the unreal.

                          Ghosts not realities

352:12  Would a mother say to her child, who is frightened at
        imaginary ghosts and sick in consequence of the fear:
        "I know that ghosts are real. They exist,
352:15  and are to be feared; but you must not be
        afraid of them"?

        Children, like adults, /ought/ to fear a reality which
352:18  can harm them and which they do not understand, for
        at any moment they may become its helpless victims;
        but instead of increasing children's fears by declaring
352:21  ghosts to be real, merciless, and powerful, thus water-
        ing the very roots of childish timidity, children should
        be assured that their fears are groundless, that ghosts
352:24  are not realities, but traditional beliefs, erroneous and
        man-made.

        In short, children should be told not to believe in ghosts,
352:27  because there are no such things. If belief in their reality
        is destroyed, terror of ghosts will depart and health be re-
        stored. The objects of alarm will then vanish into noth-
352:30  ingness, no longer seeming worthy of fear or honor. To
        accomplish a good result, it is certainly not irrational to
        tell the truth about ghosts.

                         The real and the unreal

353:1   The Christianly scientific real is the sensuous unreal.
        Sin, disease, whatever seems real to material sense, is un-
353:3   real in divine Science. The physical senses
        and Science have ever been antagonistic, and
        they will so continue, till the testimony of the physical
353:6   senses yields entirely to Christian Science.

        How can a Christian, having the stronger evidence of
        Truth which contradicts the evidence of error, think of
353:9   the latter as real or true, either in the form of sickness or
        of sin? All must admit that Christ is "the way, the
        truth, and the life," and that omnipotent Truth certainly
353:12  does destroy error.

                          Superstition obsolete

        The age has not wholly outlived the sense of ghostly
        beliefs. It still holds them more or less. Time has not
353:15  yet reached eternity, immortality, complete
        reality. All the real is eternal. Perfection
        underlies reality. Without perfection, nothing is wholly
353:18  real. All things will continue to disappear, until per-
        fection appears and reality is reached. We must give up
        the spectral at all points. We must not continue to admit
353:21  the somethingness of superstition, but we must yield up
        all belief in it and be wise. When we learn that error
        is not real, we shall be ready for progress, "forgetting
353:24  those things which are behind."

        The grave does not banish the ghost of materiality.
        So long as there are supposed limits to Mind, and those
353:27  limits are human, so long will ghosts seem to continue.
        Mind is limitless. It never was material. The true idea
        of being is spiritual and immortal, and from this it follows
353:30  that whatever is laid off is the ghost, some unreal belief.
        Mortal beliefs can neither demonstrate Christianity nor
        apprehend the reality of Life.

                            Christian warfare

354:1   Are the protests of Christian Science against the notion
        that there can be material life, substance, or mind "utter
354:3   falsities and absurdities," as some aver? Why
        then do Christians try to obey the Scriptures
        and war against "the world, the flesh, and the devil"?
354:6   Why do they invoke the divine aid to enable them to leave
        all for Christ, Truth? Why do they use this phraseology,
        and yet deny Christian Science, when it teaches precisely
354:9   this thought? The words of divine Science find their
        immortality in deeds, for their Principle heals the sick
        and spiritualizes humanity.

                             Healing omitted

354:12  On the other hand, the Christian opponents of Chris-
        tian Science neither give nor offer any proofs that their
        Master's religion can heal the sick. Surely
354:15  it is not enough to cleave to barren and desul-
        tory dogmas, derived from the traditions of the elders who
        thereunto have set their seals.

                         Scientific consistency

354:18  Consistency is seen in example more than in precept.
        Inconsistency is shown by words without deeds, which
        are like clouds without rain. If our words
354:21  fail to express our deeds, God will redeem that
        weakness, and out of the mouth of babes He will perfect
        praise. The night of materiality is far spent, and with
354:24  the dawn Truth will waken men spiritually to hear and
        to speak the new tongue.

        Sin should become unreal to every one. It is in itself
354:27  inconsistent, a divided kingdom. Its supposed realism
        has no divine authority, and I rejoice in the apprehension
        of this grand verity.

                            Spiritual meaning

354:30  The opponents of divine Science must be
        charitable, if they would be Christian. If the
        letter of Christian Science appears inconsistent, they should
355:1   gain the spiritual meaning of Christian Science, and then
        the ambiguity will vanish.

                           Practical arguments

355:3   The charge of inconsistency in Christianly scientific
        methods of dealing with sin and disease is met by some-
        thing practical, - namely, the proof of the
355:6   utility of these methods; and proofs are better
        than mere verbal arguments or prayers which evince no
        spiritual power to heal.

355:9   As for sin and disease, Christian Science says, in the
        language of the Master, "Follow me; and let the dead
        bury their dead." Let discord of every name and nature
355:12  be heard no more, and let the harmonious and true sense
        of Life and being take possession of human consciousness.

        What is the relative value of the two conflicting the-
355:15  ories regarding Christian healing? One, according to
        the commands of our Master, heals the sick. The other,
        popular religion, declines to admit that Christ's religion
355:18  has exercised any systematic healing power since the first
        century.

                         Conditions of criticism

        The statement that the teachings of Christian Sci-
355:21  ence in this work are "absolutely false, and the most
        egregious fallacies ever offered for accept-
        ance," is an opinion wholly due to a misap-
355:24  prehension both of the divine Principle and practice of
        Christian Science and to a consequent inability to demon-
        strate this Science. Without this understanding, no one
355:27  is capable of impartial or correct criticism, because demon-
        stration and spiritual understanding are God's immortal
        keynotes, proved to be such by our Master and evidenced
355:30  by the sick who are cured and by the sinners who are
        reformed.

                      Weakness of material theories

        Strangely enough, we ask for material theories in sup-
356:1   port of spiritual and eternal truths, when the two are so
        antagonistic that the material thought must become spir-
356:3   itualized before the spiritual fact is attained.
        So-called material existence affords no evidence
        theories of spiritual existence and immortality. Sin,
356:6   sickness, and death do not prove man's entity or immor-
        tality. Discord can never establish the facts of harmony.
        Matter is not the vestibule of Spirit.

                       Irreconciliable differences

356:9   Jesus reasoned on this subject practically, and con-
        trolled sickness, sin, and death on the basis of his spir-
        ituality. Understanding the nothingness of
356:12  material things, he spoke of flesh and Spirit
        as the two opposites, - as error and Truth, not contrib-
        uting in any way to each other's happiness and existence.
356:15  Jesus knew, "It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh
        profiteth nothing."

                        Copartnership impossible

        There is neither a present nor an eternal copartner-
356:18  ship between error and Truth, between flesh and Spirit.
        God is as incapable of producing sin, sick-
        ness, and death as He is of experiencing these
356:21  errors. How then is it possible for Him to create man
        subject to this triad of errors, - man who is made in the
        divine likeness?

356:24  Does God create a material man out of Himself, Spirit?
        Does evil proceed from good? Does divine Love com-
        mit a fraud on humanity by making man inclined to sin,
356:27  and then punishing him for it? Would any one call it
        wise and good to create the primitive, and then punish its
        derivative?

                      Two infinite creators absurd

356:30  Does subsequent follow its antecedent? It does.
        Was there original self-creative sin? Then there must
        have been more than one creator, more than one God.
357:1   In common justice, we must admit that God will not
        punish man for doing what He created man
357:3   capable of doing, and knew from the outset
        that man would do. God is "of purer eyes
        than to behold evil." We sustain Truth, not by accept-
357:6   ing, but by rejecting a lie.

        Jesus said of personified evil, that it was "a liar, and
        the father of it." Truth creates neither a lie, a capacity
357:9   to lie, nor a liar. If mankind would relinquish the belief
        that God makes sickness, sin, and death, or makes man
        capable of suffering on account of this malevolent triad,
357:12  the foundations of error would be sapped and error's de-
        struction ensured; but if we theoretically endow mortals
        with the creativeness and authority of Deity, how dare we
357:15  attempt to destroy what He hath made, or even to deny
        that God made man evil and made evil good?

                            Anthropomorphism

        History teaches that the popular and false notions
357:18  about the Divine Being and character have originated
        in the human mind. As there is in reality but
        one God, one Mind, wrong notions about God
357:21  must have originated in a false supposition, not in im-
        mortal Truth, and they are fading out. They are false
        claims, which will eventually disappear, according to the
357:24  vision of St. John in the Apocalypse.

                              One supremacy

        If what opposes God is real, there must be two
        powers, and God is not supreme and infinite. Can
357:27  Deity be almighty, if another mighty and
        self-creative cause exists and sways man-
        kind? Has the Father "Life in Himself," as the Scrip-
357:30  tures say, and, if so, can Life, or God, dwell in evil and
        create it? Can matter drive Life, Spirit, hence, and so
        defeat omnipotence?

                             Matter impotent

358:1   Is the woodman's axe, which destroys a tree's so-called
        life, superior to omnipotence? Can a leaden bullet de-
358:3   prive a man of Life, - that is, of God, who is
        man's Life? If God is at the mercy of matter,
        then matter is omnipotent. Such doctrines are "confu-
358:6   sion worse confounded." If two statements directly con-
        tradict each other and one is true, the other must be false.
        Is Science thus contradictory?

                      Scientific and Biblical facts

358:9   Christian Science, understood, coincides with the
        Scriptures, and sustains logically and demonstratively
        every point it presents. Otherwise it would
358:12  not be Science, and could not present its
        proofs. Christian Science is neither made up of contra-
        dictory aphorisms nor of the inventions of those who scoff
358:15  at God. It presents the calm and clear verdict of Truth
        against error, uttered and illustrated by the prophets,
        by Jesus, by his apostles, as is recorded throughout the
358:18  Scriptures.

        Why are the words of Jesus more frequently cited
        for our instruction than are his remarkable works? Is
358:21  it not because there are few who have gained a true
        knowledge of the great import to Christianity of those
        works?

                           Personal confidence

358:24  Sometimes it is said; "Rest assured that whatever
        effect Christian Scientists may have on the sick, comes
        through rousing within the sick a belief
358:27  that in the removal of disease these healers
        have wonderful power, derived from the Holy Ghost."
        Is it likely that church-members have more faith in
358:30  some Christian Scientist, whom they have perhaps
        never seen and against whom they have been warned,
        than they have in their own accredited and orthodox
359:1   pastors, whom they have seen and have been taught
        to love and to trust?

359:3   Let any clergyman try to cure his friends by their
        faith in him. Will that faith heal them? Yet Scien-
        tists will take the same cases, and cures will follow.
359:6   Is this because the patients have more faith in the Scien-
        tist than in their pastor? I have healed infidels whose
        only objection to this method was, that I as a Chris-
359:9   tian Scientist believed in the Holy Spirit, while they, the
        patients, did not.

        Even though you aver that the material senses are
359:12  indispensable to man's existence or entity, you must
        change the human concept of life, and must at length
        know yourself spiritually and scientifically. The evi-
359:15  dence of the existence of Spirit, Soul, is palpable only to
        spiritual sense, and is not apparent to the material senses,
        which cognize only that which is the opposite of Spirit.

359:18  True Christianity is to be honored wherever found,
        but when shall we arrive at the goal which that word
        implies? From Puritan parents, the discov-
359:21  erer of Christian Science early received her
        religious education. In childhood, she often listened
        with joy to these words, falling from the lips of her
359:24  saintly mother, "God is able to raise you up from sick-
        ness;" and she pondered the meaning of that Scripture
        she so often quotes: "And these signs shall follow them
359:27  that believe; . . . they shall lay hands on the sick,
        and they shall recover."

                          Two different artists

        A Christian Scientist and an opponent are like two
359:30  artists. One says: "I have spiritual ideals,
        indestructible and glorious. When others see
        them as I do, in their true light and loveliness, - and
360:1   know that these ideals are real and eternal because drawn
        from Truth, - they will find that nothing is lost, and all
360:3   is won, by a right estimate of what is real."

        The other artist replies: "You wrong my experience.
        I have no mind-ideals except those which are both mental
360:6   and material. It is true that materiality renders these
        ideals imperfect and destructible; yet I would not ex-
        change mine for thine, for mine give me such personal
360:9   pleasure, and they are not so shockingly transcendental.
        They require less self-abnegation, and keep Soul well out
        of sight. Moreover, I have no notion of losing my old
360:12  doctrines or human opinions."

                            Choose ye to-day

        Dear reader, which mind-picture or externalized thought
        shall be real to you, - the material or the spiritual?
360:15  Both you cannot have. You are bringing out
        your own ideal. This ideal is either temporal
        or eternal. Either Spirit or matter is your model. If you
360:18  try to have two models, then you practically have none.
        Like a pendulum in a clock, you will be thrown back and
        forth, striking the ribs of matter and swinging between the
360:21  real and the unreal.

        Hear the wisdom of Job, as given in the excellent trans-
        lation of the late Rev. George R. Noyes, D.D.: -
360:24  Shall mortal man be more just than God?
        Shall man be more pure than his Maker?
        Behold, He putteth no trust in His ministering spirits,
360:27  And His angels He chargeth with frailty.

        Of old, the Jews put to death the Galilean Prophet,
        the best Christian on earth, for the truth he spoke and
360:30  demonstrated, while to-day, Jew and Christian can unite
        in doctrine and denomination on the very basis of Jesus'
        words and works. The Jew believes that the Messiah or
361:1   Christ has not yet come; the Christian believes that
        Christ is God. Here Christian Science intervenes, ex-
361:3   plains these doctrinal points, cancels the disagreement,
        and settles the question. Christ, as the true spiritual idea,
        is the ideal of God now and forever, here and everywhere.
361:6   The Jew who believes in the First Commandment is a
        monotheist; he has one omnipresent God. Thus the Jew
        unites with the Christian's doctrine that God is come and
        is present now and forever. The Christian who believes
        in the First Commandment is a monotheist. This he
        virtually unites with the Jew's belief in one God, and
361:12  recognizes that Jesus Christ is not God, as Jesus himself
        declared, but is the Son of God. This declaration of
        Jesus, understood, conflicts not at all with another of his
361:15  sayings: "I and my Father are one," - that is, one in
        quality, not in quantity. As a drop of water is one with
        the ocean, a ray of light one with the, sun, even so God
361:18  and man, Father and son, are one in being. The Scrip-
        ture reads: "For in Him we live, and move, and have
        our being."

361:21  I have revised /Science and Health/ only to give a
        clearer and fuller expression of its original meaning. Spir-
        itual ideas unfold as we advance. A human perception of
361:24  divine Science, however limited, must be correct in order
        to be Science and subject to demonstration. A germ of in-
        finite Truth, though least in the kingdom of heaven is the
361:27  higher hope on earth, but it will be rejected and reviled
        until God prepares the soil for the seed. That which
        when sown bears immortal fruit, enriches mankind only
361:30  when it is understood, - hence the many readings given
        the Scriptures, and the requisite revisions of /Science and
        Health with Key to the Scriptures/.




        CHAPTER XII - CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PRACTICE

        Why art thou cast down, O my soul [sense]?
        And why art thou disquieted within me?
        Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him,
        Who is the health of my countenance and my God. - PSALMS.

        And these signs shall follow them that believe: In my name
        shall they cast out devils: they shall speak with new tongues;
        they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly
        thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the
        sick, and they shall recover. - JESUS.

                           A gospel narrative

362:1   IT is related in the seventh chapter of Luke's Gospel
        that Jesus was once the honored guest of a certain
362:3   Pharisee, by name Simon, though he was quite unlike
        Simon the disciple. While they were at meat, an unusual
        incident occurred, as if to interrupt the scene
362:6   of Oriental festivity. A "strange woman"
        came in. Heedless of the fact that she was debarred from
        such a place and such society, especially under the stern
362:9   rules of rabbinical law, as positively as if she were a Hin-
        doo pariah intruding upon the household of a high-caste
        Brahman, this woman (Mary Magdalene, as she has
362:12  since been called) approached Jesus. According to the
        custom of those days, he reclined on a couch with his
        head towards the table and his bare feet away from it.
362:15  It was therefore easy for the Magdalen to come behind
363:1   the couch and reach his feet. She bore an alabaster jar
        containing costly and fragrant oil, - sandal oil perhaps,
363:3   which is in such common use in the East. Breaking
        the sealed jar, she perfumed Jesus' feet with the oil,
        wiping them with her long hair, which hung loosely
363:6   about her shoulders, as was customary with women of her
        grade.

                         Parable of the creditor

        Did Jesus spurn the woman? Did he repel her adora-
363:9   tion? No! He regarded her compassionately. Nor was
        this all. Knowing what those around him
        were saying in their hearts, especially his host,
363:12  - that they were wondering why, being a prophet, the
        exalted guest did not at once detect the woman's immoral
        status and bid her depart, - knowing this, Jesus rebuked
363:15  them with a short story or parable. He described two
        debtors, one for a large sum and one for a smaller, who
        were released from their obligations by their common
363:18  creditor. "Which of them will love him most?" was the
        Master's question to Simon the Pharisee; and Simon re-
        plied, "He to whom he forgave most." Jesus approved
363:21  the answer, and so brought home the lesson to all, follow-
        ing it with that remarkable declaration to the woman,
        "Thy sins are forgiven."

                             Divine insight

363:24  Why did he thus summarize her debt to divine Love?
        Had she repented and reformed, and did his insight
        detect this unspoken moral uprising? She
363:27  bathed his feet with her tears before she
        anointed them with the oil. In the absence of other
        proofs, was her grief sufficient evidence to warrant the
363:30  expectation of her repentance, reformation, and growth
        in wisdom? Certainly there was encouragement in the
        mere fact that she was showing her affection for a man
364:1   of undoubted goodness and purity, who has since been
        rightfully regarded as the best man that ever trod this
364:3   planet. Her reverence was unfeigned, and it was mani-
        fested towards one who was soon, though they knew it
        not, to lay down his mortal existence in behalf of all
364:6   sinners, that through his word and works they might be
        redeemed from sensuality and sin.

                        Penitence or hospitality

        Which was the higher tribute to such ineffable affec-
364:9   tion, the hospitality of the Pharisee or the contrition of
        the Magdalen? This query Jesus answered
        by rebuking self-righteousness and declaring
364:12  the absolution of the penitent. He even said that this
        poor woman had done what his rich entertainer had neg-
