death, to the disappointment of the believer. How could you think
anything purely spiritual and formless existing without blending
together with other things?  Thirdly, it fails to gratify the desire,
cherished by the believer, of enjoying eternal life, because soul has
to lose its body, the sole important medium through which it may
enjoy life.  Fourthly, soul is taken as a subject matter to receive
in the future life the reward or the punishment from God for our
actions in this life; but the very idea of eternal punishment is
inconsistent with the boundless love of God.  Fifthly, it is beyond
all doubt that soul is conceived as an entity, which unifies various
mental faculties and exists as the foundation of individual
personality.  But the existence of such soul is quite incompatible
with the well-known pathological fact that it is possible for the
individual to have double or treble or multiple personalities.  Thus
the belief in the existence of soul conceived by the common sense
turns out not only to be irrational, but a useless encumbrance on the
religious mind.  Therefore Zen declares that there is no such thing
as soul, and that mind and body are one.  Hwui Chung (Ye-chu), a
famous disciple of the Sixth Patriarch in China, to quote an example,
one day asked a monk: "Where did you come from?"  "I came, sir, from
the South," replied the man.  "What doctrine do the masters of the
South teach?" asked Hwui Chung again.  "They teach, sir, that body is
mortal, but mind is immortal," was the answer.  "That," said the
master, "is the heterodox doctrine of the Atman!"  "How do you, sir,"
questioned the monk, "teach about that?"  "I teach that the body and
mind are one," was the reply.[FN#183]


[FN#183]  For further explanation, see Sho-bo-gen-zo and
Mu-chu-mon-do.

Fiske, [FN#184] in his argument against materialism, blames the
denial of immortality, saying: "The materialistic assumption that
there is no such state of things, and that the life of the soul ends
accordingly with the life of the body, is perhaps the most colossal
instance of baseless assumption that is known to the history of
philosophy."  But we can say with equal force that the common-sense
assumption that the life of soul continues beyond the grave is,
perhaps, the most colossal instance of baseless assumption that is
known to the history of thought, because, there being no scientific
evidences that give countenance to the assumption, even the
spiritualists themselves hesitate to assert the existence of a ghost
or soul.  Again he[FN#185] says: "With this illegitimate hypothesis
of annihilation the materialist transgresses the bounds of experience
quite as widely as the poet who sings of the New Jerusalem with its
river of life and its street of gold.  Scientifically speaking, there
is not a particle of evidence for either view."  This is as much as
to say there is not a particle of evidence, scientifically speaking,
for the common-sense view of soul, because the poet's description of
the New Jerusalem is nothing but the result of the common-sense
belief of immortality.


[FN#184]  'The Destiny of Man,' p. 110.

[FN#185]  'The Destiny of Man,' pp. 110, 111.


4. The Examination of the Notion of Self.

The belief in immortality is based on the strong instinct of
self-preservation that calls forth an insatiable longing for
longevity.  It is another form of egoism, one of the relics of our
brute forefathers.  We must bear in mind that this illusion of the
individual Self is the foundation on which every form of immorality
has its being.  I challenge my readers to find in the whole history
of mankind any crime not based on egoism.  Evil-doers have been as a
rule pleasure-hunters, money-seekers, seekers after self-interests,
characterized by lust, folly, and cruelty.  Has there been anyone who
committed theft that he might further the interests of his villagers?
 Has there been any paramour who disgraced himself that lie might
help his neighbours?  Has there been any traitor who performed the
ignoble conduct to promote the welfare of his own country or society
at large?

To get Enlightened, therefore, we have to correct, first of all, our
notions concerning Self.  Individual body and mind are not the only
important constituents of Self.  There are many other indispensable
elements in the notion of Self.  For instance, I have come into
existence as another form of my parents.  I am theirs, and may justly
be called the reincarnation of them.  And again, my father is another
form of his parents; my mother of hers; his and her parents of
theirs; and ad infinitum.  In brief, all my forefathers live and have
their being in me.  I cannot help, therefore, thinking that my
physical state is the result of the sum total of my good and bad
actions in the past lives I led in the persons of my forefathers, and
of the influence I received therein;[FN#186] and that my psychical
state is the result of that which I received, felt, imagined,
conceived, experienced, and thought in my past existences in the
persons of my ancestors.

[FN#186]  This is the law of Karma.


Besides this, my brothers, my sisters, my neighbours--nay, all my
follow-men and fellow-women are no other than the reincarnation of
their parents and forefathers, who are also mine.  The same blood
invigorated the king as well as the beggar; the same nerve energized
the white as well as the black men; the same consciousness vitalized
the wise as well as the unwise.  Impossible it is to conceive myself
independent of my fellow-men and fellow-women, for they are mine and
I am theirs--that is, I live and move in them, and they live and move
in me.

It is bare nonsense to say that I go to school, not to be educated as
a member of society, but simply to gratify my individual desire for
knowledge; or that I make a fortune, not to lead the life of a
well-to-do in society, but to satisfy my individual money-loving
instinct; or that I seek after truth, neither to do good to my
contemporaries nor to the future generations, but only for my
individual curiosity or that I live neither to live with my family
nor with my friends nor with anyone else, but to live my individual
life.  It is as gross absurdity to say that I am an individual
absolutely independent of society as to say I am a husband with no
wife, or I am a son to no parents.  Whatever I do directly or
indirectly I contribute to the common fortune of man; whatever anyone
else does directly or indirectly determines my fate.  Therefore we
must realize that our Selves necessarily include other members of the
community, while other members' Selves necessarily comprehend us.



5. Nature is the Mother of All Things.

Furthermore, man has come into existence out of Nature.  He is her
child.  She provided him food, raiment, and shelter.  She nourishes
him, strengthens him, and vitalizes him.  At the same time she
disciplines, punishes, and instructs him.  His body is of her own
formation, his knowledge is of her own laws, and his activities are
the responses to her own addresses to him.  Modern civilization is
said by some to be the conquest of man over Nature; but, in fact, it
is his faithful obedience to her.  "Bacon truly said," says
Eucken,[FN#187] "that to rule nature man must first serve her.  He
forgot to add that, as her ruler, he is still destined to go on
serving her."  She can never be attacked by any being unless he acts
in strict conformity to her laws.  To accomplish anything against her
law is as impossible as to catch fishes in a forest, or to make bread
of rock.  How many species of animals have perished owing to their
inability to follow her steps!  How immense fortunes have been lost
in vain from man's ignorance of her order!  How many human beings
disappeared on earth from their disobedience to her unbending will!
She is, nevertheless, true to those who obey her rules.  Has not
science proved that she is truthful?  Has not art found that she is
beautiful?


[FN#187]  Eucken's 'Philosophy of Life,' by W. R. Royce Gibbon, p. 51.


Has not philosophy announced that she is spiritual?  Has not religion
proclaimed that she is good?  At all events, she is the mother of all
beings.  She lives in all things and they live in her.  All that she
possesses is theirs, and all that they want she supplies.  Her life
is the same vitality that stirs all sentient beings.  Chwang
Tsz[FN#188] (So-shi) is right when he says: "Heaven, Earth, and I
were produced together, and all things and I are one."  And again:
"If all things be regarded with love, Heaven and Earth are one with
me."  Sang Chao (So-jo) also says: "Heaven and Earth are of the same
root as we.  All things in the world are of one substance with
Me."[FN#189]


[FN#188]  Chwang Tsz, vol. i., p. 20.

[FN#189]  This is a favourite subject of discussion by Zenists.



6. Real Self.

If there be no individual soul either in mind or body, where does
personality lie?  What is Real Self?  How does it differ from soul?
Self is living entity, not immutable like soul, but mutable and
ever-changing life, which is body when observed by senses, and which
is mind when experienced by introspection.  It is not an entity lying
behind mind and body, but life existent as the union of body and
mind.  It existed in our forefathers in the past, is existing in the
present, and will exist in the future generations.  It also discloses
itself to some measure in vegetables and animals, and shadows itself
forth in inorganic nature.  It is Cosmic life and Cosmic spirit, and
at the same time individual life and individual spirit.  It is one
and the same life which embraces men and nature.  It is the
self-existent, creative, universal principle that moves on from
eternity to eternity.  As such it is called Mind or Self by Zenists.
Pan Shan (Ban-zan) says: "The moon of mind comprehends all the
universe in its light."  A man asked Chang Sha (Cho-sha): "How can
you turn the phenomenal universe into Self ?"  "How can you turn Self
into the phenomenal universe?" returned the master.

When we get the insight into this Self, we are able to have the open
sesame to the mysteries of the universe, because to know the nature
of a drop of water is to know the nature of the river, the lake, and
the ocean--nay, even of vapour, mist, and cloud; in other words, to
get an insight into individual life is the key to the secret of
Universal Life.  We must not confine Self within the poor little
person called body.  That is the root of the poorest and most
miserable egoism.  We should expand that egoism into family-egoism,
then into nation-egoism, then into race-egoism, then into
human-egoism, then into living-being-egoism, and lastly into
universe-egoism, which is not egoism at all.  Thus we deny the
immortality of soul as conceived by common sense, but assume
immortality of the Great Soul, which animates, vitalizes, and
spiritualizes all sentient beings.  It is Hinayana Buddhism that
first denied the existence of atman or Self so emphatically
inculcated in the Upanisads, and paved the way for the general
conception of Universal Self, with the eulogies of which almost every
page of Mahayana books is filled.



7. The Awakening of the Innermost Wisdom.

Having set ourselves free from the misconception of Self, next we
must awaken our innermost wisdom, pure and divine, called the Mind of
Buddha,[FN#190] or Bodhi,[FN#191] or Prajnya[FN#192] by Zen masters.
It is the divine light, the inner heaven, the key to all moral
treasures, the centre of thought and consciousness, the source of all
influence and power, the seat of kindness, justice, sympathy,
impartial love, humanity, and mercy, the measure of all things.  When
this innermost wisdom is fully awakened, we are able to realize that
each and everyone of us is identical in spirit, in essence, in nature
with the universal life or Buddha, that each ever lives face to face
with Buddha, that each is beset by the abundant grace of the Blessed
One, that He arouses his moral nature, that He opens his spiritual
eyes, that He unfolds his new capacity, that He appoints his mission,
and that life is not an ocean of birth, disease, old age, and death,
nor the vale of tears, but the holy temple of Buddha, the Pure
Land,[FN#193] where be can enjoy the bliss of Nirvana.


[FN#190]  Zen is often called the Sect of Buddha-mind, as it lays
stress on the awakening of the Mind of Buddha.  The words 'the Mind
of Buddha' were taken from a passage in Lankavatara-sutra.

[FN#191]  That knowledge by which one becomes enlightened.

[FN#192]  Supreme wisdom.

[FN#193]  Sukhavati, or the land of bliss.


Then our minds go through an entire revolution.  We are no more
troubled by anger and hatred, no more bitten by envy and ambition, no
more stung by sorrow and chagrin, no more overwhelmed by melancholy
and despair.  Not that we become passionless or simply intellectual,
but that we have purified passions, which, instead of troubling us,
inspire us with noble aspirations, such as anger and hatred against
injustice, cruelty, and dishonesty, sorrow and lamentation for human
frailty, mirth and joy for the welfare of follow-beings, pity and
sympathy for suffering creatures.  The same change purifies our
intellect.  Scepticism and sophistry give way to firm conviction;
criticism and hypothesis to right judgment; and inference and
argument to realization.

What we merely observed before we now touch with heart as well.  What
we knew in relation of difference before we now understand in
relation of unity as well.  How things happen was our chief concern
before, but now we consider as well bow much value they have.  What
was outside us before now comes within us.  What was dead and
indifferent before grows now alive and lovable to us. What was
insignificant and empty before becomes now important, and has
profound meaning.  Wherever we go we find beauty; whomever we meet we
find good; whatever we get we receive with gratitude.  This is the
reason why the Zenists not only regarded all their fellow-beings as
their benefactors, but felt gratitude even towards fuel and water.
The present writer knows a contemporary Zenist who would not drink
even a cup of water without first making a salutation to it.  Such an
attitude of Zen toward things may well be illustrated by the
following example: Sueh Fung (Sep-po) and Kin Shan (Kin-zan), once
travelling through a mountainous district, saw a leaf of the rape
floating down the stream.  Thereon Kin Shan said: "Let us go up, dear
brother, along the stream that we may find a sage living up on the
mountain.  I hope we shall find a good teacher in him."  "No,"
replied Sueh Fung, "for he cannot be a sage who wastes even a leaf of
the rape.  He will be no good teacher for us."



8. Zen is not Nihilistic.

Zen judged from ancient Zen masters' aphorisms may seem, at the first
sight, to be idealistic in an extreme form, as they say: "Mind is
Buddha" or, "Buddha is Mind," or, "There is nothing outside mind,"
or, "Three worlds are of but one mind."  And it may also appear to be
nihilistic, as they say: "There has been nothing since all eternity,"
"By illusion you see the castle of the Three Worlds"; "by
Enlightenment you see but emptiness in ten directions."[FN#194]  In
reality, however, Zen[FN#195] is neither idealistic nor nihilistic.
Zen makes use of the nihilistic idea of Hinayana Buddhism, and calls
its students' attention to the change and evanescence of life and of
the world, first to destroy the error of immutation, next to dispel
the attachment to the sensual objects.


[FN#194]  These words were repeatedly uttered by Chinese and Japanese
Zenists of all ages.  Chwen Hih (Fu-dai-shi) expressed this very idea
in his Sin Wang Ming (Shin-o-mei) at the time of Bodhidharma.

[FN#195]  The Rin-zai teachers mostly make use of the doctrine of
unreality of all things, as taught in Prajnya-paramita-sutras.  We
have to note that there are some differences between the Mahayana
doctrine of unreality and the Hinayana doctrine of unreality.


It is a misleading tendency of our intellect to conceive things as if
they were immutable and constant.  It often leaves changing and
concrete individual objects out of consideration, and lays stress on
the general, abstract, unchanging aspect of things.  It is inclined
to be given to generalization and abstraction.  It often looks not at
this thing or at that thing, but at things in general.  It loves to
think not of a good thing nor of a bad thing, but of bad and good in
the abstract.  This intellectual tendency hardens and petrifies the
living and growing world, and leads us to take the universe as a
thing dead, inert, and standing still.  This error of immutation can
be corrected by the doctrine of Transcience taught by Hinayana
Buddhism.  But as medicine taken in an undue quantity turns into
poison, so the doctrine of Transcience drove the Hinayanists to the
suicidal conclusion of nihilism.  A well-known scholar and believer
of Zen, Kwei Fung (Kei-ha) says in his refutation of nihilism:[FN#196]

"If mind as well as external objects be unreal, who is it that knows
they are so?  Again, if there be nothing real in the universe, what
is it that causes unreal objects to appear?  We stand witness to the
fact that there is no one of the unreal things on earth that is not
made to appear by something real.  If there be no water of unchanging
fluidity, how can there be the unreal and temporary forms of waves?
If there be no unchanging mirror, bright and clean, bow can there be
the various images, unreal and temporary, reflected in it?  If mind
as well as external objects be nothing at all, no one can tell what
it is that causes these unreal appearances.  Therefore this doctrine
(of the unreality of all things) can never clearly disclose spiritual
Reality.  So that Mahabheri-harakaparivarta-sutra says: " All the
sutras that teach the unreality of things belong to the imperfect
doctrine " (of the Shakya Muni).  Mahaprajnya-paramita-sutra says The
doctrine of unreality is the entrance-gate of Mahayana."


[FN#196]  See the appendix, chap. ii., 'The Mahayana Doctrine of
Nihilism.'



9. Zen and Idealism.

Next Zen makes use of Idealism as explained by the Dharmalaksana
School of Mahayana Buddhism.[FN#197]  For instance, the Fourth
Patriarch says: "Hundreds and thousands of laws originate with mind.
