without any previous consultation, all had the same sentiments, and
offered substantially the same answer. All the reasons that are
given come to one and the same thing--viz. occupation with present
interests, duties, possessions, or affections. There are differences
in the excuses which are not only helps to the vividness of the
narrative, but also express differences in the speakers. One man is
a shade politer than the others. He puts his refusal on the ground
of necessity. He 'must,' and so he courteously prays that he may be
held excused. The second one is not quite so polite; but still there
is a touch of courtesy about him too. He does not pretend necessity
as his friend had done, but he simply says, 'I _am_ going'; and
that is not quite so courteous as the former answer, but still he
begs to be excused. The last man thinks that he has such an
undeniable reason that he may be as brusque as he likes, and so he
says, 'I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come' and I do
not make any apologies. So with varying degrees of apparent
recognition of the claims of host and feast, the ground of refusal
is set forth as possessions in two cases, and as affections in the
third; and these so fill the men's hearts and minds that they have
no time to attend to the call that summons them to the feast.

Now it is obvious to note that the alleged necessity in one of these
excuses was no necessity at all. Who made the 'must'? The man himself.
The field would not run away though he waited till to-morrow. The
bargain was finished, for he had bought it. There was no necessity
for his going, and the next day would have done quite as well as
to-day; so the 'must' was entirely in his own mind. That is to say,
a great many of us mask inclinations under the garb of imperative
duties and say, 'We are so pressed by necessary obligations and
engagements that we really have not got any time to attend to these
higher questions which you are trying to press upon us.' You remember
the old story. 'I must live,' said the thief. 'I do not see the
necessity,' said the judge. A man says, 'I _must_ be at business
to-morrow morning at half-past eight. How can I think about religion?'
Well, if you really _must_, you _can_ think about it. But if you
are only juggling and deceiving yourself with inclinations that pose as
necessities, the sooner the veil is off the better, and you understand
whereabouts you are, and what is your true position in reference to the
Gospel of Jesus Christ.

But then let me, only in a word, remind you that the other side of
the excuse is a very operative one. 'I have married a wife, and
therefore I cannot come.' There are some of us around whom the
strong grasp of earthly affections is flung so embracingly and
sweetly that we cannot, as we think, turn our loves upward and fix
them upon God. Fathers and mothers, husbands and wives, parents and
children, remember Christ's deep words, 'A man's foes shall be they
of his own household'; and be sure that the prediction is fulfilled
many a time by the hindrances of their love even more than by the
opposition of their hatred.

All these excuses refer to legitimate things. It is perfectly right
that the man should go and see after his field, perfectly right that
the ten bullocks should be harnessed and tried, perfectly right that
the sweetness of wedded love should be tasted and drunk, perfectly
wrong that any of them should be put as a reason for not accepting
Christ's offer. Let us take the lesson that legitimate business and
lawful and pure affections may ruin a soul, and may constitute the
hindrance that blocks its road to God.

Brethren, I said that these were flimsy excuses. I shall have to
explain what I mean by that in a moment. As excuses they are flimsy;
but as reasons which actually operate with hundreds of people,
preventing them from being Christians, they are not flimsy; they are
most solid and real. Our Lord does not mean them as exhaustive.
There are a great many other grounds upon which different types of
character turn away from the offered blessings of the Gospel, which
do not come within view of the parable. But although not exhaustive
they are widely operative. I wonder how many men and women there are
listening to me now of whom it is true that they are so busy with
their daily occupations that they have not time to be religious, and
of how many men, and perhaps more especially women, among us at this
moment it is true that their hearts are so ensnared with loves that
belong to earth--beautiful and potentially sacred and elevating as
these are--that they have not time to turn themselves to the one
eternal Lover of their souls. Let me beseech you, dear friends--and
you especially who are strangers to this place and to my voice--to
do what I cannot, and would not if I could, lay these thoughts on
your own hearts, and ask yourselves, 'Is it I?'

And then before I pass from this point of my discourse, remember
that the contrariety between these duties and the acceptance of the
offered feast existed only in the imagination of the men that made
them. There is no reason why you should not go to the feast and see
after your field. There is no reason why you should not love your
wife and go to the feast. God's summons comes into collision with
many wishes, but with no duties or legitimate occupations. The more
a man accepts and lives upon the good that Jesus Christ spreads
before him, the more fit will he be for all his work, and for all
his enjoyments. The field will be better tilled, the bullocks will
be better driven, the wife will be more wisely, tenderly, and
sacredly loved if in your hearts Christ is enthroned, and whatsoever
you do you do as for Him. It is only the excessive and abusive
possession of His gifts and absorption in our duties and relations
that turns them into impediments in the path of our Christian life.
And the flimsiness of the excuse is manifest by the fact that the
contrarity is self-created.

III. Lastly, note the real reason.

I have said that as pretexts the three explanations were
unsatisfactory. When a man pleads a previous engagement as a reason
for not accepting an invitation, nine times out of ten it is a
polite way of saying, 'I do not want to go.' It was so in this case.
How all these absolute impossibilities, which made it perfectly out
of the question that the three recreants should sit down at the
table, would have melted into thin air if, by any chance, there had
come into their minds a wish to be there! They would have found
means to look after the field and the cattle and the home, and to be
in their places notwithstanding, if they had wanted. The real reason
that underlies men's turning away from Christ's offer is, as I said
in the beginning of my remarks, that they do not care to have it.
They have no inclinations and no tastes for the higher and purer
blessings.

Brother, do not let us lose ourselves in generalities. I am talking
about you, and about the set of your inclinations and tastes. And I
want you to ask yourself whether it is not a fact that some of you
like oxen better than God; whether it is not a fact that if the two
were there before you, you would rather have a good big field made
over to you than have the food that is spread upon that table.

Well then what is the cause of the perverted inclination? Why is it
that when Christ says, 'Child, come to Me, and I will give thee
pardon, peace, purity, power, hope, Heaven, Myself,' there is no
responsive desire kindled in the heart? Why do I not want God? Why
do I not care for Jesus Christ? Why do the blessings about which
preachers are perpetually talking seem to me so shadowy, so remote
from anything that I need, so ill-fitting to anything that I desire?
There must be something very deeply wrong. This is what is wrong,
your heart has shaken itself loose from dependence upon God; and you
have no love as you ought to have for Him. You prefer to stand
alone. The prodigal son, having gone away into the far country,
likes the swine's husks better than the bread in his father's house,
and it is only when the supply of the latter coarse dainty gives out
that the purer taste becomes strong. Strange, is it not? but yet it
is true.

Now there are one or two things that I want to say about this
indifference, resulting from preoccupation and from alienation, and
which hides its ugliness behind all manner of flimsy excuses. One is
that the reason itself is utterly unreasonable. I have said the true
reason is indifference. Can anybody put into words which do not
betray the absurdity of the position, the conduct of the man who
says, 'I do not want God; give me five yoke of oxen. That is the
real good, and I will stick by that.' There is one mystery in the
world, and if it were solved everything would be solved; and that
mystery is that men turn away from God and cleave to earth. No
account can be given of sin. No account can be given of man's
preference for the lesser and the lower; and neglect of the greater
and the higher, except to say it is utterly inexplicable and
unreasonable.

I need not say such indifference is shameful ingratitude to the
yearning love which provides, and the infinite sacrifice by which
was provided, this great feast to which we are asked. It cost Christ
pains, and tears, and blood, to prepare that feast, and He looks to
us, and says to us, 'Come and drink of the wine which I have
mingled, and eat of the bread which I have provided at such a cost.'
There are monsters of ingratitude, but there are none more
miraculously monstrous than the men who look, as some of us are
doing, untouched on Christ's sacrifice, and listen unmoved to
Christ's pleadings.

The excuses will disappear one day. We can trick our consciences; we
can put off the messengers; we cannot deceive the Host. All the thin
curtains that we weave to veil the naked ugliness of our
unwillingness to accept Christ will be burnt up one day. And I pray
you to ask yourselves, 'What shall I say when He comes and asks me,
"Why was thy place empty at My table"?' 'And he was speechless.' Do
not, dear brethren, refuse that gift, lest you bring upon yourselves
the terrible and righteous wrath of the Host whose invitation you
are slighting, and at whose table you are refusing to sit.




THE RASH BUILDER


    'Which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not
    down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have
    sufficient to finish it?'--LUKE xiv. 28.

Christ sought for no recruits under false pretences, but rather
discouraged than stimulated light-hearted adhesion. His constant
effort was to sift the crowds that gathered round Him. So here great
multitudes are following Him, and how does He welcome them? Does He
lay Himself out to attract them? Luke tells us that He _turned_
and faced the following multitude; and then, with a steady hand,
drenched with cold water the too easily kindled flame. Was that
because He did not wish them to follow Him? He desired every soul in
that crowd for His own, and He knew that the best way to attract is
sometimes to repel; and that a plain statement of the painful
consequences of a course will quench no genuine enthusiasm, but may
turn a mere flash in the pan into a purpose that will flame through
a life.

So our Lord lays down in stringent words the law of discipleship as
being self-sacrifice; the abandonment of the dearest, and the
acceptance of the most painful. And then He illustrates the law by
these two expanded similes or condensed parables, of the rash
builder and the rash soldier. Each contains a side of the Christian
life, and represents one phase of what a true disciple ought to be.
I wish to look with you now at the first of these two comparisons.

I. Consider then, first, the building, or the true aim of
discipleship.

The building of the tower represents what every human life ought to
aim at, the rearing up of a strong, solid structure in which the
builder may dwell and be at rest.

But then remember we are always building, consciously or
unconsciously. By our transitory actions we are all rearing up a
house for our souls in which we have to dwell; building character
from out of the fleeting acts of conduct, which character we have to
carry with us for ever. Soft invertebrate animals secrete their own
shells. That is what we are doing-making character, which is the
shield of self, as it were; and in which we have to abide.

My friend, what are you building? A prison; a mere garden-house of
lustful delights; or a temple fortress in which God may dwell
reverenced, and you may abide restful? Observe that whilst all men
are thus unconsciously and habitually rearing up a permanent abode
by their transient actions, every life that is better than a brute's
ought to have for its aim the building up of ourselves into firm
strength. The development of character is what we ought to ask from,
and to secure by, this fleeting life of ours. Not enjoyment; that is
a miserable aim. Not the satisfaction of earthly desires; not the
prosperity of our business or other ordinary avocations. The demand
that we should make upon life, and the aim which we should have
clearly before us in all that we do, is that it may contribute to
the formation of a pure and noble self, to the development of
character into that likeness to Jesus Christ, which is perfection
and peace and blessedness.

And while that is true about all life, it is eminently true in
regard to the highest form of life, which is the Christian life.
There are dreadful mistakes and imperfections in the ordinary vulgar
conception of what a Christian is, and what he is a Christian for.
What do you think men and women are meant to be Christians for? That
they may get away from some material and outward hell? Possibly.
That they may get celestial happiness? Certainly. But are these the
main things? By no means. What people are meant to be Christians for
is that they may be shaped into the likeness of Jesus Christ; or to
go back to the metaphor of my text, the meaning and aim of Christian
discipleship is not happiness, but the building up of the tower in
which the man may dwell.

Ah, friend; is that your notion of what a Christian is; and of what
he is a Christian for, to be like the Master? Alas! alas! how few of
us, honestly and continually and practically, lay to heart the
stringent and grand conception which underlies this metaphor of our
Lord's, who identifies the man that was thinking of being His
disciple with the man that sits down intending to build a tower.

II. So, secondly, note the cost of the building, or the conditions
of discipleship.

Building is an expensive amusement, as many a man who has gone
rashly in for bricks and mortar has found out to his cost. And the
most expensive of all sorts of building is the building up of
Christian character. That costs more than anything else, but there
are a number of other things less noble and desirable, which share
with it, to some extent, in the expenditure which it involves.

Discipleship demands constant reference to the plan. A man that
lives as he likes, by impulse, by inclination, or ignobly yielding
to the pressure of circumstances and saying, 'I could not help
myself, I was carried away by the flood,' or 'Everybody round about
me is doing it, and I could not be singular'--will never build
anything worth living in. It will be a born ruin--if I may so say.
There must be continual reference to the plan. That is to say, if a
man is to do anything worth doing, there must be a very clear marking
out to himself of what he means to secure by life, and a keeping of
the aim continually before him as his guide and his pole-star. Did
you ever see the pretty architect's plans, that were all so white and
neat when they came out of his office, after the masons have done with
them-all thumb-marked and dirty? I wonder if your Bibles are like
that? Do we refer to the standard of conduct with  anything like the
continual checking of our work by the architect's intention, which
every man who builds anything that will stand is obliged to practise?
Consult your plan, the pattern of your Master, the words of your
Redeemer, the gospel of your God, the voice of judgment and conscience,
and get into the habit of living, not like a vegetable, upon what
happens to be nearest its roots, nor like a brute, by the impulses of
the unreasoning nature, but clear above these put the understanding,
and high above that put the conscience, and above them all put the
will of the Lord. Consult your plan if you want to build your tower.

Then, further, another condition is continuous effort. You cannot
'rush' the building of a great edifice. You have to wait till the
foundations get consolidated, and then by a separate effort every
stone has to be laid in its bed and out of the builder's hands. So
by slow degrees, with continuity of effort, the building rises.

Now there has been a great deal of what I humbly venture to call
one-sidedness talked about the way by which Christian character is
to be developed and perfected. And one set of the New Testament
metaphors upon that subject has been pressed to the exclusion of the
others, and the effortless growth of the plant has been presented as
if it were the complete example of Christian progress. I know that
Jesus Christ has said: 'First the blade, then the ear; after that
the full corn in the ear.' But I know that He has also said, 'Which
of you, intending to build a tower'--and that involves the idea of
effort; and that He has further said, 'Or what king, going to make
war against another king'--and that involves the idea of antagonism
and conflict. And so, on the whole, I lay it down that this is one
of the conditions of building the tower, that the energy of the
builder should never slacken, but, with continual renewal of effort,
he should rear his life's building.

And then, still further, there is the fundamental condition of all;
and that is, self-surrender. Our Lord lays this down in the most
stringent terms in the words before my text, where He points to two
directions in which that spirit is required to manifest itself. One
is detachment from persons that are dearest, and even from one's own
selfish life; the other is the acceptance of things that are most
contrary to one's inclinations, against the grain, painful and hard
to bear. And so we may combine these two in this statement: If any
man is going to build a Christlike life he will have to detach
himself from surrounding things and dear ones, and to crucify self
by suppression of the lower nature and the endurance of evils. The
preceding parable which is connected in subject with the text, the
story of the great supper, and the excuses made for not coming to
it, represents two-thirds of the refusals as arising from the undue
love for, and regard to, earthly possessions, and the remaining
third as arising from the undue love to, and regard for, the
legitimate objects of affection. And these are the two chords that
hold most of us most tightly. It is not Christianity alone, dear
brethren, that says that if you want to do anything worth doing, you
must detach yourself from outward wealth. It is not Christianity
alone that says that, if you want to build up a noble life, you must
not let earthly love dominate and absorb your energy; but it is
Christianity that says so most emphatically, and that has best
reason to say so.

Concentration is the secret of all excellence. If the river is to
have any scour in it that will sweep away pollution and corruption,
it must not go winding and lingering in many curves, howsoever
flowery may be the banks, nor spreading over a broad bed, but you
must straighten it up and make it deep that it may run strong. And
if you will diffuse yourself all over these poor, wretched worldly
goods, or even let the rush of your heart's outflow go in the
direction of father and mother, wife and children, brethren and
sisters, forgetting Him, then you will never come to any good nor be
of use in this world. But if you want to be Christians after
Christ's pattern, remember that the price of the building is rigidly
to sacrifice self, 'to scorn delights and live laborious days,' and
to keep all vagrant desires and purposes within rigid limits, and
absolutely subordinated to Himself.

On the other hand, there is to be the acceptance of what is painful
to the lower nature. Unpleasant consequences of duty have to be
borne, and the lower self, with its appetites and desires, has to be
crucified. The vine must be mercilessly pruned in tendrils, leaves,
and branches even, though the rich sap may seem to bleed away to
waste, if we are to grow precious grapes out of which may be
expressed the wine of the Kingdom. We must be dead to much if we are
to be alive to anything worth living for.

Now remember that Christ's demand of self-surrender, self-sacrifice,
continuous effort, rigid limitation, does not come from any mere
false asceticism, but is inevitable in the very nature of the case,
and is made also by all worthy work. How much every one of us has
had to shear off our lives, how many tastes we have had to allow to
go ungratified, how many capacities undeveloped, in how many
directions we have had to hedge up our way, and not do, or be this,
that, or the other; if we have ever done anything in any direction
worthy the doing! Concentration and voluntary limitation, in order
to fix all powers on the supreme aim which judgment and conscience
have enjoined is the condition of all excellence, of all sanity of
living, and eminently of all Christian discipleship.

III. Further, note the failures.

The tower of the rash builder stands a gaunt, staring ruin.

Whosoever throws himself upon great undertakings or high aims,
without a deliberate forecast of the difficulties and sacrifices
they involve, is sure to stop almost before he has begun. Many a man
and woman leaves the starting-point with a rush, as if they were
going to be at the goal presently, and before they have run fifty
yards turn aside and quietly walk out of the course. I wonder how
many of you began, when you were lads or girls, to study some
language, and stuck before you had got through twenty pages of the
grammar, or to learn some art, and have still got the tools lying
unused in a dusty corner. And how many of you who call yourselves
Christians began in the same fashion long ago to run the race? 'Ye
did run well.' What did hinder you? What hindered Atalanta?  The
golden apples that were flung down on the path. Oh, the Church is
full of these abortive Christians; ruins from their beginning,
standing gaunt and windowless, the ground-plan a great palace, the
reality a hovel that has not risen a foot for the last ten years. I
wonder if there are any stunted Christians of that sort in this
congregation before me, who began under the influence of some
impulse or emotion, genuine enough, no doubt, but who had taken no
account of how much it would cost to finish the building. And so the
building is not finished, and never will be.

But I should remark here that what I am speaking about as failure is
not incomplete attainment of the aim. For all our lives have to
confess that they incompletely attain their aim; and lofty aims,
imperfectly realised, and still maintained, are the very salt of
life, and beautiful 'as the new moon with a ragged edge, e'en in its
imperfection beautiful.' Paul was an old man and an advanced
Christian when he said, 'Not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect, but I follow after.' And the highest
completeness to which the Christian builder can reach in this life
is the partial accomplishment of his aim and the persistent
adherence to and aspiration after the unaccomplished aim. It is not
these incomplete but progressive and aspiring lives that are
failures, but it is the lives of men who have abandoned high aims,
and have almost forgotten that they ever cherished them.

And what does our Lord say about such? That everybody laughs at
them. It is not more than they deserve. An out-and-out Christian
will often be disliked, but if he is made a mock of there will be a
_soupcon_ of awe and respect even in the mockery. Half-and-half
Christians get, and richly deserve, the curled lip and sarcasm of a
world that knows when a man is in earnest, and knows when he is an
incarnate sham.

IV. Lastly, I would have you observe the inviting encouragement
hidden in the apparent repelling warning.

If we read my text isolated, it may seem as if the only lesson that
our Lord meant to be drawn from it was a counsel of despair. 'Unless
you feel quite sure that you can finish, you had better not begin.'
Is that what He meant to say? I think not. He did mean to say, 'Do
not begin without opening your eyes to what is involved in the
beginning.' But suppose a man had taken His advice, had listened to
the terms, and had said, 'I cannot keep them, and I am going to
fling all up, and not try any more'--is that what Jesus Christ
wanted to bring him to? Surely not. And that it is not so arises
plainly enough from the observation that this parable and the
succeeding one are both sealed up, as it were, with 'So likewise,
whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he
cannot be My disciple.'

Now, if I may so say, there are two kinds of 'forsaking all that we
have.' One is the forsaking by which we become disciples; and the
other the forsaking by which we continue true disciples. The
conviction that they had not sufficient to finish is the very
conviction that Christ wished to root in the minds of the crowds.
He exhibits the difficulties in order that they may feel they cannot
cope with them. What then? That they may 'forsake' all their own
power to cope with them.

That is the first kind of 'forsaking all that we have.' That makes a
disciple. The recognition of my own utter impotence to do the things
which yet I see must be done, is the underside of trust in Him. And
that trust in Him brings the power that makes it possible for us to
do the things which we cannot of ourselves do, and the consciousness
of the impotence to do which is the first step toward doing them. It
is the self-sufficient man who is sure to be bankrupt before he has
finished his building; but he who has no confidence in himself, and
recognises the fact that he cannot build, will go to Jesus Christ
and say, 'Lord, I am poor and needy. Come Thou Thyself and be my
strength.' Such a forsaking of all that we have in the recognition
of our own poverty and powerlessness brings into the field an Ally
for our reinforcement that has more than the twenty thousand that
are coming against us, and will make us strong.

And then, if, knowing our weakness, our misery, our poverty, and
cleaving to Jesus Christ in simple confidence in His divine power
breathed into our weakness, and His abundant riches lavished upon
our poverty, we cast ourselves into the work to which He calls us by
His grace, then we shall find that the sweet and certain assurance
that we have Him for the possession and the treasure of our lives
will make parting with everything else, not painful, but natural and
necessary and a joy, as the expression of our supreme love to Him.
It should not, and would not be difficult to fling away paste gems
and false riches if our hands were filled with the jewels that
Christ bestows. And it will not be difficult to slay the old man
when the new Christ lives in us, by our faith and submission.

So, dear brethren, it all comes to this. We are all builders; what
kind of a work is your life's work going to turn out? Are you
building on the foundation, taking Jesus Christ for the anchor of
your hope, for the basis of your belief, for the crown of your aims,
for your all and in all? Are you building upon Him? If so, then the
building will stand when the storm comes and the 'hail sweeps away
the refuges' that other men have built elsewhere. But are you
building on that foundation the gold of self-denial, the silver of
white purity, the precious stones of variously-coloured and
Christlike virtues? Then your work will indeed be incomplete, but
its very incompleteness will be a prophecy of the time when 'the
headstone shall be brought forth with shoutings'; and you may humbly
trust that the day which 'declares every man's work of what sort it
is' will not destroy yours, but that it will gleam and flash in the
light of the revealing and reflecting fires. See to it that you are
building _for_ eternity, _on_ the foundation, _with_ the fair stones
which Jesus Christ gives to all those who let Him shape their lives. He
is at once, Architect, Material, Foundation; and in Him 'every several
building fitly framed together groweth into a holy temple in the Lord.'




'THAT WHICH WAS LOST'


    'An hundred sheep ... ten pieces of silver,... two
    sons.'--LUKE XV. 4,8,11.

The immediate occasion of these three inimitable parables, which have
found their way to the heart of the world, needs to be remembered in
order to grasp their import and importance. They are intended to
vindicate Christ's conduct in associating with outcasts and
disreputable persons whom His Pharisaical critics thought a great
deal too foul to be touched by clean hands. They were not meant to
set forth with anything like completeness either what wanderers had
to do to go back to God, or what God had done to bring wanderers back
to Himself. If this had been remembered, many misconceptions,
widespread and mischievous, especially affecting the meaning of the
last of the three parables--that of the Prodigal Son--would have been
avoided. The purpose of the parables accounts for Christ's accepting
the division which His antagonists made of men, into 'righteous,' like
themselves, and 'unclean,' like the publicans and sinners. There was a
far deeper truth to be spoken about the condition of humanity than
that. But for the purposes of His argument Christ passes it by. The
remembrance of the intention of the parables explains their
incompleteness as a statement of what people call 'the way of
salvation.' They were not meant to teach us that, but they were meant
to show us that a human instinct which prizes lost things because they
are lost has something corresponding to it in the divine nature, and
so to vindicate the conduct of  Christ.

I venture to isolate these three statements of the subjects of the
parables, because I think that looking at the threefold aspect in
which the one general thought is presented may help us to some
useful considerations.

I. I ask you, then, to look with me, first, at the varying causes of
loss.

The sheep was lost, the _drachma_ was lost, the son was lost.
But in each case the reason for the loss was different. Whilst I
would avoid all fanciful inserting into our Lord's words of more
than they can fairly bear, I would also avoid superficial evacuating
them of any of their depth of significance. So I think it is not
unintentional nor unimportant that in these three metaphors there
are set forth three obviously distinct operative causes for man's
departure from God.

The sheep did not intend to go anywhere, either to keep with or to
leave the shepherd. It simply knew that grass was sweet, and that
there, ahead of it, was another tuft, and it went after that. So it
nibbled itself away out of the path, out of the shepherd's care, out
of the flock's companionship. It was heedless; and therefore it was
lost.

Now that is a fair statement of facts in regard to thousands of men,
of whom I have no doubt there are some listening to me now. They do
not intend any mischief, they have no purpose of rebellion or
transgression, but they live what we call animal lives. The sheep
knows only where the herbage is abundant and fresh: and it goes
there. An animal has no foresight, and is the happier because it
cannot look before and after. It has only a rudimentary conscience,
if it has that. Its inclinations are restrained by no sense of
obligation. Many men live just so, without restraint upon appetite,
without checking of inclination, without foresight except of the
material good which a certain course of conduct may get. So, all
unwitting, meaning no mischief, they wander further and further from
the right road, and find themselves at last in a waterless desert.

Dear friends, am I speaking to any now who have too much yielded to
inclinations, who have been unwilling to look forward to the end,
and ask themselves what all will come to at the last, and who
scarcely know what it is to take heed unto their ways, except in so
far as worldly prudence may dictate certain courses of conduct for
the purpose of securing certain worldly and perishable ends? I would
plead, especially with the younger portion of my congregation, to
take the touching picture of this first parable as a solemn prophecy
of what certainly befalls every man who sets out upon his path
without careful consideration  of whither it leads to at the last;
and who lives for the present, in any of its forms, and who lets
himself be led by inclinations or appetites. The animal does so,
and, as a rule, its instincts are its sufficient guide. But you and
I are blessed or cursed, as the case may be, with higher powers,
which, if we do not use, we shall certainly land in the desert. If a
man who is meant to guide himself by intelligence, reason, will,
foresight, conscience, chooses to go down to the level of the beast,
the faculties that serve the beast will not serve the man. And even
the sheep is lost from the flock if it yields only to these.

But how it speaks of the Lord's tender sympathy for the wanderers
that He should put in the forefront of the parables this explanation
of the condition of men, and should not at first charge it upon them
as sin, but only as heedlessness and folly! There is much that in
itself is wrong and undesirable, the criminality of which is
diminished by the fact that it was heedlessly done, though the
heedlessness itself is a crime.

Now turn to the second parable. The coin was heavy, so it fell; it
was round, so it rolled; it was dead, so it lay. And there are
people who are things rather than persons, so entirely have they
given up their wills, and so absolutely do they let themselves be
determined by circumstances. It was not the _drachma_ that lost
itself, but it was the law of gravitation that lost it, and it had
no power of resistance. This also is an explanation--partial, as I
shall have to show you in a moment, but still real,--of a great deal
of human wandering. There are masses of men who have no more power
to resist the pressure of circumstances and temptations than the
piece of silver had when it dropped from the woman's open palm and
trundled away into some dark corner. That lightens the darkness of
much of the world's sin.

But for you to abnegate the right and power of resisting
circumstances is to abdicate the sovereignty with which God has
crowned you. All men are shaped by externals, but the shape which
the externals impose upon us is settled by ourselves. Here are two
men, for instance, exposed to precisely the same conditions: but one
of them yields, and is ruined; the other resists, and is raised and
strengthened. As Jesus Christ, so all things have a double
operation. They are 'either a savour of life unto life or a savour
of death unto death.' There is the stone. You may build upon it, or
you may stumble over it: you take your choice. Here is the adverse
circumstance. You may rule it, or you may let it rule you.
Circumstances and outward temptations are the fool's masters, and
the wise man's servants. It all depends on the set of the sail and
the firmness of the hand that grasps the tiller, which way the wind
shall carry the ship. The same breeze speeds vessels on directly
opposite courses, and so the same circumstances may drive men in two
contrary directions, sending the one further and further away from,
and drawing the other nearer and nearer to, the haven of their
hearts.

Dear friends, as we have to guard against the animal life of
yielding to inclinations and inward impulse, of forgetting the
future, and of taking no heed to our paths, so, unless we wish to
ruin ourselves altogether, we have to fight against the mechanical
life which, with a minimum of volition, lets the world do with us
what it will. And sure I am that there are men and women in this
audience at this time who have let their lives be determined by
forces that have swept them away from God.

In the third parable the foolish boy had no love to his father to
keep him from emigrating. He wanted to be his own master, and to get
away into a place where he thought he could sow his wild oats and no
news of it ever reach the father's house. He wanted to have the
fingering of the money, and to enjoy the sense of possession. And so
he went off on his unblessed road to the harlots and the swine's
trough.

And _that_ is no parable; that is a picture. The other two were
parabolical representations; this is the thing itself. For
carelessness of the bonds that knit a heart to God; hardness of an
unresponsive heart unmelted by benefits; indifference to the
blessedness of living by a Father's side and beneath His eye; the
uprising of a desire of independence and the impatience of control;
the exercise of self will--these are causes of loss that underlie
the others of which I have been speaking, and which make for every
one of us the essential sinfulness of our sin. It is rebellion, and
it is rebellion against a Father's love.

Now, notice, that whilst the other two that we have been speaking
about do partially explain the terrible fact that we go away from
God, their explanation is only partial, and this grimmer truth
underlies them. There are modern theories, as there were ancient
ones, that say: 'Oh! sin is a theological bugbear. There is not any
such thing. It is only indifference, ignorance, error.' And then
there are other theorists that say: 'Sin! There is no sin in
following natural laws and impulses. Circumstances shape men;
heredity shapes them. The notion that their actions are criminal is
a mere figment of an exploded superstition.'

Yes! and down below the ignorance, and inadvertence, and error, and
heredity, and domination of externals, there lies the individual
choice in each case. The man knows--however he sophisticates
himself, or uses other people to provide him with sophistries--that
he need not have done that thing unless he had chosen to do it. You
cannot get beyond or argue away that consciousness. And so I say
that all these immoral teachings, which are very common to-day, omit
from the thing that they profess to analyse the very characteristic
element of it, which is, as our Lord taught us, not the following
inclination like a silly sheep; not the rolling away, in obedience
to natural law, like the drachma; but the rising up of a rebellious
will that desires a separation, and kicks against control, as in the
case of the son.

So, dear friends, whilst I thankfully admit that much of the
darkness of human conduct may be lightened by the representations of
our two first parables, I cannot but feel that we have to leave to
God the determination in each case of how far these have diminished
individual criminality; and that we have to remember for ourselves
that our departure from God is not explicable unless we recognise
the fact that we have chosen rather to be away from Him than to be
with Him; and that we like better to have our goods at our own
disposal, and to live as it pleases ourselves.

II. So note, secondly, the varying proportions of loss and
possession.

A hundred sheep; ten drachmas; two sons. The loss in one case is 1
per cent., a trifle; in the other case 10 per cent., more serious;
in the last case 50 per cent., heartbreaking. Now, I do not suppose
that our Lord intended any special significance to be attached to
these varying numbers. Rather they were simply suggested by the cast
of the parable in which they respectively occurred. A hundred sheep
is a fair average flock; ten pieces of silver are the modest hoard
of a poor woman; two sons are a family large enough to represent the
contrast which is necessary to the parable. But still we may
permissibly look at this varying proportion in order to see whether
it, too, cannot teach us something.

It throws light upon the owner's care and pains in seeking. In one
aspect, these are set forth most strikingly by the parable in which
the thing lost bears the smallest proportion to the thing still
retained. The shepherd might well have said: 'One in a hundred does
not matter much. I have got the ninety and nine.' But he went to
look for it. But, in another aspect, the woman, of course, has a
more serious loss to face, and possibly seeks with more anxiety. And
when you come up to the last case, where half the household is
blotted out, as it were, then we can see the depth of anxiety and
pains and care which must necessarily follow.

But beyond the consideration that the ascending proportion suggests
increasing pains and anxiety, there is another lesson, which seems
to me even more precious, and it is this, that it matters very
little to the loser how much he keeps, or what the worth of the lost
thing is. There is something in human nature which makes anything
that is lost precious by reason of its loss. Nobody can tell how
large a space a tree fills until it is felled. If you lose one tiny
stone out of a ring, or a bracelet, it makes a gap, and causes
annoyance altogether disproportionate to the lustre that it had when
it was there. A man loses a small portion of his fortune in some
unlucky speculation, and the loss annoys him a great deal more than
the possession solaced him, and he thinks more about the hundreds
that have vanished than about the thousands that remain. Men are
made so. It is a human instinct, that apart altogether from the
consideration of its intrinsic worth, and the proportion it bears to
that which is still possessed, the lost thing draws, and the loser
will take any pains to find it.

So Christ says, When a woman will light a candle and sweep the house
and search diligently till she finds her lost sixpence (for the
drachma was worth little more), and will bring in all her neighbours
to rejoice with her, that is like God; and the human instinct which
prizes lost things, not because of their value, but because they are
lost, has something corresponding to it in the heart of the Majesty
of the heavens. It is Christ's vindication, of course, as I need not
remind you, of His own conduct. He says in effect, to these
Pharisees, 'You are finding fault with Me for doing what we all do.
I am only acting in accordance with a natural human instinct; and
when I thus act God Himself is acting in and through Me.'

If I had time, I think I could show that this principle, brought out
in my texts, really sweeps away one of the difficulties which modern
science has to suggest against Evangelical Christianity. We hear it
said, 'How can you suppose that a speck of a world like this, amidst
all these flaming orbs that stud the infinite depths of the heavens,
is of so much importance in God's sight that His Son came down to
die for it?' The magnitude of the world, as compared with others,
has nothing to do with the question. God's action is determined by
its moral condition. If it be true that here is sin, which rends men
away from Him, and that so they are lost, then it is supremely
natural that all the miracles of the Christian revelation should
follow. The _rationale_ of the Incarnation lies in this, 'A
certain man had a hundred sheep.... One of them went astray ... and
He went into the wilderness and found it.'

III. Now I meant to have said a word about the varying glimpses that
we have here, into God's claims upon us, and His heart.

Ownership is the word that describes His relation to us in the first
two parables; love is the word that describes it in the third. But
the ownership melts into love, because God does not reckon that He
possesses men by natural right of creation or the like, unless they
yield their hearts to Him, and give themselves, by their own joyful
self-surrender, into His hands. But I must not be tempted to speak
upon that matter; only, before I close, let me point you to that
most blessed and heart-melting thought, that God accounts Himself to
have lost something when a man goes away from Him.

That word 'the lost' has another, and in some senses a more
tragical, significance in Scripture. The lost are lost to themselves
and to blessedness. The word implies destruction; but it also
carries with it this, that God prizes us, is glad to have us, and, I
was going to say, feels an incompleteness in His possessions when
men depart from Him.

Oh, brethren, surely such a thought as that should melt us; and if,
as is certainly the case, we have strayed away from Him into green
pastures, which have ended in a wilderness, without a blade of
grass; or if we have rolled away from Him in passive submission to
circumstances; or if we have risen up in rebellion against Him, and
claimed our separate right of possession and use of the goods that
fall to us, if we would only think that He considers that He has
lost us, and prizes us because we are lost to Him, and wants to get
us back again, surely, surely it would draw us to Himself. Think of
the greatness of the love into which the ownership is merged, as
measured by the infinite price which He has paid to bring us back,
and let us all say, 'I will arise and go to my Father.'




THE PRODIGAL AND HIS FATHER


    'And He said, A certain man had two sons: 12. And the
    younger of them said to his father, Father, give me
    the portion of goods that falleth to me. And he
    divided unto them his living. 13. And not many days
    after the younger son gathered all together, and took
    his journey into a far country, and there wasted his
    substance with riotous living. 14. And when he had
    spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land;
    and he began to be in want. 15. And he went and joined
    himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him
    into his fields to feed swine. 16. And he would fain
    have filled his belly with the husks that the swine
    did eat: and no man gave unto him. 17. And when he
    came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of
    my father's have bread enough, and to spare, and I
    perish with hunger! 18. I will arise and go to my
    father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned
    against Heaven, and before thee, 19. And am no more
    worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
    hired servants. 20. And he arose, and came to his
    father. But when he was yet a great way off, his
    father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell
    on his neck, and kissed him. 21. And the son said unto
    him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy
    sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.
    22. But the father said to his servants, Bring forth
    the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on
    his hand, and shoes on his feet: 23. And bring hither
    the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be
    merry: 24. For this my son was dead, and is alive
    again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to
    be merry.'--LUKE xv. 11-24.
