
"Never mind," said the man, "I takes you home."

So the strong man gathered the sick child in his arms, and with her head
pillowed upon his shoulder, carried her to the place pointed out by the
younger girl. Annie ran around the house to tell her mother that there
was a man at the front door wishing to see her. The astonished mother,
with a mixture of surprise and joy, took charge of the precious burden
and the child was laid upon a bed.

After thanking the man, she expected him to withdraw, but instead, he
stood turning his hat in his hands as one who wishes to say something,
but knows not how to begin.

The mother observing this, repeated her thanks and finally said: "Would
you like me to pay you for bringing my child home?"

"Oh, no," said he with tears, "God pays me! God pays me! I would like
to tell you something, but I speak English so poorly that I fear you
will not understand."

The mother assured him that she was used to the German and could understand
him very well.

"I am the proprietor of an ink factory," said he. "My men work by the
piece. I have to keep separate accounts with each. I pay them every
Saturday. At twelve o'clock they will be at my desk for their money.
This week I have had many hindrances and was behind with my books. I was
working hard at them with the sweat on my face, in my great anxiety to
be ready in time. Suddenly I could not see the figures; the words in the
book all ran together, and I had a plain impression on my mind that some
one in the street wished to see me. I went out, looked up and down the
street, but seeing no one, went back to my desk and wrote a little.
Presently the darkness was greater than before, and the impression
stronger than before, that someone in the street needed me.

"Again I went out, looked up and down the street, walked a little way,
puzzled to know what I meant. Was my hard work and were the cares of
business driving me out of my wits? Unable to solve the mystery I turned
again into my shop and to my desk.

"This time my fingers refused to grasp the pen. I found myself unable
to write a word, or make a figure; but the impression was stronger than
ever on my mind, that someone needed my help. A voice seemed to say:
'Why don't you go out as I tell you? There is need of your help.' This
time I took my hat on going out, resolved to stay till I found out whether
I was losing my senses, or there was a duty for me to do. I walked some
distance without seeing anyone, and was more and more puzzled, till I
came opposite the children, and found that there was indeed need of my
help. I cannot understand it, madam."

As the noble German was about leaving the house, the younger girl had
the courage to say: "O mother, we prayed."

Thus the mystery was solved, and with tear-stained cheeks, a heaving
breast, and a humble, grateful heart, the kind man went back to his
accounts.

I have enjoyed many a happy hour in conversation with Annie in her own
house since she has a home of her own. The last I knew of Annie and Vanie
they were living in the same city, earnest Christian women. Their children
were growing up around them, who, I hope, will have like confidence in
mother, and faith in God.

--Jeigh Arrh.

Annie was the wife of James A. Clayton of San Jose, California. I have
enjoyed their hospitality and esteem both very highly.

--James Rogers.



GOD HEALS A BLIND GIRL

One day we went to visit Ruth's aunt. While there, a very dear friend
of Ruth's aunt came to visit her, bringing Annie, her little four-year-old
girl who was the same age as Ruth. They had taken Annie to an eye doctor
the day before and he had said that she was blind and would always be
blind. The two children played together. Ruth would lead her by the hand
and this touched her heart very much.

After we went home, she came to me crying, and said, "Mama, Annie is
blind. Mama, Annie can't see anything. Mama, Annie can't even see her
mama!"

I (Ruth's mother) answered, "No, Annie can't see anything."

"Can't Jesus make Annie see her mama?" Ruth asked.

"Yes, Jesus can do anything," Mother told her.

"I'll never quit praying till Jesus makes Annie see her Mama," she said.
She knelt down and prayed, and for several days she would come in from
her play ever so often and kneel down and pray and ask Jesus to make
Annie see her mama.

In a few days we received word that Annie said "Oh, I see my mama!" From
then on she could see.

When the girls were eight years old and Ruth had moved from that state,
her aunt (who had also moved) received a letter from Annie's mother,
saying, "Annie seems to be losing her eyesight again." She said also
that she would like for her to send Annie a new dress while she could
still see it, and if she knew where Ruth was to ask her to pray for Annie
that Jesus would not let her go blind again. Ruth was at the home of her
aunt when she received this letter. She prayed earnestly again and God
answered her prayer and gave Annie her eyesight. It was even better than
normal.

The last time I saw Annie she was a grown woman around forty, and she
showed me how she could see to read a long way from the light, which we
could not do. Surely God did a wonderful work in answer to a little
girl's prayer.

Children, let's pray; and when we pray, believe that God hears, and
receive the good things that he has to give us and others.

--Essie Wilson.



"DOES THIS RAILROAD LEAD TO HEAVEN?"

In traveling we often meet with persons of different nationalities and
languages; we also meet with incidents of various character, some
sorrowful, others, joyful and instructive. One of the latter character
I witnessed recently while traveling upon the cars. The train was going
west and the time was evening. At a station a little girl about eight
years old came aboard, carrying a budget under her arm. She then commenced
an eager scrutiny of faces, but all were strange to her. She appeared
weary, and placing her budget for a pillow, she prepared to try and
secure a little sleep. Soon the conductor came along collecting tickets
and fare. Observing him she asked him if she might lie there. The
gentlemanly conductor replied that she might, and then kindly asked for
her ticket. She informed him that she had none, when the following
conversation ensued. Said the conductor:

"Where are you going?"

"I am going to heaven," she answered.

"Who pays your fare?" he asked again.

She then said, "Mister, does this railroad lead to heaven, and does Jesus
travel on it?"

"I think not," he answered, "Why did you think so?"

[Illustration]

"Why sir, before my ma died she used to sing to me of a heavenly railroad,
and you looked so nice and kind that I thought this was the road. My ma
used to sing of Jesus on the heavenly railroad, and that He paid the
fare for everybody, and that the train stopped at every station to take
people on board; but my ma don't sing to me any more. Nobody sings to
me now; and I thought I'd take the cars and go to ma. Mister, do you
sing to your little girl about the railroad that goes to heaven? You
have a little girl, haven't you?"

He replied, weeping, "No my little dear I have no little girl now. I had
one once; but she died some time ago, and went to heaven."

"Did she go over this railroad, and are you going to see her now?" she
asked.

By this time every person in the coach was upon their feet, and most of
them were weeping. An attempt to describe what I witnessed is almost
futile. Some said: "God bless the little girl." Hearing some person say
that she was an angel, the little girl earnestly replied: "Yes, my ma
used to say that I would be an angel some time."

Addressing herself once more to the conductor, she asked him, "Do you
love Jesus? I do, and if you love Him, He will let you ride to heaven
on His railroad. I am going there and I wish you would go with me. I
know Jesus will let me into heaven when I get there and He will let you
in, too, and everybody that will ride on His railroad--yes, all these
people. Wouldn't you like to see heaven and Jesus, and your little girl?"

These words, so pathetically and innocently uttered, brought a great
gush of tears from all eyes, but most profusely from those of the
conductor. Some who were traveling on the heavenly railroad shouted aloud
for joy.

She asked the conductor: "Mister, may I lie here until we get to heaven?"

"Yes, dear, yes," he answered.

"Will you wake me up then so that I may see my ma and your little girl
and Jesus?" she asked, "for I do so much want to see them all."

The answer came in broken accents but in words very tenderly spoken "Yes,
dear angel, yes. God bless you." "Amen!" was sobbed by more than a score
of voices.

Turning her eyes again upon the conductor, she interrogated him again,
"What shall I tell your little girl when I see her? Shall I tell her
that I saw her pa on Jesus' railroad? Shall I?"

This brought a fresh flood of tears from all present, and the conductor
knelt by her side, and, embracing her wept the reply he could not utter.
At this juncture the brakeman called out: "H----." The conductor arose
and requested him to attend to his (the conductor's) duty at the station,
for he was engaged. That was a precious place. I thank God that I was a
witness to this scene, but I was sorry that at this point I was obliged
to leave the train.

We learn from this incident that out of the mouths of even babes God
hath ordained strength, and that we ought to be willing to represent the
cause of our blessed Jesus even in a railroad coach.

_The Sequel_

Brother Dosh:--I wish to relieve my heart by writing to you, and saying
that that angel visit on the cars was a blessing to me, although I did
not realize it in its fullness until some hours after. But blessed be
the Redeemer, I know now that I am His, and He is mine. I no longer
wonder why Christians are happy. Oh, my joy, my joy! The instrument of
my salvation has gone to God. I had purposed adopting her in the place
of my little daughter who is now in heaven. With this intention I took
her to C--b, and on my return trip I took her back to S--n, where she
left the cars. In consultation with my wife in regard to adopting her,
she replied, "Yes, certainly, and immediately, too, for there is a Divine
providence in this. Oh," said she, "I could never refuse to take under
my charge the instrument of my husband's salvation."

I made inquiry for the child at S--n and learned that in three days after
her return she died suddenly, without any apparent disease, and her happy
soul had gone to dwell with her ma, my little girl and the angels in
heaven. I was sorry to hear of her death but my sorrow is turned to joy
when I think my angel-daughter received intelligence from earth concerning
her pa, and that he is on the heavenly railway. Oh! sir, me thinks I see
her near the Redeemer. I think I hear her sing! "I'm safe at home, and
pa and ma are coming," and I find myself sending back the reply: "Yes,
my darling we are coming and will soon be there." Oh, my dear sir, I am
glad that I ever formed your acquaintance; may the blessing of the great
God rest upon you. Please write to me, and be assured, I would be most
happy to meet you again.

--J. M. Dosh, in _Christian Expositor_



THE YOUNG MARTYR

On the afternoon of August 9, 1853, a little Norwegian boy, named Kund
Iverson, who lived in the city of Chicago, Illinois, was going to the
pastures for his cow as light-hearted, I suppose, as boys usually are
when going to the pasture on a summer afternoon. He came at length to a
stream of water where there was a gang of idle, ill-looking, big boys;
who, when they saw Kund, came up to him; and said they wanted him to go
into Mr. Elston's garden and steal some apples.

"No," said Kund promptly; "I cannot steal, I am sure."

"Well, but you've got to," they cried.

[Illustration: THE CRIES OF THE DROWNING CHILD GREW FAINTER AND FAINTER]


They threatened to duck him, for these wicked big boys had often frightened
little boys into robbing gardens for them. Little boys, they thought,
were less likely to get found out.

The threat did not frighten Kund, so to make their words good, they
seized him and dragged him into the river, and in spite of his cries and
struggles, plunged him in. But the heroic boy even with the water gurgling
and choking in his throat, never flinched, for he knew that God had said:
"Thou shalt not steal," and God's law he had made his law; and no cursing,
or threats, or cruelty of the big boys would make him give up. Provoked
by his firmness, I suppose, they determined to see if they could conquer
him. So they ducked him again but it still was, "No, no"; and they kept
him under water. Was there no one near to hear his distressing cries,
and rescue the poor child from their cruel grip? No; there was none to
rescue him; and gradually the cries of the drowning child grew fainter
and fainter, and his struggles less and less, and the boy was drowned.
He could die, but would not steal.

A German boy who had stood near, much frightened by what he saw, ran
home to tell the news. The agonized parents hastened to the spot, and
all night they searched for the lifeless body of their lost darling. It
was found the next morning; and who shall describe their feelings as
they clasped the little form to their bosoms? Early piety had blossomed
in his little life. He loved his Bible and his Savior. His seat was
never vacant at Sunday school, and so intelligent, conscientious and
steadfast had he been.

Perhaps the little boy used often to think how, when he grew up, he would
like to be a preacher or a missionary, and do something for his Lord and
Master. He did not know what post he might be called to occupy, even as
a little child; and as he left home that afternoon and looked his last
look in his mother's face, he thought he was only going after his cows;
and other boys, and the neighbors, if they saw him, thought so, too. They
did not then know that instead of going to the pasture he was going to
preach one of the most powerful sermons of Bible law and Bible principles
the country ever heard. They did not know that he was going to give an
example of steadfastness of purpose and of unflinching integrity, such
as should thrill the heart of this nation with wonder and admiration.
He was then only a Norwegian boy, Kund Iverson, only thirteen years old,
but his name was soon to be reckoned with martyrs and heroes. And as the
story of his moral heroism winged its way from state to state, and city
to city, and village to village, how many mothers cried with full hearts:
"May his spirit rest upon my boy!" And strong men have wept over it and
exclaimed: "God be praised for the lad!" And rich men put their hands
into their pockets and said, "Let us build him a monument; let his name
be perpetuated, for his memory is blessed." May there be a generation
of Kund Iversons, strong in their integrity, true to their Bibles ready
to die rather than do wrong.

--_The Cynosure_



A CHILD'S PRAYER ANSWERED

The following touching incident which drew tears from my eyes, was related
to me a short time since, by a dear friend who had it from an eyewitness
of the same. It occurred in the great city of New York, on one of the
coldest days in February.

A little boy about ten years old was standing before a shoe-store in
Broadway barefooted, peering through the window, and shivering with cold.

A lady riding up the street in a beautiful carriage, drawn by horses
finely caparisoned, observed the little fellow in his forlorn condition
and immediately ordered the driver to draw up and stop in front of the
store. The lady richly dressed in silk, alighted from her carriage, went
quickly to the boy, and said:

"My little fellow why are you looking so earnestly in that window?"

"I was asking God to give me a pair of shoes," was the reply. The lady
took him by the hand and went into the store, and asked the proprietor
if he would allow one of his clerks to go and buy half a dozen pairs of
stockings for the boy. He readily assented. She then asked him if he
could give her a basin of water and a towel, and he replied: "Certainly,"
and quickly brought them to her.

She took the little fellow to the back part of the store, and, removing
her gloves knelt down, washed those little feet and dried them with the
towel.

[Illustration]

By this time the young man had returned with the stockings. Placing a
pair upon his feet, she purchased and gave him a pair of shoes, and tying
up the remaining pairs of stockings, gave them to him, and patting him
