Arjuna while after routing the foe he proceeded towards the city of
Virata, like an elephant with rent temples. And having routed the whole
army of the Kuru like a violent wind scattering the clouds, that slayer
of foes, Partha, regardfully addressing the prince of Matsya, said, 'It
is known to thee alone, O child, that the sons of Pritha are all living
with thy father. Do not eulogise them upon entering the city, for then
the king of the Matsyas may hide himself in fear. On the other hand,
entering the city, do thou proclaim in the presence of thy father that
the deed is thy own, saying,--_By me hath the army of the Kurus been
vanquished and by me have the kine been recovered from the foe!_'

"Uttara said, 'The feat thou hast achieved is beyond my power. I do not
possess the ability to achieve it. I shall not, however, O Savyasachin,
discover thee to my father, as long as thou wilt not tell me to do it.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having vanquished the hostile army and wrested
the whole of the cattle wealth from the Kurus, Jishnu returned again to
the cemetery and having approached the same _Sami_ tree stood there with
body mangled by the arrows of the enemy. Then that terrible monkey
blazing like fire ascended into the sky with those other creatures in
the flag-staff. And the illusion created (by Viswakarma) melted away and
Uttara's own banner bearing the device of a lion was set up on the car
again. And having replaced the arrows and quivers of those foremost of
the Kuru princes, and also that other weapon the _(Gandiva)_ which
enhances the fierceness of a battle, the illustrious prince of Matsya
set out for the city with a glad heart, having Kiritin as his
charioteer. And having achieved an exceedingly mighty feat and slain the
foe, Partha also, that slayer of foes, binding his hair into a braid as
before, took the reins from Uttara's hands. And that illustrious hero
entered the city of Virata, with a cheerful heart rehabilitating himself
as Vrihannala, the car-driver of Uttara.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "When all the Kauravas utterly routed and
vanquished, set out in a dejected mood for Hastinapura, Phalguna, on his
way back, addressed Uttara, saying, 'O prince, O hero of mighty arms,
seeing the kine escorted in advance of us by the cowherds, we shall
enter Virata's metropolis in the afternoon, having tended the steeds
with drink and a bath. Let the cowherds, despatched by thee, speedily
repair to the city with the good news and proclaim thy victory.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Agreeable to Arjuna's words, Uttara speedily
ordered the messengers, saying, 'Go ye and proclaim the king's victory.
The foe hath been routed, and the kine have been recovered.' And the
Matsya and the Bharata princes having thus consulted together
re-approached the same _Sami_ tree. And gratified with the victory they
had won, and arrived at the foot of the _Sami_ tree, they wore on their
persons and took up on their car the ornaments and robes they had left
there. And having vanquished the whole hostile army and recovered the
whole of the wealth from the Kurus, the heroic son of Virata returned to
the city with Vrihannala as his car-driver."


SECTION LXVII

Vaisampayana said, "Having speedily recovered his wealth Virata owning a
large army entered his city with a cheerful heart, accompanied by the
four Pandavas. And having vanquished the _Trigartas_ in battle and
recovered all the kine, that mighty monarch, along with the sons of
Pritha, looked resplendent and blazed forth in beauty. And as the brave
king, that enhancer of the joys of friends, was seated on his throne,
all his subjects headed by the Brahmanas stood before him. And
worshipped by them, the king of the Matsyas, at the head of his army,
saluted the Brahmanas and his subjects in return and dismissed them
cheerfully. And Virata, the king of the Matsyas owning a large army,
enquired after Uttara, saying, 'Where hath Uttara gone?' And the women
and the maidens of the palace and the other females living in the inner
apartments joyfully said unto him, 'Our kine having been seized by the
Kurus, Bhuminjaya incensed at this and from excess of bravery hath
issued forth alone with only Vrihannala as his second, for vanquishing
the six mighty car-warriors, Bhishma the son of Santanu, and Kripa, and
Karna, and Duryodhana, and Drona, and Drona's son who have all come with
the Kuru army.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then king Virata, hearing that his brave son
had gone forth with only one car and with Vrihannala as his car-driver,
became filled with grief, and addressing his chief counsellors, said,
'Without doubt, the Kauravas and other lords of earth, learning the
defeat of the Trigartas, will never keep their ground. Therefore, let
those of my warriors that have not been wounded by the _Trigartas_ go
out, accompanied by a mighty force, for the protection of Uttara.' And
saying this, the king speedily despatched, for the sake of his son,
horses and elephants and cars and a large number of foot-soldiers,
equipped and decked with various kinds of weapons and ornaments. And it
was thus that Virata, the king of the Matsyas, owning a large army,
quickly ordered out a large division consisting of four kinds of troops.
And having done this, he said, 'Learn ye, without loss of time whether
the prince liveth still or not! I myself think that he who hath got a
person of the neuter sex for his car-driver is not alive.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then king Yudhishthira the just, smilingly said
unto the afflicted king Virata, 'If, O monarch, Vrihannala hath been his
charioteer, the foe will never be able to take away thy kine today.
Protected by that charioteer, thy son will be able to vanquish in battle
all the lords of earth allied with the Kurus, indeed, even the gods and
the _Asuras_ and the _Siddhas_ and the _Yakshas_ together.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Meanwhile, the swift-footed messengers
despatched by Uttara, having reached Virata's city, gave tidings of the
victory. And the minister-in-chief then informed the king of everything,
viz., the great victory that had been won, the defeat of the Kurus, and
the expected arrival of Uttara. And he said, 'All the kine have been
brought back, the Kurus have been defeated, and Uttara, that slayer of
foes, is well with his car-driver.' Then Yudhishthira said, 'By good
luck it is that the kine have been recovered and the Kurus routed. I do
not, however, regard it strange that thy son should have vanquished the
Kurus, for his victory is assured that hath Vrihannala for his
charioteer.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing of the victory of his son possessed of
immeasurable might, king Virata became so glad that the bristles of his
body stood erect. And having made presents of raiments unto the
messengers, he ordered his ministers, saying, 'Let the highways be
decorated with flags, and let all the gods and goddesses be worshipped
with flowery offerings. And let princes and brave warriors, and
musicians and harlots decked in ornaments, march out to receive my son.
And let the bellman, speedily riding an intoxicated elephant, proclaim
my victory at places where four roads meet. And let Uttara, too, in
gorgeous attire and surrounded by virgins and chanters of eulogies, go
forth to receive my son.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having listened to these words of the king, all
the citizens with auspicious things in hand, and many amongst them with
cymbals and trumpets and conchs, and beautiful women attired in gorgeous
robes, and reciters of auspicious and sacred hymns, accompanied by
encomiasts and minstrels, and drummers and other kinds of musicians
issued forth from the city of the mighty Virata to welcome Uttara of
immeasurable prowess. And having despatched troops and maidens and
courtesans decked in ornaments, the wise king of the Matsyas cheerfully
said these words, '_O Sairindhri_, fetch the dice. And, O Kanka, let the
play commence.' The son of Pandu replied, saying, 'We have heard it said
that one whose heart is filled with joy should not play with a cunning
gambler. I do not therefore, dare gamble with thee that are so
transported with joy. I am ever desirous of doing what is for thy good.
Let the play, however, commence if it pleases thee.'

"Virata said, 'My female slaves and kine, my gold and whatsoever other
wealth I have, nothing of all this shall thou be able to protect today
even if I do not gamble.' Kanka said in reply, 'O monarch, O bestower of
honours, what business hast thou with gamble which is attended with
numerous evils? Gambling is fraught with many evils; it should,
therefore, be shunned. Thou mayst have seen or at least heard of
Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu. He lost his extensive and prosperous
kingdom and his god-like brothers at dice. For this, I am averse to
gambling. But if thou likest, O king, I will play.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "While the play was going on, Matsya said unto
the son of Pandu, 'Lo, the Kauravas that are so formidable have been
vanquished in battle by my son.' Upon this, the illustrious king
Yudhishthira said, 'Why should not he conquer that hath Vrihannala for
his charioteer?'

"Thus addressed, King Matsya became angry and said unto Pandu's son,
'Thou wretch of a Brahmana, dost thou compare one of the neuter sex with
my son! Hast thou no knowledge of what is proper and what improper for
one to say? Without doubt, thou disregardest me. Why should not my son
vanquish all those with Bhishma and Drona as their leaders? O Brahmana,
for friendship only I pardon thee this thy offence. Thou must not,
however, say so again if thou wishest to live.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'There where Bhishma and Drona and Drona's son and
the son of Vikartana and Kripa and king Duryodhana and other royal and
mighty car-warriors are assembled or there where Indra himself is
surrounded by the Maruts, what other person than Vrihannala can fight,
encountering them all! None hath been, none will be, his equal in
strength of arms! Indeed, it is Vrihannala only whose heart is filled
with joy at sight of a terrible conflict. It is he who had vanquished
the celestials and the _Asuras_ and human beings fighting together. With
such a one for his ally, why should not thy son conquer the foe?' Virata
said, 'Repeatedly forbidden by me, thou dost not yet restrain thy
tongue. If there is none to punish, no one would practise virtue.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Saying this, the king inflamed with anger
forcibly struck Yudhishthira in the face with a dice, and reproached him
angrily, saying, 'Let it not occur again!' And having been violently
struck, blood began to flow from his nose. But the son of Pritha held it
in his hands before it fell on the ground. And the virtuous Yudhishthira
then glanced at Draupadi who was standing by his side. Ever obedient to
the wishes of her lord, the faultless Draupadi, understanding his
meaning, and bringing a golden vessel filled with water, received the
blood that flowed from his nose. Meanwhile, Uttara, entertained with
sweet perfumes of diverse kinds and decked with floral chaplets, slowly
entered the city, received with respect by the citizens, the women, and
the people of the provinces. And approaching the gate of the palace he
sent the news of his arrival to his father. And the porter then,
approaching the king, said, 'Thy son Uttara, waiteth at the gate with
Vrihannala as his companion.' And the Matsya king, with a cheerful
heart, said unto him, 'Do thou usher both, as I am very anxious to see
them.' Then Yudhishthira, the king of the Kurus, gently whispered unto
the ears of the warder, 'Let Uttara enter alone; Vrihannala must not
come in. Such is the vow of that hero of mighty arms that whoever
causeth a wound on my person or sheddeth my blood except in battle,
shall not live. Inflamed with rage he will never bear patiently to see
me bleeding, but will slay Virata even now with his counsellors and
troops and steeds.'"


SECTION LXVIII

Vaisampayana said, "Then Bhuminjaya, the eldest son of the king,
entered, and having worshipped the feet of his father approached Kanka.
And he beheld Kanka covered with blood, and seated on the ground at one
end of the court, and waited upon by the _Sairindhri_. And seeing this,
Uttara asked his father in a hurry, saying, 'By whom, O king, hath this
one been struck? By whom hath this sinful act been perpetrated?'

"Virata said, 'This crooked Brahmana hath been struck by me. He
deserveth even more than this. When I was praising thee, he praised that
person of the third sex.'

"Uttara said, 'Thou hast, O king, committed an improper act. Do thou
speedily propitiate him so that the virulent poison of a Brahmana's
curse may not consume thee to thy roots!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having heard the words of his son, Virata, that
enhancer of the limits of his kingdom, began to soothe Kunti's son, who
was like unto a fire hid in ashes, for obtaining his forgiveness. And
unto the king desirous of obtaining his pardon the Pandava replied, 'O
king, I have long ago forgiven it. Anger I have none. Had this blood
from my nostrils fallen on the ground, then, without doubt, thou, O
monarch, wouldst have been destroyed with thy kingdom. I do not,
however, blame thee, O king, for having struck an innocent person. For,
O king, they that are powerful generally act with unreasoning
severity.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "When the bleeding had stopped, Vrihannala
entered (the council-room) and having saluted both Virata and Kanka,
stood silent. And the king, having appeased the chief of the Kurus,
began to praise, in Savyasachin's hearing, Uttara who had returned from
the battle. And the king said, 'O enhancer of the joys of Kekaya's
princess, in thee have I truly a son! I never had nor shall have, a son
that is equal to thee! How, indeed, couldst thou, O child, encounter
that Karna who leaveth not a single mark unhit amongst even a thousand
that he may aim at all at once? How couldst thou, O child, encounter
that Bhishma who hath no equal in the whole world of men? How also
couldst thou, O child, encounter Drona, that foremost of all wielders of
weapons, that preceptor of the Vrishnis and Kauravas, twice-born one who
may be regarded as the preceptor of all the Kshatriyas? How couldst thou
meet in battle the celebrated Aswatthaman? How couldst thou, O child,
encounter that Duryodhana, the prince who is capable of piercing even a
mountain with his mighty arrows? My foes have all been thrashed. A
delicious breeze seems to blow around me. And since thou hast recovered
in battle the whole of my wealth that had been seized by the Kurus, it
seems that all those mighty warriors were struck with panic. Without
doubt, thou, O bull amongst men, has routed the foe and snatched away
from them my wealth of kine, like his prey from a tiger.'"


SECTION LXIX

"Uttara said, 'The kine have not been recovered by me, nor have the foe
been vanquished by me. All that hath been accomplished by the son of a
deity. Capable of striking like a thunderbolt, that youth of celestial
origin, beholding me running away in fear, stopped me and himself
mounted on my car. It was by him that the kine have been recovered and
the Kauravas vanquished. The deed, O father, is that hero's and not
mine. It was he that repulsed with arrows Kripa and Drona and Drona's
son of powerful energy, and the _Suta's_ son and Bhishma. That mighty
hero then spoke unto the affrighted prince Duryodhana who was running
away like the leader of a head of elephants, these words, "O prince of
the Kuru race, I do not see that thou art safe by any means even at
Hastinapura. Protect thy life by putting forth thy might. Thou shalt not
escape me by flight. Therefore, make up thy mind for fight. If
victorious, the sovereignty of the earth will be thine, or if slain,
heaven itself will be thine."

"'Thus addressed, king Duryodhana--that tiger among men surrounded by
his counsellors,--sighing on his car like a snake turned back, showered
arrows endued with the speed and force of thunderbolts. Beholding all
this, venerable sire, my thighs began to quake. Then that celestial
youth pierced with arrows the Kuru army consisting of leonine warriors.
And having pierced and afflicted that crowd of cars, that youth, stout
as the lion, laughed at them and robbed them of their clothes and
attires. Indeed, the six great car-warriors of the Kurus were vanquished
by that hero alone, even like herds of animals ranging in the forest by
a single tiger in rage.'

"Virata said, 'Where is that mighty-armed and famous youth of celestial
origin, that hero who recovered in battle my wealth that had been seized
by the Kurus? I am anxious to behold and worship that mighty warrior of
celestial origin who hath saved thee and my kine also.'

"Uttara replied, 'The mighty son of a deity disappeared there and then.
I think, however, that he will show himself either tomorrow or the day
after.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Virata, that owner of a large army, remained
ignorant of the son of Pandu who was thus described unto him by Uttara,
and who was living in the palace in disguise. And permitted by the
high-souled Virata, Partha presented with his own hands the garments he
had brought, unto Virata's daughter. And the beautiful Uttara, obtaining
those new and costly clothes of diverse kinds, became highly glad, along
with the son of the Matsya king."


SECTION LXX

Vaisampayana said, "Then, on the third day, attired in white robes after
a bath, and decked in ornaments of all kinds, those great car-warriors,
the five Pandava brothers, having accomplished their vow, and with
Yudhishthira at their head, looked resplendent as they entered the
palace-gate like five intoxicated elephants. And having entered the
council-hall of Virata, they took their seats on the thrones reserved
for kings, and shone brilliantly like fires on the sacrificial altar.
And after Pandavas had taken their seats, Virata, that lord of earth,
came there for holding his council and discharging other royal offices.
And beholding the illustrious Pandavas blazing like fires, the king
reflected for a moment. And then, filled with wrath, the Matsya king
spoke unto Kanka seated there like a celestial and looking like the lord
of celestials surrounded by the Martus. And he said, 'A player at dice
thou wert employed by me as a courtier! How couldst thou occupy the
royal seat thus attired in handsome robes and ornaments?'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Virata, O king, and
desirous of jesting with him, Arjuna smilingly said in reply, 'This
person, O king, deserveth to occupy the same seat with Indra himself.
Devoted to the Brahmanas, acquainted with the _Vedas_, indifferent to
luxury and carnal enjoyments, habitually performing sacrifices, steady
in vows, this one, indeed, is the very embodiment of virtue. The
