     Where is the sacred dower
       That the Bride of Christ was given?
     Gone to the wielders of power,
       The misers and minters of money;
     Gone for the greed that is their creed--
       And these in the land have thriven.
     What then wert thou, and what art now,
       And wherefore hast thou striven?

     REFRAIN

     And every note of every bell
       Sang Gabriel! rang Gabriel!
     In the tower that is left the tale to tell
       Of Gabriel, the Archangel."

To-day, the total Indian population of Southern California is reported
as between two and three thousand. It is not increasing, and it is good
for the race that it is not. Until the incumbency by W.A. Jones of the
Indian Commissionership in Washington, there seems to have been little
or no attempt at effective protection of the Indians against the land
and other thefts of the whites. The facts are succinctly and powerfully
stated by Helen Hunt Jackson in her report to the government, and in her
_Glimpses of California and the Missions_. The indictment of churches,
citizens, and the general government, for their crime of supineness in
allowing our acknowledged wards to be seduced, cheated, and corrupted,
should be read by every honest American; even though it make his blood
seethe with indignation and his nerves quiver with shame.

In my larger work on this subject I published a table from the report of
the agent for the "Mission-Tule" Consolidated Agency, which is dated
September 25, 1903.

This is the official report of an agent whom not even his best friends
acknowledge as being over fond of his Indian charges, or likely to be
sentimental in his dealings with them. What does this report state? Of
twenty-eight "reservations"--and some of these include several Indian
villages--it announces that the lands of eight are yet "not patented."
In other words, that the Indians are living upon them "on sufferance."
Therefore, if any citizen of the United States, possessed of sufficient
political power, so desired, the lands could be restored to the public
domain. Then, not even the United States Supreme Court could hold them
for the future use and benefit of the Indians.

On five of these reservations the land is "desert," and in two cases,
"subject to intense heat" (it might be said, to 150 degrees, and even
higher in the middle of summer); in one case there is "little water for
irrigation."

In four cases it is "poor land," with "no water," and in another
instance there are "worthless, dry hills;" in still another the soil is
"almost worthless for lack of water!"

In one of the desert cases, where there are five villages, the
government has supplied "water in abundance for irrigation and domestic
use, from artesian wells." Yet the land is not patented, and the Indians
are helpless, if evicted by resolute men.

At Cahuilla, with a population of one hundred fifty-five, the report
says, "mountain valley; stock land and little water. Not patented."

At Santa Isabel, including Volcan, with a population of two hundred
eighty-four, the reservation of twenty-nine thousand eight hundred
forty-four acres is patented, but the report says it is "mountainous;
stock land; no water."

At San Jacinto, with a population of one hundred forty-three, the two
thousand nine hundred sixty acres are "mostly poor; very little water,
and not patented."

San Manuel, with thirty-eight persons, has a patent for six hundred
forty acres of "worthless, dry hills."

Temecula, with one hundred eighty-one persons, has had allotted to its
members three thousand three hundred sixty acres, which area, however,
is "almost worthless for lack of water."

Let us reflect upon these things! The poor Indian is exiled and expelled
from the lands of his ancestors to worthless hills, sandy desert,
grazing lands, mostly poor and mountainous land, while our powerful
government stands by and professes its helplessness to prevent the evil.
These discouraging facts are enough to make the just and good men who
once guided the republic rise from their graves. Is there a remnant of
honor, justice, or integrity, left among our politicians?

There is one thing this government should have done, could have done,
and might have done, and it is to its discredit and disgrace that it did
not do it; that is, when the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo transferred the
Indians from the domination of Mexico to that of the United States,
this government "of, for, and by" the people, should have recognized the
helplessness of its wards and not passed a law of which they could not
by any possibility know, requiring them to file on their lands, but it
should have appointed a competent guardian of their moral and legal
rights, taking it for granted that _occupancy of the lands of their
forefathers would give them a legal title which would hold forever
against all comers_.

In all the Spanish occupation of California it is doubtful whether one
case ever occurred where an Indian was driven off his land.

In rendering a decision on the Warner's Ranch Case the United States
Supreme Court had an opportunity offered it, once for all to settle the
status of all American Indians. Had it familiarized itself with the laws
of Spain, under which all Spanish grants were made, it would have found
that the Indian was always considered first and foremost in all grants
of lands made. He must be protected in his right; it was inalienable. He
was helpless, and therefore the officers of the Crown were made
responsible for his protection. If subordinate officers failed, then the
more urgent the duty of superior officers. Therefore, even had a grant
been made of Warner's Ranch in which the grantor purposely left out the
recognition of the rights of the Indians, the highest Spanish courts
would not have tolerated any such abuse of power. This was an axiom of
Spanish rule, shown by a hundred, a thousand precedents. Hence it
should have been recognized by the United States Supreme Court. It is
good law, but better, it is good sense and common justice, and this is
especially good when it protects the helpless and weak from the powerful
and strong.

In our dealings with the Indians in our school system, we are making the
mistake of being in too great a hurry. A race of aborigines is not
raised into civilization in a night. It will be well if it is done in
two or three generations.

Contrast our method with that followed by the padres. Is there any
comparison? Yes! To our shame and disgrace. The padres kept fathers and
mothers and children together, at least to a reasonable degree. Where
there were families they lived--as a rule--in their own homes near the
Missions. Thus there was no division of families. On the other hand, we
have wilfully and deliberately, though perhaps without _malice
aforethought_ (although the effect has been exactly the same as if we
had had malice), separated children from their parents and sent them a
hundred, several hundred, often two or three _thousand_ miles away from
home, there to receive an education often entirely inappropriate and
incompetent to meet their needs. And even this sending has not always
been honorably done. _Vide_ the United States Indian Commissioner's
report for 1900. He says:

     "These pupils are gathered from the cabin, the wickiup, and
     the tepee. _Partly by cajolery and partly by threats; partly
     by bribery and partly by fraud; partly by persuasion and
     partly by force_, they are induced to leave their homes and
     their kindred to enter these schools and take upon themselves
     the outward semblance of civilized life. They are chosen not
     on account of any particular merit of their own, not by
     reason of mental fitness, but solely because they have Indian
     blood in their veins. Without regard to their worldly
     condition; without any previous training; without any
     preparation whatever, they are transported to the
     schools--sometimes thousands of miles away--without the
     slightest expense or trouble to themselves or their people.

     "The Indian youth finds himself at once, as if by magic,
     translated from a state of poverty to one of affluence. He is
     well fed and clothed and lodged. Books and all the
     accessories of learning are given him and teachers provided
     to instruct him. He is educated in the industrial arts on the
     one hand, and not only in the rudiments but in the liberal
     arts on the other. Beyond the three r's he is instructed in
     geography, grammar, and history; he is taught drawing,
     algebra and geometry, music and astronomy and receives
     lessons in physiology, botany, and entomology. Matrons wait
     on him while he is well, and physicians and nurses attend him
     when he is sick. A steam laundry does his washing, and the
     latest modern appliances do his cooking. A library affords
     him relaxation for his leisure hours, athletic sports and the
     gymnasium furnish him exercise and recreation, while music
     entertains him in the evening. He has hot and cold baths, and
     steam heat and electric light, and all the modern
     conveniences. All the necessities of life are given him, and
     many of the luxuries. All of this without money and without
     price, or the contribution of a single effort of his own or
     of his people. His wants are all supplied almost for the
     wish. The child of the wigwam becomes a modern Aladdin, who
     has only to rub the government lamp to gratify his desires.

     "Here he remains until his education is finished, when he is
     returned to his home--which by contrast must seem squalid
     indeed--to the parents whom his education must make it
     difficult to honor, and left to make his way against the
     ignorance and bigotry of his tribe. Is it any wonder he
     fails? Is it surprising if he lapses into barbarism? Not
     having earned his education, it is not appreciated; having
     made no sacrifice to obtain it, it is not valued. It is
     looked upon as a right and not as a privilege; It is accepted
     as a favor to the government and not to the recipient, and
     the almost inevitable tendency is to encourage dependency,
     foster pride, and create a spirit of arrogance and
     selfishness. The testimony on this point of those closely
     connected with the Indian employees of the service would, it
     is believe, be interesting."

So there the matter stands. Nothing of any great importance was really
done to help the Indians except the conferences at Mohonk, N.Y., until,
in 1902, the Sequoya League was organized, composed of many men and
women of national prominence, with the avowed purpose "to make better
Indians." In its first pronunciamento it declared:

     "The first struggle will be not to arouse sympathy but to
     inform with slow patience and long wisdom the wide-spread
     sympathy which already exists. We cannot take the Indians out
     of the hands of the National Government; we cannot take the
     National Government into our own hands. Therefore we must
     work with the National Government in any large plan for the
     betterment of Indian conditions.

     "The League means, in absolute good faith, not to fight, but
     to assist the Indian Bureau. It means to give the money of
     many and the time and brains and experience of more than a
     few to honest assistance to the Bureau in doing the work for
     which it has never had either enough money or enough
     disinterested and expert assistance to do in the best way the
     thing it and every American would like to see done."



CHAPTER XXXIII

MISSION ARCHITECTURE

The question is often asked: Is there a Mission architecture? It is not
my intention here to discuss this question _in extenso_, but merely to
answer it by asking another and then making an affirmation. What is it
that constitutes a style in architecture? It cannot be that every
separate style must show different and distinct features from every
other style. It is not enough that in each style there are specific
features that, when combined, form an appropriate and harmonious
relationship that distinguishes it from every other combination.

As a rule, the Missions were built in the form of a hollow square: the
church representing the _fachada_, with the priests' quarters and the
houses for the Indians forming the wings. These quarters were generally
colonnaded or cloistered, with a series of semicircular arches, and
roofed with red tiles. In the interior was the _patio_ or court, which
often contained a fountain and a garden. Upon this _patio_ opened all
the apartments: those of the fathers and of the majordomo, and the
guest-rooms, as well as the workshops, schoolrooms and storehouses.

One of the strongest features of this style, and one that has had a wide
influence upon our modern architecture, is the stepped and curved sides
of the pediment.

This is found at San Luis Rey, San Gabriel, San Antonio de Padua, Santa
Ines, and at other places. At San Luis Rey, it is the dominant feature
of the extension wall to the right of the _fachada_ of the
main building.

On this San Luis pediment occurs a lantern which architects regard as
misplaced. Yet the fathers' motive for its presence is clear: that is,
the uplifting of the Sign whereby the Indians could alone find
salvation.

Another means of uplifting the cross was found in the domes--practically
all of which were terraced--on the summits of which the lantern and
cross were placed.

The careful observer may note another distinctive feature which was
seldom absent from the Mission domes. This is the series of steps at
each "corner" of the half-dome. Several eminent architects have told me
that the purpose of these steps is unknown, but to my simple lay mind it
is evident that they were placed there purposely by the clerical
architects to afford easy access to the surmounting cross; so that any
accident to this sacred symbol could be speedily remedied. It must be
remembered that the fathers were skilled in reading some phases of the
Indian mind. The knew that an accident to the Cross might work a
complete revolution in the minds of the superstitious Indians whose
conversion they sought. Hence common, practical sense demanded speedy
and easy access to the cross in case such emergency arose.

It will also be noticed that throughout the whole chain of Missions the
walls, piers and buttresses are exceedingly solid and massive, reaching
even to six, eight, ten and more feet in thickness. This was undoubtedly
for the purpose of counteracting the shaking of the earthquakes, and the
effectiveness of this method of building is evidenced by the fact that
these old adobe structures still remain (even though some are in a
shattered condition, owing to their long want of care) while later and
more pretentious buildings have fallen.

From these details, therefore, it is apparent that the chief features of
the Mission style of architecture are found to be as follows:

1. Solid and massive walls, piers and buttresses.

2. Arched corridors.

3. Curved pedimented gables.

4. Terraced towers, surmounted by a lantern.

5. Pierced Campanile, either in tower or wall.

6. Broad, unbroken, mural masses.

7. Wide, overhanging eaves.

8. Long, low, sloping roofs covered with red clay tiles.

9. Patio, or inner court.

In studying carefully the whole chain of Missions in California I found
that the only building that contains all these elements in harmonious
combination is that of San Luis Rey. Hence it alone is to be regarded as
the typical Mission structure, all the others failing in one or more
essentials. Santa Barbara is spoiled as a pure piece of Mission
architecture by the introduction of the Greek engaged columns in the
_fachada._ San Juan Capistrano undoubtedly was a pure "type" structure,
but in its present dilapidated condition it is almost impossible to
determine its exact appearance.

San Antonio de Padua lacks the terraced towers and the pierced
campanile. San Gabriel and Santa Ines also have no towers, though both
have the pierced campanile. And so, on analysis, will all the Missions
be found to be defective in one or more points and therefore not
entitled to rank as "type" structures.

As an offshoot from the Mission style has come the now world-famed and
popular California bungalow style, which appropriates to itself every
architectural style and no-style known.

But California has also utilized to a remarkable degree in greater or
lesser purity the distinctive features of the Mission style, as I have
above enumerated them, in modern churches, hospitals, school-houses,
railway depots, warehouses, private residences, court-houses,
libraries, etc.

[Illustration: HIGH SCHOOL, RIVERSIDE, CALIF. In modern Mission
architecture.]

[Illustration: WALL DECORATIONS ON OLD MISSION CHAPEL OF SAN ANTONIO DE
PALA.]

[Illustration: ARCHES AT GLENWOOD MISSION INN, RIVERSIDE, CALIF.]

Of greater importance, however, than the development of what I regard
as a distinct style of architecture, is the development of the Mission
_spirit_ in architecture. Copying of past styles is never a proof of
originality or power. The same spirit that led to the creation of the
Mission Style,--the creative impulse, the originality, the vision, the
free, imaginative power, the virility that desires expression and
demands objective manifestation,--_this_ was fostered by the Franciscan
architects. This spirit is in the California atmosphere. A considerable
number of architects have caught it. Without slavish adherence to any
style, without copying anything, they are creating, expressing, even as
did the Franciscan padres, beautiful thoughts in stone, brick, wood and
reinforced concrete. In my _magnum opus_ on _Mission Architecture_,
which has long been in preparation, I hope clearly to present not only
the full details of what the padres accomplished, but what these later
creative artists, impelled by the same spirit, have given to the world.



CHAPTER XXXIV

THE GLENWOOD MISSION INN

It is an incontrovertible fact that no great idea ever rests in its own
accomplishment. There are offshoots from it, ideas generated in other
minds entirely different from the original, yet dependent upon it for
life. For instance, which of the Mission fathers had the faintest
conception that in erecting their structures under the adverse
conditions then existing in California, they were practically
originating a new style of architecture; or that in making their crude
and simple chairs, benches and tables they were starting a revolution in
furniture making; or that in caring for and entertaining the few
travelers who happened to pass over _El Camino Real_ they were to
suggest a name, an architectural style, a method of management for the
most unique, and in many respects the most attractive hotel in the
world. For such indeed is the Glenwood Mission Inn, at Riverside,
California, at this present time.

This inn is an honest and just tribute to the influence of the Old
Mission Fathers of California, as necessary to a complete understanding
of the far-reaching power of their work as is _El Camino Real_, the
Mission Play, or the Mission Style of architecture. After listening to
lectures on the work of the Franciscan padres and visiting the Missions
themselves, its owners, Mr. and Mrs. Frank Miller, humanely interested
in the welfare of the Mission Indians, collectors of the handicrafts of
these artistic aborigines, and students of what history tells us of
them, began, some twenty-five years ago, to realize that in the Mission
idea was an ideal for a modern hotel. Slowly the suggestion grew, and as
they discussed it with those whose knowledge enabled them to appreciate
it, the clearer was it formulated, until some ten or a dozen years ago
time seemed ripe for its realization. Arthur B. Benton, one of the
leading architects of Southern California, formulated plans, and the
hotel was erected. Its architecture conforms remarkably to that of the
Missions. On Seventh Street are the arched corridors of San Fernando,
San Juan Capistrano, San Miguel and San Antonio de Padua; inside is an
extensive patio and the automobiles stop close to the Campanile
reproducing the curved pediments of San Gabriel. On the Sixth Street
