around it." And in that sentence he has condensed a whole system.

Everything we see having a form is built around a mental image--either
the mental image of some man, some animal, or of the Absolute. This is
the rule of the universe, and in the matter of character-building we but
follow a well established rule. When we wish to build a house, we first
think of "house" in a general way. Then we begin to think of "what kind"
of a house. Then we go into details. Then we consult an architect, and he
makes us a plan, which plan is his mental image, suggested by our mental
image. Then, the plan once decided upon, we consult the builder, and at
last the house stands completed--an objectified Mental Image. And so it
is with every created thing--all manifestation of a Mental Image.

And so, when we wish to establish a trait of Character, we must form a
clear, distinct Mental Image of what we wish to be. This is an important
step. Make your picture clear and distinct, and fasten it in your mind.
Then begin to build around it. Let your thoughts dwell upon the mental
picture. Let your imagination see yourself as possessed of the desired
trait, and _acting it out_. Act it out in your imagination, over and over
again, as often as possible, persevering, and continuously, seeing
yourself manifesting the trait under a variety of circumstances and
conditions. As you continue to do this you will find that you will
gradually begin to express the thought in action--to objectify the
subjective mental image. It will become "natural" for you to act more and
more in accordance with your mental image, until at last the new habit
will become firmly fixed in your mind, and will become your natural mode
of action and expression.

This is no vague, visionary theory. It is a well known and proven
psychological fact, and thousands have worked marvelous changes in their
character by its means.

Not only may one elevate his moral character in this way, but he may
mould his "work-a-day" self to better conform to the needs of his
environment and occupation. If one lacks Perseverance, he may attain
it; if one is filled with Fear, he may supplant it with Fearlessness; if
one lacks Self-confidence, he may gain it. In fact, there is no trait
that may not be developed in this way. People have literally "made
themselves over" by following this method of character-building. The
great trouble with the race has been that persons have not realized that
they _could_ do these things. They have thought that they were doomed to
remain just the creatures that they found themselves to be. They did not
realize that the work of creation was not ended, and that they had within
themselves a creative power adapted to the needs of their case. When man
first realizes this truth, and proves it by practice, he becomes another
being. He finds himself superior to environment, and training--he finds
that he may ride over these things. He makes _his own environment_, and
_he trains himself_.

In some of the larger schools in England and the United States, certain
scholars who have developed and manifested the ability to control
themselves and their actions are placed on the roll of a grade called
the "Self-governed grade." Those in this grade act as if they had
memorized the following words of Herbert Spencer: "In the supremacy of
self-control consists one of the perfections of the ideal man. Not to be
impulsive--not to be spurred hither and thither by each desire--but to be
self-restrained, self-balanced, governed by the just decision of the
feelings in council assembled * * * that it is which moral education
strives to produce." And this is the desire of the writer of this
lesson--to place each student in the "Self-governed class."

We cannot attempt, in the short space of a single lesson, to map out a
course of instruction in Character Building adapted to the special needs
of each individual. But we think that what we have said on the subject
should be sufficient to point out the method for each student to map out
a course for himself, following the general rules given above. As a help
to the student, however, we will give a brief course of instruction for
the cultivation of one desirable trait of character. The general plan of
this course may be adapted to fit the requirements of _any other case_,
if intelligence is used by the student. The case we have selected is that
of a student who has been suffering from "a lack of Moral Courage--a lack
of Self-Confidence--an inability to maintain my poise in the presence
of other people--an inability to say 'No!'--a feeling of Inferiority to
those with whom I come in contact." The brief outline of the course of
practice given in this case is herewith given:

PRELIMINARY THOUGHT. You should fix firmly in your mind the fact that you
are the Equal of any and every man. You come from the same source. You
are an expression of the same One Life. In the eyes of the Absolute you
are the equal of any man, even the highest in the land. Truth is "Things
as God sees them"--and in Truth you and the man are equal, and, at the
last, One. All feelings of Inferiority are illusions, errors, and lies,
and have no existence in Truth. When in the company of others remember
this fact and realize that the Life Principle in you is talking to the
Life Principle in them. Let the Life Principle flow through you, and
endeavor to forget your personal self. At the same time, endeavor to see
that same Life Principle, behind and beyond the personality of the person
in whose presence you are. He is by a personality hiding the Life
Principle, just as you are. Nothing more--nothing less! You are both
One in Truth. Let the conscious of the "I" beam forth and you will
experience an uplift and sense of Courage, and the other will likewise
feel it. You have within you the Source of Courage, Moral and Physical,
and you have naught to Fear--Fearlessness is your Divine Heritage, avail
yourself of it. You have Self-Conscience, for the Self is the "I" within
you, not the petty personality, and you must have confidence in that "I."
Retreat within yourself until you feel the presence of the "I," and then
will you have a Self-Confidence that nothing can shake or disturb. Once
having attained the permanent consciousness of the "I," you will have
poise. Once having realized that you are a Center of Power, you will have
no difficulty in saying "No!" when it is right to do so. Once having
realized your true nature--your Real Self--you will lose all sense of
Inferiority, and will know that you are a manifestation of the One Life
and have behind you the strength, power, and grandeur of the Cosmos.
Begin by realizing YOURSELF, and then proceed with the following methods
of training the mind.

WORD IMAGES. It is difficult for the mind to build itself around an idea,
unless that idea be expressed in words. A word is the center of an idea,
just as the idea is the center of the mental image, and the mental image
the center of the growing mental habit. Therefore, the Yogis always lay
great stress upon the use of words in this way. In the particular case
before us, we should suggest the holding before you of a few words
crystallizing the main thought. We suggest the words "I Am"; Courage;
Confidence; Poise; Firmness; Equality. Commit these words to memory, and
then endeavor to fix in your mind a clear conception of the meaning of
each word, so that each may stand for a Live Idea when you say it. Beware
of parrot-like or phonographic repetition. Let each word's meaning stand
out clearly before you, so that when you repeat it you may _feel_ its
meaning. Repeat the words over frequently, when opportunity presents
itself, and you will soon begin to notice that they act as a strong
mental tonic upon you, producing a bracing, energizing effect. And each
time you repeat the words, understandingly, you have done something to
clear away the mental path over which you wish to travel.

PRACTICE. When you are at leisure, and are able to indulge in "day
dreams" without injury to your affairs of life, call your imagination
into play and endeavor to picture yourself as being possessed of the
qualities indicated by the words named. Picture yourself under the most
trying circumstances, making use of the desired qualities, and
manifesting them fully. Endeavor to picture yourself as acting out your
part well, and exhibiting the desired qualities. Do not be ashamed to
indulge in these day-dreams, for they are the prophecies of the things to
follow, and you are but rehearsing your part before the day of the
performance. Practice makes perfect, and if you accustom yourself to
acting in a certain way in imagination, you will find it much easier to
play your part when the real performance occurs. This may seem childish
to many of you, but if you have an actor among your acquaintances,
consult him about it, and you will find that he will heartily recommend
it. He will tell you what practice does for one in this direction, and
how repeated practice and rehearsals may fix a character so firmly in a
man's mind that he may find it difficult to divest himself of it after a
time. Choose well the part you wish to play--the character you wish to be
yours--and then after fixing it well in your mind, practice, practice,
practice. Keep your ideal constantly before you, and endeavor to grow
into it. And you will succeed, if you exercise patience and perseverance.

But, more than this. Do not confine your practice to mere private
rehearsal. You need some "dress rehearsals" as well--rehearsals in
public. Therefore, after you get well started in your work, manage to
exercise your growing character-habits in your everyday life. Pick out
the little cases first and "try it on them."

You will find that you will be able to overcome conditions that formerly
bothered you much. You will become conscious of a growing strength and
power coming from within, and you will recognize that you are indeed a
changed person. Let your thought express itself in action, whenever you
get a good chance. But do not try to force chances just to try your
strength. Do not, for instance, try to force people to ask for favors
that you may say "No!" You will find plenty of genuine tests without
forcing any. Accustom yourself to looking people in the eye, and feeling
the power that is back of you, and within you. You will soon be able to
see through their personality, and realize that it is just one portion of
the One Life gazing at another portion, and that therefore there is
nothing to be afraid of. A realization of your Real Self will enable you
to maintain your poise under trying circumstances, if you will but throw
aside your false idea about your personality. Forget yourself--your
little personal self--for a while, and fix your mind on the Universal
Self of which you are a part. All these things that have worried you are
but incidents of the Personal Life, and are seen to be illusions when
viewed from the standpoint of the Universal Life.

Carry the Universal Life with you as much as possible into your everyday
life. It belongs there as much as anywhere, and will prove to be a tower
of strength and refuge to you in the perplexing situations of your busy
life.

Remember always that the Ego is master of the mental states and habits,
and that the Will is the direct instrument of the Ego, and is always
ready for its use. Let your soul be filled with the strong Desire to
cultivate those mental habits that will make you Strong. Nature's plan is
to produce Strong Individual expressions of herself, and she will be glad
to give you her aid in becoming strong. The man who wishes to strengthen
himself will always find great forces back of him to aid him in the work,
for is he not carrying out one of Nature's pet plans, and one which she
has been striving for throughout the ages. Anything that tends to make
you realize and express your Mastery, tends to strengthen you, and
places at your disposal Nature's aid. You may witness this in everyday
life--Nature seems to like _strong_ individuals, and delights in pushing
them ahead. By Mastery, we mean mastery over your own lower nature, as
well as over outside nature, of course. The "I" is Master--forget it not,
O student, and assert it constantly. Peace be with you.


MANTRAM (OR AFFIRMATION).

I am the Master of my Mental Habits--I control my Character. I Will to be
Strong, and summon the forces of my Nature to my aid.




THE TWELFTH LESSON.

SUB-CONSCIOUS INFLUENCES.


In this lesson we wish to touch upon a certain feature of sub-conscious
mentation that has been much dwelt upon by certain schools of western
writers and students during the past twenty years, but which has also
been misunderstood, and, alas, too often misused, by some of those who
have been attracted to the subject. We allude to what has been called the
"Power of Thought." While this power is very real, and like any other of
the forces of nature may be properly used and applied in our every day
life, still many students of the power of the Mind have misused it and
have stooped to practices worthy only of the followers of the schools of
"Black Magic." We hear on all sides of the use of "treatments" for
selfish and often base ends, those following these practices seeming to
be in utter ignorance of the occult laws brought into operation, and the
terrible reaction inevitably falling to the lot of those practicing this
negative form of mental influence. We have been amazed at the prevailing
ignorance concerning the nature and effects of this improper use of
mental force, and at the same time, at the common custom of such selfish,
improper uses. This, more particularly, when the true occultist knows
that these things are not necessary, even to those who seek "Success" by
mental forces. There is a true method of the use of mental forces, as
well as an improper use, and we trust that in this lesson we may be able
to bring the matter sharply and clearly before the minds of our students.

In our first course (The Fourteen Lessons) in the several lessons
entitled, respectively, "Thought Dynamics," "Telepathy, etc.," and
"Psychic Influence," we have given a general idea of the effect of one
mind upon other minds, and many other writers have called the attention
of the Western world to the same facts. There has been a general
awakening of interest in this phase of the subject among the Western
people of late years, and many and wonderful are the theories that have
been advanced among the conflicting schools regarding the matter. But,
notwithstanding the conflicting theories, there is a general agreement
upon the fundamental facts. They all agree that the mental forces may be
used to affect oneself and others, and many have started in to use these
mental forces for their own selfish ends and purposes, believing that
they were fully justified in so doing, and being unaware of the web of
psychic causes and effects which they were weaving around them by their
practices.

Now, at the beginning, let us impress upon the minds of our students the
fact that while it is undoubtedly true that people who are unaware of the
true sources of strength within them, may be, and often are affected by
mental force exerted by others, it is equally true that no one can be
adversely affected in this way providing he realizes the "I" within
himself, which is the only Real part of him, and which is an impregnable
tower of strength against the assaults of others. There is no cause for
all of this fear that is being manifested by many Western students of
thought-power, who are in constant dread of being "treated" adversely by
other people. The man or woman who realizes the "I" within, may by the
slightest exercise of the Will surround himself with a mental aura which
will repel adverse thought-waves emanating from the minds of others. Nay,
more than this--the habitual recognition of the "I," and a few moments'
meditation upon it each day, will of itself erect such an aura, and will
charge this aura with a vitality that will turn back adverse thought, and
cause it to return to the source from which it came, where it will serve
the good purpose of bringing to the mistaken mind originating it, the
conviction that such practices are hurtful and to be avoided.

This realization of the "I," which we brought out in the first few
lessons of the present series, is the best and only real method of
self-protection. This may be easily understood, when we remind you that
the whole phenomena of mental influencing belongs to the "illusion" side
of existence--the negative side--and that the Real and Positive side must
of necessity be stronger. Nothing can affect the Real in you--and the
nearer you get to the Real, in realization and understanding, the
stronger do you become. _This is the whole secret_. Think it over.

But, there are comparatively few people who are able to rest firmly in
the "I" consciousness all the time and the others demand help while they
are growing. To such, we would say "Creep as close the Realization of the
I, as possible, and rest your spiritual feet firmly upon the rock of the
Real Self." If you feel that people, circumstances, or things are
influencing you unduly, stand up boldly, and deny the influence. Say
something like this, "I DENY the power or influence of persons,
circumstances, or things to adversely affect me. I ASSERT my Reality,
Power and Dominion over these things." These words may seem very simple,
but when uttered with the consciousness of the Truth underlying them,
they become as a mighty force. You will understand, of course, that there
is no magic or virtue in the words themselves--that is, in the grouping
of the letters forming the words, or the sounds of the words--the virtue
resting in the _idea_ of which the words are the expression. You will be
surprised at the effect of this STATEMENT upon depressing, or adverse
influences surrounding you. If you--_you_ who are reading these words
now--feel yourself subject to any adverse or depressing influences, will
then stand up erect, throwing your shoulders back, raising your head, and
looking boldly and fearlessly ahead, and repeat these words firmly, and
with faith, you will feel the adverse influences disappearing. You will
almost see the clouds falling back from you. Try it now, before reading
further, and you will become conscious of a new strength and power.

You are perfectly justified in thus denying adverse influence. You have a
perfect right to drive back threatening or depressing thought-clouds. You
have a perfect right to take your stand upon the Rock of Truth--your Real
Self--and demand your Freedom. These negative thoughts of the world in
general, and of some people in particular, belong to the dark side of
life, and you have a right to demand freedom from them. You do not belong
to the same idea of life, and it is your privilege--yes, your duty--to
repel them and bid them disappear from your horizon. You are a Child of
Light, and it is your right and duty to assert your freedom from the
things of darkness. You are merely asserting the Truth when you affirm
your superiority and dominion over these dark forces. And in the measure
of your Recognition and Faith, will be the power at your disposal. Faith
and Recognition renders man a god. If we could but fully recognize and
realize just what we are, we could rise above this entire plane of
negative, dark world of thought. But we have become so blinded and
stupefied with the race-thought of fear and weakness, and so hypnotized
with the suggestions of weakness that we hear on all sides of us, that
even the best of us find it hard to avoid occasionally sinking back into
the lower depths of despair and discouragement. But, let us remember
this, brothers and sisters, that these periods of "back-sliding" become
less frequent, and last a shorter time, as we proceed. Bye-and-bye we
shall escape them altogether.

Some may think that we are laying too much stress upon the negative side
of the question, but we feel that what we have said is timely, and much
needed by many who read these lessons. There has been so much said
regarding this negative, adverse power of thought, that it is well that
all should be taught that it is in their power to rise above this thing--
that the weapon for its defeat is already in their hand.

The most advanced student may occasionally forget that he is superior to
the adverse influence of the race-thought, and other clouds of thought
influence that happen to be in his neighborhood. When we think of how few
there are who are sending forth the positive, hopeful, thought-waves, and
how many are sending forth continually the thoughts of discouragement,
fear, and despair, it is no wonder that at times there comes to us a
feeling of discouragement, helplessness, and "what's the use." But we
must be ever alert, to stand up and _deny these things out of existence_
so far as our personal thought world is concerned. There is a wonderful
occult truth in the last sentence. We are the makers, preservers, and
destroyers of our personal thought-world. We may bring into it that which
we desire to appear; we may keep there what we wish, cultivating,
developing and unfolding the thought-forms that we desire; we may
destroy that which we wish to keep out. The "I" is the master of its
thought-world. Think over this great truth, O student! By Desire we
call into existence--by affirmation we preserve and encourage--by
Denial we destroy. The Hindus in their popular religious conceptions
picture the One Being as a Trinity, composed of Brahma, the Creator;
Vishnu, the Preserver, and Siva, the Destroyer--not three gods, as is
commonly supposed, but a Trinity composed of three aspects of Deity or
Being. This idea of the threefold Being is also applicable to the
Individual--"as above so below." The "I" is the Being of the Individual,
and the thought-world is its manifestation. It creates, preserves, and
destroys--as it Will. Carry this idea with you, and realize that your
individual thought-world is your own field of manifestation. In it you
are constantly creating--constantly preserving--constantly destroying.
And if you can destroy anything in your own thought-world you remove it
from its field of activity, so far as you are concerned. And if you
create anything in your own thought-world, you bring it into active
being, so far as you are concerned. And if you preserve anything, you
keep it by you in effect and full operation and influence in your life.
This truth belongs to the higher phases of the subject, for its
explanation is inextricably bound up in the explanation of the
"Thing-in-Itself"--the Absolute and Its Manifestations. But even what we
have said above, should give to the alert student sufficient notice to
cause him to grasp the facts of the case, and to apply the principles in
his own life.

If one lives on the plane of the race-thought, he is subject to its laws,
for the law of cause and effect is in full operation on each plane of
life. But when one raises himself above the race-thought, and on to the
plane of the Recognition of the Real Self--The "I"--then does he
extricate himself from the lower laws of cause and effect, and places
himself on a higher plane of causation, in which he plays a much higher
part. And so we are constantly reminding you that your tower of strength
and refuge lies on the higher plane. But, nevertheless, we must deal with
the things and laws of the lower plane, because very few who read these
lessons are able to rest entirely upon the higher plane. The great
majority of them have done no more than to lift themselves partially on
