
But high above all other ways in which creatures can lie patent to
God, and open for the influx of a Divine Indweller, lies the way of
faith and love. Whosoever opens his heart in these divinely-taught
emotions, and fixes them upon the Christ in whom God dwells, receives
into the very roots of his being--as the water that trickles through
the soil to the rootlets of the tree--the very Godhead Himself. 'He
that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.'

That God shall dwell in my heart is possible only from the fact that
He dwelt in all His fulness in Christ, through whom I touch Him. That
Temple consecrates all heart-shrines; and all worshippers that keep
near to Him, partake with Him of the Father that dwelt in Him.

Only remember that in Christ God dwelt completely, all 'the fulness
of the Godhead bodily' was there, but in us it is but partially; that
in Christ, therefore, the divine indwelling was uniform and
invariable, but in us it fluctuates, and sometimes is more intimate
and blessed, and sometimes He leaves the habitation when we leave
Him; that in Christ, therefore, there was no progress in the divine
indwelling, but that in us, if there be any true inhabitation of our
souls by God, that abiding will become more and more, until every
corner of our being is hallowed and filled with the searching
effulgence of the all-pervasive Light. And let us remember that God
dwelt in Christ, but that in us it is God in Christ who dwells. So to
Him we owe it all, that our poor hearts are made the dwelling-place
of God; or, as this Apostle puts it, in other words conveying the
same idea, 'Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief Corner-stone; in whom
all the building fitly framed together groweth ... for a habitation
of God through the Spirit.'

II. Now then, turning from this underlying idea of the passage, let
us look, for a moment, at some of the many applications of which the
great thought is susceptible. I remark, then, in the second place,
that as temples all Christians are to be manifesters of God.

The meaning of the Temple as of all temples was, that there the
indwelling Deity should reveal Himself; and if it be true that we
Christian men and women are, in this deep and blessed reality of
which I have been speaking, the abiding places and habitations of
God, then it follows that we shall stand in the world as the great
means by which God is manifested and made known, and that in a
two-fold way; _to ourselves_ and _to other people_.

The real revelation of God to our hearts must be His abiding in our
hearts. We do not learn God until we possess God. He must fill our
souls before we know His sweetness. The answer that our Lord made to
one of His disciples is full of the deepest truth. 'How is it,' said
one of them in his blundering way, 'how is it that Thou wilt manifest
Thyself to us?' And the answer was, 'We will come and make Our abode
with him.' You do not know God until, if I might so say, He sits at
your fireside and talks with you in your hearts. Just as some wife
may have a husband whom the world knows as hero, or sage, or orator,
but she knows him as nobody else can; so the outside, and if I may so
say, the public character of God is but the surface of the revelation
that He makes to us, when in the deepest secrecy of our own hearts He
pours Himself into our waiting spirits. O brethren! it is within the
curtains of the Holiest of all that the Shekinah flashes; it is
within our own hearts, shrined and templed there, that God reveals
Himself to us, as He does not unto the world.

And then, further, Christian men, as the temples and habitations of
God, are appointed to be the great means of making Him known to the
world around. The eye that cannot look at the sun can look at the
rosy clouds that lie on either side of it, and herald its rising;
their opalescent tints and pearly lights are beautiful to dim vision,
to which the sun itself is too bright to be looked upon. Men will
believe in a gentle Christ when they see you gentle. They will
believe in a righteous love when they see it manifesting itself in
you. You are 'the secretaries of God's praise,' as George Herbert has
it. He dwells in your hearts that out of your lives He may be
revealed. The pictures in a book of travels, or the diagrams in a
mathematical work, tell a great deal more in half a dozen lines than
can be put into as many pages of dry words. And it is not books of
theology nor eloquent sermons, but it is a Church glowing with the
glory of God, and manifestly all flushed with His light and majesty,
that will have power to draw men to believe in the God whom it
reveals. When explorers land upon some untravelled island and meet
the gentle inhabitants with armlets of rough gold upon their wrists,
they say there must be many a gold-bearing rock of quartz crystal in
the interior of the land. And if you present yourselves, Christian
men and women, to the world with the likeness of your Master plain
upon you, then people will believe in the Christianity that you
profess. You have to popularise the Gospel in the fashion in which
go-betweens and middlemen between students and the populace
popularise science. You have to make it possible for men to believe
in the Christ because they see Christ in you. 'Know ye not that ye
are the temples of the living God?' Let His light shine from you.

III. I remark again that as temples all Christian lives should be
places of sacrifice.

What is the use of a temple without worship? And what kind of worship
is that in which the centre point is not an altar? That is the sort
of temple that a great many professing Christians are. They have
forgotten the altar in their spiritual architecture. Have you got one
in your heart? It is but a poor, half-furnished sanctuary that has
not. Where is yours? The key and the secret of all noble life is to
yield up one's own will, to sacrifice oneself. There never was
anything done in this world worth doing, and there never will be till
the end of time, of which sacrifice is not the centre and
inspiration. And the difference between all other and lesser
nobilities of life, and the supreme beauty of a true Christian life
is that the sacrifice of the Christian is properly a
_sacrifice_--that is, an offering to _God_, done for the sake of the
great love wherewith He has loved us. As Christ is the one true
Temple, and we become so by partaking of Him, so He is the one
Sacrifice for sins for ever, and we become sacrifices only through
Him. If there be any lesson which comes out of this great truth of
Christians as temples, it is not a lesson of pluming ourselves on our
dignity, or losing ourselves in the mysticisms which lie near this
truth, but it is the hard lesson--If a temple, then an altar; if an
altar, then a sacrifice. 'Ye are built up a spiritual house, a holy
priesthood, that ye may offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to
God'--sacrifice, priest, temple, all in one; and all for the sake and
by the might of that dear Lord who has given Himself a bleeding
Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, that we might offer a
Eucharistic sacrifice of thanks and praise and self-surrender unto
Him, and to His Father God.

IV. And, lastly, this great truth of my text enforces the solemn
lesson of the necessary sanctity of the Christian life.

'The temple of God,' says the context, 'the temple of God is holy,
which (holy persons) ye are.' The plain first idea of the temple is a
place set apart and consecrated to God.

Hence, of course, follows the idea of purity, but the parent idea of
'holiness' is not purity, which is the consequence, but consecration
or separation to God, which is the root.

And so in very various applications, on which I have not time to
dwell now, this idea of the necessary sanctity of the Temple is put
forth in these two letters to the Corinthian Church. Corinth was a
city honeycombed with the grossest immoralities; and hence, perhaps,
to some extent the great emphasis and earnestness and even severity
of the Apostle in dealing with some forms of evil.

But without dwelling on the details, let me just point you to three
directions in which this general notion of sanctity is applied. There
is that of our context here 'Know ye not that ye are the temple of
God? If any man _destroy_ the temple of God, him shall God
destroy, for the temple of God is holy, and such ye are.'

He is thinking here mainly, I suppose, about the devastation and
destruction of this temple of God, which was caused by schismatical
and heretical teaching, and by the habit of forming parties, 'one of
Paul, one of Apollos, one of Cephas, one of Christ,' which was
rending that Corinthian Church into pieces. But we may apply it more
widely than that, and say that anything which corrupts and defiles
the Christian life and the Christian character assumes a darker tint
of evil when we think that it is sacrilege--the profanation of the
temple, the pollution of that which ought to be pure as He who dwells
in it.

Christian men and women, how that thought darkens the blackness of
all sin! How solemnly there peals out the warning, 'If any man
destroy or impair the temple,' by any form of pollution, 'him' with
retribution in kind, 'him shall God destroy.' Keep the temple clear;
keep it clean. Let Him come with His scourge of small cords and His
merciful rebuke. You Manchester men know what it is to let the
money-changers into the sanctuary. Beware lest, beginning with making
your hearts 'houses of merchandise,' you should end by making them
'dens of thieves.'

And then, still further, there is another application of this same
principle, in the second of these Epistles. 'What agreement hath the
temple of God with idols?' 'Ye are the temple of the living God.'

Christianity is intolerant. There is to be one image in the shrine.
One of the old Roman Stoic Emperors had a pantheon in his palace with
Jesus Christ upon one pedestal and Plato on the one beside Him. And
some of us are trying the same kind of thing. Christ there, and
somebody else here. Remember, Christ must be everything or nothing!
Stars may be sown by millions, but for the earth there is one sun.
And you and I are to shrine one dear Guest, and one only, in the
inmost recesses of our hearts.

And there is another application of this metaphor also in our
letter.'Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost
which is in you?' Christianity despises 'the flesh'; Christianity
reverences the body; and would teach us all that, being robed in that
most wonderful work of God's hands, which becomes a shrine for God
Himself if He dwell in our hearts, all purity, all chastisement and
subjugation of animal passion is our duty. Drunkenness, and gluttony,
lusts of every kind, impurity of conduct, and impurity of word and
look and thought, all these assume a still darker tint when they are
thought of as not only crimes against the physical constitution and
the moral law of humanity, but insults flung in the face of the God
that would inhabit the shrine.

And in regard to sins of this kind, which it is so difficult to speak
of in public, and which grow unchecked in secrecy, and are ruining
hundreds of young lives, the words of this context are grimly true,
'If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy.' I speak
now mainly in brotherly or fatherly warning to young men--did you
ever read this, 'His bones are full of the iniquities of his youth,
which shall lie down with him in the dust'? 'Know ye not that ye are
the temple of God?'

And so, brethren, our text tells us what we may all be. There is no
heart without its deity. Alas! alas! for the many listening to me now
whose spirits are like some of those Egyptian temples, which had in
the inmost shrine a coiled-up serpent, the mummy of a monkey, or some
other form as animal and obscene.

Oh! turn to Christ and cry, 'Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and
the ark of Thy strength.' Open your hearts and let Christ come in.
And before Him, as of old, the bestial Dagon will be found, dejected
and truncated, lying on the sill there; and all the vain, cruel,
lustful gods that have held riot and carnival in your hearts will
flee away into the darkness, like some foul ghosts at cock-crow. 'If
any man hear My voice and open the door I will come in.' And the
glory of the Lord shall fill the house.




DEATH, THE FRIEND

   '... All things are yours ... death.'--1 COR. iii. 21, 22.


What Jesus Christ is to a man settles what everything else is to Him.
Our relation to Jesus determines our relation to the universe. If we
belong to Him, everything belongs to us. If we are His servants, all
things are our servants. The household of Jesus, which is the whole
Creation, is not divided against itself, and the fellow-servants do
not beat one another. Two bodies moving in the same direction, and
under the impulse of the same force, cannot come into collision, and
since 'all things work together,' according to the counsel of His
will, 'all things work together for good' to His lovers. The
triumphant words of my text are no piece of empty rhetoric, but the
plain result of two facts--Christ's rule and the Christian's
submission. 'All things are yours, and ye are Christ's,' so the stars
in their courses fight against those who fight against Him, and if we
are at peace with Him we shall 'make a league with the beasts of the
field, and the stones of the field,' which otherwise would be
hindrances and stumbling-blocks, 'shall be at peace with' us.

The Apostle carries his confidence in the subservience of all things
to Christ's servants very far, and the words of my text, in which he
dares to suggest that 'the Shadow feared of man' is, after all, a
veiled friend, are hard to believe, when we are brought face to face
with death, either when we meditate on our own end, or when our
hearts are sore and our hands are empty. Then the question comes, and
often is asked with tears of blood, Is it true that this awful force,
which we cannot command, does indeed serve us? Did it serve those
whom it dragged from our sides; and in serving them, did it serve us?
Paul rings out his 'Yes'; and if we have as firm a hold of Paul's
Lord as Paul had, our answer will be the same. Let me, then, deal
with this great thought that lies here, of the conversion of the last
enemy into a friend, the assurance that we may all have that death is
ours, though not in the sense that we can command it, yet in the
sense that it ministers to our highest good.

That thought may be true about ourselves when it comes to our turn to
die, and, thank God, has been true about all those who have departed
in His faith and fear. Some of you may have seen two very striking
engravings by a great, though somewhat unknown artist, representing
Death as the Destroyer, and Death as the Friend. In the one case he
comes into a scene of wild revelry, and there at his feet lie, stark
and stiff, corpses in their gay clothing and with garlands on their
brows, and feasters and musicians are flying in terror from the
cowled Skeleton. In the other he comes into a quiet church belfry,
where an aged saint sits with folded arms and closed eyes, and an
open Bible by his side, and endless peace upon the wearied face. The
window is flung wide to the sunrise, and on its sill perches a bird
that gives forth its morning song. The cowled figure has brought rest
to the weary, and the glad dawning of a new life to the aged, and is
a friend. The two pictures are better than all the poor words that I
can say. It depends on the people to whom he comes, whether he comes
as a destroyer or as a helper. Of course, for all of us the mere
physical facts remain the same, the pangs and the pain, the slow
torture of the loosing of the bond, or the sharp agony of its
instantaneous rending apart. But we have gone but a very little way
into life and its experiences, if we have not learnt that identity of
circumstances may cover profound difference of essentials, and that
the same experiences may have wholly different messages and meanings
to two people who are equally implicated in them. Thus, while the
physical fact remains the same for all, the whole bearing of it may
so differ that Death to one man will be a Destroyer, while to another
it is a Friend.

For, if we come to analyse the thoughts of humanity about the last
act in human life on earth, what is it that makes the dread darkness
of death, which all men know, though they so seldom think of it? I
suppose, first of all, if we seek to question our feelings, that
which makes Death a foe to the ordinary experience is, that it is
like a step off the edge of a precipice in a fog; a step into a dim
condition of which the imagination can form no conception, because it
has no experience, and all imagination's pictures are painted with
pigments drawn from our past. Because it is impossible for a man to
have any clear vision of what it is that is coming to meet him, and
he cannot tell 'in that sleep what dreams may come,' he shrinks, as
we all shrink, from a step into the vast Inane, the dim Unknown. But
the Gospel comes and says, 'It _is_ a land of great darkness,' but
'To the people that sit in darkness a great light hath shined.'

  'Our knowledge of that life is small,
  The eye of faith is dim.'

But faith has an eye, and there is light, and this we can see--One
face whose brightness scatters all the gloom, One Person who has not
ceased to be the Sun of Righteousness with healing in His beams, even
in the darkness of the grave. Therefore, one at least of the
repellent features which, to the timorous heart, makes Death a foe,
is gone, when we know that the known Christ fills the Unknown.

Then, again, another of the elements, as I suppose, which constitute
the hostile aspect that Death assumes to most of us, is that it
apparently hales us away from all the wholesome activities and
occupations of life, and bans us into a state of apparent inaction.
The thought that death is rest does sometimes attract the weary or
harassed, or they fancy it does, but that is a morbid feeling, and
much more common in sentimental epitaphs than among the usual
thoughts of men. To most of us there is no joy, but a chill, in the
anticipation that all the forms of activity which have so occupied,
and often enriched, our lives here, are to be cut off at once. 'What
am I to do if I have no books?' says the student. 'What am I to do if
I have no mill?' says the spinner. 'What am I to do if I have no
nursery or kitchen?' say the women. What are you to do? There is only
one quieting answer to such questions. It tells us that what we are
doing here is learning our trade, and that we are to be moved into
another workshop there, to practise it. Nothing can bereave us of the
force we made our own, being here; and 'there is nobler work for us
to do' when the Master of all the servants stoops from His Throne and
says: 'Thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things; have thou authority over ten cities.' Then
the faithfulness of the steward will be exchanged for the authority
of the ruler, and the toil of the servant for a share in the joy of
the Lord.

So another of the elements which make Death an enemy is turned into
an element which makes it a friend, and instead of the separation
from this earthly body, the organ of our activity and the medium of
our connection with the external universe being the condemnation of
the naked spirit to inaction, it is the emancipation of the spirit
into greater activity. For nothing drops away at death that does not
make a man the richer for its loss, and when the dross is purged from
the silver, there remains 'a vessel unto honour, fit for the Master's
use.' This mightier activity is the contribution to our blessedness,
which Death makes to them who use their activities here in Christ's
service.

Then, still further, another of the elements which is converted from
being a terror into a joy is that Death, the separator, becomes to
Christ's servants Death, the uniter. We all know how that function of
death is perhaps the one that makes us shrink from it the most, dread
it the most, and sometimes hate it the most. But it will be with us
as it was with those who were to be initiated into ancient religious
rites. Blindfolded, they were led by a hand that grasped theirs but
was not seen, through dark, narrow, devious passages, but they were
led into a great company in a mighty hall. Seen from this side, the
ministry of Death parts a man from dear ones, but, oh! if we could
see round the turn in the corridor, we should see that the solitude
is but for a moment, and that the true office of Death is not so much
to part from those beloved on earth as to carry to, and unite with,
Him that is best Beloved in the heavens, and in Him with all His
saints. They that are joined to Christ, as they who pass from earth
are joined, are thereby joined to all who, in like manner, are knit
to Him. Although other dear bonds are loosed by the bony fingers of
the Skeleton, his very loosing of them ties more closely the bond
that unites us to Jesus, and when the dull ear of the dying has
ceased to hear the voices of earth that used to thrill it in their
lowest whisper, I suppose it hears another Voice that says: 'When
thou passest through the fire I will be with thee, and through the
waters they shall not overflow thee.' Thus the Separator unites,
first to Jesus, and then to 'the general assembly and Church of the
first-born,' and leads into the city of the living God, the pilgrims
who long have lived, often isolated, in the desert.

There is a last element in Death which is changed for the Christian,
and that is that to men generally, when they think about it, there is
an instinctive recoil from Death, because there is an instinctive
suspicion that after Death is the Judgment, and that, somehow or
other--never mind about the drapery in which the idea may be embodied
for our weakness--when a man dies he passes to a state where he will
reap the consequences of what he has sown here. But to Christ's
servant that last thought is robbed of its sting, and all the poison
sucked out of it, for he can say: 'He that died for me makes it
possible for me to die undreading, and to pass thither, knowing that
I shall meet as my Judge Him whom I have trusted as my Saviour, and
so may have boldness before Him in the Day of Judgment.'

Knit these four contrasts together. Death as a step into a dim
unknown _versus_ Death as a step into a region lighted by Jesus;
Death as the cessation of activity _versus_ Death as the introduction
to nobler opportunities, and the endowment with nobler capacities of
service; Death as the separator and isolator _versus_ Death as
uniting to Jesus and all His lovers; Death as haling us to the
judgment-seat of the adversary _versus_ Death as bringing us to the
tribunal of the Christ; and I think we can understand how Christians
can venture to say, 'All things are ours, whether life or death'
which leads to a better life.

And now let me add one word more. All this that I have been saying,
and all the blessed strength for ourselves and calming in our sorrows
which result therefrom, stand or fall with the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ. There is nothing else that makes these things certain. There
are, of course, instincts, peradventures, hopes, fears, doubts. But
in this region, and in regard to all this cycle of truths, the same
thing applies which applies round the whole horizon of Christian
Revelation--if you want not speculations but certainties, you have to
go to Jesus Christ for them. There were many men who thought that
there were islands of the sea beyond the setting sun that dyed the
western waves, but Columbus went and came back again, and brought
their products--and then the thought became a fact. Unless you
believe that Jesus Christ has come back from 'the bourne from which
no traveller returns,' and has come laden with the gifts of 'happy
isles of Eden' far beyond the sea, there is no certitude upon which a
dying man can lay his head, or by which a bleeding heart can be
staunched. But when He draws near, alive from the dead, and says to
us, as He did to the disciples on the evening of the day of
Resurrection, 'Peace be unto you,' and shows us His hands and His
side, then we do not only speculate or think a future life possible
or probable, or hesitate to deny it, or hope or fear, as the case may
be, but we _know_, and we can say: 'All things are ours ... death'
amongst others. The fact that Jesus Christ has died changes the whole
aspect of death to His servant, inasmuch as in that great solitude he
has a companion, and in the valley of the shadow of death sees
footsteps that tell him of One that went before.

Nor need I do more than remind you how the manner of our Lord's death
shows that He is Lord not only of the dead but of the Death that
makes them dead. For His own tremendous assertion, 'I have power to
lay down My life, and I have power to take it again,' was confirmed
by His attitude and His words at the last, as is hinted at by the
very expressions with which the Evangelists record the fact of His
death: 'He yielded up His spirit,' 'He gave up the ghost,' 'He
breathed out His life.' It is confirmed to us by such words as those
remarkable ones of the Apocalypse, which speak of Him as 'the Living
One,' who, by His own will, 'became dead.' He died because He would,
and He would die because He loved you and me. And in dying, He showed
Himself to be, not the Victim, but the Conqueror, of the Death to
which He submitted. The Jewish king on the fatal field of Gilboa
called his sword-bearer, and the servant came, and Saul bade him
smite, and when his trembling hand shrank from such an act, the king
fell on his own sword. The Lord of life and death summoned His
servant Death, and He came obedient, but Jesus died not by Death's
stroke, but by His own act. So that Lord of Death, who died because
He would, is the Lord who has the keys of death and the grave. In
regard to one servant He says, 'I will that he tarry till I come,'
and that man lives through a century, and in regard to another He
says, 'Follow thou Me,' and that man dies on a cross. The dying Lord
is Lord of Death, and the living Lord is for us all the Prince of
Life.

Brethren, we have to take His yoke upon us by the act of faith which
leads to a love that issues in an obedience which will become more
and more complete, as we become more fully Christ's. Then death will
be ours, for then we shall count that the highest good for us will be
fuller union with, a fuller possession of, and a completer conformity
to, Jesus Christ our King, and that whatever brings us these, even
though it brings also pain and sorrow and much from which we shrink,
is all on our side. It is possible--may it be so with each of
us!--that for us Death may be, not an enemy that bans us into
darkness and inactivity, or hales us to a judgment-seat, but the
Angel who wakes us, at whose touch the chains fall off, and who leads
us through 'the iron gate that opens of its own accord,' and brings
us into the City.




SERVANTS AND LORDS

   'All things are yours; 22. Whether Paul, or Apollos,
   or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
   present, or things to come; all are yours; 23. And ye
   are Christ's.'--1 COR. iii. 21-23.


The Corinthian Christians seem to have carried into the Church some
of the worst vices of Greek--and English--political life. They were
split up into wrangling factions, each swearing by the name of some
person. Paul was the battle-cry of one set; Apollos of another. Paul
and Apollos were very good friends, their admirers bitter
foes--according to a very common experience. The springs lie close
together up in the hills, the rivers may be parted by half a
continent.

These feuds were all the more detestable to the Apostle because his
name was dragged into them; and so he sets himself, in the first part
of this letter, with all his might, to shame and to argue the
Corinthian Christians out of their wrangling. This great text is one
of the considerations which he adduces with that purpose. In effect
he says, 'To pin your faith to any one teacher is a wilful narrowing
of the sources of your blessing and your wisdom. You say you are
Paul's men. Has Apollos got nothing that he could teach you? and may
you not get any good out of brave brother Cephas? Take them all; they
were all meant for your good. Let no man glory in individuals.'

That is all that his argument required him to say. But in his
impetuous way he goes on into regions far beyond. His thought, like
some swiftly revolving wheel, catches fire of its own rapid motion;
and he blazes up into this triumphant enumeration of all the things
that serve the soul which serves Jesus Christ. 'You are lords of men,
of the world of time, of death, of eternity; but you are not lords of
yourselves. You belong to Jesus, and in the measure in which you
belong to Him do all things belong to you.'

I. I think, then, that I shall best bring out the fulness of these
words by simply following them as they lie before us, and asking
you to consider, first, how Christ's servants are men's lords.

'All things are yours, Paul, Apollos, Cephas.' These three teachers
were all lights kindled at the central Light, and therefore shining.
They were fragments of His wisdom, of Him that spoke; varying, but
yet harmonious, and mutually complementary aspects of the one
infinite Truth had been committed to them. Each was but a part of the
mighty whole, a little segment of the circle

  'They are but broken lights of Thee,
  And Thou, O Lord! art more than they.'

And in the measure, therefore, in which men adhere to Christ, and
have taken Him for theirs; in that measure are they delivered from
all undue dependence on, still more from all slavish submission to,
any single individual teacher or aspect of truth. To have Christ for
ours, and to be His, which are only the opposite sides of the same
thing, mean, in brief, to take Jesus Christ for the source of all
knowledge of moral and religious truth. His Word is the Christian's
creed, His Person and the truths that lie in Him, are the fountains
of all our knowledge of God and man. To be Christ's is to take Him as
the master who has absolute authority over conduct and practice. His
commandment is the Christian's duty; His pattern the Christian's
all-sufficient example; His smile the Christian's reward. To be
Christ's is to take Him for the home of our hearts, in whose gracious
and sweet love we find all sufficiency and a rest for our seeking
affections. And so, if ye are His, Paul, Apollos, Cephas, all men are
yours; in the sense that you are delivered from all undue dependence
upon them; and in the sense that they subserve your highest good.

So the true democracy of Christianity, which abjures swearing by the
words of any teacher, is simply the result of loyal adherence to the
teaching of Jesus Christ. And that proud independence which some of
you seek to cultivate, and on the strength of which you declare that
no man is your master upon earth, is an unwholesome and dangerous
independence, unless it be conjoined with the bowing down of the
whole nature, in loyal submission, to the absolute authority of the
only lips that ever spoke truth, truth only, and truth always. If
Christ be our Master, if we take our creed from Him, if we accept His
words and His revelation of the Father as our faith and our objective
religion, then all the slavery to favourite names, all the taking of
truth second-hand from the lips that we honour, all the partisanship
for one against another which has been the shame and the ruin of the
Christian Church, and is working untold mischiefs in it to-day, are
ended at once. 'One is your Master, even Christ.' 'Call no man Rabbi!
upon earth; but bow before Him, the Incarnate and the Personal
Truth.'

And in like manner they who are Christ's are delivered from all
temptations to make men's maxims and practices and approbation the
law of their conduct. Society presses upon each of us; what we call
public opinion, which is generally the clatter of the half-dozen
people that happen to stand nearest us, rules us; and it needs to be
said very emphatically to all Christian men and women--Take your law
of conduct from His lips, and from nobody else's.

'They say. What say they? Let them say.' If we take Christ's
commandment for our absolute law, and Christ's approbation for our
highest aim and all-sufficient reward, we shall then be able to brush
aside other maxims and other people's opinions of us, safely and
humbly, and to say, 'With me it is a very small matter to be judged
of you, or of man's judgment. He that judgeth me is the Lord.'

The envoy of some foreign power cares very little what the
inhabitants of the land to which he is ambassador may think of him
and his doings; it is his sovereign's good opinion that he seeks to
secure. The soldier's reward is his commander's praise, the slave's
joy is the master's smile, and for us it ought to be the law of our
lives, and in the measure in which we really belong to Christ it will
be the law of our lives, that 'we labour that, whether present or
absent, we may be pleasing to Him.'

So, brethren, as teachers, as patterns, as objects of love which is
only too apt to be exclusive and to master us, we can only take one
another in subordination to our supreme submission to Christ, and if
we are His, our duty, as our joy, is to count no man necessary to our
wellbeing, but to hang only on the one Man, whom it is safe and
blessed to believe utterly, to obey abjectly, and to love with all
our strength, because He is more than man, even God manifest in the
flesh.

II. And now let us pass to the next idea here, secondly, Christ's
servants are the lords of 'the world.'

That phrase is used here, no doubt, as meaning the external material
universe. These creatures around us, they belong to us, if we belong
to Jesus Christ. That man owns the world who despises it. There are
plenty of rich men in Manchester who say they possess so many
thousand pounds. Turn the sentence about and it would be a great deal
truer--the thousands of pounds possess them. They are the slaves of
their own possessions, and every man who counts any material thing as
indispensable to his wellbeing, and regards it as the chiefest good,
is the slave-servant of that thing. He owns the world who turns it to
the highest use of growing his soul by it. All material things are
given, and, I was going to say, were created, for the growth of men,
or at all events their highest purpose is that men should, by them,
grow. And therefore, as the scaffolding is swept away when the
building is finished, so God will sweep away this material universe
with all its wonders of beauty and of contrivance, when men have been
grown by means of it. The material is less than the soul, and he is
master of the world, and owns it, who has got thoughts out of it,
truth out of it, impulses out of it, visions of God out of it, who
has by it been led nearer to his divine Master. If I look out upon a
fair landscape, and the man who draws the rents of it is standing by
my side, and I suck more sweetness, and deeper impulses, and larger
and loftier thoughts out of it than he does, it belongs to me far
more than it does to him. The world is his who from it has learned to
despise it, to know himself and to know God. He owns the world who
uses it as the arena, or wrestling ground, on which, by labour, he
may gain strength, and in which he may do service. Antagonism helps
to develop muscle, and the best use of the outward frame of things is
that we shall take it as the field upon which we can serve God.

And now all these three things--the contempt of earth, the use of
earth for growing souls, and the use of earth as the field of
service--all these things belong most truly to the man who belongs to
Christ. The world is His, and if we live near Him and cultivate
fellowship with Him, and see His face gleaming through all the
Material, and are led up nearer to Him by everything around us, then
we own the world and wring the sweetness to the last drop out of it,
though we may have but little of that outward relation to its goods
which short-sighted men call possessing them. We may solve the
paradox of those who, 'having nothing, yet have all,' if we belong to
Christ the Lord of all things, and so have co-possession with Him of
all His riches.

III. Further, my text tells us, in the third place, that Christian
men, who belong to Jesus Christ, are the lords and masters of 'life
and death.'

Both of these words are here used, as it seems to me, in their
simple, physical sense, natural life and natural death. You may say,
'Well, everybody is lord of life in that sense.' Yes, of course, in a
fashion we all possess it, seeing that we are all alive. But that
mysterious gift of personality, that awful gift of conscious
existence, only belongs, in the deepest sense, to the men who belong
to Jesus Christ. I do not call that man the owner of his own life who
is not the lord of his own spirit. I do not see in what, except in
the mere animal sense in which a fly, or a spider, or a toad may be
called the master of its life, that man owns himself who has not
given up himself to Jesus Christ. The only way to get a real hold of
yourselves is to yield yourselves to Him who gives you back Himself,
and yourself along with Him. The true ownership of life depends upon
self-control, and self-control depends upon letting Jesus Christ
govern us wholly. So the measure in which it is true of me that 'I
live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me,' is the measure in which
the lower life of sense really belongs to us, and ministers to our
highest good.

And then turn to the other member of this wonderful antithesis,
'whether life or _death_.' Surely if there is anything over which no
man can become lord, except by sinfully taking his fate into his own
hands, it is death. And yet even death, in which we seem to be
abjectly passive, and by which so many of us are dragged away
reluctantly from everything that we care to possess, may become a
matter of consent and therefore a moral act. Animals expire; a
Christian man may yield his soul to his Saviour, who is the Lord both
of the dead and of the living. If thus we feel our dependence upon
Him, and yield up our lives to Him, and can say, 'Living or dying we
are the Lord's,' then we may be quite sure that death, too, will be
our servant, and that our wills will be concerned even in passing out
of life.

Still more, if you and I, dear brethren, belong to Jesus Christ, then
death is our fellow-servant who comes to call us out of this
ill-lighted workshop into the presence of the King. And at His magic
cold touch, cares and toils and sorrows are stiffened into silence,
like noisy streams bound in white frost; and we are lifted clean up
out of all the hubbub and the toil into eternal calm. Death is ours
because it fulfils our deepest desires, and comes as a messenger to
paupers to tell them they have a great estate. Death is ours if we be
Christ's.

IV. And lastly, Christ's servants are the lords of time and eternity,
'things present or things to come.'

Our Apostle's division, in this catalogue of his, is rhetorical
rather than logical; and we need not seek to separate the first of
this final pair from others which we have already encountered in our
study of the words, but still we may draw a distinction. The whole
mass of 'things present,' including not only that material universe
which we call the world, but all the events and circumstances of our
lives, over these we may exercise supreme control. If we are bowing
in humble submission to Jesus Christ, they will all subserve our
highest good. Every weather will be right; night and day equally
desirable; the darkness will be good for eyes that have been tired of
brightness and that need repose, the light will be good. The howling
tempests of winter and its white snows, the sharp winds of spring and
its bursting sunshine; the calm steady heat of June and the mellowing
days of August, all serve to ripen the grain. And so all 'things
present,' the light and the dark, the hopes fulfilled and the hopes
disappointed, the gains and the losses, the prayers answered and the
prayers unanswered, they will all be recognised, if we have the
wisdom that comes from submission to Jesus Christ's will, as being
ours and ministering to our highest blessing.

We shall be their lords too inasmuch as we shall be able to control
them. We need not be 'anvils but hammers.' We need not let outward
circumstances dominate and tyrannise over us. We need not be like the
mosses in the stream, that lie whichever way the current sets, nor
like some poor little sailing boat that is at the mercy of the winds
and the waves, but may carry an inward impulse like some great
ocean-going steamer, the throb of whose power shall drive us straight
forward on our course, whatever beats against us. That we may have
this inward power and mastery over things present, and not be shaped
and moulded and made by them, let us yield ourselves to Christ, and
He will help us to rule them.

And then, all 'things to come,' the dim, vague future, shall be for
each of us like some sunlit ocean stretching shoreless to the
horizon; every little ripple flashing with its own bright sunshine,
and all bearing us onwards to the great Throne that stands on the sea
of glass mingled with fire.

Then, my brother, ask yourselves what your future is if you have not
Christ for your Friend.

  'I backward cast mine eye
    On prospects drear;
  And forward though I cannot see,
    I guess and fear.'

So I beseech you, yield yourselves to Jesus Christ, He died to win
us. He bears our sins that they may be all forgiven. If we give
ourselves to Him who has given Himself to us, then we shall be lords
of men, of the world, of life and death, of time and eternity.

In the old days conquerors used to bestow upon their followers lands
and broad dominions on condition of their doing suit and service, and
bringing homage to them. Christ, the King of the universe, makes His
subjects kings, and will give us to share in His dominion, so that to
each of us may be fulfilled that boundless and almost unbelievable
promise: 'He that overcometh shall inherit all things.' 'All are
yours if ye are Christ's.'




THE THREE TRIBUNALS

   'But with me it is a very small thing that I should be
   judged of you, or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not
   mine own self. 4. For I know nothing by myself; yet am
   I not hereby justified; but he that judgeth me is the
   Lord.'--1 COR. iv. 3, 4.


The Church at Corinth was honeycombed by the characteristic Greek
vice of party spirit. The three great teachers, Paul, Peter, Apollos,
were pitted against each other, and each was unduly exalted by those
who swore by him, and unduly depreciated by the other two factions.
But the men whose names were the war-cries of these sections were
themselves knit in closest friendship, and felt themselves to be
servants in common of one Master, and fellow-workers in one task.

So Paul, in the immediate context, associating Peter and Apollos with
himself, bids the Corinthians think of '_us_' as being servants
of Christ, and not therefore responsible to men; and as stewards of
the mysteries of God, that is, dispensers of truths long hidden but
now revealed, and as therefore accountable for correct accounts and
faithful dispensation only to the Lord of the household. Being
responsible to Him, they heeded very little what others thought about
them. Being responsible to Him, they could not accept vindication
by their own consciences as being final. There was a judgment beyond
these.

So here we have three tribunals--that of man's estimates, that of our
own consciences, that of Jesus Christ. An appeal lies from the first
to the second, and from the second to the third. It is base to depend
on men's judgments; it is well to attend to the decisions of
conscience, but it is not well to take it for granted that, if
conscience approve, we are absolved. The court of final appeal is
Jesus Christ, and what He thinks about each of us. So let us look
briefly at these three tribunals.

I. First, the lowest--men's judgment.

'With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you,'
enlightened Christians that you are, or by the outside world. Now,
Paul's letters give ample evidence that he was keenly alive to the
hostile and malevolent criticisms and slanders of his untiring
opponents. Many a flash of sarcasm out of the cloud like a lightning
bolt, many a burst of wounded affection like rain from summer skies,
tell us this. But I need not quote these. Such a character as his
could not but be quick to feel the surrounding atmosphere, whether it
was of love or of suspicion. So, he had to harden himself against
what naturally had a great effect upon him, the estimate which he
felt that people round him were making of him. There was nothing
brusque, rough, contemptuous in his brushing aside these popular
judgments. He gave them all due weight, and yet he felt, 'From all
that this lowest tribunal may decide, there are two appeals, one to
my own conscience, and one to my Master in heaven.'

Now, I suppose I need not say a word about the power which that
terrible court which is always sitting, and which passes judgment
upon every one of us, though we do not always hear the sentences
read, has upon us all. There is a power which it is meant to have. It
is not good for a man to stand constantly in the attitude of defying
whatever anybody else chooses to say or to think about him. But the
danger to which we are all exposed, far more than that other extreme,
is of deferring too completely and slavishly to, and being far too
subtly influenced in all that we do by, the thought of what A, B, or
C, may have to say or to think about it. 'The last infirmity of noble
minds,' says Milton about the love of fame. It is an infirmity to
love it, and long for it, and live by it. It is a weakening of
