     the Paschal Candle was not in use, at any rate in Rome, in the
     pontificate of Zacharias (_ob._ 752 A.D.) point in this direction.
     In the Spanish Church particularly the very ancient custom of
     praying at the hour when the evening lamps were lighted had developed
     into the regular office of the _lucernarium_, as distinct from
     Vespers. The Mozarabic Breviary (seventh century) contains the
     prayers and responses for this service, and the Rule of St. Isidore
     runs: "In the evening offices, first the lucernarium, then two
     psalms, one responsory and lauds, a hymn and prayer are to be
     said." St. Basil also writes: "It seemed good to our fathers not
     to receive in silence the gift of the evening light, but to give
     thanks as soon as it appeared." It is probable, therefore, that
     Prudentius intended the hymn for daily use, and that after speaking
     of God as the source of light, and His manifestations in the form
     of fire to Moses and the Israelites, his thoughts pass naturally,
     though somewhat abruptly, to the special festival--Easter Eve--on
     which the sanctuaries were most brilliantly illuminated. The
     question is fully discussed by Brockhaus (_A. Prudentius Clemens
     in seiner Bedeutung fuer die Kirche seiner Zeit_), and Roesler (_Der
     catholische Dichter A. Prudentius_). Part of this hymn is used in
     the Mozarabic Breviary for the First Sunday after Epiphany, at
     Vespers, being stanzas 1, 7, 35, 38-41.

7     The words _incussu silicis_ are perhaps reminiscent of the Spanish
     ceremonial of Easter Eve, when the bishop struck the flint, lighting
     from it first a candle, then a lamp, from which the deacons lighted
     their candles; these were blessed by the bishop, and the procession
     from the _processus_ into the church followed.

21     Cf. Vaughan, _The Lampe_:--

                    "Then thou dost weepe
          Still as thou burn'st, and the warm droppings creepe
          To measure out thy length."

119     The _folium_ here is probably the ancient _malobathrum_, generally
     identified as the Indian cinnamon. The Arab traders who brought this
     valuable product into the Western markets, surrounded its origin with
     much mystery.

125     The following stanzas, in which Prudentius elaborates the
     beautiful fancy that the sufferings of lost spirits are alleviated
     at Eastertide, have incurred the severe censure of some of the
     earlier editors. Fabricius calls it "a Spanish fabrication," while
     others, as Cardinal Bellarmine, declare that the author is speaking
     "poetically and not dogmatically." That such a belief, however, was
     actually held by some section of the ancient Church is evident from
     the words of St. Augustine (_Encheiridion_, c. 112): _Paenas
     damnatorum certis temporum intervallis existiment, si hoc eis placet,
     aliquatenus mitigari, dummodo intelligatur in eis manere ira Dei, hoc
     est ipsa damnatio._ "Let men believe, if it so please them, that at
     certain intervals the pains of the damned are somewhat alleviated,
     provided that it be understood that the wrath of God, that is
     damnation itself, abides upon them."

140     It is somewhat startling to find Prudentius speaking of the Holy
     Eucharist in terms which would recall to his contemporary readers
     Virgilian phraseology and the honeyed cake (_liba_) used in pagan
     sacrifice. It must be remembered, however, that in the early days of
     the Church paganism and Christianity flourished side by side for a
     considerable period; and we find various pagan practices allowed
     to continue, where they were innocent. Thus the bride-cake and the
     bridal-veil are of heathen origin; the mirth of the Saturnalia
     survives, in a modified form, in some of the rejoicings of Christmas;
     and the flowers, which had filled the pagan temples during the
     Floralia, were employed to adorn God's House at the Easter festival.

141     The brilliant illumination of churches on Easter Eve is very
     ancient. According to Eusebius, Constantine "turned the mystical
     vigil into the light of day by means of lamps suspended in every
     part, setting up also great waxen tapers, as large as columns,
     throughout the city." Gregory of Nyssa also speaks of "the cloud
     of fire mingling with the rays of the rising sun, and making the eve
     and the festival one continuous day without interval of darkness."

153     Cf. _Paradise Lost_, iii. 51:--

          "So much the rather thou, Celestial Light,
          Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
          Irradiate."


                                 VI

     The last seven stanzas of this hymn are used in the Moz. Brev. at
     Compline on Passion Sunday, and daily until Maundy Thursday.

56     Cf. Job. vii. 14: "Then Thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest
     me through visions."

95     In the translation of this stanza the explanation of Nebrissensis
     is adopted, an early editor of Prudentius (1512) and one of the
     leaders of the Renaissance in Spain. He considers that "the few of
     the impious who are condemned to eternal death" are the incurable
     sinners, _immedicabiles_. Others attempt to reconcile these words
     with the general belief of the early Church by maintaining that
     _non pii_ is not equivalent to _impii_, but rather refers to the
     class that is neither decidedly good nor definitely bad, and that
     the mercy of God is extended to the majority of these. A third view
     is that the poet is speaking relatively, and means that few are
     condemned in proportion to the number that deserve condemnation.
     In whatever way the words are explained, it is interesting to find
     an advocate of "the larger hope" in the fourth century.

105     Cf. Rev. xvii. 8: "The beast that thou sawest was, and is not;
     and is about to come up out of the abyss, and to go into perdition."

109     Cf. 2 Thess. ii. 4: "The son of perdition, who opposeth and
     exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped;
     so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that
     he is God."

127     The phrase _rorem subisse sacrum_ would suggest baptism by
     sprinkling, except that Prudentius uses the word loosely elsewhere.
     Immersion was undoubtedly the general practice of the early Church,
     "clinical" baptism being allowed only in cases of necessity.

128     The anointing with oil showed that the catechumen was enrolled
     among the spiritual priesthood, and with the unction was joined the
     sign of the Cross on the forehead.



                                VII

1     This entire hymn is used in the Moz. Brev., divided into fifteen
     portions for use during Lent.

27     The word _sacerdos_ here, as in ix. 4, is used in the sense of
     "prophet"; but in both passages there is some idea of the exercise
     of priestly functions. Elijah may be called "priest" from his having
     offered sacrifice on Mount Carmel, and David from his wearing the
     priestly ephod as he danced before the Ark.

69     The old editors discuss these lines with much gravity, and mostly
     come to the conclusion that "locusts" were "a kind of bird, of
     the length of a finger, with quick, short flight"; while the "wild
     honey" was not actual honey at all, but "the tender leaves of
     certain trees, which, when crushed by the fingers, had the pleasant
     savour of honey."

76     A gloss on one of the Vat. MSS. adds: "This is not authorised; for
     John merely baptized with water, and not in the name of the Father,
     Son and Holy Ghost; therefore his baptism was of no avail, save that
     it prepared the way for Christ to baptize." Many of the Fathers,
     however, while expressly affirming that John's baptism differed
     from that of Christ, allowed that the stains of sin were washed
     away by the former. St. Chrysostom draws this distinction: "There
     was in John's baptism pardon, but not without repentance; remission
     of sins, but only attained by grief."

100     The story of Jonah, as a type of the Resurrection, is one of the
     most frequent subjects of the frescoes of the Catacombs. In one very
     ancient picture, a man in a small boat is depicted in the act of
     placing the prophet in the very jaws of the whale.

115     Two stanzas are omitted in the text, which depict the sufferings
     of Jonah with a wealth of detail not in accordance with modern
     taste. For the sake of giving a complete text, we append them here:--

          "_Transmissa raptim praeda cassos dentium
          eludit ictus incruentam transvolans
          inpune linguam, ne retentam mordicus
          offam molares dissecarent uvidi,
          os omne transit et palatum praeterit._

          _Ternis dierum ac noctium processibus
          mansit ferino devoratus gutture,
          errabat illic per latebras viscerum,
          ventris recessus circumibat tortiles
          anhelus extis intus aestuantibus._"

194     Prudentius appears to have believed that the mystery of the
     Incarnation was concealed from Satan, and that the Temptation
     was an endeavour to ascertain whether Jesus was the Son of God
     or no. Cf. Milton, _Par. Reg._ i.:--

          "Who this is we must learn, for Man he seems
          In all his lineaments, though in his face
          The glimpses of his Father's glory shine."



                                VIII

9     The day of twelve hours appears to have been adopted by the
     Romans about B.C. 291. Ambrose (_de virginibus_, iii. 4), commenting
     on Ps. cxix. and the words "Seven times a day do I praise thee,"
     declares that prayers are to be offered up with thanksgiving when
     we rise from sleep, when we go forth, when we prepare to take food,
     when we have taken it, at the hour of incense, and lastly, when we
     retire to rest. He probably alludes to private prayer. The stanza
     here indicates that the second hour after midday has arrived, when
     the fasting ended and the midday meal was taken.

14     The word _festum_, as in vii. 4, indicates a special fast day.
     Until the sixth century, fasting was simply a penitential discipline
     and was not used as a particular mode of penance. In the fourth
     century it was a fairly common practice as a preparation for Holy
     Communion. Fasting before Baptism was a much earlier practice.
     The stated fasts of the Western Church were (1) _annual_, that
     is, ante-paschal or Lent; (2) _monthly_, or the fasts of the four
     seasons in the 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th months; (3) _weekly_, on
     Wednesday and Friday. There was also the fast of the Rogations and
     the Vigils or Eves of holy days. It is doubtful whether all these
     were in vogue as early as Prudentius.

33     This passage on the Shepherd reminds us of one of the most common
     pictorial representations of the Catacombs. Christian art owed
     something to paganism in this matter; ancient sculptures represent
     the god Pan with a goat thrown across his shoulders and a Pan's
     pipe in his hand; while the poets Calpurnius and Tibullus both
     refer to the custom of carrying a stray or neglected lamb on the
     shoulders of the shepherd. Going further back, the figure is common
     in the O. T. to express God's care over His people. Our Lord
     therefore used for His own purpose and transfigured with new
     meaning a familiar figure. The gradual transition from paganism
     to Christianity is curiously illustrated by the fact that in several
     of the Catacomb bas-reliefs and paintings the Good Shepherd holds in
     His outstretched hand a Pan's pipe. See Maitland's _Church in the
     Catacombs_, p. 315, for a woodcut of the Good Shepherd with a lamb
     over His shoulders, two sheep at His feet, a palm tree (or poplar)
     on either side, and a Pan's pipe in His right hand; and also the
     frontispiece for a reproduction from the Cemetery of St. Peter and
     St. Marcellinus.


                                 IX

1     This hymn, which first introduced into sacred song the trochaic
     metre familiar in Greek Tragedy and the Latin adaptations of it,
     supplies the Moz. Brev. with some stanzas for use during Holy Week.
     The lines selected are 22-24, 1-21.

11     The use of the symbol _O_, (pronounced here as a single
     syllable), appears to indicate that the names Omega and Omikron
     came into use at a later date than Prudentius' time. In Rev. i. 8,
     the best MSS. read _ego eimi to alpha kai to o_.

33     The words _vulnerum piamina_ are generally supposed to refer to
     the "gifts which Moses commanded" to be offered by those healed of
     leprosy (Lev. xiv. 2). If so, Prudentius' language may imply that
     the cure was not actually complete until the offering of these gifts,
     and is at variance with St. Matthew, viii. 43, "and forthwith his
     leprosy was cleansed." Probably, however, his idea is rather that
     the gifts to the priest formally marked the leper as a clean man.

71     Cf. note on iii. 199.


                                 X

1     Parts of this hymn are used in the Moz. Brev. in the Office of the
     Dead, being ll. 1-16, 45-48, 57-68, 157-168.

     The burial rites of the primitive Church were simple, and marked by
     an absence of the ostentatious expression of grief which the pagan
     peoples displayed. The general practice of cremation was rejected,
     partly owing to the new belief in the resurrection of the body, and
     partly from a desire to imitate the burial of the Lord. At Rome,
     during the first three centuries, the dead were laid in the
     Catacombs, in which Prudentius took conspicuous interest (see
     Translator's Note), but after 338 A.D. this practice became less
     frequent, and was completely abandoned after 410 A.D. Elsewhere,
     from the earliest times, the Christians purchased special enclosures
     (_areae_), which were often attacked and rifled by angry mobs in the
     days of persecution. The body was frequently embalmed (_cf._ ll. 51,
     52), swathed in white linen (l. 49), and placed in a coffin; vigils
     and hymns continued for three or four days, but hired mourners were
     forbidden (l. 113), and instead of the dirges of the heathens,
     chants expressive of triumphant faith were sung as the body was
     carried to the grave, where a simple service was held, and evergreens
     and flowers were strewn about the tomb (ll. 169, 170). The earliest
     inscriptions are often roughly scratched on plaster, and consist
     merely of a name and age, or simple words like--

          GEMELLA DORMIT IN PACE

     but later (cf. l. 171), they were engraved on small marble slabs.

25     In both thought and language this stanza, as vii. 16 _et seq._, is
     evidently reminiscent of Horace (_Sat._ 2, ii. 77): _Quin corpus
     onustum_, etc.

          "The Body, too, with Yesterday's excess
          Burthened and tired, shall the pure Soul depress,
          Weigh down this Portion of celestial Birth,
          This Breath of God, and fix it to the Earth."
                        (Francis).

51     Boldetti, in his work on the Catacombs (lib. i. cap. 59), says
     that on many occasions, when he was present at the opening of a
     grave, the assembled company were conscious of a spicy odour
     diffusing itself from the tomb. Cf. Tertullian (_Apol._ 42): "The
     Arabs and Sabaeans knew well that we consume more of their precious
     merchandise for our dead than do the heathen for their gods."

57     Prudentius' firm faith in the resurrection of the body is also
     nobly expressed in the _Apotheosis_ (ll. 1063 _et seq._):--

          "_Nosco meum in Christo corpus resurgere; quid me
          Desperare iubes? veniam, quibus ille revenit
          Calcata de morte viis: quod credimus hoc est._

            *       *       *       *       *

          _Pellite corde metum, mea membra, et credite vosmet
          Cum Christo reditura Deo; nam vos gerit ille
          Et secum revocat: morbos ridete minaces:
          Inflictos casus contemnite; tetra sepulcra
          Despuite; exsurgens quo Christus provocat, ite._"

                         _Translation._
