 world passeth away" in us. The feelings we have now are not those
 which we had in childhood. There has passed away a glory from the
 earth--the stars, the sun, the moon, the green fields have lost their
 beauty and significance--nothing remains as it was, except their
 repeated impressions on the mind, the impressions of time, space,
 eternity, colour, form; these cannot alter, but all besides has
 changed. Our very minds alter. There is no bereavement so painful, no
 shock so terrible, but time will remove or alleviate. The keenest
 feeling in this world time wears out at last, and our minds become
 like old monumental tablets which have lost the inscription once
 graven deeply upon them.

 In conclusion, we have to examine the nature of this Christian
 unworldliness which is taught us in the text. The principle of
 unworldliness is stated in the latter portion of the text; in the
 former part the apostle makes an application of the principle to four
 cases of life. First, to cases of domestic relationship--"it remaineth
 that they that have wives be as though they had none." Secondly, to
 cases of sorrow--"and they that weep as though they wept not."
 Thirdly, to cases of joy--"and they that rejoice as though they
 rejoiced not." And, finally to cases of the acquisition of worldly
 property, "and they that buy as though they possessed not." Time will
 not allow us to go into these applications; we must confine ourselves
 to a brief consideration of the principle. The principle of Christian
 unworldliness, then is this, to "use this world as not abusing it."
 Here Christianity takes its stand, in opposition to two contrary
 principles. The spirit of the world says, "Time is short, therefore
 use it while you have it; take your fill of pleasure while you may." A
 narrow religion says, "Time is short, therefore temporal things should
 receive no attention: do not weep, do not rejoice; it is beneath a
 Christian." In opposition to the narrow spirit of religion,
 Christianity says, "_Use_ this world;"--in opposition to the spirit of
 the world Christianity says, "Do not _abuse_ it." A distinct duty
 arises from this principle to use the world. While in the world we are
 citizens of the world: it is our _duty_ to share its joys, to take our
 part in its sorrows, not to shrink from its difficulties, but to mix
 ourselves with its infinite opportunities. So that if time be short,
 so far from that fact lessening their dignity or importance, it
 infinitely increases them; since upon these depend the destinies of
 our eternal being. Unworldliness is this--to hold things from God in
 the perpetual conviction that they will not last; to have the world,
 and not to let the world have us; to be the world's masters, and not
 the world's slaves.




 XV.

 _Preached January 11, 1852._

 THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH A FAMILY.


   "Our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and
    earth is named."--Ephesians iii. 14, 15.

 In the verses immediately before the text the Apostle Paul has been
 speaking of what he calls a mystery--that is, a revealed secret. And
 the secret was this, that the Gentiles would be "fellow-heirs and of
 the same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ by the gospel."
 It had been kept secret from the former ages and generations; it was a
 secret which the Jew had not suspected, had not even dreamt of. It
 appeared to him to be his duty to keep as far as possible from the
 Gentile. Circumcision, which taught him the duty of separation from
 the Gentile spirit, and Gentile practices, seemed to him to teach
 hatred towards Gentile _persons_, until at length, in the good
 pleasure and providence of God, in the fulness of time, through the
 instrumentality of men whose _hearts_ rather than whose intellects
 were inspired by God, the truth came out distinct and clear, that God
 was the Father of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews, "for the same
 Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon Him."

 In the progress of the months, my Christian brethren, we have arrived
 again at that period of the year in which our Church calls upon us to
 commemorate the Epiphany, or manifestation of Jesus Christ to the
 Gentiles, and we know not that in the whole range of Scripture we
 could find a passage which more distinctly and definitely than this,
 brings before us the spirit in which it is incumbent upon us to enter
 upon this duty. In considering this passage we shall divide it into
 these two branches:--1st, the definition which the Apostle Paul here
 gives of the Church of Christ; and, 2ndly, the Name by which this
 Church is named.


 I. In the first place, let us consider the definition given by the
 Apostle Paul of the Christian Church, taken in its entirety. It is
 this, "the whole family in heaven and earth." But in order to
 understand this fully, it will be necessary for us to break it up into
 its different terms.

 1. First of all it is taught by this definition that the Church of
 Christ is a society founded upon natural affinities--a "family." A
 family is built on affinities which are natural, not artificial; it is
 not a combination, but a society. In ancient times an association of
 interest combined men in one guild or corporation for protecting the
 common persons in that corporation from oppression. In modern times
 identity of political creed or opinion has bound men together in one
 league, in order to establish those political principles which
 appeared to them of importance. Similarity of taste has united men
 together in what is called an association, or a society, in order by
 this means to attain more completely the ends of that science to which
 they had devoted themselves. But as these have been raised
 artificially, so their end is inevitably, dissolution. Society passes
 on, and guilds and corporations die; principles are established, and
 leagues become dissolved; tastes change, and then the association or
 society breaks up and comes to nothing.

 It is upon another principle altogether that that which we call a
 family, or true society, is formed. It is not built upon similarity of
 taste, nor identity of opinion, but upon affinities of nature. You do
 not _choose_ who shall be your brother; you cannot exclude your mother
 or your sister; it does not depend upon choice or arbitrary opinion at
 all, but is founded upon the eternal nature of things. And precisely
 in the same way is the Christian Church formed--upon natural affinity,
 and not upon artificial combination. "The family, the whole family in
 heaven and earth;" not made up of those who _call_ themselves
 brethren, but of those who _are_ brethren; not founded merely upon the
 principles of combination, but upon the principles of affinity. That
 is not a church, or a family, or a society which is made up by men's
 choice, as when in the upper classes of life, men of fashion unite
 together, selecting their associates from their own _class_, and form
 what is technically called a society; it is a combination if you will,
 but a society it is not--a family it is not--a Church of Christ it
 cannot be.

 And, again, when the Baptists or the Independents, or any other
 sectarians, unite themselves with men holding the same faith and
 entertaining the same opinions, there may be a _sect_, a
 _combination_, a _persuasion_, but a _Church_ there cannot be. And so
 again, when the Jew in time past linked himself with the Jew, with
 those of the same nation, there you have what in ancient times was
 called Judaism, and in modern times is called Hebraicism--a system, a
 combination, but not a Church. The Church rises ever out of the
 family. First of all in the good providence of God, there is the
 family, then the tribe, then the nation; and then the nation merges
 itself into Humanity. And the nation which refuses to merge its
 nationality in Humanity, to lose itself in the general interests of
 mankind, is left behind, and loses almost its religious
 nationality--like the Jewish people.

 Such is the first principle. A man is born of the same family, and is
 not made such by an appointment, or by arbitrary choice.

 2. Another thing which is taught by this definition is this, that the
 Church of Christ is a whole made up of manifold diversities. We are
 told here it is "the _whole_ family," taking into it the great and
 good of ages past, now in heaven; and also the struggling, the
 humble, and the weak now existing upon earth. Here again, the analogy
 holds good between the Church and the family. Never more than in the
 family is the true entirety of our nature seen. Observe how all the
 diversities of human condition and character manifest themselves in
 the family.

 First of all, there are the two opposite poles of masculine and
 feminine, which contain within them the entire of our Humanity--which
 together, not separately, make up the whole of man. Then there are the
 diversities in the degrees and kinds of affection. For when we speak
 of family affection, we must remember that it is made up of many
 diversities. There is nothing more different than the love which the
 sister bears towards the brother, compared with that which the brother
 bears towards the sister. The affection which a man bears towards his
 father is quite distinct from that which he feels towards his mother;
 it is something quite different towards his sister; totally diverse
 again, towards his brother.

 And then there are diversities of character. First the mature wisdom
 and stern integrity of the father; then the exuberant tenderness of
 the mother. And then one is brave and enthusiastic, another
 thoughtful, and another tender. One is remarkable for being full of
 rich humour, another is sad, mournful, even melancholy. Again, besides
 these, there are diversities of condition in life. First, there is the
 heir, sustaining the name and honour of the family; then perchance the
 soldier, in whose career all the anxiety and solicitude of the family
 is centred; then the man of business, to whom they look up, trusting
 his advice, expecting his counsel; lastly perhaps, there is the
 invalid, from the very cradle trembling between life and death,
 drawing out all the sympathies and anxieties of each member of the
 family, and so uniting them all more closely, from their having one
 common point of sympathy and solicitude. Now, you will observe that
 these are not accidental, but absolutely essential to the idea of a
 family; for so far as any one of them is lost, so far the family is
 incomplete. A family made up of one sex alone, all brothers and no
 sisters; or in which all are devoted to one pursuit; or in which there
 is no diversity of temper and dispositions--the same monotonous
 repeated identity--a sameness in the type of character--this is not a
 family, it is only the fragment of a family.

 And precisely in the same way all these diversities of character and
 condition are necessary to constitute and complete the idea of a
 Christian Church. For as in ages past it was the delight of the Church
 to canonize one particular class of virtues--as for instance, purity
 or martyrdom--so now, in every age, and in every individual bosom,
 there is a tendency to canonize, or honour, or reckon as Christian,
 only one or two classes of Christian qualities. For example, if you
 were to ask in the present day where you should find a type of the
 Christian character, many in all probability would point you to the
 man who keeps the Sabbath-day, is regular in his attendance upon the
 services of the Church, who loves to hear the Christian sermon. This
 is a phase of Christian character--that which is essentially and
 peculiarly the _feminine_ type of religion. But is there in God's
 Church to be found no place for that type which is rather masculine
 than feminine?--which, not in litanies or in psalm-singing does the
 will of God, but by struggling for principles, and contending for the
 truth--_that_ life, whose prayer is action, whose aspiration is
 continual effort?

 Or again, in every age, amongst all men, in the history of almost
 every individual, at one time or another, there has been a tendency
 towards that which has been emphatically named in modern times
 _hero-worship_--leading us to an admiration of the more singular,
 powerful, noble qualities of humanity. And wherever this tendency to
 hero-worship exists there will be found side by side with it a
 tendency to undervalue and depreciate excellences of an opposite
 character--the humble, meek, retiring qualities. But it is precisely
 for these that the Church of Christ finds place. "Blessed are the
 meek, blessed are the merciful, blessed are they that hunger and
 thirst after righteousness, blessed are the poor in spirit." In God's
 world there is a place for the wren and the violet, just as truly as
 there is for the eagle and the rose. In the Church of God there is a
 place--and that the noblest--for Dorcas making garments for the poor,
 and for Mary sitting at the feet of Jesus, just as truly as there is
 for Elijah confounding a false religion by his noble opposition; for
 John the Baptist making a king tremble on his throne; or for the
 Apostle Paul "compassing sea and land" by his wisdom and his heroic
 deeds.

 Once more, there are ages, as well as times in our own individual
 experience, when we set up charity as if it were the one only
 Christian character. And wherever this tendency is found there will be
 found at the same time, and side by side with it, a tendency to admire
 the spurious form of charity, which is a sentiment and not a virtue;
 which can sympathize with crime, but not with law; which can be tender
 to savages, but has no respect, no care for national honour. And
 therefore, does this principle of the Apostle Paul call upon us to
 esteem also another form or type of character, and the opposite one;
 that which is remarkable for--in which predominates--not so much
 charity as _justice_; that which was seen in the warriors and prophets
 of old; who perchance, had a more strong recoil from vice than
 sympathy with virtue; whose indignation towards that which is wrong
 and hypocritical was more intense than their love for that which is
 good: the material, the character, out of which the reformer and the
 prophet, those who are called to do great works on earth, are made.

 The Church of Christ takes not in one individual form of goodness
 merely, but every form of excellence that can adorn Humanity. Nor is
 this wonderful when we remember Who He was from whom this Church was
 named. It was He in whom centred all excellence--a righteousness
 which was entire and perfect. But when we speak of the perfection of
 righteousness, let us remember that it is made not of one exaggerated
 character, but of a true harmony, a due proportion of all virtues
 united. In Him were found therefore, that tenderness towards sinners
 which had no sympathy with sin; that humility which could be
 dignified, and was yet united with self-respect; that simplicity which
 is ever to be met with, side by side with true majesty; that love
 which could weep over Jerusalem at the very moment when He was
 pronouncing its doom, that truth and justice which appeared to stand
 as a protection to those who had been oppressed, at the same time that
 He scathed with indignant invective the Pharisees of the then existing
 Jews.

 There are two, only two, _perfect_ Humanities. One has existed already
 in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, the other is to be found only
 in the collective Church. Once, only once, has God given a perfect
 representation of Himself, "the brightness of the Father's glory, and
 the express image of His person." And if we ask again for a perfect
 Humanity, the answer is, it is not in this Church or in that Church,
 or in this man or in that man, in this age or in that age, but in the
 collective blended graces and beauties, and humanities, which are
 found in every age, in all churches, but not in every separate man.
 So, at least, Paul has taught us, "Till we _all_ come"--_collectively_
 not separately--"in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
 the Son of God, unto a perfect man"--in other words, to a perfect
 _Humanity_--"unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of
 Christ."

 3. The last thing which is taught us by this definition is, that the
 Church of Christ is a society which is for ever shifting its locality,
 and altering its forms. It is the _whole_ church, "the _whole_ family
 in heaven and earth." So then, those who were on earth, and are now in
 heaven, are yet members of the same family still. Those who had their
 home here, now have it there.

 Let us see what it is that we should learn from this doctrine. It is
 this, that the dead are not lost to us. There is a sense in which the
 departed are ours more than they were before. There is a sense in
 which the Apostles Paul, or John, the good and great of ages past,
 belong to this age more than to that in which they lived, but in which
 they were not understood; in which the common-place and every-day part
 of their lives hindered the brightness and glory and beauty of their
 character from shining forth. So it is in the family. It is possible
 for men to live in the same house, and partake of the same meal from
 day to day, and from year to year, and yet remain strangers to each
 other, mistaking each other's feelings, not comprehending each other's
 character; and it is only when the Atlantic rolls between, and half a
 hemisphere is interposed, that we learn how dear they are to us, how
 all our life is bound up in deep anxiety with their existence.
 Therefore it is the Christian feels that the family is not broken.
 Think you that family can break or end?--that because the chair is
 empty, therefore he, your child, is no more? It may be so with the
 coarse, the selfish, the unbelieving, the superstitious; but the eye
 of faith sees there only a transformation. He is not there, he is
 risen. You see the place where he was, but he has passed to heaven. So
 at least the parental heart of David felt of old, "by faith and not by
 sight," when speaking of his infant child. "I shall go to him, but he
 shall not return to me."

 Once more, the Church of Christ is a society ever altering and
 changing its external forms. "The _whole_ family"--the Church of the
 Patriarchs, and of ages before them; and yet the same family.
 Remember, I pray you, the diversities of form through which, in so
 many ages and generations, this Church has passed. Consider the
 difference there was between the patriarchal Church of the time of
 Abraham and Isaac, and its condition under David; or the difference
 between the Church so existing and its state in the days of the
 apostles; and the marvellous difference between that and the same
 Church four or five centuries later; or, once again, the difference
 between that, externally one, and the Church as it exists in the
 present day, broken into so many fragments. Yet diversified as these
 states may be, they are not more so than the various stages of a
 family.
