fantastic, still expresses with peculiar intensity the beliefs and
emotions of the Tibetans and Mongols and has forced men of violence to
believe that a power higher than their own is wielded by intellect and
asceticism.

There seems to be no difference between Tibetan and Mongolian Lamaism
in deities, doctrines or observances.[1068] Mongolian Lamas imitate
the usages of Tibet, study there when they can and recite their
services in Tibetan, although they have translations of the scriptures
in their own language. Well read priests in Peking have told me that
it is better to study the canon in Tibetan than in Mongol, because
complete copies in Mongol, if extant, are practically unobtainable.

The political and military decadence of the Mongols has been ascribed
by some authors to Lamaism and to the substitution of priestly for
warlike ideals. But such a substitution is not likely to have taken
place except in minds prepared for it by other causes and it does not
appear that the Moslims of Central Asia are more virile and vigorous
than the Buddhists. The collapse of the Mongols can be easily
illustrated if not explained by the fate of Turks and Tartars in the
Balkan Peninsula and Russia. Wherever the Turks are the ruling race
they endeavour to assert their superiority over all Christians, often
by violent methods. But when the positions are reversed and the
Christians become rulers as in Bulgaria, the Turks make no resistance
but either retire or acquiesce meekly in the new regime.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1057: See for instance the particulars given as to various
branches of the Nying-ma pa sect in _J.A.S.B._ 1882, pp. 6-14.]

[Footnote 1058: Urgyen-pa or Dzok-chen-pa.]

[Footnote 1059: Or Pemayangtse.]

[Footnote 1060: bKah-gDams-pa.]

[Footnote 1061: _Buddhism_, p. 70.]

[Footnote 1062: bKah-brGyud-pa.]

[Footnote 1063: Sandberg, _Handbook of Tibetan_, p. 207.]

[Footnote 1064: Authorities differ as to the name of the sect which
owns Himis and other monasteries in Ladak.]

[Footnote 1065: See for some account of him and specimens of his
poems, Sandberg, _Tibet and the Tibetans_, chap. XIII.]

[Footnote 1066: I do not know whether the ceremonies of the other
sects offer the same resemblance. Probably they have all imitated the
Gelugpa. Some authors attribute the resemblance to contact with
Nestorian Christianity in early times but the resemblance is
definitely to Roman costumes and ceremonies not to those of the
Eastern church. Is there any reason to believe that the Nestorian
ritual resembled that of western catholics?]

[Footnote 1067: See also Filchner, _Das Kloster Kumbum_, 1906.]

[Footnote 1068: Almost the only difference that I have noticed is that
whereas Tibetans habitually translate Indian proper names, Mongols
frequently use Sanskrit words, such as Manjusri, or slightly
modified forms such as Dara, Maidari (=Tara, Maitreya). The same
practice is found in the old Uigur translations. See _Bibl. Buddh._
XII. Tisastvustik. For an interesting account of contemporary Lamaism
in Mongolia see Binstead, "Life in a Khalkha Steppe Monastery,"
_J.R.A.S._ 1914, 847-900.]




CHAPTER LIV

JAPAN


This work as originally planned contained a section on Japanese
Buddhism consisting of three chapters, but after it had been sent to
the publishers I was appointed H.M. Ambassador in Tokyo and I decided
to omit this section. Let not any Japanese suppose that it contained
disparaging criticism of his country or its religions. It would, I
hope, have given no offence to either Buddhists or Shintoists, but an
ambassador had better err on the side of discretion and refrain from
public comments on the institutions of the country to which he is
accredited.

The omission is regrettable in so far as it prevents me from noticing
some of the most interesting and beautiful developments of Buddhism,
but for historical purposes and the investigation of the past the loss
is not great, for Japanese Buddhism throws little light on ancient
India or even on ancient China. It has not influenced other countries.
Its interest lies not in the relics of antiquity which it has
preserved but in the new shape and setting which a race at once
assimilative and inventive has given to old ideas.

Though the doctrine of the Buddha reached Japan from China through
Korea,[1069] Chinese and Japanese Buddhism differ in several respects.
Lamaism never gained a footing in Japan, probably because it was the
religion of the hated Mongols. There was hardly any direct intercourse
with India. Whereas the state religion of China was frequently hostile
to Buddhism, in Japan such relations were generally friendly and from
the seventh century until the Meiji era an arrangement known as
Ryo-bu Shinto or two-fold Shinto was in force, by which
Shinto shrines were with few exceptions handed over to the custody
of Buddhist priests, native deities and historical personages being
declared to be manifestations of various Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.
Again, Buddhism in Japan has had a more intimate connection with
social, political and even military matters in various periods than in
China. This is one reason for its chief characteristic, namely,
the large number and distinct character of its sects. They are not
merely schools like the religious divisions of India and China, but
real sects with divergent doctrines and sometimes antagonistic to one
another.

It became the fashion in Japan to talk of the twelve sects, but the
names given are not always the same.

One of the commonest lists is as follows:[1070]

    1. Kusha.                 5. Hosso.             9. Jodo.
    2. Jo-jitsu.              6. Kegon.            10. Zen.
    3. Ritsu-shu or Risshu    7. Tendai.           11. Shin.
    4. Sanron.                8. Shingon.          12. Nichiren.

This list is historically correct, but Nos. 1-4 are almost or quite
extinct, and the number twelve is therefore sometimes made up as
follows:

    1. Hosso.                 5. Yuzu Nembutsu.     9. Obaku.
    2. Kegon.                 6. Jodo.             10. Shin.
    3. Tendai.                7. Rinzai.           11. Nichiren.
    4. Shingon.               8. Sodo.             12. Ji.

Here Nos. 7, 8, 9 are subdivisions of the Zen and 5 and 12 are two
small sects.

Taking the first list, we may easily distinguish two classes. The
first eight, called by the Japanese Hasshu, are all old and all
imported from China. They represent the Buddhism of the Nara and
Hei-an periods. The other four all arose after 1170 and were all
remodelled, if not created, in Japan. Chronologically the sects may be
arranged as follows, the dates marking the foundation or introduction
of each:

    (i)   Seventh century: Sanron, 625; Jo-jitsu, 625; Hosso, 657;
          Kusha, 660.
    (ii)  Eighth century: Kegon, 735; Ritsu, 745.
    (iii) Ninth century: Tendai, 805; Shingon, 806.
    (iv)  Twelfth and thirteenth centuries: Yuzu Nembutsu,
             1123; Jodo, 1174; Zen, 1202; Shin, 1224; Nichiren,
             1253; Ji, 1275.

All Japanese sects of importance are Mahayanist. The Hinayana is
represented only by the Kusha, Jo-jitsu and Risshu. The two former are
both extinct: the third still numbers a few adherents, but is not
anti-Mahayanist. It merely insists on the importance of discipline.

Though the Hosso and Kegon sects are not extinct, their survival is
due to their monastic possessions rather than to the vitality of their
doctrines, but the great sects of the ninth century, the Tendai and
Shingon, are still flourishing. For some seven hundred years,
especially in the Fujiwara period, they had great influence not only
in art and literature, but in political and even in military matters,
for they maintained large bodies of troops consisting of soldier monks
or mercenaries and were a considerable menace to the secular
authority. So serious was the danger felt to be that in the sixteenth
century Nobunaga and Hideyoshi destroyed the great monasteries of
Hieizan and Negoro and the pretensions of the Buddhist Church to
temporal power were brought to an end.

But apart from this political activity, new sects which appeared in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries suited the popular needs of the
time and were a sign of true religious life. Two of these sects, the
Jodo and Shinshu,[1071] are Amidist--that is to say they teach
that the only or at least the best way of winning salvation is to
appeal to the mercy of Amida, who will give his worshippers a place in
his paradise after death. The Jodo is relatively old fashioned, and
does not differ much in practice from the worship of Amida as seen in
China, but the Shinshu has no exact parallel elsewhere. Though it
has not introduced many innovations in theology, its abandonment of
monastic discipline, its progressive and popular spirit and its
conspicuous success make it a distinct and remarkable type. Its
priests marry and eat meat: it has no endowments and relies on
voluntary subscription, yet its temples are among the largest and most
conspicuous in Japan. But the hierarchical spirit is not absent and
since Shinshu priests can marry, there arose the institution of
hereditary abbots who were even more like barons than the celibate
prelates of the older sects.

The Nichiren sect is a purely Japanese growth, without any prototype
in China, and is a protest against Amidism and an attempt to
restore Shaka--the historical Buddha--to his proper position from
which he has been ousted. Nichiren, the founder, is one of the most
picturesque figures of Japanese history. His teaching, which was based
on the Lotus Sutra, was remarkable for its combative spirit and he
himself played a considerable part in the politics of his age. His
followers form one of the most influential and conspicuous sects at
the present day, although not so numerous as the Amidists.

Zen is the Japanese equivalent of Ch'an or Dhyana and is the name
given to the sect founded in China by Bodhidharma. It is said to have
been introduced into Japan in the seventh century, but died out.
Later, under the Hojo Regents, and especially during the
Ashikaga period, it flourished exceedingly. Zen ecclesiastics managed
politics like the French cardinals of the seventeenth century and
profoundly influenced art and literature, since they produced a long
line of painters and writers. But the most interesting feature in the
history of this sect in Japan is that, though it preserves the
teaching of Bodhidharma without much change, yet it underwent a
curious social metamorphosis, for it became the chosen creed of the
military class and contributed not a little to the Bushido or code of
chivalry. It is strange that this mystical doctrine should have spread
among warriors, but its insistence on simplicity of life, discipline
of mind and body, and concentration of thought harmonized with their
ideals.

Apart from differences of doctrine such as divide the Shinshu,
Nichiren and Zen, Japanese sects show a remarkable tendency to
multiply subdivisions, due chiefly to disputes as to the proper
succession of abbots. Thus the Jodo sect has four subsects, and the
first and second of these are again subdivided into six and four
respectively. And so with many others. Even the little Ji sect, which
is credited with only 509 temples in all Japan, includes thirteen
subdivisions.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1069: The accepted date is A.D. 552.]

[Footnote 1070: These names are mostly borrowed from the Chinese and
represent: 1. Chu-she; 2. Ch'eng-shih; 3. Lu; 4. San-lun; 5.
Fa-hsiang; 6. Hua-yen; 7. T'ien-t'ai; 8. Chen-yen; 9. Ching-t'u; 10.
Ch'an. See my remarks on these sects in the section on Chinese
Buddhism. See Haas, _Die Sekten dea Japanischen Buddhismus_, 1905:
many notices in the same author's _Annalen des Jap. Bud._ cited
above and Ryauon Fujishima, _Le Buddhisme Japonais_, 1889.]

[Footnote 1071: As well as the smaller sects called Ji and
Yuzunembutsu.]:




BOOK VII

MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS




CHAPTER LV

INFLUENCE OF CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA


In phrases like the above title, the word influence is easy and
convenient. When we hesitate to describe a belief or usage as borrowed
or derived, it comes pat to say that it shows traces of external
influence. But in what circumstances is such influence exercised? It
is not the necessary result of contact, for in the east of Europe the
Christian Church has not become mohammedanized nor in Poland and
Roumania has it contracted any taint of Judaism. In these cases there
is difference of race as well as of religion. In business the Turk and
Jew have some common ground with the oriental Christian: in social
life but little and in religion none at all. Europe has sometimes
shown an interest in Asiatic religions, but on the whole an antipathy
to them. Christianity originated in Palestine, which is a
Mediterranean rather than an Asiatic country, and its most important
forms, particularly the Roman Catholic Church, took shape on European
soil. Such cults as the worship of Isis and Mithra were prevalent in
Europe but they gained their first footing among Asiatic slaves and
soldiers and would perhaps not have maintained themselves among
European converts only. And Buddhism, though it may have attracted
individual minds, has never produced any general impression west of
India. Both in Spain and in south-eastern Europe Islam was the
religion of invaders and made surprisingly few converts. Christian
heretics, such as the Nestorians and Monophysites, who were expelled
from Constantinople and had their home in Asia, left the west alone
and proselytized in the east. The peculiar detestation felt by the
Church for the doctrines of the Manichaeans was perhaps partly due to
the fact that they were in spirit Asiatic. And the converse of this
antipathy is also true: the progress of Christianity in Asia has been
insignificant.

But when people of the same race profess different creeds, these
creeds do influence one another and tend to approximate. This is
specially remarkable in India, where Islam, in theory the
uncompromising opponent of image worship and polytheism, is
sometimes in practice undistinguishable from the lower superstitions
of Hinduism. In the middle ages Buddhism and Hinduism converged until
they coincided so completely that Buddhism disappeared. In China it
often needs an expert to distinguish the manifestations of Taoism and
Buddhism: in Japan Buddhism and the old national religion were
combined in the mixed worship known as Ryobu Shinto. In the
British Isles an impartial observer would probably notice that
Anglicans and English Roman Catholics (not Irish perhaps) have more in
common than they think.

There are clearly two sets of causes which may divide a race between
religions: internal movements, such as the rise of Buddhism, and
external impulses, such as missions or conquest. Conquest pure and
simple is best illustrated by the history of Islam, also by the
conversion of Mexico and South America to Roman Catholicism. But even
when conversion is pacific, it will generally be found that, if it is
successful on a large scale, it means the introduction of more than a
creed. The religious leader in his own country can trust to his
eloquence and power over his hearers. The real support of the
missionary, however little he may like the idea, is usually that he
represents a superior type of civilization. At one time in their
career Buddhism and Christianity were the greatest agencies for
spreading civilization in Asia and Europe respectively. They brought
with them art and literature: they had the encouragement of the most
enlightened princes: those who did not accept them in many cases
remained obviously on a lower level. Much the same thing happens in
Africa to-day. The natives who accept Mohammedanism or Christianity
are moved, not by the arguments of the Koran or Bible, but by the idea
that it is a fine thing to be like an Arab or a European. A pagan in
Uganda is literally a pagan; an uninstructed rustic from a distant
village.

Now if we consider the relations of India with the west, we find on
neither side the conditions which usually render propaganda
successful. Before the Mohammedan invasions and the Portuguese
conquest of Goa, no faith can have presented itself to the Hindus with
anything like the prestige which marked the advent of Buddhism in
China and Japan. Alexander opened a road to India for Hellenic culture
and with it came some religious ideas, but the Greeks had no
missionary spirit and if there were any early Christian missions they
must have been on a small scale. The same is true of the west: if
Asoka's missions reached their destination, they failed to inspire any
record of their doings. Still there was traffic by land and sea. The
Hindus, if self-complacent, were not averse to new ideas, and before
the establishment of Christianity there was not much bigotry in the
west, for organized religion was unknown in Europe: practices might be
forbidden as immoral or anti-social but such expressions as contrary
to the Bible or Koran had no equivalent. Old worships were felt to be
unsatisfying: new ones were freely adopted: mysteries were
relished. There was no invasion, nothing that suggested foreign
conquest or alarmed national jealousy, but the way was open to ideas,
though they ran some risk of suffering transformation on their long
journey.

As I have repeatedly pointed out, Hinduism and Buddhism are
essentially religions of central and eastern, not of western Asia, but
they came in contact with the west in several regions and an enquiry
into the influence which they exercised or felt can be subdivided.
There is the question whether they owe anything to Christianity in
their later developments and also the question whether Christianity
has borrowed anything from them.[1072] Other questions to be
considered are the relations of Indian religions to Zoroastrianism in
ancient and to Islam in more recent times, which, if of less general
interest than problems involving Christianity, are easier to
investigate and of considerable importance.

Let us begin with the influence of Christianity on Indian religion.
For earlier periods the record of contact between Hindus and
Christians is fragmentary, but the evidence of the last two centuries
may give a significant indication as to the effect of early Christian
influence. In these two centuries Christianity has been presented to
the Hindus in the most favourable circumstances: it has come as the
religion of the governing power and associated with European
civilization: it has not, like Mohammedanism, been propagated by force
or accompanied by any intolerance which could awaken repugnance, but
its doctrines have been preached and expounded by private
missionaries, if not always with skill and sympathy, at least with
zeal and a desire to persuade. The result is that according to the
census of 1911 there are now 3,876,000 Christians including Europeans,
that is to say, a sect a little stronger than the Sikhs as against
more than sixty-six million Mohammedans. Of these 3,876,000 many are
drawn from the lowest castes or from tribes that are hardly considered
as Hindus. Some religious associations, generally known as Somaj, have
been founded under the influence of European philosophy as much as of
Christianity: imitation of European civilization (which is quite a
different thing from Christianity) is visible in the objects and
methods of religious and philanthropic institutions: some curious
mixed sects of small numerical strength have been formed by the fusion
of Christian with Hindu or Mohammedan elements or of all three
together. Yet the religious thought and customs of India in general
seem hardly conscious of contact with Christianity: there is no sign
that they have felt any fancy for the theology of the Athanasian
Creed or the ceremonies of the Roman Catholic Church which might have
interested speculative and ritualistic minds. Similarly, though
intellectual intercourse between India and China was long and fairly
intimate and though the influence of Indian thought on China was very
great, yet the influence of China on Indian thought is negligible.
This being so, it would be rash to believe without good evidence that,
in the past, doctrines which have penetrated Indian literature during
centuries and have found acceptance with untold millions owe their
origin to obscure foreign colonists or missions.

Writers who wish to prove that Indian religions are indebted to
Christianity often approach their task with a certain misconception.
They assume that if at some remote epoch a few stray Christians
reached India, they could overcome without difficulty the barriers of
language and social usage and further that their doctrine would be
accepted as something new and striking which would straightway
influence popular superstition and philosophic thought. But Lyall
gives a juster perspective in his poem about the Meditations of a
Hindu Prince who, grown sceptical in the quest of truth, listens to
the "word of the English," and finds it:

    "Naught but the world wide story how the earth and the heavens began,
     How the gods were glad and angry and a deity once was man."

Many doctrines preached by Christianity such as the love of God,
salvation by faith, and the incarnation, had been thought out in India
before the Christian era, and when Christian missionaries preached
them they probably seemed to thoughtful Hindus a new and not very
adequate version of a very old tale. On the other hand the central and
peculiar doctrine of dogmatic Christianity is that the world has been
saved by the death of Christ. If this doctrine of the atonement or the
sacrifice of a divine being had appeared in India as an importation
from the west, we might justly talk of the influence of Christianity
on Indian religion. But it is unknown in Hinduism and Buddhism or
(since it is rash to make absolute statements about these vast and
multifarious growths of speculation) it is at any rate exceedingly
rare. These facts create a presumption that the resemblances between
Christianity and Indian religion are due to coincidence rather than
borrowing, unless borrowing can be clearly proved, and this
conclusion, though it may seem tame, is surely a source of
satisfaction. The divagations of human thought are manifold and its
conclusions often contradictory, but if there is anything that can be
called truth it is but natural that logic, intuition, philosophy,
poetry, learning and saintship should in different countries sometimes
attain similar results.

Christianity, like other western ideas, may have reached India both by
land and by sea. After the conquests of Alexander had once opened the
route to the Indus and established Hellenistic kingdoms in its
vicinity, the ideas and art of Greece and Rome journeyed without
difficulty to the Panjab, arriving perhaps as somewhat wayworn and
cosmopolitan travellers but still clearly European. A certain amount
of Christianity _may_ have come along this track, but for any
historical investigation clearly the first question is, what is the
earliest period at which we have any record of its presence in India?
It would appear[1073] that the first allusions to the presence of
Christians in Parthia, Bactria and the border lands of India date from
the third century and that the oldest account[1074] of Christian
communities in southern India is the narrative of Cosmas
Indicopleustes (_c._ 525 A.D.). These latter Christians probably came
to India by sea from Persia in consequence of the persecutions which
raged there in 343 and 414, exactly as at a later date the Parsees
escaped the violence of the Moslims by emigrating to Gujarat and
Bombay.

The story that the Apostle Thomas preached in some part of India has
often been used as an argument for the early introduction and
influence of Christianity, but recent authorities agree in thinking
that it is legendary or at best not provable. The tale occurs first in
the Acts of St. Thomas,[1075] the Syriac text of which is considered to
date from about 250. It relates how the apostle was sold as a slave
skilled in architecture and coming to the Court of Gundaphar, king of
India, undertook to build, a palace but expended the moneys given to
him in charity and, when called to account, explained that he was
building for the king a palace in heaven, not made with hands. This
sounds more like an echo of some Buddhist Jataka written in praise of
liberality than an embellishment of any real biography. Other legends
make southern India the sphere of Thomas's activity, though he can
hardly have taught in both Madras and Parthia, and a similar
uncertainty is indicated by the tradition that his relics were
transported to Edessa, which doubtless means that according to other
accounts he died there. Tradition connects Thomas with Parthians quite
as much as with Indians, and, if he really contributed to the
diffusion of Christianity, it is more likely that he laboured in
the western part of Parthia than on its extreme eastern frontiers. The
fact that there really was an Indo-Parthian king with a name something
like Gondophares no more makes the legend of St. Thomas historical than
the fact that there was a Bohemian king with a name something like
Wenceslas makes the Christmas carol containing that name historical.

On the other hand it is clear that during the early centuries of our
era no definite frontier in the religious and intellectual sphere can
be drawn between India and Persia. Christianity reached Persia early:
it formed part of the composite creed of Mani, who was born about 216,
and Christians were persecuted in 343. From at least the third century
onwards Christian ideas _may_ have entered India, but this does not
authorize the assumption that they came with sufficient prestige and
following to exercise any lively influence, or in sufficient purity to
be clearly distinguished from Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism.

By water there was an ancient connection between the west coast of
India and both the Red Sea and Persian Gulf. Traffic by the former
route was specially active, from the time of Augustus to that of Nero.
Pliny[1076] complains that every year India and the East took from
Italy a hundred million sesterces in return for spices, perfumes and
ornaments. Strabo[1077] who visited Egypt tells how 120 ships sailed
from Myos Hormos (on the Red Sea) to India "although in the time of
the Ptolemies scarcely any one would undertake this voyage." Muziris
(Cranganore) was the chief depot of western trade and even seems to
have been the seat of a Roman commercial colony. Roman coins have been
found in northern and even more abundantly in southern India, and
Hindu mints used Roman models. But only rarely can any one except
sailors and merchants, who made a speciality of eastern trade, have
undertaken the long and arduous journey. Certainly ideas travel with
mysterious rapidity. The debt of Indian astronomy to Greece is
undeniable[1078] and if the same cannot be affirmed of Indian
mathematics and medicine yet the resemblance between Greek and Indian
treatises on these sciences is remarkable. Early Tamil poems[1079]
speak of Greek wines and dumb (that is unintelligible) Roman soldiers
in the service of Indian kings, but do not mention philosophers,
teachers or missionaries. After 70 A.D. this trade declined, perhaps
because the Flavian Emperors and their successors were averse to the
oriental luxuries which formed its staple, and in 215 the massacre
ordered by Caracalla dealt a blow to the commercial importance of
Alexandria from which it did not recover for a long time. Thus the
period when intercourse between Egypt and India was most active is
anterior to the period when Christianity began to spread: it is hardly
likely that in 70 or 80 A.D. there were many Christians in Egypt.

As already mentioned, colonies of Christians from Persia settled on
the west coast of India, where there are also Jewish colonies of
considerable antiquity. The story that this Church was founded by St.
Thomas and that his relics are preserved in south India has not been
found in any work older than Marco Polo.[1080] Cosmas Indicopleustes
states that the Bishop of Kalliana was appointed from Persia, and this
explains the connection of Nestorianism with southern India, for at
that time the Nestorian Catholicos of Ctesiphon was the only Christian
prelate tolerated by the Persian Government.

This Church may have had a considerable number of adherents for it was
not confined to Malabar, its home and centre, but had branches on the
east coast near Madras. But it was isolated and became corrupt. It is
said that in 660 it had no regular ministry and in the fourteenth
century even baptism had fallen into disuse. Like the popular forms of
Mohammedanism it adopted many Hindu doctrines and rites. This implies
on the one hand a considerable exchange of ideas: on the other hand,
if such reformers as Ramanuja and Ramananda were in touch with these
Nestorians we may doubt if they would have imbibed from them the
teaching of the New Testament. There is evidence that Roman Catholic
missions on their way to or from China landed in Malabar during the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries and made some converts. In 1330
the Pope sent a Bishop to Quilon with the object of bringing the
Nestorians into communion with the see of Rome. But the definite
establishment of Roman Catholicism dates from the Portuguese conquest
of Goa in 1510, followed by the appointment of an Archbishop and the
introduction of the Inquisition. Henceforth there is no difficulty in
accounting for Christian influence, but it is generally admitted that
the intolerance of the Portuguese made them and their religion
distasteful to Hindus and Moslims alike. We hear, however, that Akbar,
desiring to hear Christian doctrines represented in a disputation held
at his Court, sent for Christian priests from Goa, and his Minister
Abul Fazl is quoted as having written poetry in which mosques,
churches and temples are classed together as places where people seek
for God.[1081]

Such being the opportunities and approximate dates for Christian
influence in India, we may now examine the features in Hinduism which
have been attributed to it. They may be classified under three
principal heads, (i) The monotheistic Sivaism of the south. (ii)
Various doctrines of Vaishnavism such as _bhakti_, grace, the love and
fatherhood of God, the Word, and incarnation. (iii) Particular
ceremonies or traditions such as the sacred meal known as Prasada and
the stories of Krishna's infancy.

In southern India we have a seaboard in communication with Egypt,
Arabia and the Persian Gulf. The reality of intercourse with the west
is attested by Roman, Jewish, Nestorian and Mohammedan settlements,
but on the other hand the Brahmans of Malabar are remarkable even
according to Hindu standards for their strictness and aloofness. As I
have pointed out elsewhere, the want of chronology in south Indian
literature makes it difficult to sketch with any precision even the
outlines of its religious history, but it is probable that Aryan
religion came first in the form of Buddhism and Jainism and that
Sivaism made its appearance only when the ground had been prepared by
them. They were less exposed than the Buddhism of the north to the
influences which created the Mahayana, but they no doubt mingled with
the indigenous beliefs of the Dravidians. There is no record of what
these may have been before contact with Hindu civilization; in
historical times they comprise the propitiation of spirits, mostly
malignant and hence often called devils, but also a strong tendency to
monotheism and ethical poetry of a high moral standard. These latter
characteristics are noticeable in most, if not all, Dravidian races,
even those which are in the lower stages of civilization.[1082] This
temperament, educated by Buddhism and finally selecting Sivaism, might
spontaneously produce such poems as the Tiruvacagam. Such ideas as
God's love for human souls and the soul's struggle to be worthy of
that love are found in other Indian religions besides Tamil Sivaism
and in their earlier forms cannot be ascribed to Christian influence,
but it must be admitted that the poems of the Sittars show an
extraordinary approximation to the language of devotional literature
in Europe. If, as Caldwell thinks, these compositions are as recent as
the sixteenth or seventeenth century, there is no chronological
difficulty in supposing their contents to be inspired by Christian
ideas. But the question rather is, would Portuguese Catholicism or
corrupt Nestorianism have inspired poems denouncing idolatry and
inculcating the purest theism? Scepticism on this point is
permissible. I am inclined to think that the influence of
Christianity as well as the much greater influence of Mohammedanism
was mostly indirect. They imported little in the way of custom and
dogma but they strengthened the idea which naturally accompanies
sectarianism, namely, that it is reasonable and proper for a religion
to inculcate the worship of one all-sufficient power. But that this
idea can flourish in surroundings repugnant to both Christianity and
Islam is shown by the sect of Lingayats.

The resemblances to Christianity in Vishnuism are on a larger scale
than the corresponding phenomena in Sivaism. In most parts of India,
from Assam to Madras, the worship of Vishnu and his incarnations has
assumed the form of a monotheism which, if frequently turning into
pantheism, still persistently inculcates loving devotion to a deity
who is himself moved by love for mankind. The corresponding phase of
Sivaism is restricted to certain periods and districts of southern
India. The doctrine of _bhakti_, or devotional faith, is common to
Vishnuites and Sivaites, but is more prominent among the former.
It has often been conjectured to be due to Christian influence but the
conjecture is, I think, wrong, for the doctrine is probably
pre-Christian. Panini[1083] appears to allude to it, and the idea
of loving devotion to God is fully developed in the Svetasvatara
Upanishad and the Bhagavad-gita, works of doubtful date it is true,
but in my opinion anterior to the Christian era and on any hypothesis
not much posterior to it. Some time must have elapsed after the death
of Christ before Christianity could present itself in India as an
influential doctrine. Also _bhakti_ does not make its first appearance
as something new and full grown. The seed, the young plant and the
flower can all be found on Indian soil. So, too, the idea that God
became man for the sake of mankind is a gradual Indian growth. In the
Veda Vishnu takes three steps for the good of men. It is probable that
his avataras were recognized some centuries before Christ and, if this
is regarded as not demonstrable, it cannot be denied that the
analogous conception of Buddhas who visit the world to save and
instruct mankind is pre-Christian.[1084] Similarly though passages may
be found in the writings of Kabir and others in which the doctrine of
Sabda or the Word is stated in language recalling the fourth
Gospel, and though in this case the hypothesis of imitation offers no
chronological difficulties, yet it is unnecessary. For Sabda, in
the sense of the Veda conceived as an eternal self-existent sound, is
an old Indian notion and when stated in these terms does not appear
very Christian. It is found in Zoroastrianism, where Manthra Spenta
the holy word is said to be the very soul of God,[1085] and it is
perhaps connected with the still more primitive notion that words and
names have a mysterious potency and are in themselves spells. But even
if the idea of Sabda were derived from the idea of Logos it need
not be an instance of specifically Christian influence, for this Logos
idea was only utilized by Christianity and was part of the common
stock of religious thought prevalent about the time of Christ in
Egypt, Syria and Asia Minor, and it is even possible that its earlier
forms may owe something to India. And were it proved that the
teaching of Kabir, which clearly owes much to Islam, also owes much to
Christianity, the fact would not be very important, for the followers
of Kabir form a small and eccentric though interesting sect, in no way
typical of Hinduism as a whole.

The form of Vishnuism known as Pancaratra appears to have had its
origin, or at least to have flourished very early, in Kashmir and the
extreme north-west, and perhaps a direct connection may be traced
between central Asia and some aspects of the worship of Krishna at
Muttra. The passage of Greek and Persian influence through the
frontier districts is attested by statuary and coins, but no such
memorials of Christianity have been discovered. But the leaders of the
Vishnuite movement in the twelfth and subsequent centuries were mostly
Brahmans of southern extraction who migrated to Hindustan. Stress is
sometimes laid on the fact that they lived in the neighbourhood of
ancient Nestorian churches and even Garbe thinks that Ramanuja, who
studied for some time at Conjevaram, was in touch with the Christians
of Mailapur near Madras. I find it hard to believe that such contact
can have had much result. For Ramanuja was a Brahman of the straitest
sect who probably thought it contamination to be within speaking
distance of a Christian.[1086] He was undoubtedly a remarkable scholar
and knew by heart all the principal Hindu scriptures, including those
that teach _bhakti_. Why then suppose that he took his ideas not from
works like the Bhagavad-gita on which he wrote a commentary or from
the Pancaratra which he eulogizes, but from persons whom he must have
regarded as obscure heretics? And lastly is there any proof that such
ideas as the love of God and salvation by faith flourished among the
Christians of Mailapur? In remote branches of the oriental Church
Christianity is generally reduced to legends and superstitions, and
this Church was so corrupt that it had even lost the rite of
baptism and is said to have held that the third person of the
Trinity was the Madonna[1087] and not the Holy Ghost. Surely this
doctrine is an extraordinary heresy in Christianity and far from
having inspired Hindu theories as to the position of Vishnu's spouse
is borrowed from those theories or from some of the innumerable Indian
doctrines about the Sakti.

It is clear that the Advaita philosophy of Sankara was influential
in India from the ninth century to the twelfth and then lost some of
its prestige owing to the rise of a more personal theism. It does not
seem to me that any introduction or reinforcement of Christianity, to
which this theistic movement might be attributed, can be proved to
have taken place about 1100, and it is not always safe to seek for a
political or social explanation of such movements. But if we must have
an external explanation, the obvious one is the progress of
Mohammedanism. One may even suggest a parallel between the epochs of
Sankara and of Ramanuja. The former, though the avowed enemy of
Buddhism, introduced into Hinduism the doctrine of Maya described by
Indian critics as crypto-Buddhism. Ramanuja probably did not come into
direct contact with Islam,[1088] which was the chief enemy of Hinduism
in his time, but his theism (which, however, was semi-pantheistic) may
have been similarly due to the impression produced by that enemy on
Indian thought.[1089]

It is easy to see superficial parallels between Hindu and Christian
ceremonies, but on examination they are generally not found to prove
that there has been direct borrowing from Christianity. For instance,
the superior castes are commonly styled twice born in virtue of
certain initiatory ceremonies performed on them in youth, and it is
natural to compare this second birth with baptismal regeneration. But,
though there is here a real similarity of ideas, it would be hard to
deny that these ideas as well as the practices which express them have
arisen independently.[1090] And though a practice of sprinkling
the forehead with water similar to baptism is in use among Hindus, it
is only a variety of the world-wide ceremony of purification with
sacred water. Several authors have seen a resemblance between the
communion and a sacred meal often eaten in Hindu temples and called
_prasad_ (favour) or mahaprasad. The usual forms of this observance do
not resemble the Mass in externals (as do certain ceremonies in
Lamaism) and the analogy, if any, resides in the eating of a common
religious meal. Such a meal in Indian temples has its origin in the
necessity and advantage of disposing of sacrificial food. It cannot be
maintained that the deities eat the substance of it and, if it is not
consumed by fire, the obvious method of disposal is for mankind to eat
it. The practice is probably world-wide and the consumers may be
either the priests or the worshippers. Both varieties of the rite are
found in India. In the ancient Soma sacrifices the officiants drank
the residue of the sacred drink: in modern temples, where ample meals
are set before the god more than once a day, it is the custom, perhaps
because it is more advantageous, to sell them to the devout. From this
point of view the _prasad_ is by no means the equivalent of the Lord's
Supper, but rather of the things offered to idols which many early
Christians scrupled to eat. It has, however, another and special
significance due to the regulations imposed by caste. As a rule a
Hindu of respectable social status cannot eat with his inferiors
without incurring defilement. But in many temples members of all
castes can eat the _prasad_ together as a sign that before the deity
all his worshippers are equal. From this point of view the _prasad_ is
really analogous to the communion inasmuch as it is the sign of
religious community, but it is clearly distinct in origin and though
the sacred food may be eaten with great reverence, we are not told
that it is associated with the ideas of commemoration, sacrifice or
transubstantiation which cling to the Christian sacrament.[1091]

The most curious coincidences between Indian and Christian legend
are afforded by the stories and representations of the birth and
infancy of Krishna. These have been elaborately discussed by Weber in
a well-known monograph.[1092] Krishna is represented with his mother,
much as the infant Christ with the Madonna; he is born in a
stable,[1093] and other well-known incidents such as the appearance of
a star are reproduced. Two things strike us in these resemblances.
Firstly, they are not found in the usual literary version of the
Indian legend,[1094] and it is therefore probable that they represent
an independent and borrowed story: secondly, they are almost entirely
concerned with the mythological aspects of Christianity. Many
Christians would admit that the adoration of the Virgin and Child is
unscriptural and borrowed from the worship of pagan goddesses who were
represented as holding their divine offspring in their arms. If this
is admitted, it is possible that Devaki and her son may be a replica
not of the Madonna but of a pagan prototype. But there is no
difficulty in admitting that Christian legends and Christian art may
have entered northern India from Bactria and Persia, and have found a
home in Muttra. Only it does not follow from this that any penetrating
influence transformed Hindu thought and is responsible for Krishna's
divinity, for the idea of _bhakti_, or for the theology of the
Bhagavad-gita. The borrowed features in the Krishna story are
superficial and also late. They do not occur in the Mahabharata and
the earliest authority cited by Weber is Hemadri, a writer of the
thirteenth century. Allowing that what he describes may have existed
several centuries before his own date, we have still no ground for
tracing the main ideas of Vaishnavism to Christianity and the later
vagaries of Krishnaism are precisely the aspects of Indian religion
which most outrage Christian sentiment.

One edition of the Bhavishya Purana contains a summary of the book
of Genesis from Adam to Abraham.[1095] Though it is a late
interpolation, it shows conclusively that the editors of Puranas had
no objection to borrowing from Christian sources and it maybe that
some incidents in the life of Krishna as related by the Vishnu,
Bhagavata and other Puranas are borrowed from the Gospels, such as
Kamsa's orders to massacre all male infants when Krishna is born, the
journey of Nanda, Krishna's foster-father, to Mathura in order to pay
taxes and the presentation of a pot of ointment to Krishna by a
hunchback woman whom he miraculously makes straight. In estimating the
importance of such coincidences we must remember that they are merely
casual details in a long story of adventures which, in their general
outline, bear no relation to the life of Christ. The most striking of
these is the "massacre of the Innocents." The Harivamsa, which is
not later than the fifth century A.D., relates that Kamsa killed all
the other children of Devaki, though it does not mention a general
massacre, and Patanjali (_c._ 150 B.C.) knew the legend of the
hostility between Krishna and Kamsa and the latter's death.[1096] So
if anything has been borrowed from the Gospel account it is only the
general slaughter of children. The mention of a pot of ointment
strikes Europeans because such an object is not familiar to us, but it
was an ordinary form of luxury in India and Judaea alike, and the fact
that a woman honoured both Krishna and Christ in the same way but in
totally different circumstances is hardly more than a chance
coincidence. The fact that both Nanda and Joseph leave their homes in
order to pay their taxes is certainly curious and I will leave the
reader to form his own opinion about it. The instance of the Bhavishya
Purana shows that Hindus had no scruples about borrowing from the
Bible and in some Indian dialects the name Krishna appears as Krishto
or Kushto. On the other hand, whatever borrowing there may have been
is concerned exclusively with trivial details: the principal episodes
of the Krishna legend were known before the Christian era.

This is perhaps the place to examine a curious episode of the
Mahabharata which narrates the visit of certain sages to a region
called Svetadvipa, the white island or continent, identified by
some with Alexandria or a Christian settlement in central Asia. The
episode occurs in the Santiparvan[1097] of the Mahabharata and is
introduced by the story of a royal sacrifice, at which most of the
gods appeared in visible shape but Hari (Vishnu or Krishna) took his
offerings unseen. The king and his priests were angry, but three sages
called Ekata, Dvita and Trita, who are described as the miraculous
offspring of Brahma, interposed explaining that none of those present
were worthy to see Hari. They related how they had once desired to
behold him in his own form and after protracted austerities repaired
under divine guidance to an island called Svetadvipa on the
northern shores of the Sea of Milk.[1098] It was inhabited by beings
white and shining like the moon who followed the rules of the
Pancaratra, took no food and were continually engaged in silent
prayer. So great was the effulgence that at first the visitors were
blinded. It was only after another century of penance that they began
to have hopes of beholding the deity. Then there suddenly arose a
great light. The inhabitants of the island ran towards it with joined
hands and, as if they were making an offering, cried, "Victory to
thee, O thou of the lotus eyes, reverence to thee, producer of all
things: reverence to thee, Hrishikesa, great Purusha, the
first-born." The three sages saw nothing but were conscious that a
wind laden with perfumes blew past them. They were convinced, however,
that the deity had appeared to his worshippers. A voice from heaven
told them that this was so and that no one without faith (abhakta)
could see Narayana.

A subsequent section of the same book tells us that Narada visited
Svetadvipa and received from Narayana the Pancaratra, which is
thus definitely associated with the locality.

Some writers have seen in this legend a poetical account of contact
with Christianity, but wrongly, as I think. We have here no mythicized
version of a real journey but a voyage of the imagination. The sea of
milk, the white land and its white shining inhabitants are an attempt
to express the pure radiance proper to the courts of God, much as the
Book of Revelation tells of a sea of glass, elders in white raiment
and a deity whose head and hair were white like wool and snow. Nor
need we suppose, as some have done, that the worship of the white
sages is an attempt to describe the Mass. The story does not say that
whenever the White Islanders held a religious service the deity
appeared, but that on a particular occasion when the deity appeared
they ran to meet him and saluted him with a hymn. The idea that prayer
and meditation are the sacrifice to be offered by perfected saints is
thoroughly Indian and ancient. The account testifies to the
non-Brahmanic character of this worship of Vishnu, which was
patronized by the Brahmans though not originated by them, but there is
nothing exotic in the hymn to Narayana and the epithet first-born
(purvaja), in which some have detected a Christian flavour, is as old
as the Rig Veda. The reason for laying the scene of the story in the
north (if indeed the points of the compass have any place in this
mythical geography) is no doubt the early connection of the Pancaratra
with Kashmir and north-western India.[1099] The facts that some
Puranas people the regions near Svetadvipa with Iranian
sun-worshippers[1100] and that some details of the Pancaratra (though
not the system as a whole) show a resemblance to Zoroastrianism
suggest interesting hypotheses as to origin of this form of Vishnuism,
but more facts are needed to confirm them. Chronology gives us little
help, for though the Mahabharata was substantially complete in the
fourth century, it cannot be denied that additions may have been made
to it later and that the story of Svetadvipa may be one of them.
There were Nestorian Bishops at Merv and Herat in the fifth century,
but there appears to be no evidence that Christianity reached
Transoxiana before the fall of the Sassanids in the first half of the
seventh century.

Thus there is little reason to regard Christianity as an important
factor in the evolution of Hinduism, because (_a_) there is no
evidence that it appeared in an influential form before the sixteenth
century and (_b_) there is strong evidence that most of the doctrines
and practices resembling Christianity have an Indian origin. On the
other hand abundant instances show that the Hindus had no objection to
borrowing from a foreign religion anything great or small which took
their fancy. But the interesting point is that the principal Christian
doctrines were either indigenous in India--such as _bhakti_ and
_avataras_--or repugnant to the vast majority of Hindus, such as the
crucifixion and atonement. I do not think that Nestorianism had any
appreciable effect on the history of religious thought in southern
India. Hellenic and Zoroastrian ideas undoubtedly entered
north-western India, but, though Christian ideas may have come with
them, few of the instances cited seem even probable except some
details in the life of Krishna which affect neither the legend as a
whole nor the doctrines associated with it. Some later sects, such as
the Kabirpanthis, show remarkable resemblances to Christianity, but
then the teaching of Kabir was admittedly a blend of Hinduism and
Islam, and since Islam accepted many Christian doctrines, it remains
to be proved that any further explanation is needed. Barth observed
that criticism is generally on the look out for the least trace of
Christian influence on Hinduism but does not pay sufficient attention
to the extent of Moslim influence. Every student of Indian religion
should bear in mind this dictum of the great French savant. After the
sixteenth century there is no difficulty in supposing direct contact
with Roman Catholicism. Tukaram, the Maratha poet who lived
comparatively near to Goa, may have imitated the diction of the
Gospels.

Some authors[1101] are disposed to see Christian influence in Chinese
and Japanese Buddhism, particularly in the Amidist sects. I have
touched on this subject in several places but it may be well to
summarize my conclusions here.

The chief Amidist doctrines are clearly defined in the Sukha
vati-vyuha which was translated from Sanskrit into Chinese in the
latter half of the second century A.D. It must therefore have existed
in Sanskrit at least in the first century of our era, at which period
dogmatic Christianity could hardly have penetrated to India or any
part of Central Asia where a Sanskrit treatise was likely to be
written. Its doctrines must therefore be independent of Christianity
and indeed their resemblance to Christianity is often exaggerated, for
though salvation by faith in Amida is remarkably like justification by
faith, yet Amida is not a Saviour who died for the world and faith in
him is coupled with the use of certain invocations. The whole theory
has close parallels in Zoroastrianism and is also a natural
development of ideas already existing in India.

Nor can I think that the common use of rites on behalf of the dead in
Buddhist China is traceable to Christianity. In this case too the
parallel is superficial, for the rites are in most cases not prayers
_for_ the dead: the officiants recite formulae by which they acquire
merit and they then formally transfer this merit to the dead. Seeing
how great was the importance assigned to the cult of the dead in
China, it is not necessary to seek for explanations why a religion
trying to win its way in those countries invented ceremonies to
satisfy the popular craving, and Buddhism had no need to imitate
Christianity, for from an early period it had countenanced offerings
intended to comfort and help the departed.

Under the T'ang dynasty Manichaeism, Nestorianism and new streams of
Buddhism all entered China. These religions had some similarity to one
another, their clergy may have co-operated and Manichaeism certainly
adopted Buddhist ideas. There is no reason why Buddhism should not
have adopted Nestorian ideas and, in so far as the Nestorians
familiarized China with the idea of salvation by faith in a divine
personage, they may have helped the spread of Amidism. But the
evidence that we possess seems to show not that the Nestorians
introduced the story of Christ's life and sacrifice into Buddhism but
that they suppressed the idea of atonement by his death, possibly
under Buddhist influence.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1072: The most learned and lucid discussion of these
questions, which includes an account of earlier literature on the
subject, is to be found in Garbe's _Indien und das Christentum_, 1914.
But I am not able to accept all his conclusions. The work, to which I
am much indebted, is cited below as Garbe. See also Carpenter, _Theism
in Medieval India_, 1921, pp. 521-524.]

[Footnote 1073: See Garbe and Harnack, _Mission und Ausbreitung des
Christentums_, ii. Chrysostom (Hom. in Joh. 2. 2) writing at the end
of the fourth century speaks of Syrians, Egyptians, Persians and ten
thousand other nations learning Christianity from translations into
their languages, but one cannot expect geographical accuracy in so
rhetorical a passage.]

[Footnote 1074: Eusebius (_Ecc. Hist_. v. 10), supported by notices in
Jerome and others, states that Pantaenus went from Alexandria to preach
in India and found there Christians using the Gospel according to
Matthew written in Hebrew characters. It had been left there by the
Apostle Bartholomew. But many scholars are of opinion that by India in
this passage is meant southern Arabia. In these early notices India is
used vaguely for Eastern Parthia, Southern Arabia and even Ethiopia.
It requires considerable evidence to make it probable that at the time
of Pantaenus (second century A.D.) any one in India used the Gospel in
a Semitic language.]

[Footnote 1075: See, for the Thomas legend, Garbe, Vincent Smith,
_Early History of India_, 3rd ed. pp. 231 ff., and Philipps in _I.A._.
1903, pp. 1-15 and 145-160.]

[Footnote 1076: _Nat. Hist_. xii. 18 (41).]

[Footnote 1077: II. iv. 12. Strabo died soon after 21 A.D.]

[Footnote 1078: It is seen even in borrowed words, _e.g._ hora =
[Greek: hora]: Jyau = [Greek: Zeus]: Heli = [Greek: helios].]

[Footnote 1079: See Kanakasabhai's book, _The Tamils 1800 years ago_.]

[Footnote 1080: Harnack (_Mission und Ausbreitung des Christentums_,
II. 126) says "Dass die Thomas-Christen welche man im 16 Jahrhundert
in Indien wieder entdeckte bis ins 3 Jahrhundert hinaufgehen lasst
sich nicht erweisen."]

[Footnote 1081: For Akbar and Christianity, see _Cathay and the Way
Thither_ (Hakluyt Society), vol. IV. 172-3.]

[Footnote 1082: See Gover, _Folk Songs of Southern India_, 1871.]

[Footnote 1083: iv. 3. 95, 98.]

[Footnote 1084: Cf. the Pali verses in the Therigatha, 157: "Hail to
thee, Buddha, who savest me and many others from suffering."]

[Footnote 1085: See Yasht, 13. 81 and Vendidad, 19. 14.]

[Footnote 1086: The liberal ideas as to caste held by some Vishnuites
are due to Ramanand (c. 1400) who was excommunicated by his
coreligionists. I find it hard to agree with Garbe that Ramanuja
admitted the theoretical equality of all castes. He says himself
(Sri-Bhashya, II. 3. 46, 47) that souls are of the same nature in so
far as they are all parts of Brahman (a proposition which follows from
his fundamental principles and is not at all due to Christian
influence), but that some men are entitled to read the Veda while
others are debarred from the privilege. All fire, he adds, is of the
same nature, but fire taken from the house of a Brahman is pure,
whereas fire taken from a cremation ground is impure. Even so the soul
is defiled by being associated with a low-caste body.]

[Footnote 1087: See Grieson and Garbe. But I have not found a
quotation from any original authority. Mohammed, however, had the same
notion of the Trinity.]

[Footnote 1088: But the Mappilahs or Moplahs appear to have settled on
the Malabar coast about 900 A.D.]

[Footnote 1089: Similarly the neo-Confucianism of the Sung dynasty was
influenced by Mahayanist Buddhism. Chu-hsi and his disciples condemned
Buddhism, but the new problems and new solutions which they brought
forward would not have been heard of but for Buddhism.]

[Footnote 1090: The idea of the second birth is found in the Majjhima
Nikaya, where in Sutta 86 the converted brigand Angulimala speaks of
his regenerate life as _Yato aham ariyaya jatiya jato_, "Since I was
born by this noble (or holy) birth." Brahmanic parallels are numerous,
_e.g._ Manu, 2. 146.]

[Footnote 1091: It is said, however, that the celebration of the
Prasad by the Kabirpanthis bears an extraordinary resemblance to the
Holy Communion of Christians. This may be so, but, as already
mentioned, this late and admittedly composite sect is not typical of
Hinduism as a whole.]

[Footnote 1092: Krishnajanmashtami, _Memoirs of Academy of
Berlin_, 1867.]

[Footnote 1093: In spite of making enquiry I have never seen or heard
