In the two preceding chapters, he dwells largely upon the persecutions
of the Christians, exhorts them to be faithful, expresses his desire
"to perfect that which is lacking in their faith," and concludes by
saying--"To the end he may establish your hearts unblamable in
holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ _with all his saints."_ No one will deny that this has
reference to his coming at the end of the Jewish age. Now would it not
be doing injustice to this powerful and cogent reasoner to say, that
he suddenly drops this subject without giving his brethren any
warning, and runs off to the end of time, speaks of another coming of'
Christ at which he is to raise, at the same instant, all the dead and
change the living to immortal beings? And that he should again, as
suddenly, drop this subject, and hasten right back to the coming of
Christ at the destruction of Jerusalem? To charge him with this is
certainly ungenerous.

After stating that Christ should descend with a shout, with the voice
of the archangel and the trump of God to exalt the dead and living, he
adds--"But of the times and seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I
write for yourselves perfectly know that the day of the Lord so cometh
as a thief in the night. For when they shall say peace and safety then
sudden destruction cometh upon them, and they shall not escape." There
is no resisting the conclusion, that _"the day of the Lord"_ in this
passage refers to the same period when "_the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven_" in the passage above; which must be at the
destruction of Jerusalem. He quotes Christ's own language, Matt.
xxiv:43. See also 2 Peter iii:10. In both places, the sudden coming of
Jesus is compared to a "thief in the night." But where is a _general_
resurrection, at the end of time, clearly stated, that he had no need
to inform them of the times and seasons, because they already
perfectly knew? Where is sudden destruction to come upon any in that
day? For one, I find no such revelation.

Though the doctrine of immortal resurrection of all mankind was fully
revealed, and established in the world at the coming of Christ in his
kingdom; yet that particular point is not argued by the apostle in the
scripture on which we are commenting. He is not speaking of all
mankind, nor of the immortal resurrection; but as in Phil. iii:20, 21,
so _here_ he is speaking of the Christians _only_ who should be alive
when that scene burst and of those dead _only_ who had died in the
cause of Christ. "The dead in Christ" cannot possibly include those
who died previous to his birth, but those only who died in the faith
of his doctrine previous to his coming in his kingdom. We might reason
this point at large, but deem it unnecessary till some one proves how
those, who never heard of a Saviour, could be said to die in Christ,
or to be dead in him. I would, however, remark that the Greek
preposition _en_ may be rendered, _on account of_. The phrase would
then read thus--_the dead on account of Christ_. Wakefield renders it
thus--"_they who have died in the cause of Christ_." That this is its
true sense, I have not a doubt.

Let one thing here be distinctly noticed: Paul says--"For this we say
unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain,"
&c. Now where has our Lord ever said, when speaking of the immortal
resurrection, that some would be alive, and be changed to immortal
beings? Nowhere. This single circumstance ought to make every man
pause before he asserts such a change to be true. Read Christ's
language in all three of the Evangelists where he addresses the
Sadducees; and he speaks only of the dead being raised, but not of any
one being changed. Read his language, John vi:39--"And this is the
Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I
should lose nothing, but raise it up again at the last day." Nothing
is here said about changing the living to immortal beings. The Father
has given all into the hands of his Son; and if he is to _raise_ them
up at the last day, then all must die, for the _change_ of the living
is not the _resurrection_ of the dead. How then could Paul tell his
brethren, "by the word of the Lord," that they were to be thus
changed? He could not because there is not a "thus saith the Lord" to
support it. But Paul had the word of the Lord support the change in
the living which we have pointed out. Christ said, "the righteous
should go into life eternal," they "that endured unto the end should
be saved" that "they should shine like the sun in the kingdom of their
Father," and that "they should be recompensed at the resurrection of
the just."

But, inquires the reader, were those who died in the cause of Christ
raised immortal at his coming? No, they were not. It simply means that
they were in that day to receive their elevated stations of glory and
and honor in the gospel kingdom, so much so, as if they had been
alive. The living Christians, in this respect, were not to be before
them. Having suffered and died in the cause of Christ, they were in
the minds of the living to "shine as the stars forever and ever" in
the kingdom of Christ, because they had turned many to righteousness.
The Lord had, as it were, delayed his coming, and many had given up
faith in Christ's resurrection, and were sorrowing without hope over
their friends who had fallen asleep in his cause. They of course had
no faith in the immortal resurrection of their friends, nor in the
fulfillment of Christ's predicted coming to raise their names to
unfading honor for having labored and died in his cause. We are not to
understand that those departed saints were _literally_ exalted to
elevated stations in Christ's kingdom on earth, any more than Christ
_literally_ came. But as Jesus was _in that day_, at the end of the
Jewish age, "crowned with glory and honor," as king on the mediatorial
throne of the universe, so were his apostles elevated on thrones of
glory with him. Jesus says, "when the Son of man shall sit on his
throne of glory, ye also shall also sit upon twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel."

Now certain it is, that Jesus did take his throne, when he came in his
glory, at the destruction of the temple. Then it is equally certain,
that the apostles and martyrs also took their's at the same period and
in the same sense. _Then_ Christ came and "his holy angels" and all
the saints came with him; not literally, but in the same sense that he
himself came. Luke ix:26, 27--"For whosoever shall be ashamed of me
and of my words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he shall
come in his own glory and of his Father's and of the holy angels; but
I tell you of a truth there be some standing here which shall not
taste death till they see the kingdom of God." I Thess. iii:13--"To
the end he may establish your hearts unblamable in holiness before God
our Lord even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with
all his saints." Here we perceive, that he was to come "_with all his
saints and holy angels_." By his _holy angels_, we are to understand
his gospel messengers or martyred apostles and by _his_ saints, those
who had died in his cause. These are the persons who are said to be
_dead in Christ, and asleep in Jesus_. By the words _dead and asleep_
we are not to understand their present extinction of existence in
contrast with their immortal resurrection, but the supposed _low and
disgraceful_ cause in which they died, or for which they were put to
death by their persecutors, as malefactors. This _disgraceful
condition_, in which their murderers viewed them as unchangeably
sleeping, stands in contrast with their _triumphant exaltation_ at the
coming of Christ. Their enemies would _then_ look upon them as having
come forth from the dust of the earth and shining as the brightness of
the firmament and as the stars forever and ever, and not as sleeping
in perpetual infamy and dishonor. [See Daniel xii 2, 3, and John v:28,
29.] Their enemies (whether dead or alive) were to come forth to
_shame, contempt, and condemnation_, which stand in contrast with the
_glory and honor_ to which the Christians (whether dead or alive in
Christ) were to be raised in the minds of the living even to
succeeding generations.

Let it be distinctly noticed that _these dead in Christ_ are not said
to be raised _incorruptible and immortal_, but only caught up with the
living Christians in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air--not
_literally_, but in the same sense that the living saw the Son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven, so should they see his saints and holy
angels raised from the slumber of infamy, and, together with the
Christians who remained alive at that day, be exalted with him in the
air. [See Matt. xxiv:30, 31--Mark xiii:26, 27--Luke xxi:27, 28, and
Rev. i:7.] In these passages he is represented as "coming in the
_clouds_ with his angels," who "gathered, with a great sound of the
trumpet, his elect," and raised them to honor in his kingdom. And let
me add--this is all the _change_ Christ has ever said should take
place in the living at the sound of the Trumpet. I have no doubt that
the Apostle had his eye upon the above words of our Lord when he said,
"we shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air." It
will here be plainly seen in what sense those who had died in the
cause of Christ were _first_ raised. They are represented as coming
with him at the destruction of the temple, and after that event the
whole "body" was exalted together. The "vile body" of Christians on
earth (vile indeed in the eyes of their enemies) was then "fashioned
like unto his glorious body" of saints and angels in heaven who had
died in his cause.

That we have given a correct exposition of 1 Thess. iv:15, 16, 17, is
evident from Paul's words 2 Tim. iv:7, 8--"I have fought the good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth
there is laid up for me a _crown of righteousness_, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at _that day_," &c. The phrase
"_that day_" means not the day of Paul's death, but the day Christ
should appear in the clouds of heaven at the end of the Jewish age.
His _crown was merited_ for having "fought the good fight and kept the
faith." The crown means that exalted honor he should then receive for
having "turned many to righteousness." And not only himself, but all,
"who love the appearing of Christ," should shine as the brightness of
the firmament and as the stars forever and ever in his gospel kingdom
among men. We this day look upon the martyrs and apostles as the
lights of the Christian world and as occupying, on the sacred page,
stations far more exalted than any ever conferred upon the greatest
men of the universe. They are "made priests and kings to God" for
dying in his cause, and thus establishing the truth of Christianity.

This was the "first resurrection," and these were the persons who had
a part in it, which no subsequent christians can ever can have. Rev.
xx:6--"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first
resurrection, on such the second death hath no power, but they shall
be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand
years." But if Christ had not come in his kingdom at the end of the
Jewish age, as the prophets and himself had declared, then the whole
Christian system must have fallen and the names of its martyrs and
apostles remained buried in perpetual infamy as a set of deluded men
and impostors. But, blessed be God, it is not so. They, by their
faithfulness, have attained unto the "first resurrection" and thus
broken the dark chains of infidelity into fragments. This is the
_resurrection and change_ referred to in Phil. iii:20, 21, and 1
Thess. iv:15, 16, 17, on which we have commented.

We have intentionally omitted till now Phil. iii:11, 12, as our ideas
will be more readily comprehended here than in our introductory
discourse, where we simply adverted to these words of Paul--"If by any
means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead--Not as though
I had already attained either were already perfect," &c. Here we
perceive that the resurrection unto which he desired to attain
depended on his exertions in the cause of Christ, and being faithful
unto the end. He says (verse 14)--"I press towards the mark for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus." But what prize was
this? Ans. It was a _part_ in the _first resurrection_ to which he
desired to attain (verse 11) and he was not "perfect," he feared "lest
after having preached to others himself might be a cast-away." He
feared that he might not endure faithful unto the end. He was well
aware that the promise was--"Be thou faithful unto death and I will
give thee a crown of life." To obtain this crown of life in the first
resurrection, was the _highest prize_, the _highest calling of God_,
ever suspended upon human merits! Paul did continue faithful, and as
he was led to the thought of death, with composure and satisfaction
exclaimed--"For I am now ready to be offered; and the time of my
departure" is at hand. "I have fought the good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a
_crown of righteousness_, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall
give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also, that
love his appearing." Here we perceive that Paul had continued
faithful, and was entitled to the promised crown, which was awarded to
him, and to all "the dead in Christ," who, on account of their
faithfulness, had a part in the first resurrection--when he came in
the clouds of heaven to establish his kingdom. It has nothing to do
with the immortal resurrection of the dead, for that is not the reward
of merit, but the gift of God. To _that_ all shall attain who die in
Adam. But in the _first_ resurrection none had a part except those who
died in the cause of Christ, and the living who continued faithful to
the day of his appearing. On them and _them only_ devolved the honor
of establishing the truth of Christianity for the happiness of future
generations, by not only testifying that they had seen Jesus alive
from the dead, but by cheerfully submitting to death, and showing
themselves miracles of suffering in his cause. Both the departed and
those that remained alive, attained to the first resurrection, were
glorified together, and their crowns shall shine in the gospel heavens
with undiminished splendor long after those of kings and tyrants shall
be dimmed and lost in the vortex of revolutions.

He concludes the chapter by noticing the change of the "vile body"
which we have explained. Here then is no evidence of a general
resurrection, nor of the end of time. The _context_, the _silence_ of
Jesus about the change of the living into immortal beings, and the
_whole tenor_ of revelation combine to set it at defiance. Of one
thing I am satisfied; that no man ever _has_, and I believe, no man
ever _can reconcile_ the change of the living and the resurrection of
the dead recorded in Philippians and 1 Thessalonians with their
respective contexts, so as to prove a general and immortal
resurrection at the end of time. As I have traveled in an untrodden
path, I do not know but that I may have erred in some minor points,
but am satisfied that my general positions are sound and tenable.

[To be continued.]

SERMON XXIV

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." 1
Cor. xv:20.

We have now come to that point in our subject where it will be
necessary to cite a few passages to prove that the immortal
resurrection is _successive, not general_, and will conclude by
considering some of the principal texts, which may be urged as
objections.

We have already shown that the resurrection of the dead was to be at
the sound of the last trump. And as that trump commenced sounding at
the end of the Jewish age, when Christ came in his kingdom, I deem it
sufficient to establish the fact that the dead are continually rising
in this _last, this gospel day_. But the question presents itself--
were any of the human family raised immortal before that period? To
this question I give an affirmative answer. I firmly believe, that the
dead have been rising immortal from Adam to the present day, for God
has never changed the established order of the universe. I believe
that the dead are raised without any _miracle_, in the common
acceptance of that term, as much as I believe that we are born, and
die, not by a _miracle_, but according to that constitution of things
which God has immutably established from the beginning. I believe this
doctrine of Christ to be founded upon the unchanging principles of
philosophy but so mysterious, that man in his present existence cannot
comprehend the subtle causes and effects by which he shall put on
immortality. It was, therefore, necessary that this sublime truth
should be established in the world by the miracles Jesus wrought and
by the miraculous power of God in raising him from death. The first
man Adam was made by a miracle, while his posterity are naturally born
into life, according to that constitution of things which God has
established. So Christ, the second Adam, was born from the dead by a
miracle, while mankind from the beginning, have, in succession, been
born from the dead according to that constitution of things which he
has established.

On this principle, it may be stated as an objection, that as none of
Adam's posterity could be born till their parent was created by a
miracle, so none of the human family could be born from the dead, till
Christ the second Adam were raised immortal by the miraculous power of
God. This objection is futile unless it can be proved that Christ
_creates_ life and immortality. In fact, it would even then fail;--
because Christ, as our sacrifice, was slain from the foundation of the
world in the offerings made to God in his stead. The atonement, made
by the high priest throughout the whole Mosaic dispensation, concluded
by raising the Jewish nation in figure on his "breast-plate of
judgment" into the holy of holies, which was a pattern of things in
the heavens. The atonement always involved the resurrection. The
judgment of the Jews, for two thousand years, by Moses only pointed
out the resurrection of man in _figure_, but Christ proved the
_reality_ by a tangible _fact_, and thus revealed it to the living as
the doctrine of God of which the world had been ignorant. So what the
_judgment_ of the world by Moses taught in _figure, the judgment_ of
the world by Christ teaches in _reality_. My limits will not allow me
to argue this point at large. I have already remarked, that I believe
_"the judgment of the world"_ expresses the whole reign of Christ
including the resurrection.

