

THE SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT.

SERMON AT LONDON.

_BY THOMAS CASE._


I come now to the third query, how? And this inquiry divides itself into
two branches--How to (I.) Acceptation and (II.) Perpetuity? For the
satisfying of both which, I will fetch as much as may be out of the
text, that so you may yet further behold what proportion there is
between the duty there, and that which lies before us this day.

In the first place, we must inquire how this duty may be so managed,
that God may accept of us in the doing of it? How to acceptation?

Now, in the general, we must know that this service, being an ordinance
of God, must be undertaken and managed with an ordinance frame of heart,
_i.e._ according to the laws and rules of divine worship; and by how
much the more sacred and solemn this ordinance is, by so much the more
ought we to call up and provoke the choicest, and heavenliest of those
affections and dispositions of spirit, wherewith we make our
addressments to the holy things of God.

In particular, _First_, We are to come to this service, with the most
ponderous advisedness, and most serious deliberation of judgment, that
may be. It is one of those grand qualifications which God Himself calls
for to an oath. "Thou shalt swear in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness." In truth for the matter, and that we have already
examined in the former sermon in righteousness, in reference to the
keeping of the oath (of which hereafter) and in judgment, in respect of
the taking or making of the oath, the thing which we are now about, that
we should well consider what we do. And indeed, if at any time, and in
any undertaking, that advice be useful, "Ponder the path of thy feet,"
"And keep thy foot when thou enterest into the house of God;" then
certainly it is most seasonable, when a people or person draw near to
make or renew their covenant with the most high God. And it seems, in
the latter of those two Scriptures now quoted, the Holy Ghost doth
principally refer to this duty of making vows and covenants with God;
the second verse doth intimate such a business, "Be not rash with thy
mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter anything before God." To
utter what? The fourth verse is express, "when thou makest a vow unto
God." So that it is clear, the purpose of the Holy Ghost in that place
is, as in all our holy services, so especially in this of vows, to
caution all the people of God, when they draw near to utter their vows
unto the Lord, to manage it with the greatest deliberation, and
solidness of judgment that is possible; to sit down and consider with
ourselves before hand, with whom we have to deal? What we have to do?
Upon what warrant? By what rule? To what end? "The lame and the blind,"
God's soul hates for a sacrifice, The lame affections, and the blind
ignorant judgment. And well He may; for certainly, they that do not
swear in judgment, will not, cannot swear in righteousness; they that do
not make their vows in judgment, will not, cannot pay, or perform them
in righteousness. He that swears he knows not what, will observe he
cares not how. Incogitant making, will end in unconscionable breaking of
covenant; and, if need be, in a cursed abjuration of it; for rash
swearing is a precipice to forswearing. And therefore, if any of you
have not well weighed this service, or be any ways unsatisfied, in
whole, or in parts, I advise you to forbear, till your judgments be
better informed. "Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin." Provided, that
this be not done merely in a pretence to evade and elude this service,
to which God and the two nations call you, as here in the text. "Come,
let us join." Take heed of casting a mist of willing prejudice and
affected ignorance, before your own eyes; such the apostle speaks of, to
no other purpose, but that your own malignity may steal away in that
mist undiscovered; for be sure, your sin will find you out. An ingenious
ignorance and truly conscientious tenderness, is accompanied with an
ingenuous and conscientious use of all means, for information and
satisfaction; and to such, I make no question, the ministers of Christ
will be ready to communicate what light they have, for resolving doubts,
removing scruples, and satisfying conscience, whensoever you shall make
your addresses for that purpose. In the mean time, if there be any that,
under pretence of unsatisfiedness, do shun the duty and information too;
they will be found, but to mock God and authority; to whose justice and
wisdom therefore I must leave them. God tells His people, when He joins
Himself to them, "I will marry thee to Myself, in righteousness, and
judgment." How in judgment? Because God considers what He does, when He
takes a people or person to Himself; not that God chuseth for any wealth
or worth in the creature, faith foreseen, or works foreseen; but that
finding it (on the contrary) poor and beggarly, and undone, and
foreseeing what it is like to prove, crooked and froward, unteachable
and untractable; He sits down to speak after the manner of men, and
considers, what course to take, and what it is like to cost Him, to make
them such a people, as He may delight in, and then consulting with His
treasures, and finding He hath wherewithal to bear their charges, and
to bring about His own ends; He resolves to take them, and marry them to
Himself, whatsoever it cost Him. The result of such a consultation you
may read, dropped from God's own pen, "And I said, how shall I put thee
among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of
the hosts of nations?" Here is God's wise deliberation on the matter:
"how shall I put thee?" That is, how shall I do this? But I must do it
to Mine own dishonour; for I see before-hand what thou wilt prove; thou
wilt be the same that ever thou wast; as idolatrous, as adulterous, as
unstable, as backsliding as ever. It is not a pleasant land, a goodly
heritage, that will make thee better. Well, after some pause, God was
resolved what to do: and I said, hear His resolution, "Thou shalt call
Me, my Father, and shalt not turn away from Me:" that is, as if He had
said, I will take this course with thee, I will first give thee the
heart of a child, "thou shalt call Me, Father:" and then I will give
thee the inheritance of a child, "a goodly heritage." And when I have
done; I will not leave thee to thyself, but I will knit thee to Myself,
by an indissoluble union. "I will put My Spirit into thee." "And thou
shalt not turn away from Me." There is God's wise resolution; He
resolves to do all Himself, and then He is sure it will not fail His
expectation; He undertakes it. "Thou shalt call Me, my Father, and shalt
not turn away from Me." Thus God, when He marrieth His people to
Himself, doeth it in judgment. Now therefore, "be ye followers of God,
as dear children." And since you come now about the counterpart of the
same work; namely, to join or marry yourselves to God, do it in
judgment. Consider well what you do; and, among other things, since you
are so poor, and nothing in yourselves, as you have seen in the opening
of this precious Scripture; bethink yourselves where you will have
strength and sufficiency, to make good this great and solemn engagement
with your God. But of this more hereafter.

_Secondly_, See that you come to this service with a reverential frame
of spirit, with that holy fear and awe, upon your hearts, as becomes the
greatness and holiness of that God, and that ordinance, with whom you
have to do; remembering that you are this day to swear before God, by
God, to God: either of which, singly considered, might justly make us
fear and tremble; how much more may this threefold cord bow and bind our
hearts down in an humble, and holy prosternation? It is said of Jacob,
"He sware by the fear of his father Isaac." Jacob in his oath chooseth
this title of fear, to give unto God, to shew with what fear he came;
but to swear by this God, what should we do; when, as I say, we come to
swear by Him, and to Him? Surely, when He is so especially the object of
our oath, He should then especially be the object of our fear. The
consideration of that infinite distance between God and us, may
wonderfully advantage us towards the getting of our hearts into this
holy posture. Great is that distance that is between a king and a
beggar; and yet, there is but creature and creature; greater is that
distance between heaven and earth; and yet these, but creature and
creature; and yet, greater is the distance between an angel and a worm;
and yet still, there is but creature and creature. But now, the distance
that is between God and us, is infinitely wider; for behold, there is
the "Mighty, Almighty Creator, before whom all the nations are but as a
drop of a bucket, and the small dust of the balance." And the poor
nothing creature, "vanity, and altogether lighter than vanity." And yet,
this is not all; yea, this is the shortest measure of that distance,
whereof we speak; the distance of Creator and the creature; lo, it is
found between God and the angels in heaven, and the "spirits of just men
made perfect;" in respect whereof, the Psalmist saith of God, "He
humbleth Himself to behold the things that are in heaven." It is a
condescension for that infinitely glorious being, who dwells in Himself,
and is abundantly satisfied in the beholding of His own incomprehensible
excellencies, to vouchsafe to look out of Himself, and behold the things
that are in heaven; the best of those glorious inhabitants that stand
round about His throne; who therefore, conscious of that infinite
distance wherein they stand, make their addresses with the greatest
self-abasements, "covering their faces, and casting themselves down"
upon those heavenly pavements. But, behold! upon us, poor wretches, that
dwell here below, in these houses of clay, there is found that which
widens this distance beyond all expression or apprehension; sin sets us
farther beneath a worm, than a worm is beneath an angel. I had almost
said (bear with the expression, I use it, because no other expression
can reach it) sin sets us as much beneath our creatureship, as our
creatureship sets us beneath the Creator. Surely there is more of God to
be seen in the worst of a creature, than there is of a creature to be
seen in the best of sin; there is nothing vile and base enough under
heaven, to make a simile of sin.

And now, therefore, if it be such a condescension for the great God to
behold the things that are in heaven, how infinite condescension is it,
to behold the sinful things that are on earth! and if sinless saints,
and spotless angels do tender their services, which yet are as spotless
as their persons, with such reverential deportment; what abhorrency and
self-annihilation can be sufficient to accompany our approaches to this
God of holiness, in such high and holy engagements, in whom, when God
looks out of Himself, He can behold nothing besides our creatureship, of
our own, but that which His soul hates! "Let us therefore have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably," in this so excellent an ordinance,
"with reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire." The
acceptable serving of God, is with reverence and godly fear. The Lord
teach us to bring fear, that so we may find acceptation.

Again, _Thirdly_, to that end, labour to approve yourselves to God in
this service, in the uprightness and sincerity of your hearts. The want
of this, God lays oft to the charge of the Israelites, as in other
duties, so especially in this, which is now before us, "They lied to Him
with their tongues: for their heart was not right with Him; neither were
they stedfast in His covenant." And this stood between them and their
acceptance: God tells the prophet Ezekiel as much; "Son of man, these
men have set up their idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling-block
of their iniquity before their face; should I be inquired of at all by
them?" They come with their hearts full of their lusts; so many lusts,
so many idols; and for this God refuseth to be inquired of by them:
"should I be inquired of?" is as much as, "I will not be inquired of."
It is a denial with disdain; "should I?" Or, if they be so impudent to
inquire, He will not answer; or if He give them an answer, it shall be a
cold one; He will give them their answer at the door; better none; "I
will answer them according to the multitude of their idols," _i.e._
according to the merit of their idolatry: they bring the matter of their
own damnation with them, and they shall carry away nothing else from Me,
but the answer or obsignation of that damnation. Oh! it is a dangerous
thing, to bring the love of any sin with us to the ordinances of God,
"If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer."
And so may we say to our own souls; if I regard iniquity, the Lord will
not accept my person, He will not regard my covenant. If God see
anything lie nearer our hearts than Himself, He will scorn us, and our
services. If, therefore, you would be accepted, "out with your idols;"
cast out the love of sin, out of your hearts; and be upright with your
God in this holy undertaking. It is the main qualification in the text,
"they shall inquire the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward,"
_i.e._, in sincerity, with uprightness of spirit, with the full set and
bent of their souls: as it is said of Christ, when He went to His
passion; "He stedfastly set His face to go up to Jerusalem." He went
with all His heart to be crucified; with a strong bent of spirit.
Beloved, we are not going to "crucifying work," (unless it be to crucify
the flesh with the affections and lusts) but to marriage work; "to join
ourselves to the Lord, in an everlasting covenant." Let us do it "with
our faces Zion-ward;" yea, let us stedfastly set our faces
reformation-ward and heaven-ward, and God-ward, and Christ-ward, with
whom we enter covenant this day. A man may inquire the way to Zion, with
his face towards Babylon; a people or person may enter covenant with
God, with their hearts Rome-ward, and earth-ward, and sin-ward, and
hell-ward. Friends, look to your hearts. "Peradventure, said Jacob, my
father will feel me, and I shall seem to him as one that mocks, and I
shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing." Without all
peradventure, may we say, our Father will feel us; for He searcheth all
hearts, and understandeth the imagination of the thoughts. If we be
found as they that mock, shewing much love with our mouths, while our
hearts are far from Him, we shall bring a curse upon ourselves; yea, and
upon the kingdoms also, and not a blessing. It is reported to the honour
of Judah, in the day of their covenanting with their God; "they had
sworn with all their heart, and with their whole desire." And their
success was answerable to their sincerity; for so it follows, "And the
Lord was found of them, and gave them rest round about." Oh! that this
might be our honour and happiness in this day, of our lifting up our
hands to the most high God, that God might not see in us a double heart,
an heart and an heart, as the Hebrew expresses it, _i.e._ one heart for
God, and another for our idols; one heart for Christ, and another for
Antichrist,: but He might see us a single, upright hearted people,
without base mixtures and composition; for He loves truth, _i.e._
sincerity, in the inward parts; that He finding such sincerity as He
looks for, we also might find such success as we look for; safety and
deliverance to both the nations; yea, that both in respect of our
sincerity and success, that might be made good upon us that is spoken to
the eternal honour of that good king Hezekiah, "And in every work that
he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the
commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and
prospered." Universal sincerity is accompanied with universal
prosperity; in all he did, he was upright, and in all he did, he
prospered. Brethren, whatever you want, be sure you want not sincerity;
let God see you fully set in your hearts to take all from sin, and to
give all to Jesus Christ; me-thinks I hear God saying unto us,
"according to your uprightness, so be it unto you."

In the _Fourth_ place, if you would be accepted by God in this holy
service, labour to make God your end. It is your pattern in the text,
"they shall go and seek the Lord;" it was not now "howling upon their
beds for corn and wine," as formerly; of which God says, "they cried not
unto Me," _i.e._, they did not make God the end of their prayers; as
elsewhere God tells them: "When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and
seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye fast to Me, even unto
Me?" In seventy years, they kept sevenscore fasts in Babylon; and yet,
amongst them all, they kept not one day unto God; for though the duty
looked upon God, they that did the duty did not look upon God; that is,
they did not set up God, as their chief end, in fasting and praying:
they mourned not so much for their sin, as for their captivity; or, if
for their sin, they mourned for it not so much as God's dishonour, as
the cause of their captivity; they were not troubled so much, that they
had by their sins walked contrary to God, as that God, by His judgments,
had "walked contrary to them." They fasted and prayed, rather to get off
their chains than to get off their sins; to get rid of the bondage of
the Babylonians, than to get rid of the servitude of their own base
lusts. But now, blessed be God, it was otherwise: "the children of
Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together" to what end?
"They shall seek the Lord," _i.e._ they shall seek God for Himself, and
not only for themselves; "going and weeping;" why? Not so much that He
hath offended them, as that they have offended Him; for their sins, more
than for their punishments; so it is more distinctly reported, "A voice
was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of the
children of Israel; because they have perverted their way, and have
forsaken the Lord their God." They had forgotten God before, not only in
their sins, but in their duties; "they cried not to Me; they fasted not
to Me; not at all unto Me." But now they remember the Lord their God;
they seek His face; they labour to atone Him; yea, they seek Him to be
their Lord, as well as their Saviour; to govern them, as well as to
deliver them; "they ask the way to Zion;" they require as well, and
more, how they should serve Him, as that He should save them. "The Lord
is our judge, the Lord is our law-giver, the Lord is our king, He will
save us." Beloved Christians, let us write after this copy, and in this
great business we have in hand, let us seek God, and seek Him as a
fountain of holiness, as well as a fountain of happiness. Take we heed
of those base, low, dung-hill ends, which prevailed upon the Shechemites
to enter into covenant with the God of the Hebrews, "shall not their
cattle and substance be ours?" Let the two nations, and every soul in
both the nations, that lift up the hand to the most high God, in this
holy league and covenant, take heed of, and abhor such unworthy
thoughts, if they should be crowding in upon this service, and say unto
them, as once Christ to Peter, "get thee behind me, Satan; thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men."
You may remember how it fared with Hamor, and his son Shechem, and their
people, to whom they propounded these base ends. God did not only
disappoint them of their ends, but destroy them for them; their aims
were to get the Hebrews' substance and cattle; but they lost their own,
with lives to boot; "For it came to pass on the third day, when they
were sore, two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, came upon the city
boldly, and slew all the males. And the sons of Jacob came upon the
slain, and spoiled the city; they took their sheep, and their oxen, and
all their wealth." A most horrid and bloody treachery and cruelty in
them, which stands as a brand of infamy upon their foreheads to this
day; but a most just and righteous censure from God, and a caution to
all succeeding generations, of prostituting heavenly and holy ordinances
to earthly and sensual ends. Oh! let it be our "admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come, to the end, that we may not tempt God,
as they also tempted." For, if God so much abhorred, and so severely
punished these worldly respects in the men of the world; if God was so
angry with poor purblind heathen, who had no other light for their
guide, but the glimmering light of nature; how will His anger not only
kindle, but flame in the avenging of such baseness upon Christians, a
people of His own, who have the glorious light of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, to discover to them higher and heavenly ends and references? So
that such a kingdom, people, or person, that should dare to bring such
base carnal ends, to so spiritual and divine a contract, should be made
a monument of the wrath and vengeance of divine justice; and while they
propound to themselves safety, or riches, or greatness, from such an
excellent ordinance, God makes it by a strange but a righteous hand, an
occasion of misery and ruin to them and their posterity, to many
generations.

Christians, labour to set up God in this day and duty, wherein you
engage yourselves so nigh unto Him; and if you would have heavenly
blessings, see that you propound and pursue heavenly ends and aims;
lest, while you come to make a covenant with God, you commit idolatry
against Him. Whatsoever we make our ultimate and highest end, we make
our God. If therefore you cannot make God your sole, your only end, yet
be sure you make Him your choicest, your chiefest end; keep God in His
own place; and let all self-respects whatsoever vail to His glory,
according to that great rule, "whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever
ye do, do all to the glory of God."

_Fifthly_, To do this business to acceptation, we must do it cheerfully:
as God loves a cheerful giver, so He loves a cheerful hearer, a cheerful
petitioner, and a cheerful covenanter; and you have it in the text too,
"come let us;" there is their readiness and cheerfulness to the work; as
it was that for which the apostle doth commend his Macedonians in
another service. "This they did, not as we hoped, but first gave
themselves to the Lord." So these, they give themselves to God of their
own accord, "come let us." Oh! that the ministers of the Gospel might
have occasion to make the same boast of you, concerning this solemn
ordinance before you, that they might say and rejoice, that you were a
people, "that gave yourselves to the Lord," and unto the work of
reformation, not by a Parliamentary fear, or by our ministerial
compulsions; but, above our hopes, and beyond our expectations; of your
own accord. See what a wonder, not only of cheerfulness, but of joy and
triumph, is recorded of the Jews in king Asa's time, in their taking of
the covenant. "They sware unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with
shouting; and with trumpets, and with cornets. And all Judah rejoiced at
the oath; for they had sworn with all their hearts." There was indeed a
severe mulct, a capital censure enacted, against those that should
refuse, and reject this ordinance. "They should be put to death, whether
great or small, whether man or woman." A very grievous censure; but it
seems there was neither need, nor use for it; "for all Judah rejoiced at
the oath;" the people looked upon this service, not as their pressure,
but as their privilege; and therefore came to it, not with contentedness
only, but an holy triumph, and so saved the magistrate and themselves
the labour and charges of executing that sentence on delinquents. Oh!
that this may be your wisdom and honour; that whatever penalty the
honourable Parliaments of either nation, shall in their wisdom think fit
to proportion to the grievous sin of rebelling against this covenant of
the Lord; (and it seems by the instance before, that whatsoever penalty
they shall ordain less than death, will not be justice only but
moderation) I say, whatever it shall be, it may be rendered useless and
invalid by the forwardness and rejoicings of an obedient people; that
all England, as well as Scotland, would rejoice at the oath, and swear
with all their hearts. For certainly it will not be so much our duty as
our prerogative, as I have shewed you before, to enter into covenant
with God and His people. It is the day of God's power: the Lord make you
a "willing people." And, as a testimony of this willingness and joy,
imitate the people here in the text, and stir up one another, and
provoke one another to this holy service. "Let us join ourselves to the
Lord." They express their charity, as well as their joy; they would not
go to Zion alone; they call as many as they meet with them; "come let us
join ourselves to the Lord." Oh, that this might be your temper! It is
the very character of the evangelical church; as both Isaiah and Micah
have described it; their words be the same. "Many people shall go and
say, come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord." Oh! that
while neutrals and malignants do discourage one another, and set off one
another, and embitter one another's spirits; God and His ministers might
find you encouraging each other, and provoking one another, and
labouring to oil one another's spirits, to this (as other) Gospel duty
and prerogative; God could not choose, but be much pleased with such a
sight. I might have made this a distinct qualification, but for
brevity's sake, I couch it under this head. I come to the last. If you
would be accepted, bring faith with you to this service: and that in a
fourfold reference; 1. God. 2. The ordinance. 3. Ourselves. 4. Jesus
Christ.

_First_, In reference unto God; "for he that will come to God," in any
ordinance, "must believe that God is and that He is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him." There is nothing God takes better at His
people's hand, than when they come with their hearts as full of good
thoughts of God as ever they can hold; such as, "Lo, this is our God, we
have waited for Him, and He will save us; we have waited for Him, we
will be glad, and rejoice in His salvation." "He will save," "we will be
glad," _i.e._, God will undoubtedly give us occasion of gladness and
triumph in His praises. Oh, sweet and blessed confidence of divine
goodness! how well doth this become the children of such a father, who
hath styled Himself the Father of mercies? Good thoughts of God do
mightily please, and even engage God to shew mercy to His people. "Let
us therefore come with boldness to the throne of grace;" even in this
ordinance also, "that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help us in
this time of our need."

_Secondly_, Let us bring faith in reference to the duty; as we are to
believe well of God, so we are to believe well of the duty, that it is
an ordinance wherein God will be sanctified, and found of them that seek
Him. It is not enough, that we seek Him in His ordinance, but that we
believe it to be His ordinance. "Whatever is not of faith, is sin;" He
speaks not of a faith that doth justify the person; but of a faith that
doth justify the performance; that is, a thorough conviction of
conscience, that the work, whatsoever it is, is such that the word will
bear me out in it, such as God Himself doth approve. To do doubtfully,
is to do sinfully; an ignorant person cannot please God.

_Thirdly_, Bring faith in reference to your own persons; believe that
God will accept of them in this ordinance; whatever your success shall
be in regard of the kingdom, yet you shall find acceptance in regard of
your persons: so the church. "Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and
worketh righteousness, those that remember Thee in Thy ways." When a
people or person can say, as the church in another place, "In the way of
Thy judgments, have we waited for Thee, O Lord; the desire of our soul
is to Thy name, and to the remembrance of Thee," God will not stay till
they come unto Him, but He will meet them half-way; "thou meetest him,"
like the father of the prodigal, while they are yet half-way, He will
see, and run, and meet, and fall upon their neck; and while they weep at
His feet, tears of contrition; He will weep over their necks, the tears
of compassion: Oh! stir up yourselves, and engage your faith to believe,
and expect a gracious entertainment. If God see you coming in the
integrity and uprightness of your hearts, to enter into covenant with
God, to take Him as your God, and to give up yourselves to be His
people, to take away all from sin, and to give all to Jesus Christ; He
will certainly take it well at your hands, and say unto you, "come, my
people, and welcome; I will be your God, and you shall be my people;"
which that you may not miss of,

In the _fourth_ place, come believingly, in reference to Jesus Christ;
be sure you bring a Christ with you; for "He hath made us accepted in
the Beloved." Come without a Christ, and go without acceptance.

The day of atonement among the Jews was called the day of expiation; and
the word _kippurim_ is derived from an Hebrew root, that signifies to
cover; and so the day of atonement was as much as to say, "the day of
covering; the covering of nakedness: and the covering of sin." "Blessed
is the man whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered."
In which very name of the day, the ground or reason is held forth, why
it was called a day of atonement, because it was a day of covering:
wherein Christ was typified, Who is the "the covering of the saints; the
long white robes of His righteousness" covering both their persons and
performances; so that the nakedness of neither doth appear in the eyes
of His Father; "He hath beheld no iniquity in Jacob, neither hath seen
