
Obj. 3: Further, the salvation which Christ bestows is an everlasting
one, according to Isa. 51:6: "My salvation shall be for ever." But
Christ did not ascend into heaven to remain there eternally; for it
is written (Acts 1:11): "He shall so come as you have seen Him going,
into heaven." Besides, we read of Him showing Himself to many holy
people on earth after He went up to heaven, to Paul, for instance
(Acts 9). Consequently, it seems that Christ's Ascension is not the
cause of our salvation.

_On the contrary,_ He Himself said (John 16:7): "It is expedient to
you that I go"; i.e. that I should leave you and ascend into heaven.

_I answer that,_ Christ's Ascension is the cause of our salvation in
two ways: first of all, on our part; secondly, on His.

On our part, in so far as by the Ascension our souls are uplifted to
Him; because, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3), His Ascension fosters,
first, faith; secondly, hope; thirdly, charity. Fourthly, our
reverence for Him is thereby increased, since we no longer deem Him
an earthly man, but the God of heaven; thus the Apostle says (2 Cor.
5:16): "If we have known Christ according to the flesh--'that is, as
mortal, whereby we reputed Him as a mere man,'" as the gloss
interprets the words--"but now we know Him so no longer."

On His part, in regard to those things which, in ascending, He did
for our salvation. First, He prepared the way for our ascent into
heaven, according to His own saying (John 14:2): "I go to prepare a
place for you," and the words of Micheas (2:13), "He shall go up that
shall open the way before them." For since He is our Head the members
must follow whither the Head has gone: hence He said (John 14:3):
"That where I am, you also may be." In sign whereof He took to heaven
the souls of the saints delivered from hell, according to Ps. 67:19
(Cf. Eph. 4:8): "Ascending on high, He led captivity captive,"
because He took with Him to heaven those who had been held captives
by the devil--to heaven, as to a place strange to human nature.
captives in deed of a happy taking, since they were acquired by His
victory.

Secondly, because as the high-priest under the Old Testament entered
the holy place to stand before God for the people, so also Christ
entered heaven "to make intercession for us," as is said in Heb.
7:25. Because the very showing of Himself in the human nature which
He took with Him to heaven is a pleading for us, so that for the very
reason that God so exalted human nature in Christ, He may take pity
on them for whom the Son of God took human nature. Thirdly, that
being established in His heavenly seat as God and Lord, He might send
down gifts upon men, according to Eph. 4:10: "He ascended above all
the heavens, that He might fill all things," that is, "with His
gifts,"    according to the gloss.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ's Ascension is the cause of our salvation by way
not of merit, but of efficiency, as was stated above regarding His
Resurrection (Q. 56, A. 1, ad 3, 4).

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's Passion is the cause of our ascending to
heaven, properly speaking, by removing the hindrance which is sin,
and also by way of merit: whereas Christ's Ascension is the direct
cause of our ascension, as by beginning it in Him who is our Head,
with whom the members must be united.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ by once ascending into heaven acquired for
Himself and for us in perpetuity the right and worthiness of a
heavenly dwelling-place; which worthiness suffers in no way, if, from
some special dispensation, He sometimes comes down in body to earth;
either in order to show Himself to the whole world, as at the
judgment; or else to show Himself particularly to some individual,
e.g. in Paul's case, as we read in Acts 9. And lest any man may think
that Christ was not bodily present when this occurred, the contrary
is shown from what the Apostle says in 1 Cor. 14:8, to confirm faith
in the Resurrection: "Last of all He was seen also by me, as by one
born out of due time": which vision would not confirm the truth of
the Resurrection except he had beheld Christ's very body.
_______________________

QUESTION 58

OF CHRIST'S SITTING AT THE RIGHT HAND OF THE FATHER
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider Christ's sitting at the right hand of the
Father, concerning which there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Christ is seated at the right hand of the Father?

(2) Whether this belongs to Him according to the Divine Nature?

(3) Whether it belongs to Him according to His human nature?

(4) Whether it is something proper to Christ?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 58, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Fitting That Christ Should Sit at the Right Hand of God
the Father?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting that Christ should sit at the
right hand of God the Father. For right and left are differences of
bodily position. But nothing corporeal can be applied to God, since
"God is a spirit," as we read in John 4:24. Therefore it seems that
Christ does not sit at the right hand of the Father.

Obj. 2: Further, if anyone sits at another's right hand, then the
latter is seated on his left. Consequently, if Christ sits at the
right hand of the Father, it follows that the Father is seated on the
left of the Son; which is unseemly.

Obj. 3: Further, sitting and standing savor of opposition. But
Stephen (Acts 7:55) said: "Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the
Son of man standing on the right hand of God." Therefore it seems
that Christ does not sit at the right hand of the Father.

_On the contrary,_ It is written in the last chapter of Mark (16:19):
"The Lord Jesus, after He had spoken to them, was taken up to heaven,
and sitteth on the right hand of God."

_I answer that,_ The word "sitting" may have a twofold meaning;
namely, "abiding" as in Luke 24:49: "Sit [Douay: 'Stay'] you in the
city": and royal or judiciary "power," as in Prov. 20:8: "The king,
that sitteth on the throne of judgment, scattereth away all evil with
his look." Now in either sense it belongs to Christ to sit at the
Father's right hand. First of all inasmuch as He abides eternally
unchangeable in the Father's bliss, which is termed His right hand,
according to Ps. 15:11: "At Thy right hand are delights even to the
end." Hence Augustine says (De Symb. i): "'Sitteth at the right hand
of the Father': To sit means to dwell, just as we say of any man: 'He
sat in that country for three years': Believe, then, that Christ
dwells so at the right hand of the Father: for He is happy, and the
Father's right hand is the name for His bliss." Secondly, Christ is
said to sit at the right hand of the Father inasmuch as He reigns
together with the Father, and has judiciary power from Him; just as
he who sits at the king's right hand helps him in ruling and judging.
Hence Augustine says (De Symb. ii): "By the expression 'right hand,'
understand the power which this Man, chosen of God, received, that He
might come to judge, who before had come to be judged."

Reply Obj. 1: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv): "We do not speak
of the Father's right hand as of a place, for how can a place be
designated by His right hand, who Himself is beyond all place? Right
and left belong to things definable by limit. But we style, as the
Father's right hand, the glory and honor of the Godhead."

Reply Obj. 2: The argument holds good if sitting at the right hand be
taken corporeally. Hence Augustine says (De Symb. i): "If we accept
it in a carnal sense that Christ sits at the Father's right hand,
then the Father will be on the left. But there"--that is, in eternal
bliss, "it is all right hand, since no misery is there."

Reply Obj. 3: As Gregory says in a Homily on the Ascension (Hom. xxix
in Evang.), "it is the judge's place to sit, while to stand is the
place of the combatant or helper. Consequently, Stephen in his toil
of combat saw Him standing whom He had as his helper. But Mark
describes Him as seated after the Ascension, because after the glory
of His Ascension He will at the end be seen as judge."
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 58, Art. 2]

Whether It Belongs to Christ As God to Sit at the Right Hand of the
Father?

Objection 1: It would seem that it does not belong to Christ as God
to sit at the right hand of the Father. For, as God, Christ is the
Father's right hand. But it does not appear to be the same thing to
be the right hand of anyone and to sit on his right hand. Therefore,
as God, Christ does not sit at the right hand of the Father.

Obj. 2: Further, in the last chapter of Mark (16:19) it is said that
"the Lord Jesus was taken up into heaven, and sitteth on the right
hand of God." But it was not as God that Christ was taken up to
heaven. Therefore neither does He, as God, sit at the right hand of
God.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ as God is the equal of the Father and of the
Holy Ghost. Consequently, if Christ sits as God at the right hand of
the Father, with equal reason the Holy Ghost sits at the right hand
of the Father and of the Son, and the Father Himself on the right
hand of the Son; which no one is found to say.

_On the contrary,_ Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv): that "what we
style as the Father's right hand, is the glory and honor of the
Godhead, wherein the Son of God existed before ages as God and as
consubstantial with the Father."

_I answer that,_ As may be gathered from what has been said (A. 1)
three things can be understood under the expression "right hand."
First of all, as Damascene takes it, "the glory of the Godhead":
secondly, according to Augustine "the beatitude of the Father":
thirdly, according to the same authority, "judiciary power." Now as
we observed (A. 1) "sitting" denotes either abiding, or royal or
judiciary dignity. Hence, to sit on the right hand of the Father is
nothing else than to share in the glory of the Godhead with the
Father, and to possess beatitude and judiciary power, and that
unchangeably and royally. But this belongs to the Son as God. Hence
it is manifest that Christ as God sits at the right hand of the
Father; yet so that this preposition "at," which is a transitive one,
implies merely personal distinction and order of origin, but not
degree of nature or dignity, for there is no such thing in the Divine
Persons, as was shown in the First Part (Q. 42, AA. 3, 4).

Reply Obj. 1: The Son of God is called the Father's "right hand" by
appropriation, just as He is called the "Power" of the Father (1 Cor.
1:24). But "right hand of the Father," in its three meanings given
above, is something common to the three Persons.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ as man is exalted to Divine honor; and this is
signified in the aforesaid sitting; nevertheless such honor belongs
to Him as God, not through any assumption, but through His origin
from eternity.

Reply Obj. 3: In no way can it be said that the Father is seated at
the right hand of the Son or of the Holy Ghost; because the Son and
the Holy Ghost derive their origin from the Father, and not
conversely. The Holy Ghost, however, can be said properly to sit at
the right hand of the Father or of the Son, in the aforesaid sense,
although by a kind of appropriation it is attributed to the Son, to
whom equality is appropriated; thus Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ.
i) that "in the Father there is unity, in the Son equality, in the
Holy Ghost the connection of unity with equality."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 58, Art. 3]

Whether It Belongs to Christ As Man to Sit at the Right Hand of the
Father?

Objection 1: It would seem that it does not belong to Christ as man
to sit at the right hand of the Father, because, as Damascene says
(De Fide Orth. iv): "What we call the Father's right hand is the
glory and honor of the Godhead." But the glory and honor of the
Godhead do not belong to Christ as man. Consequently, it seems that
Christ as man does not sit at the right hand of the Father.

Obj. 2: Further, to sit on the ruler's right hand seems to exclude
subjection, because one so sitting seems in a measure to be reigning
with him. But Christ as man is "subject unto" the Father, as is said
in 1 Cor. 15:28. Therefore it seems that Christ as man does not sit
at the Father's right hand.

Obj. 3: Further, on Rom. 8:34: "Who is at the right hand of God," the
gloss adds: "that is, equal to the Father in that honor, whereby God
is the Father: or, on the right hand of the Father, that is, in the
mightier gifts of God." And on Heb. 1:3: "sitteth on the right hand
of the majesty on high," the gloss adds, "that is, in equality with
the Father over all things, both in place and dignity." But equality
with God does not belong to Christ as man; for in this respect Christ
Himself says (John 14:28): "The Father is greater than I."
Consequently, it appears unseemly for Christ as man to sit on the
Father's right hand.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Symb. ii): "By the expression
'right hand' understand the power which this Man, chosen of God,
received, that He might come as judge, who before had come to be
judged."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), by the expression "right
hand" is understood either the glory of His Godhead, or His eternal
beatitude, or His judicial and royal power. Now this preposition "at"
signifies a kind of approach to the right hand; thus denoting
something in common, and yet with a distinction, as already observed
(De Symb. ii). And this can be in three ways: first of all, by
something common in nature, and a distinction in person; and thus
Christ as the Son of God, sits at the right hand of the Father,
because He has the same Nature as the Father: hence these things
belong to the Son essentially, just as to the Father; and this is to
be in equality with the Father. Secondly, according to the grace of
union, which, on the contrary, implies distinction of nature, and
unity of person. According to this, Christ as man is the Son of God,
and consequently sits at the Father's right hand; yet so that the
expression "as" does not denote condition of nature, but unity of
suppositum, as explained above (Q. 16, AA. 10, 11). Thirdly, the said
approach can be understood according to habitual grace, which is more
fully in Christ than in all other creatures, so much so that human
nature in Christ is more blessed than all other creatures, and
possesses over all other creatures royal and judiciary power.

So, then, if "as" denote condition of nature, then Christ, as God,
sits "at the Father's right hand," that is, "in equality with the
Father"; but as man, He sits "at the right hand of the Father," that
is, "in the Father's mightier gifts beyond all other creatures," that
is to say, "in greater beatitude," and "exercising judiciary power."
But if "as" denote unity of person, thus again as man, He sits at the
Father's right hand "as to equality of honor," inasmuch as with the
same honor we venerate the Son of God with His assumed nature, as was
said above (Q. 25, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: Christ's humanity according to the conditions of His
nature has not the glory or honor of the Godhead, which it has
nevertheless by reason of the Person with whom it is united. Hence
Damascene adds in the passage quoted: "In which," that is, in the
glory of the Godhead, "the Son of God existing before ages, as God
and consubstantial with the Father, sits in His conglorified flesh;
for, under one adoration the one hypostasis, together with His flesh,
is adored by every creature."

Reply Obj. 2: Christ as man is subject to the Father, if "as" denote
the condition of nature: in which respect it does not belong to Him
as man to sit at the Father's right hand, by reason of their mutual
equality. But it does thus belong to Him to sit at the right hand of
the Father, according as is thereby denoted the excellence of
beatitude and His judiciary power over every creature.

Reply Obj. 3: It does not belong to Christ's human nature to be in
equality with the Father, but only to the Person who assumed it; but
it does belong even to the assumed human nature to share in God's
mightier gifts, in so far as it implies exaltation above other
creatures.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 58, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Proper to Christ to Sit at the Right Hand of the Father?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not proper to Christ to sit at
the right hand of the Father, because the Apostle says (Eph. 2:4, 6):
"God . . . hath raised us up together, and hath made us sit together
in the heavenly places through Christ Jesus." But to be raised up is
not proper to Christ. Therefore for like reason neither is it proper
to Him to sit "on the right hand" of God "on high" (Heb. 1:3).

Obj. 2: Further, as Augustine says (De Symb. i): "For Christ to sit
at the right hand of the Father, is to dwell in His beatitude." But
many more share in this. Therefore it does not appear to be proper to
Christ to sit at the right hand of the Father.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ Himself says (Apoc. 3:21): "To him that shall
overcome, I will give to sit with Me in My throne: as I also have
overcome, and am set down with My Father in His throne." But it is by
sitting on His Father's throne that Christ is seated at His right
hand. Therefore others who overcome likewise, sit at the Father's
right hand.

Obj. 4: Further, the Lord says (Matt. 20:23): "To sit on My right or
left hand, is not Mine to give to you, but to them for whom it is
prepared by My Father." But no purpose would be served by saying
this, unless it was prepared for some. Consequently, to sit at the
right hand is not proper to Christ.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Heb. 1:13): "To which of the angels
said He at any time: Sit thou on My right hand, i.e. 'in My mightier
gifts,'" or "'as my equal in the Godhead'"? [*The comment is from the
gloss of Peter Lombard] as if to answer: "To none." But angels are
higher than other creatures. Therefore, much less does it belong to
anyone save Christ to sit at the Father's right hand.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), Christ is said to sit at the
Father's right hand inasmuch as He is on equality with the Father in
respect of His Divine Nature, while in respect of His humanity, He
excels all creatures in the possession of Divine gifts. But each of
these belongs exclusively to Christ. Consequently, it belongs to no
one else, angel or man, but to Christ alone, to sit at the right hand
of the Father.

Reply Obj. 1: Since Christ is our Head, then what was bestowed on
Christ is bestowed on us through Him. And on this account, since He
is already raised up, the Apostle says that God has, so to speak,
"raised us up together with Him," still we ourselves are not raised
up yet, but are to be raised up, according to Rom. 8:11: "He who
raised up Jesus from the dead, shall quicken also your mortal
bodies": and after the same manner of speech the Apostle adds that
"He has made us to sit together with Him, in the heavenly places";
namely, for the very reason that Christ our Head sits there.

Reply Obj. 2: Since the right hand is the Divine beatitude, then "to
sit on the right hand" does not mean simply to be in beatitude, but
to possess beatitude with a kind of dominative power, as a property
and part of one's nature. This belongs to Christ alone, and to no
other creature. Yet it can be said that every saint in bliss is
placed on God's right hand; hence it is written (Matt. 25:33): "He
shall set the sheep on His right hand."

Reply Obj. 3: By the "throne" is meant the judiciary power which
Christ has from the Father: and in this sense He is said "to sit in
the Father's throne." But other saints have it from Christ; and in
this respect they are said "to sit on Christ's throne"; according to
Matt. 19:28: "You also shall sit upon twelve seats, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel."

Reply Obj. 4: As Chrysostom says (Hom. lxv in Matth.), "that place,"
to wit, sitting at the right hand, "is closed not only to all men,
but likewise to angels: for, Paul declares it to be the prerogative
of Christ, saying: 'To which of the angels said He at any time: Sit
on My right hand?'" Our Lord therefore "replied not as though some
were going to sit there one day, but condescending to the
supplication of the questioners; since more than others they sought
this one thing alone, to stand nigh to Him." Still it can be said
that the sons of Zebedee sought for higher excellence in sharing His
judiciary power; hence they did not ask to sit on the Father's right
hand or left, but on Christ's.
_______________________

QUESTION 59

OF CHRIST'S JUDICIARY POWER
(In Six Articles)

We have now to consider Christ's judiciary power. Under this head
there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether judiciary power is to be attributed to Christ?

(2) Whether it belongs to Him as man?

(3) Whether He acquired it by merits?

(4) Whether His judiciary power is universal with regard to all men?

(5) Whether besides the judgment that takes place now in time, we are
to expect Him in the future general judgment?

(6) Whether His judiciary power extends likewise to the angels?

It will be more suitable to consider the execution of the Last
Judgment when we treat of things pertaining to the end of the world
[*See Suppl., QQ. 88, seqq.]. For the present it will be enough to
touch on those points that concern Christ's dignity.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 59, Art. 1]

Whether Judiciary Power Is to Be Specially Attributed to Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that judiciary power is not to be
specially attributed to Christ. For judgment of others seems to
belong to their lord; hence it is written (Rom. 14:4): "Who art thou
that judgest another man's servant?" But, it belongs to the entire
Trinity to be Lord over creatures. Therefore judiciary power ought
not to be attributed specially to Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Dan. 7:9): "The Ancient of days sat";
and further on (Dan. 7:10), "the judgment sat, and the books were
opened." But the Ancient of days is understood to be the Father,
because as Hilary says (De Trin. ii): "Eternity is in the Father."
Consequently, judiciary power ought rather to be attributed to the
Father than to Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems to belong to the same person to judge as it
does to convince. But it belongs to the Holy Ghost to convince: for
our Lord says (John 16:8): "And when He is come," i.e. the Holy
Ghost, "He will convince the world of sin, and of justice, and of
judgment." Therefore judiciary power ought to be attributed to the
Holy Ghost rather than to Christ.

_On the contrary,_ It is said of Christ (Acts 10:42): "It is He who
was appointed by God, to be judge of the living end of the dead."

_I answer that,_ Three things are required for passing judgment:
first, the power of coercing subjects; hence it is written (Ecclus.
7:6): "Seek not to be made a judge unless thou have strength enough
to extirpate iniquities." The second thing required is upright zeal,
so as to pass judgment not out of hatred or malice, but from love of
justice, according to Prov. 3:12: "For whom the Lord loveth, He
chasteneth: and as a father in the son He pleaseth Himself." Thirdly,
wisdom is needed, upon which judgment is based, according to Ecclus.
10:1: "A wise judge shall judge his people." The first two are
conditions for judging; but on the third the very rule of judgment is
based, because the standard of judgment is the law of wisdom or
truth, according to which the judgment is passed.

Now because the Son is Wisdom begotten, and Truth proceeding from the
Father, and His perfect Image, consequently, judiciary power is
properly attributed to the Son of God. Accordingly Augustine says (De
Vera Relig. xxxi): "This is that unchangeable Truth, which is rightly
styled the law of all arts, and the art of the Almighty Craftsman.
But even as we and all rational souls judge aright of the things
beneath us, so does He who alone is Truth itself pass judgment on us,
when we cling to Him. But the Father judges Him not, for He is the
Truth no less than Himself. Consequently, whatever the Father judges,
He judges through It." Further on he concludes by saying: "Therefore
the Father judges no man, but has given all judgment to the Son."

Reply Obj. 1: This argument proves that judiciary power is common to
the entire Trinity, which is quite true: still by special
appropriation such power is attributed to the Son, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (De Trin. vi), eternity is attributed
to the Father, because He is the Principle, which is implied in the
idea of eternity. And in the same place Augustine says that the Son
is the art of the Father. So, then, judiciary authority is attributed
to the Father, inasmuch as He is the Principle of the Son, but the
very rule of judgment is attributed to the Son who is the art and
wisdom of the Father, so that as the Father does all things through
the Son, inasmuch as the Son is His art, so He judges all things
through the Son, inasmuch as the Son is His wisdom and truth. And
this is implied by Daniel, when he says in the first passage that
"the Ancient of days sat," and when he subsequently adds that the Son
of Man "came even to the Ancient of days, who gave Him power, and
glory, and a kingdom": and thereby we are given to understand that
the authority for judging lies with the Father, from whom the Son
received the power to judge.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (Tract. xcv in Joan.): "Christ said
that the Holy Ghost shall convince the world of sin, as if to say 'He
shall pour out charity upon your hearts.' For thus, when fear is
driven away, you shall have freedom for convincing." Consequently,
then, judgment is attributed to the Holy Ghost, not as regards the
rule of judgment, but as regards man's desire to judge others aright.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 59, Art. 2]

Whether Judiciary Power Belongs to Christ As Man?

Objection 1: It would seem that judiciary power does not belong to
Christ as man. For Augustine says (De Vera Relig. xxxi) that judgment
is attributed to the Son inasmuch as He is the law of the first
truth. But this is Christ's attribute as God. Consequently, judiciary
power does not belong to Christ as man but as God.

Obj. 2: Further, it belongs to judiciary power to reward the good,
just as to punish the wicked. But eternal beatitude, which is the
reward of good works, is bestowed by God alone: thus Augustine says
(Tract. xxiii super Joan.) that "the soul is made blessed by
participation of God, and not by participation of a holy soul."
Therefore it seems that judiciary power does not belong to Christ as
man, but as God.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs to Christ's judiciary power to judge
secrets of hearts, according to 1 Cor. 4:5: "Judge not before the
time; until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts." But this belongs exclusively to the Divine power, according
to Jer. 17:9, 10: "The heart of man is perverse and unsearchable, who
can know it? I am the Lord who search the heart, and prove the reins:
who give to every one according to his way." Therefore judiciary
power does not belong to Christ as man but as God.

_On the contrary,_ It is said (John 5:27): "He hath given Him power
to do judgment, because He is the Son of man."

_I answer that,_ Chrysostom (Hom. xxxix in Joan.) seems to think that
judiciary power belongs to Christ not as man, but only as God.
Accordingly he thus explains the passage just quoted from John: "'He
gave Him power to do judgment, because He is the Son of man: wonder
not at this.' For He received judiciary power, not because He is man;
but because He is the Son of the ineffable God, therefore is He
judge. But since the expressions used were greater than those
appertaining to man, He said in explanation: 'Wonder not at this,
because He is the Son of man, for He is likewise the Son of God.'"
And he proves this by the effect of the Resurrection: wherefore He
adds: "Because the hour cometh when the dead in their graves shall
hear the voice of the Son of God."

But it must be observed that although the primary authority of
judging rests with God, nevertheless the power to judge is committed
to men with regard to those subject to their jurisdiction. Hence it
is written (Deut. 1:16): "Judge that which is just"; and further on
(Deut. 1:17): "Because it is the judgment of God," that is to say, it
is by His authority that you judge. Now it was said before (Q. 8, AA.
1, 4) that Christ even in His human nature is Head of the entire
Church, and that God has "put all things under His feet."
Consequently, it belongs to Him, even according to His human nature,
to exercise judiciary power. On this account, it seems that the
authority of Scripture quoted above must be interpreted thus: "He
gave Him power to do judgment, because He is the Son of Man"; not on
account of the condition of His nature, for thus all men would have
this kind of power, as Chrysostom objects (Hom. xxxix in Joan.); but
because this belongs to the grace of the Head, which Christ received
in His human nature.

Now judiciary power belongs to Christ in this way according to His
human nature on three accounts. First, because of His likeness and
kinship with men; for, as God works through intermediary causes, as
being closer to the effects, so He judges men through the Man Christ,
that His judgment may be sweeter to men. Hence (Heb. 4:15) the
Apostle says: "For we have not a high-priest, who cannot have
compassion on our infirmities; but one tempted in all things like as
we are, without sin. Let us go therefore with confidence to the
throne of His grace." Secondly, because at the last judgment, as
Augustine says (Tract. xix in Joan.), "there will be a resurrection
of dead bodies, which God will raise up through the Son of Man"; just
as by "the same Christ He raises souls," inasmuch as "He is the Son
of God." Thirdly, because, as Augustine observes (De Verb. Dom.,
Serm. cxxvii): "It was but right that those who were to be judged
should see their judge. But those to be judged were the good and the
bad. It follows that the form of a servant should be shown in the
judgment to both good and wicked, while the form of God should be
kept for the good alone."

Reply Obj. 1: Judgment belongs to truth as its standard, while it
belongs to the man imbued with truth, according as he is as it were
one with truth, as a kind of law and "living justice" [*Aristotle,
_Ethic._ v]. Hence Augustine quotes (De Verb. Dom., Serm. cxxvii)
the saying of 1 Cor. 2:15: "The spiritual man judgeth all things."
But beyond all creatures Christ's soul was more closely united with
truth, and more full of truth; according to John 1:14: "We saw
Him . . . full of grace and truth." And according to this it belongs
principally to the soul of Christ to judge all things.

Reply Obj. 2: It belongs to God alone to bestow beatitude upon souls
by a participation with Himself; but it is Christ's prerogative to
bring them to such beatitude, inasmuch as He is their Head and the
author of their salvation, according to Heb. 2:10: "Who had brought
many children into glory, to perfect the author of their salvation by
His Passion."

Reply Obj. 3: To know and judge the secrets of hearts, of itself
belongs to God alone; but from the overflow of the Godhead into
Christ's soul it belongs to Him also to know and to judge the secrets
of hearts, as we stated above (Q. 10, A. 2), when dealing with the
knowledge of Christ. Hence it is written (Rom. 2:16): "In the day
when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 59, Art. 3]

Whether Christ Acquired His Judiciary Power by His Merits?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not acquire His judiciary
power by His merits. For judiciary power flows from the royal
dignity: according to Prov. 20:8: "The king that sitteth on the
throne of judgment, scattereth away all evil with his look." But it
was without merits that Christ acquired royal power, for it is His
due as God's Only-begotten Son: thus it is written (Luke 1:32): "The
Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of David His father, and He
shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever." Therefore Christ did not
obtain judiciary power by His merits.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated above (A. 2), judiciary power is Christ's
due inasmuch as He is our Head. But the grace of headship does not
belong to Christ by reason of merit, but follows the personal union
of the Divine and human natures: according to John 1:14, 16: "We saw
His glory . . . as of the Only-Begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth . . . and of His fulness we all have received": and this
pertains to the notion of headship. Consequently, it seems that
Christ did not have judiciary power from merits.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 2:15): "The spiritual man
judgeth all things." But a man becomes spiritual through grace, which
is not from merits; otherwise it is "no more grace," as is said in
Rom. 11:6. Therefore it seems that judiciary power belongs neither to
Christ nor to others from any merits, but from grace alone.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Job 36:17): "Thy cause hath been
judged as that of the wicked, cause and judgment thou shalt recover."
And Augustine says (Serm. cxxvii): "The Judge shall sit, who stood
before a judge; He shall condemn the truly wicked, who Himself was
falsely reputed wicked."

_I answer that,_ There is nothing to hinder one and the same thing
from being due to some one from various causes: as the glory of the
body in rising was due to Christ not only as befitting His Godhead
and His soul's glory, but likewise "from the merit of the lowliness
of His Passion" [*Cf. Augustine, Tract. civ in Joan.]. And in the
same way it must be said that judiciary power belongs to the Man
Christ on account of both His Divine personality, and the dignity of
His headship, and the fulness of His habitual grace: and yet He
obtained it from merit, so that, in accordance with the Divine
justice, He should be judge who fought for God's justice, and
conquered, and was unjustly condemned. Hence He Himself says (Apoc.
3:21): "I have overcome and am set down in My Father's throne [Vulg.:
'with My Father in His throne']." Now judiciary power is understood
by "throne," according to Ps. 9:5: "Thou hast sat on the throne, who
judgest justice."

Reply Obj. 1: This argument holds good of judiciary power according
as it is due to Christ by reason of the union with the Word of God.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument is based on the ground of His grace as
Head.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument holds good in regard to habitual grace,
which perfects Christ's soul. But although judiciary power be
Christ's due in these ways, it is not hindered from being His due
from merit.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 59, Art. 4]

Whether Judiciary Power Belongs to Christ with Respect to All Human
Affairs?

Objection 1: It would seem that judiciary power concerning all human
affairs does not belong to Christ. For as we read in Luke 12:13, 14,
when one of the crowd said to Christ: "Speak to my brother that he
divide the inheritance with me; He said to him: Man, who hath
appointed Me judge, or divider over you?" Consequently, He does not
exercise judgment over all human affairs.

Obj. 2: Further, no one exercises judgment except over his own
subjects. But, according to Heb. 2:8, "we see not as yet all things
subject to" Christ. Therefore it seems that Christ has not judgment
over all human affairs.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx) that it is part of
Divine judgment for the good to be afflicted sometimes in this world,
and sometimes to prosper, and in like manner the wicked. But the same
was the case also before the Incarnation. Consequently, not all God's
judgments regarding human affairs are included in Christ's judiciary
power.

_On the contrary,_ It is said (John 5:22): "The Father hath given all
judgment to the Son."

_I answer that,_ If we speak of Christ according to His Divine
Nature, it is evident that every judgment of the Father belongs to
the Son; for, as the Father does all things through His Word, so He
judges all things through His Word.

But if we speak of Christ in His human nature, thus again is it
evident that all things are subject to His judgment. This is made
clear if we consider first of all the relationship subsisting between
Christ's soul and the Word of God; for, if "the spiritual man judgeth
all things," as is said in 1 Cor. 2:15, inasmuch as his soul clings
to the Word of God, how much more Christ's soul, which is filled with
the truth of the Word of God, passes judgment upon all things.

Secondly, the same appears from the merit of His death; because,
according to Rom. 14:9: "To this end Christ died and rose again; that
He might be Lord both of the dead and of the living." And therefore
He has judgment over all men; and on this account the Apostle adds
(Rom. 14:10): "We shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ": and (Dan. 7:14) it is written that "He gave Him power, and
glory, and a kingdom; and all peoples, tribes, and tongues shall
serve Him."

Thirdly, the same thing is evident from comparison of human affairs
with the end of human salvation. For, to whomsoever the substance is
entrusted, the accessory is likewise committed. Now all human affairs
are ordered for the end of beatitude, which is everlasting salvation,
to which men are admitted, or from which they are excluded by
Christ's judgment, as is evident from Matt. 25:31, 40. Consequently,
it is manifest that all human affairs are included in Christ's
judiciary power.

Reply Obj. 1: As was said above (A. 3, Obj. 1), judiciary power goes
with royal dignity. Now Christ, although established king by God, did
not wish while living on earth to govern temporarily an earthly
kingdom; consequently He said (John 18:36): "My kingdom is not of
this world." In like fashion He did not wish to exercise judiciary
power over temporal concerns, since He came to raise men to Divine
things. Hence Ambrose observes on this passage in Luke: "It is well
that He who came down with a Divine purpose should hold Himself aloof
from temporal concerns; nor does He deign to be a judge of quarrels
and an arbiter of property, since He is judge of the quick and the
dead, and the arbitrator of merits."

Reply Obj. 2: All things are subject to Christ in respect of that
power, which He received from the Father, over all things, according
to Matt. 28:18: "All power is given to Me in heaven and in earth."
But as to the exercise of this power, all things are not yet subject
to Him: this will come to pass in the future, when He shall fulfil
His will regarding all things, by saving some and punishing others.

Reply Obj. 3: Judgments of this kind were exercised by Christ before
His Incarnation, inasmuch as He is the Word of God: and the soul
united with Him personally became a partaker of this power by the
Incarnation.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 59, Art. 5]

Whether After the Judgment That Takes Place in the Present Time,
There Remains Yet Another General Judgment?

Objection 1: It would seem that after the Judgment that takes place
in the present time, there does not remain another General Judgment.
For a judgment serves no purpose after the final allotment of rewards
and punishments. But rewards and punishments are allotted in this
present time: for our Lord said to the thief on the cross (Luke
23:43): "This day thou shalt be with Me in paradise": and (Luke
16:22) it is said that "the rich man died and was buried in hell."
Therefore it is useless to look forward to a final Judgment.

Obj. 2: Further, according to another (the Septuagint) version of
Nahum 1:9, "God shall not judge the same thing a second time." But in
the present time God judges both temporal and spiritual matters.
Therefore, it does not seem that another final judgment is to be
expected.

Obj. 3: Further, reward and punishment correspond with merit and
demerit. But merit and demerit bear relation to the body only in so
far as it is the instrument of the soul. Therefore reward or
punishment is not due to the body save as the soul's instrument.
Therefore no other Judgment is called for at the end (of the world)
to requite man with reward or punishment in the body, besides that
Judgment in which souls are now punished or rewarded.

_On the contrary,_ It is said in John 12:48: "The word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge you [Vulg.: 'him'] in the last day."
Therefore there will be a Judgment at the last day besides that which
takes place in the present time.

_I answer that,_ Judgment cannot be passed perfectly upon any
changeable subject before its consummation: just as judgment cannot
be given perfectly regarding the quality of any action before its
completion in itself and in its results: because many actions appear
to be profitable, which in their effects prove to be hurtful. And in
the same way perfect judgment cannot be passed upon any man before
the close of his life, since he can be changed in many respects from
good to evil, or conversely, or from good to better, or from evil to
worse. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. 9:27): "It is appointed unto men
once to die, and after this the Judgment."

But it must be observed that although man's temporal life in itself
ends with death, still it continues dependent in a measure on what
comes after it in the future. In one way, as it still lives on in
men's memories, in which sometimes, contrary to the truth, good or
evil reputations linger on. In another way in a man's children, who
are so to speak something of their parent, according to Ecclus. 30:4:
"His father is dead, and he is as if he were not dead, for he hath
left one behind him that is like himself." And yet many good men have
wicked sons, and conversely. Thirdly, as to the result of his
actions: just as from the deceit of Arius and other false leaders
unbelief continues to flourish down to the close of the world; and
even until then faith will continue to derive its progress from the
preaching of the apostles. In a fourth way, as to the body, which is
sometimes buried with honor and sometimes left unburied, and finally
falls to dust utterly. In a fifth way, as to the things upon which a
man's heart is set, such as temporal concerns, for example, some of
which quickly lapse, while others endure longer.

Now all these things are submitted to the verdict of the Divine
Judgment; and consequently, a perfect and public Judgment cannot be
made of all these things during the course of this present time.
Wherefore, there must be a final Judgment at the last day, in which
everything concerning every man in every respect shall be perfectly
and publicly judged.

Reply Obj. 1: Some men have held the opinion that the souls of the
saints shall not be rewarded in heaven, nor the souls of the lost
punished in hell, until the Judgment-day. That this is false appears
from the testimony of the Apostle (2 Cor. 5:8), where he says: "We
are confident and have a good will to be absent rather from the body,
and to be present with the Lord": that is, not to "walk by faith" but
"by sight," as appears from the context. But this is to see God in
His Essence, wherein consists "eternal life," as is clear from John
17:3. Hence it is manifest that the souls separated from bodies are
in eternal life.

Consequently, it must be maintained that after death man enters into
an unchangeable state as to all that concerns the soul: and therefore
there is no need for postponing judgment as to the reward of the
soul. But since there are some other things pertaining to a man which
go on through the whole course of time, and which are not foreign to
the Divine judgment, all these things must be brought to judgment at
the end of time. For although in regard to such things a man neither
merits nor demerits, still in a measure they accompany his reward or
punishment. Consequently all these things must be weighed in the
final judgment.

Reply Obj. 2: "God shall not judge twice the same thing," i.e. in the
same respect; but it is not unseemly for God to judge twice according
to different respects.

Reply Obj. 3: Although the reward or punishment of the body depends
upon the reward or punishment of the soul, nevertheless, since the
soul is changeable only accidentally, on account of the body, once it
is separated from the body it enters into an unchangeable condition,
and receives its judgment. But the body remains subject to change
down to the close of time: and therefore it must receive its reward
or punishment then, in the last Judgment.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 59, Art. 6]

Whether Christ's Judiciary Power Extends to the Angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's judiciary power does not
extend to the angels, because the good and wicked angels alike were
judged in the beginning of the world, when some fell through sin
while others were confirmed in bliss. But those already judged have
no need of being judged again. Therefore Christ's judiciary power
does not extend to the angels.

Obj. 2: Further, the same person cannot be both judge and judged. But
the angels will come to judge with Christ, according to Matt. 25:31:
"When the Son of Man shall come in His majesty, and all the angels
with Him." Therefore it seems that the angels will not be judged by
Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, the angels are higher than other creatures. If
Christ, then, be judge not only of men but likewise of angels, then
for the same reason He will be judge of all creatures; which seems to
be false, since this belongs to God's providence: hence it is written
(Job 34:13): "What other hath He appointed over the earth? or whom
hath He set over the world which He made?" Therefore Christ is not
the judge of the angels.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 6:3): "Know you not that
we shall judge angels?" But the saints judge only by Christ's
authority. Therefore, much more does Christ possess judiciary power
over the angels.

_I answer that,_ The angels are subjects of Christ's judiciary power,
not only with regard to His Divine Nature, as He is the Word of God,
but also with regard to His human nature. And this is evident from
three considerations. First of all, from the closeness of His assumed
nature to God; because, according to Heb. 2:16: "For nowhere doth He
take hold of the angels, but of the seed of Abraham He taketh hold."
Consequently, Christ's soul is more filled with the truth of the Word
of God than any angel: for which reason He also enlightens the
angels, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. vii), and so He has power to
judge them. Secondly, because by the lowliness of His Passion, human
nature in Christ merited to be exalted above the angels; so that, as
is said in Phil. 2:10: "In the name of Jesus every knee should bow,
of those that are in heaven, on earth, and under the earth." And
therefore Christ has judiciary power even over the good and wicked
angels: in token whereof it is said in the Apocalypse (7:11) that
"all the angels stood round about the throne." Thirdly, on account of
what they do for men, of whom Christ is the Head in a special manner.
Hence it is written (Heb. 1:14): "They are [Vulg.: 'Are they not']
all ministering spirits, sent to minister for them, who shall receive
the inheritance of salvation (?)." But they are submitted to Christ's
judgment, first, as regards the dispensing of those things which are
done through them; which dispensing is likewise done by the Man
Christ, to whom the angels ministered, as related (Matt. 4:11), and
from whom the devils besought that they might be sent into the swine,
according to Matt. 8:31. Secondly, as to other accidental rewards of
the good angels, such as the joy which they have at the salvation of
men, according to Luke 15:10: "There shall be joy before the angels
of God upon one sinner doing penance": and furthermore as to the
accidental punishments of the devils wherewith they are either
tormented here, or are shut up in hell; and this also belongs to the
Man Christ: hence it is written (Mk. 1:24) that the devil cried out:
"What have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? art Thou come to
destroy us?" Thirdly, as to the essential reward of the good angels,
which is everlasting bliss; and as to the essential punishment of the
wicked angels, which is everlasting damnation. But this was done by
Christ from the beginning of the world, inasmuch as He is the Word of
God.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument considers judgment as to the essential
reward and chief punishment.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (De Vera Relig. xxxi): "Although the
spiritual man judgeth all things, still he is judged by Truth
Itself." Consequently, although the angels judge, as being spiritual
creatures, still they are judged by Christ, inasmuch as He is the
Truth.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ judges not only the angels, but also the
administration of all creatures. For if, as Augustine says (De Trin.
iii) the lower things are ruled by God through the higher, in a
certain order, it must be said that all things are ruled by Christ's
soul, which is above every creature. Hence the Apostle says (Heb.
2:5): "For God hath not subjected unto angels the world to
come"--subject namely to Christ--"of whom we speak" [Douay: 'whereof
we speak'] [*The words "subject namely to Christ" are from a gloss].
Nor does it follow that God set another over the earth; since one and
the same Person is God and Man, our Lord Jesus Christ.

Let what has been said of the Mystery of His Incarnation suffice for
the present.
_______________________

TREATISE ON THE SACRAMENTS (QQ. 60-90)
_______________________

QUESTION 60

WHAT IS A SACRAMENT?
(In Eight Articles)

After considering those things that concern the mystery of the
incarnate Word, we must consider the sacraments of the Church which
derive their efficacy from the Word incarnate Himself. First we shall
consider the sacraments in general; secondly, we shall consider
specially each sacrament.

Concerning the first our consideration will be fivefold: (1) What is
a sacrament? (2) Of the necessity of the sacraments; (3) of the
effects of the sacraments; (4) Of their cause; (5) Of their number.

Under the first heading there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether a sacrament is a kind of sign?

(2) Whether every sign of a sacred thing is a sacrament?

(3) Whether a sacrament is a sign of one thing only, or of several?

(4) Whether a sacrament is a sign that is something sensible?

(5) Whether some determinate sensible thing is required for a
sacrament?

(6) Whether signification expressed by words is necessary for a
sacrament?

(7) Whether determinate words are required?

(8) Whether anything may be added to or subtracted from these words?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 60, Art. 1]

Whether a Sacrament Is a Kind of Sign?

Objection 1: It seems that a sacrament is not a kind of sign. For
sacrament appears to be derived from "sacring" (_sacrando_); just as
medicament, from _medicando_ (healing). But this seems to be of the
nature of a cause rather than of a sign. Therefore a sacrament is a
kind of cause rather than a kind of sign.

Obj. 2: Further, sacrament seems to signify something hidden,
according to Tob. 12:7: "It is good to hide the secret
(_sacramentum_) of a king"; and Eph. 3:9: "What is the dispensation
of the mystery (_sacramenti_) which hath been hidden from eternity in
God." But that which is hidden, seems foreign to the nature of a
sign; for "a sign is that which conveys something else to the mind,
besides the species which it impresses on the senses," as Augustine
explains (De Doctr. Christ. ii). Therefore it seems that a sacrament
is not a kind of sign.

Obj. 3: Further, an oath is sometimes called a sacrament: for it is
written in the Decretals (Caus. xxii, qu. 5): "Children who have not
attained the use of reason must not be obliged to swear: and whoever
has foresworn himself once, must no more be a witness, nor be allowed
to take a sacrament," i.e. an oath. But an oath is not a kind of
sign, therefore it seems that a sacrament is not a kind of sign.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x): "The visible
sacrifice is the sacrament, i.e. the sacred sign, of the invisible
sacrifice."

_I answer that,_ All things that are ordained to one, even in
different ways, can be denominated from it: thus, from health which
is in an animal, not only is the animal said to be healthy through
being the subject of health: but medicine also is said to be healthy
through producing health; diet through preserving it; and urine,
through being a sign of health. Consequently, a thing may be called a
"sacrament," either from having a certain hidden sanctity, and in
this sense a sacrament is a "sacred secret"; or from having some
relationship to this sanctity, which relationship may be that of a
cause, or of a sign or of any other relation. But now we are speaking
of sacraments in a special sense, as implying the habitude of sign:
and in this way a sacrament is a kind of sign.

Reply Obj. 1: Because medicine is an efficient cause of health,
consequently whatever things are denominated from medicine are to be
referred to some first active cause: so that a medicament implies a
certain causality. But sanctity from which a sacrament is
denominated, is not there taken as an efficient cause, but rather as
a formal or a final cause. Therefore it does not follow that a
sacrament need always imply causality.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers sacrament in the sense of a
"sacred secret." Now not only God's but also the king's, secret, is
said to be sacred and to be a sacrament: because according to the
ancients, whatever it was unlawful to lay violent hands on was said
to be holy or sacrosanct, such as the city walls, and persons of high
rank. Consequently those secrets, whether Divine or human, which it
is unlawful to violate by making them known to anybody whatever, are
called "sacred secrets or sacraments."

Reply Obj. 3: Even an oath has a certain relation to sacred things,
in so far as it consists in calling a sacred thing to witness. And in
this sense it is called a sacrament: not in the sense in which we
speak of sacraments now; the word "sacrament" being thus used not
equivocally but analogically, i.e. by reason of a different relation
to the one thing, viz. something sacred.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 60, Art. 2]

Whether Every Sign of a Holy Thing Is a Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that not every sign of a sacred thing is a
sacrament. For all sensible creatures are signs of sacred things;
according to Rom. 1:20: "The invisible things of God are clearly seen
being understood by the things that are made." And yet all sensible
things cannot be called sacraments. Therefore not every sign of a
sacred thing is a sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever was done under the Old Law was a figure of
Christ Who is the "Holy of Holies" (Dan. 9:24), according to 1 Cor.
10:11: "All (these) things happened to them in figure"; and Col.
2:17: "Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is
Christ's." And yet not all that was done by the Fathers of the Old
Testament, not even all the ceremonies of the Law, were sacraments,
but only in certain special cases, as stated in the Second Part
(I-II, Q. 101, A. 4). Therefore it seems that not every sign of a
sacred thing is a sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, even in the New Testament many things are done in
sign of some sacred thing; yet they are not called sacraments; such
as sprinkling with holy water, the consecration of an altar, and such
like. Therefore not every sign of a sacred thing is a sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ A definition is convertible with the thing
defined. Now some define a sacrament as being "the sign of a sacred
thing"; moreover, this is clear from the passage quoted above (A. 1)
from Augustine. Therefore it seems that every sign of a sacred thing
is a sacrament.

_I answer that,_ Signs are given to men, to whom it is proper to
discover the unknown by means of the known. Consequently a sacrament
properly so called is that which is the sign of some sacred thing
pertaining to man; so that properly speaking a sacrament, as
considered by us now, is defined as being the "sign of a holy thing
so far as it makes men holy."

Reply Obj. 1: Sensible creatures signify something holy, viz. Divine
wisdom and goodness inasmuch as these are holy in themselves; but not
inasmuch as we are made holy by them. Therefore they cannot be called
sacraments as we understand sacraments now.

Reply Obj. 2: Some things pertaining to the Old Testament signified
the holiness of Christ considered as holy in Himself. Others
signified His holiness considered as the cause of our holiness; thus
the sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb signified Christ's Sacrifice
whereby we are made holy: and such like are properly styled
sacraments of the Old Law.

Reply Obj. 3: Names are given to things considered in reference to
their end and state of completeness. Now a disposition is not an end,
whereas perfection is. Consequently things that signify disposition
to holiness are not called sacraments, and with regard to these the
objection is verified: only those are called sacraments which signify
the perfection of holiness in man.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 60, Art. 3]

Whether a Sacrament Is a Sign of One Thing Only?

Objection 1: It seems that a sacrament is a sign of one thing only.
For that which signifies many things is an ambiguous sign, and
consequently occasions deception: this is clearly seen in equivocal
words. But all deception should be removed from the Christian
religion, according to Col. 2:8: "Beware lest any man cheat you by
philosophy and vain deceit." Therefore it seems that a sacrament is
not a sign of several things.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated above (A. 2), a sacrament signifies a holy
thing in so far as it makes man holy. But there is only one cause of
man's holiness, viz. the blood of Christ; according to Heb. 13:12:
"Jesus, that He might sanctify the people by His own blood, suffered
without the gate." Therefore it seems that a sacrament does not
signify several things.

Obj. 3: Further, it has been said above (A. 2, ad 3) that a sacrament
signifies properly the very end of sanctification. Now the end of
sanctification is eternal life, according to Rom. 6:22: "You have
your fruit unto sanctification, and the end life everlasting."
Therefore it seems that the sacraments signify one thing only, viz.
eternal life.

_On the contrary,_ In the Sacrament of the Altar, two things are
signified, viz. Christ's true body, and Christ's mystical body; as
Augustine says (Liber Sent. Prosper.).

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2) a sacrament properly speaking
is that which is ordained to signify our sanctification. In which
three things may be considered; viz. the very cause of our
sanctification, which is Christ's passion; the form of our
sanctification, which is grace and the virtues; and the ultimate end
of our sanctification, which is eternal life. And all these are
signified by the sacraments. Consequently a sacrament is a sign that
is both a reminder of the past, i.e. the passion of Christ; and an
indication of that which is effected in us by Christ's passion, i.e.
grace; and a prognostic, that is, a foretelling of future glory.

Reply Obj. 1: Then is a sign ambiguous and the occasion of deception,
when it signifies many things not ordained to one another. But when
it signifies many things inasmuch as, through being mutually
ordained, they form one thing, then the sign is not ambiguous but
certain: thus this word "man" signifies the soul and body inasmuch as
together they form the human nature. In this way a sacrament
signifies the three things aforesaid, inasmuch as by being in a
certain order they are one thing.

Reply Obj. 2: Since a sacrament signifies that which sanctifies, it
must needs signify the effect, which is implied in the sanctifying
cause as such.

Reply Obj. 3: It is enough for a sacrament that it signify that
perfection which consists in the form, nor is it necessary that it
should signify only that perfection which is the end.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 60, Art. 4]

Whether a Sacrament Is Always Something Sensible?

Objection 1: It seems that a sacrament is not always something
sensible. Because, according to the Philosopher (Prior. Anal. ii),
every effect is a sign of its cause. But just as there are some
sensible effects, so are there some intelligible effects; thus
science is the effect of a demonstration. Therefore not every sign is
sensible. Now all that is required for a sacrament is something that
is a sign of some sacred thing, inasmuch as thereby man is
sanctified, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore something sensible is
not required for a sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, sacraments belong to the kingdom of God and the
Divine worship. But sensible things do not seem to belong to the
Divine worship: for we are told (John 4:24) that "God is a spirit;
and they that adore Him, must adore Him in spirit and in truth"; and
(Rom. 14:17) that "the kingdom of God is not meat and drink."
Therefore sensible things are not required for the sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii) that "sensible
things are goods of least account, since without them man can live
aright." But the sacraments are necessary for man's salvation, as we
shall show farther on (Q. 61, A. 1): so that man cannot live aright
without them. Therefore sensible things are not required for the
sacraments.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Tract. lxxx super Joan.): "The
word is added to the element and this becomes a sacrament"; and he is
speaking there of water which is a sensible element. Therefore
sensible things are required for the sacraments.

_I answer that,_ Divine wisdom provides for each thing according to
its mode; hence it is written (Wis. 8:1) that "she . . . ordereth all
things sweetly": wherefore also we are told (Matt. 25:15) that she
"gave to everyone according to his proper ability." Now it is part of
man's nature to acquire knowledge of the intelligible from the
sensible. But a sign is that by means of which one attains to the
knowledge of something else. Consequently, since the sacred things
which are signified by the sacraments, are the spiritual and
intelligible goods by means of which man is sanctified, it follows
that the sacramental signs consist in sensible things: just as in the
Divine Scriptures spiritual things are set before us under the guise
of things sensible. And hence it is that sensible things are required
for the sacraments; as Dionysius also proves in his book on the
heavenly hierarchy (Coel. Hier. i).

Reply Obj. 1: The name and definition of a thing is taken principally
from that which belongs to a thing primarily and essentially: and not
from that which belongs to it through something else. Now a sensible
effect being the primary and direct object of man's knowledge (since
all our knowledge springs from the senses) by its very nature leads
to the knowledge of something else: whereas intelligible effects are
not such as to be able to lead us to the knowledge of something else,
except in so far as they are manifested by some other thing, i.e. by
certain sensibles. It is for this reason that the name sign is given
primarily and principally to things which are offered to the senses;
hence Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii) that a sign "is that
which conveys something else to the mind, besides the species which
it impresses on the senses." But intelligible effects do not partake
of the nature of a sign except in so far as they are pointed out by
certain signs. And in this way, too, certain things which are not
sensible are termed sacraments as it were, in so far as they are
signified by certain sensible things, of which we shall treat further
on (Q. 63, A. 1, ad 2; A. 3, ad 2; Q. 73, A. 6; Q. 74, A. 1, ad 3).

Reply Obj. 2: Sensible things considered in their own nature do not
belong to the worship or kingdom of God: but considered only as signs
of spiritual things in which the kingdom of God consists.

Reply Obj. 3: Augustine speaks there of sensible things, considered
in their nature; but not as employed to signify spiritual things,
which are the highest goods.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 60, Art. 5]

Whether Determinate Things Are Required for a Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that determinate things are not required for a
sacrament. For sensible things are required in sacraments for the
purpose of signification, as stated above (A. 4). But nothing hinders
the same thing being signified by divers sensible things: thus in
Holy Scripture God is signified metaphorically, sometimes by a stone
(2 Kings 22:2; Zech. 3:9; 1 Cor. 10:4; Apoc. 4:3); sometimes by a
lion (Isa. 31:4; Apoc. 5:5); sometimes by the sun (Isa. 60:19, 20;
Mal. 4:2), or by something similar. Therefore it seems that divers
things can be suitable to the same sacrament. Therefore determinate
things are not required for the sacraments.

Obj. 2: Further, the health of the soul is more necessary than that
of the body. But in bodily medicines, which are ordained to the
health of the body, one thing can be substituted for another which
happens to be wanting. Therefore much more in the sacraments, which
are spiritual remedies ordained to the health of the soul, can one
thing be substituted for another when this happens to be lacking.

Obj. 3: Further, it is not fitting that the salvation of men be
restricted by the Divine Law: still less by the Law of Christ, Who
came to save all. But in the state of the Law of nature determinate
things were not required in the sacraments, but were put to that use
through a vow, as appears from Gen. 28, where Jacob vowed that he
would offer to God tithes and peace-offerings. Therefore it seems
that man should not have been restricted, especially under the New
Law, to the use of any determinate thing in the sacraments.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord said (John 3:5): "Unless a man be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of God."

_I answer that,_ In the use of the sacraments two things may be
considered, namely, the worship of God, and the sanctification of
man: the former of which pertains to man as referred to God, and the
latter pertains to God in reference to man. Now it is not for anyone
to determine that which is in the power of another, but only that
which is in his own power. Since, therefore, the sanctification of
man is in the power of God Who sanctifies, it is not for man to
decide what things should be used for his sanctification, but this
should be determined by Divine institution. Therefore in the
sacraments of the New Law, by which man is sanctified according to 1
Cor. 6:11, "You are washed, you are sanctified," we must use those
things which are determined by Divine institution.

Reply Obj. 1: Though the same thing can be signified by divers signs,
yet to determine which sign must be used belongs to the signifier.
Now it is God Who signifies spiritual things to us by means of the
sensible things in the sacraments, and of similitudes in the
Scriptures. And consequently, just as the Holy Ghost decides by what
similitudes spiritual things are to be signified in certain passages
of Scripture, so also must it be determined by Divine institution
what things are to be employed for the purpose of signification in
this or that sacrament.

Reply Obj. 2: Sensible things are endowed with natural powers
conducive to the health of the body: and therefore if two of them
have the same virtue, it matters not which we use. Yet they are
ordained unto sanctification not through any power that they possess
naturally, but only in virtue of the Divine institution. And
therefore it was necessary that God should determine the sensible
things to be employed in the sacraments.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix), diverse
sacraments suit different times; just as different times are
signified by different parts of the verb, viz. present, past, and
future. Consequently, just as under the state of the Law of nature
man was moved by inward instinct and without any outward law, to
worship God, so also the sensible things to be employed in the
worship of God were determined by inward instinct. But later on it
became necessary for a law to be given (to man) from without: both
because the Law of nature had become obscured by man's sins; and in
order to signify more expressly the grace of Christ, by which the
human race is sanctified. And hence the need for those things to be
determinate, of which men have to make use in the sacraments. Nor is
the way of salvation narrowed thereby: because the things which need
to be used in the sacraments, are either in everyone's possession or
can be had with little trouble.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 60, Art. 5]

Whether Words Are Required for the Signification of the Sacraments?

Objection 1: It seems that words are not required for the
signification of the sacraments. For Augustine says (Contra Faust.
xix): "What else is a corporeal sacrament but a kind of visible
word?" Wherefore to add words to the sensible things in the
sacraments seems to be the same as to add words to words. But this is
superfluous. Therefore words are not required besides the sensible
things in the sacraments.

Obj. 2: Further, a sacrament is some one thing, but it does not seem
possible to make one thing of those that belong to different genera.
Since, therefore, sensible things and words are of different genera,
for sensible things are the product of nature, but words, of reason;
it seems that in the sacraments, words are not required besides
sensible things.

Obj. 3: Further, the sacraments of the New Law succeed those of the
Old Law: since "the former were instituted when the latter were
abolished," as Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix). But no form of
words was required in the sacraments of the Old Law. Therefore
neither is it required in those of the New Law.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Eph. 5:25, 26): "Christ loved
the Church, and delivered Himself up for it; that He might sanctify
it, cleansing it by the laver of water in the word of life." And
Augustine says (Tract. xxx in Joan.): "The word is added to the
element, and this becomes a sacrament."

_I answer that,_ The sacraments, as stated above (AA. 2, 3), are
employed as signs for man's sanctification. Consequently they can be
considered in three ways: and in each way it is fitting for words to
be added to the sensible signs. For in the first place they can be
considered in regard to the cause of sanctification, which is the
Word incarnate: to Whom the sacraments have a certain conformity, in
that the word is joined to the sensible sign, just as in the mystery
of the Incarnation the Word of God is united to sensible flesh.

Secondly, sacraments may be considered on the part of man who is
sanctified, and who is composed of soul and body: to whom the
sacramental remedy is adjusted, since it touches the body through the
sensible element, and the soul through faith in the words. Hence
Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.) on John 15:3, "Now you are
clean by reason of the word," etc.: "Whence hath water this so great
virtue, to touch the body and wash the heart, but by the word doing
it, not because it is spoken, but because it is believed?"

Thirdly, a sacrament may be considered on the part of the sacramental
signification. Now Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii) that "words
are the principal signs used by men"; because words can be formed in
various ways for the purpose of signifying various mental concepts,
so that we are able to express our thoughts with greater distinctness
by means of words. And therefore in order to insure the perfection of
sacramental signification it was necessary to determine the
signification of the sensible things by means of certain words. For
water may signify both a cleansing by reason of its humidity, and
refreshment by reason of its being cool: but when we say, "I baptize
thee," it is clear that we use water in baptism in order to signify a
spiritual cleansing.

Reply Obj. 1: The sensible elements of the sacraments are called
words by way of a certain likeness, in so far as they partake of a
certain significative power, which resides principally in the very
words, as stated above. Consequently it is not a superfluous
repetition to add words to the visible element in the sacraments;
because one determines the other, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Although words and other sensible things are not in the
same genus, considered in their natures, yet have they something in
common as to the thing signified by them: which is more perfectly
done in words than in other things. Wherefore in the sacraments,
words and things, like form and matter, combine in the formation of
one thing, in so far as the signification of things is completed by
means of words, as above stated. And under words are comprised also
sensible actions, such as cleansing and anointing and such like:
because they have a like signification with the things.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix), the sacraments
of things present should be different from sacraments of things to
come. Now the sacraments of the Old Law foretold the coming of
Christ. Consequently they did not signify Christ so clearly as the
sacraments of the New Law, which flow from Christ Himself, and have a
certain likeness to Him, as stated above. Nevertheless in the Old
Law, certain words were used in things pertaining to the worship of
God, both by the priests, who were the ministers of those sacraments,
according to Num. 6:23, 24: "Thus shall you bless the children of
Israel, and you shall say to them: The Lord bless thee," etc.; and by
those who made use of those sacraments, according to Deut. 26:3: "I
profess this day before the Lord thy God," etc.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 60, Art. 7]

Whether Determinate Words Are Required in the Sacraments?

Objection 1: It seems that determinate words are not required in the
sacraments. For as the Philosopher says (Peri Herm. i), "words are
not the same for all." But salvation, which is sought through the
sacraments, is the same for all. Therefore determinate words are not
required in the sacraments.

Obj. 2: Further, words are required in the sacraments forasmuch as
they are the principal means of signification, as stated above (A.
6). But it happens that various words mean the same. Therefore
determinate words are not required in the sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, corruption of anything changes its species. But some
corrupt the pronunciation of words, and yet it is not credible that
the sacramental effect is hindered thereby; else unlettered men and
stammerers, in conferring sacraments, would frequently do so
invalidly. Therefore it seems that determinate words are not required
in the sacraments.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord used determinate words in consecrating
the sacrament of the Eucharist, when He said (Matt. 26:26): "This is
My Body." Likewise He commanded His disciples to baptize under a form
of determinate words, saying (Matt. 28:19): "Go ye and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 6, ad 2), in the sacraments the
words are as the form, and sensible things are as the matter. Now in
all things composed of matter and form, the determining principle is
on the part of the form, which is as it were the end and terminus of
the matter. Consequently for the being of a thing the need of a
determinate form is prior to the need of determinate matter: for
determinate matter is needed that it may be adapted to the
determinate form. Since, therefore, in the sacraments determinate
sensible things are required, which are as the sacramental matter,
much more is there need in them of a determinate form of words.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (Tract. lxxx super Joan.), the word
operates in the sacraments "not because it is spoken," i.e. not by
the outward sound of the voice, "but because it is believed" in
accordance with the sense of the words which is held by faith. And
this sense is indeed the same for all, though the same words as to
their sound be not used by all. Consequently no matter in what
language this sense is expressed, the sacrament is complete.

Reply Obj. 2: Although it happens in every language that various
words signify the same thing, yet one of those words is that which
those who speak that language use principally and more commonly to
signify that particular thing: and this is the word which should be
used for the sacramental signification. So also among sensible
things, that one is used for the sacramental signification which is
most commonly employed for the action by which the sacramental effect
is signified: thus water is most commonly used by men for bodily
cleansing, by which the spiritual cleansing is signified: and
therefore water is employed as the matter of baptism.

Reply Obj. 3: If he who corrupts the pronunciation of the sacramental
words--does so on purpose, he does not seem to intend to do what the
Church intends: and thus the sacrament seems to be defective. But if
he do this through error or a slip of the tongue, and if he so far
mispronounce the words as to deprive them of sense, the sacrament
seems to be defective. This would be the case especially if the
mispronunciation be in the beginning of a word, for instance, if one
were to say "in nomine matris" instead of "in nomine Patris." If,
however, the sense of the words be not entirely lost by this
mispronunciation, the sacrament is complete. This would be the case
principally if the end of a word be mispronounced; for instance, if
one were to say "patrias et filias." For although the words thus
mispronounced have no appointed meaning, yet we allow them an
accommodated meaning corresponding to the usual forms of speech. And
so, although the sensible sound is changed, yet the sense remains the
same.

What has been said about the various mispronunciations of words,
either at the beginning or at the end, holds forasmuch as with us a
change at the beginning of a word changes the meaning, whereas a
change at the end generally speaking does not effect such a change:
whereas with the Greeks the sense is changed also in the beginning of
words in the conjugation of verbs.

Nevertheless the princip[al] point to observe is the extent of the
corruption entailed by mispronunciation: for in either case it may be
so little that it does not alter the sense of the words; or so great
that it destroys it. But it is easier for the one to happen on the
part of the beginning of the words, and the other at the end.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 60, Art. 8]

Whether It Is Lawful to Add Anything to the Words in Which the
Sacramental Form Consists?

Objection 1: It seems that it is not lawful to add anything to the
words in which the sacramental form consists. For these sacramental
words are not of less importance than are the words of Holy
Scripture. But it is not lawful to add anything to, or to take
anything from, the words of Holy Scripture: for it is written (Deut.
4:2): "You shall not add to the word that I speak to you, neither
shall you take away from it"; and (Apoc. 22:18, 19): "I testify to
everyone that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book: if any
man shall add to these things, God shall add to him the plagues
written in this book. And if any man shall take away . . . God shall
take away his part out of the book of life." Therefore it seems that
neither is it lawful to add anything to, or to take anything from,
the sacramental forms.

Obj. 2: Further, in the sacraments words are by way of form, as
stated above (A. 6, ad 2; A. 7). But any addition or subtraction in
forms changes the species, as also in numbers (Metaph. viii).
Therefore it seems that if anything be added to or subtracted from a
sacramental form, it will not be the same sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the sacramental form demands a certain
number of words, so does it require that these words should be
pronounced in a certain order and without interruption. If therefore,
the sacrament is not rendered invalid by addition or subtraction of
words, in like manner it seems that neither is it, if the words be
pronounced in a different order or with interruptions.

_On the contrary,_ Certain words are inserted by some in the
sacramental forms, which are not inserted by others: thus the Latins
baptize under this form: "I baptize thee in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost"; whereas the Greeks use the
following form: "The servant of God, N . . . is baptized in the name
of the Father," etc. Yet both confer the sacrament validly. Therefore
it is lawful to add something to, or to take something from, the
sacramental forms.

_I answer that,_ With regard to all the variations that may occur in
the sacramental forms, two points seem to call for our attention. One
is on the part of the person who says the words, and whose intention
is essential to the sacrament, as will be explained further on (Q.
64, A. 8). Wherefore if he intends by such addition or suppression to
perform a rite other from that which is recognized by the Church, it
seems that the sacrament is invalid: because he seems not to intend
to do what the Church does.

The other point to be considered is the meaning of the words. For
since in the sacraments, the words produce an effect according to the
sense which they convey, as stated above (A. 7, ad 1), we must see
whether the change of words destroys the essential sense of the
words: because then the sacrament is clearly rendered invalid. Now it
is clear, if any substantial part of the sacramental form be
suppressed, that the essential sense of the words is destroyed; and
consequently the sacrament is invalid. Wherefore Didymus says (De
Spir. Sanct. ii): "If anyone attempt to baptize in such a way as to
omit one of the aforesaid names," i.e. of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, "his baptism will be invalid." But if that which is omitted be
not a substantial part of the form, such an omission does not destroy
the essential sense of the words, nor consequently the validity of
the sacrament. Thus in the form of the Eucharist--"For this is My
Body," the omission of the word "for" does not destroy the essential
sense of the words, nor consequently cause the sacrament to be
invalid; although perhaps he who makes the omission may sin from
negligence or contempt.

Again, it is possible to add something that destroys the essential
sense of the words: for instance, if one were to say: "I baptize thee
in the name of the Father Who is greater, and of the Son Who is
less," with which form the Arians baptized: and consequently such an
addition makes the sacrament invalid. But if the addition be such as
not to destroy the essential sense, the sacrament is not rendered
invalid. Nor does it matter whether this addition be made at the
beginning, in the middle, or at the end: For instance, if one were to
say, "I baptize thee in the name of the Father Almighty, and of the
only Begotten Son, and of the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete," the baptism
would be valid; and in like manner if one were to say, "I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; and may the Blessed Virgin succour thee," the baptism would be
valid.

Perhaps, however, if one were to say, "I baptize thee in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and of the Blessed
Virgin Mary," the baptism would be void; because it is written (1
Cor. 1:13): "Was Paul crucified for you or were you baptized in the
name of Paul?" But this is true if the intention be to baptize in the
name of the Blessed Virgin as in the name of the Trinity, by which
baptism is consecrated: for such a sense would be contrary to faith,
and would therefore render the sacrament invalid: whereas if the
addition, "and in the name of the Blessed Virgin" be understood, not
as if the name of the Blessed Virgin effected anything in baptism,
but as intimating that her intercession may help the person baptized
to preserve the baptismal grace, then the sacrament is not rendered
void.

Reply Obj. 1: It is not lawful to add anything to the words of Holy
Scripture as regards the sense; but many words are added by Doctors
by way of explanation of the Holy Scriptures. Nevertheless, it is not
lawful to add even words to Holy Scripture as though such words were
a part thereof, for this would amount to forgery. It would amount to
the same if anyone were to pretend that something is essential to a
sacramental form, which is not so.

Reply Obj. 2: Words belong to a sacramental form by reason of the
sense signified by them. Consequently any addition or suppression of
words which does not add to or take from the essential sense, does
not destroy the essence of the sacrament.

Reply Obj. 3: If the words are interrupted to such an extent that the
intention of the speaker is interrupted, the sacramental sense is
destroyed, and consequently, the validity of the sacrament. But this
is not the case if the interruption of the speaker is so slight, that
his intention and the sense of the words is not interrupted.

The same is to be said of a change in the order of the words. Because
if this destroys the sense of the words, the sacrament is
invalidated: as happens when a negation is made to precede or follow
a word. But if the order is so changed that the sense of the words
does not vary, the sacrament is not invalidated, according to the
Philosopher's dictum: "Nouns and verbs mean the same though they be
transposed" (Peri Herm. x).
_______________________

QUESTION 61

OF THE NECESSITY OF THE SACRAMENTS
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the necessity of the sacraments; concerning
which there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether sacraments are necessary for man's salvation?

(2) Whether they were necessary in the state that preceded sin?

(3) Whether they were necessary in the state after sin and before
Christ?

(4) Whether they were necessary after Christ's coming?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 61, Art. 1]

Whether Sacraments Are Necessary for Man's Salvation?

Objection 1: It seems that sacraments are not necessary for man's
salvation. For the Apostle says (1 Tim. 4:8): "Bodily exercise is
profitable to little." But the use of sacraments pertains to bodily
exercise; because sacraments are perfected in the signification of
sensible things and words, as stated above (Q. 60, A. 6). Therefore
sacraments are not necessary for the salvation of man.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle was told (2 Cor. 12:9): "My grace is
sufficient for thee." But it would not suffice if sacraments were
necessary for salvation. Therefore sacraments are not necessary for
man's salvation.

Obj. 3: Further, given a sufficient cause, nothing more seems to be
required for the effect. But Christ's Passion is the sufficient cause
of our salvation; for the Apostle says (Rom. 5:10): "If, when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son: much
more, being reconciled, shall we be saved by His life." Therefore
sacraments are not necessary for man's salvation.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix): "It is
impossible to keep men together in one religious denomination,
whether true or false, except they be united by means of visible
signs or sacraments." But it is necessary for salvation that men be
united together in the name of the one true religion. Therefore
sacraments are necessary for man's salvation.

_I answer that,_ Sacraments are necessary unto man's salvation for
three reasons. The first is taken from the condition of human nature
which is such that it has to be led by things corporeal and sensible
to things spiritual and intelligible. Now it belongs to Divine
providence to provide for each one according as its condition
requires. Divine wisdom, therefore, fittingly provides man with means
of salvation, in the shape of corporeal and sensible signs that are
called sacraments.

The second reason is taken from the state of man who in sinning
subjected himself by his affections to corporeal things. Now the
healing remedy should be given to a man so as to reach the part
affected by disease. Consequently it was fitting that God should
provide man with a spiritual medicine by means of certain corporeal
signs; for if man were offered spiritual things without a veil, his
mind being taken up with the material world would be unable to apply
itself to them.

The third reason is taken from the fact that man is prone to direct
his activity chiefly towards material things. Lest, therefore, it
should be too hard for man to be drawn away entirely from bodily
actions, bodily exercise was offered to him in the sacraments, by
which he might be trained to avoid superstitious practices,
consisting in the worship of demons, and all manner of harmful
action, consisting in sinful deeds.

