through Semitic channels from Babylon.

It will be unnecessary here to go in detail through the points of
resemblance that are admitted to exist between the Hebrew account of
Creation in the first chapter of Genesis and that preserved in the
"Seven Tablets".(1) It will suffice to emphasize two of them, which gain
in significance through our newly acquired knowledge of early Sumerian
beliefs. It must be admitted that, on first reading the poem, one is
struck more by the differences than by the parallels; but that is due
to the polytheistic basis of the poem, which attracts attention when
compared with the severe and dignified monotheism of the Hebrew writer.
And if allowance be made for the change in theological standpoint, the
material points of resemblance are seen to be very marked. The outline
or general course of events is the same. In both we have an abyss of
waters at the beginning denoted by almost the same Semitic word, the
Hebrew _tehom_, translated "the deep" in Gen. i. 2, being the equivalent
of the Semitic-Babylonian _Tiamat_, the monster of storm and flood who
presents so striking a contrast to the Sumerian primaeval water.(2) The
second act of Creation in the Hebrew narrative is that of a "firmament",
which divided the waters under it from those above.(3) But this, as we
have seen, has no parallel in the early Sumerian conception until it was
combined with the Dragon combat in the form in which we find it in the
Babylonian poem. There the body of Tiamat is divided by Marduk, and from
one half of her he constructs a covering or dome for heaven, that is to
say a "firmament", to keep her upper waters in place. These will suffice
as text passages, since they serve to point out quite clearly the
Semitic source to which all the other detailed points of Hebrew
resemblance may be traced.

     (1) See _Seven Tablets_, Vol. I, pp. lxxxi ff., and Skinner,
     _Genesis_, pp. 45 ff.

     (2) The invariable use of the Hebrew word _tehom_ without
     the article, except in two passages in the plural, proves
     that it is a proper name (cf. Skinner, op. cit., p. 17); and
     its correspondence with _Tiamat_ makes the resemblance of
     the versions far more significant than if their parallelism
     were confined solely to ideas.

     (3) Gen. i. 6-8.

In the case of the Deluge traditions, so conclusive a demonstration is
not possible, since we have no similar criterion to apply. And on one
point, as we saw, the Hebrew Versions preserve an original Sumerian
strand of the narrative that was not woven into the Gilgamesh Epic,
where there is no parallel to the piety of Noah. But from the detailed
description that was given in the second lecture, it will have been
noted that the Sumerian account is on the whole far simpler and more
primitive than the other versions. It is only in the Babylonian Epic,
for example, that the later Hebrew writer finds material from which to
construct the ark, while the sweet savour of Ut-napishtim's sacrifice,
and possibly his sending forth of the birds, though reproduced in the
earlier Hebrew Version, find no parallels in the Sumerian account.(1) As
to the general character of the Flood, there is no direct reference to
rain in the Sumerian Version, though its presence is probably implied in
the storm. The heavy rain of the Babylonian Epic has been increased
to forty days of rain in the earlier Hebrew Version, which would be
suitable to a country where local rain was the sole cause of flood. But
the later Hebrew writer's addition of "the fountains of the deep" to
"the windows of heaven" certainly suggests a more intimate knowledge of
Mesopotamia, where some contributary cause other than local rain must be
sought for the sudden and overwhelming catastrophes of which the rivers
are capable.

     (1) For detailed lists of the points of agreement presented
     by the Hebrew Versions J and P to the account in the
     Gilgamesh Epic, see Skinner, op. cit., p. 177 f.; Driver,
     _Genesis_, p. 106 f.; and Gordon, _Early Traditions of
     Genesis_ (1907), pp. 38 ff.

Thus, viewed from a purely literary standpoint, we are now enabled to
trace back to a primitive age the ancestry of the traditions, which,
under a very different aspect, eventually found their way into Hebrew
literature. And in the process we may note the changes they underwent
as they passed from one race to another. The result of such literary
analysis and comparison, so far from discrediting the narratives in
Genesis, throws into still stronger relief the moral grandeur of the
Hebrew text.

We come then to the question, at what periods and by what process did
the Hebrews become acquainted with Babylonian ideas? The tendency of the
purely literary school of critics has been to explain the process by the
direct use of Babylonian documents wholly within exilic times. If the
Creation and Deluge narratives stood alone, a case might perhaps be made
out for confining Babylonian influence to this late period. It is
true that during the Captivity the Jews were directly exposed to
such influence. They had the life and civilization of their captors
immediately before their eyes, and it would have been only natural
for the more learned among the Hebrew scribes and priests to interest
themselves in the ancient literature of their new home. And any previous
familiarity with the myths of Babylonia would undoubtedly have been
increased by actual residence in the country. We may perhaps see
a result of such acquaintance with Babylonian literature, after
Jehoiachin's deportation, in an interesting literary parallel that has
been pointed out between Ezek. xiv. 12-20 and a speech in the Babylonian
account of the Deluge in the Gilgamesh Epic, XI, ii. 180-194.(1) The
passage in Ezekiel occurs within chaps. i-xxiv, which correspond to
the prophet's first period and consist in the main of his utterances in
exile before the fall of Jerusalem. It forms, in fact, the introduction
to the prophet's announcement of the coming of "four sore judgements
upon Jerusalem", from which there "shall be left a remnant that shall
be carried forth".(2) But in consequence, here and there, of traces of a
later point of view, it is generally admitted that many of the chapters
in this section may have been considerably amplified and altered by
Ezekiel himself in the course of writing. And if we may regard the
literary parallel that has been pointed out as anything more than
fortuitous, it is open to us to assume that chap. xiv may have been
worked up by Ezekiel many years after his prophetic call at Tel-abib.

     (1) See Daiches, "Ezekiel and the Babylonian Account of the
     Deluge", in the _Jewish Quarterly Review_, April 1905. It
     has of course long been recognized that Ezekiel, in
     announcing the punishment of the king of Egypt in xxxii. 2
     ff., uses imagery which strongly recalls the Babylonian
     Creation myth. For he compares Pharaoh to a sea-monster over
     whom Yahweh will throw his net (as Marduk had thrown his
     over Tiamat); cf. Loisy, _Les mythes babyloniens et les
     premiers chaptires de la Genese_ (1901), p. 87.

     (2) Ezek. xiv. 21 f.

In the passage of the Babylonian Epic, Enlil had already sent the Flood
and had destroyed the good with the wicked. Ea thereupon remonstrates
with him, and he urges that in future the sinner only should be made to
suffer for his sin; and, instead of again causing a flood, let there be
discrimination in the divine punishments sent on men or lands. While
the flood made the escape of the deserving impossible, other forms of
punishment would affect the guilty only. In Ezekiel the subject is the
same, but the point of view is different. The land the prophet has in
his mind in verse 13 is evidently Judah, and his desire is to explain
why it will suffer although not all its inhabitants deserved to share
its fate. The discrimination, which Ea urges, Ezekiel asserts will be
made; but the sinner must bear his own sin, and the righteous, however
eminent, can only save themselves by their righteousness. The general
principle propounded in the Epic is here applied to a special case.
But the parallelism between the passages lies not only in the general
principle but also in the literary setting. This will best be brought
out by printing the passages in parallel columns.

     Gilg. Epic, XI, 180-194             Ezek. xiv. 12-20

     Ea opened his mouth and spake,      And the word of the Lord came
     He said to the warrior Enlil;         unto me, saying,
     Thou director of the gods! O        Son of man, when a land sinneth
     warrior!                            against me by committing a
     Why didst thou not take counsel       trespass, and I stretch out
     but didst cause a flood?            mine hand upon it, and break
     On the transgressor lay his           the staff of the bread
     transgression!                      thereof, and send _famine_
     Be merciful, so that (all) be not     upon it, and cut off from it
     destroyed! Have patience, so        man and beast; though these
     that (all) be not (cut off)!        three men, Noah, Daniel, and
     Instead of causing a flood,           Job, were in it, they should
     Let _lions_(1) come and diminish      deliver but their own souls by
       mankind!                            their righteousness, saith the
     Instead of causing a flood,           Lord God.
     Let _leopards_(1) come and          If I cause _noisome beasts_ to
     diminish mankind!                   pass through the land, and
     Instead of causing a flood,           they spoil it, so that it be
     Let _famine_ be caused and let it     desolate, that no man may pass
     smite the land!                     through because of the beasts;
     Instead of causing a flood,           though these three men were in
     Let the _Plague-god_ come and         it, as I live, saith the Lord
     (slay) mankind!                     God, they shall deliver
     neither sons nor daughters;
     they only shall be delivered,
     but the land shall be
     desolate.
     Or if I bring a _sword_ upon
     that land, and say, Sword, go
     through the land; so that I
     cut off from it man and beast;
     though these three men were in
     it, as I live, saith the Lord
     God, they shall deliver
     neither sons nor daughters,
     but they only shall be
     delivered themselves.
     Or if I send a _pestilence_ into
     that land, and pour out my
     fury upon it in blood, to cut
     off from it man and beast;
     though Noah, Daniel, and Job,
     were in it, as I live, saith
     the Lord God, they shall
     deliver neither son nor
     daughter; they shall but
     deliver their own souls by
     their righteousness.

     (1) Both Babylonian words are in the singular, but probably
     used collectively, as is the case with their Hebrew
     equivalent in Ezek. xiv. 15.

It will be seen that, of the four kinds of divine punishment mentioned,
three accurately correspond in both compositions. Famine and pestilence
occur in both, while the lions and leopards of the Epic find an
equivalent in "noisome beasts". The sword is not referred to in the
Epic, but as this had already threatened Jerusalem at the time of the
prophecy's utterance its inclusion by Ezekiel was inevitable. Moreover,
the fact that Noah should be named in the refrain, as the first of the
three proverbial examples of righteousness, shows that Ezekiel had the
Deluge in his mind, and increases the significance of the underlying
parallel between his argument and that of the Babylonian poet.(1) It may
be added that Ezekiel has thrown his prophecy into poetical form, and
the metre of the two passages in the Babylonian and Hebrew is, as Dr.
Daiches points out, not dissimilar.

     (1) This suggestion is in some measure confirmed by the
     _Biblical Antiquities of Philo_, ascribed by Dr. James to
     the closing years of the first century A.D.; for its writer,
     in his account of the Flood, has actually used Ezek. xiv. 12
     ff. in order to elaborate the divine speech in Gen. viii. 21
     f. This will be seen from the following extract, in which
     the passage interpolated between verses 21 and 22 of Gen.
     viii is enclosed within brackets: "And God said: I will not
     again curse the earth for man's sake, for the guise of man's
     heart hath left off (sic) from his youth. And therefore I
     will not again destroy together all living as I have done.
     (But it shall be, when the dwellers upon earth have sinned,
     I will judge them by _famine_ or by the _sword_ or by fire
     or by _pestilence_ (lit. death), and there shall be
     earthquakes, and they shall be scattered into places not
     inhabited (or, the places of their habitation shall be
     scattered). But I will not again spoil the earth with the
     water of a flood, and) in all the days of the earth seed
     time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and autumn, day and
     night shall not cease . . ."; see James, _The Biblical
     Antiquities of Philo_, p. 81, iii. 9. Here wild beasts are
     omitted, and fire, earthquakes, and exile are added; but
     famine, sword, and pestilence are prominent, and the whole
     passage is clearly suggested by Ezekiel. As a result of the
     combination, we have in the _Biblical Antiquities_ a
     complete parallel to the passage in the Gilgamesh Epic.

It may of course be urged that wild beasts, famine, and pestilence are
such obvious forms of divine punishment that their enumeration by
both writers is merely due to chance. But the parallelism should be
considered with the other possible points of connexion, namely, the fact
that each writer is dealing with discrimination in divine punishments
of a wholesale character, and that while the one is inspired by the
Babylonian tradition of the Flood, the other takes the hero of the
Hebrew Flood story as the first of his selected types of righteousness.
It is possible that Ezekiel may have heard the Babylonian Version
recited after his arrival on the Chebar. And assuming that some form of
the story had long been a cherished tradition of the Hebrews themselves,
we could understand his intense interest in finding it confirmed by the
Babylonians, who would show him where their Flood had taken place. To
a man of his temperament, the one passage in the Babylonian poem that
would have made a special appeal would have been that quoted above,
where the poet urges that divine vengeance should be combined with
mercy, and that all, righteous and wicked alike, should not again be
destroyed. A problem continually in Ezekiel's thoughts was this very
question of wholesale divine punishment, as exemplified in the case of
Judah; and it would not have been unlikely that the literary structure
of the Babylonian extract may have influenced the form in which he
embodied his own conclusions.

But even if we regard this suggestion as unproved or improbable,
Ezekiel's reference to Noah surely presupposes that at least some
version of the Flood story was familiar to the Hebrews before the
Captivity. And this conclusion is confirmed by other Babylonian
parallels in the early chapters of Genesis, in which oral tradition
rather than documentary borrowing must have played the leading part.(1)
Thus Babylonian parallels may be cited for many features in the story
of Paradise,(2) though no equivalent of the story itself has been
recovered. In the legend of Adapa, for example, wisdom and immortality
are the prerogative of the gods, and the winning of immortality by man
is bound up with eating the Food of Life and drinking the Water of
Life; here too man is left with the gift of wisdom, but immortality is
withheld. And the association of winged guardians with the Sacred Tree
in Babylonian art is at least suggestive of the Cherubim and the Tree
of Life. The very side of Eden has now been identified in Southern
Babylonia by means of an old boundary-stone acquired by the British
Museum a year or two ago.(3)

     (1) See Loisy, _Les mythes babyloniens_, pp. 10 ff., and cf.
     S. Reinach, _Cultes, Mythes et Religions_, t. II, pp. 386
     ff.

     (2) Cf. especially Skinner, _Genesis_, pp. 90 ff. For the
     latest discussion of the Serpent and the Tree of Life,
     suggested by Dr. Skinner's summary of the evidence, see
     Frazer in _Essays and Studies presented to William Ridgeway_
     (1913), pp. 413 ff.

     (3) See _Babylonian Boundary Stones in the British Museum_
     (1912), pp. 76 ff., and cf. _Geographical Journal_, Vol. XL,
     No. 2 (Aug., 1912), p. 147. For the latest review of the
     evidence relating to the site of Paradise, see Boissier, "La
     situation du paradis terrestre", in _Le Globe_, t. LV,
     Memoires (Geneva, 1916).

But I need not now detain you by going over this familiar ground. Such
possible echoes from Babylon seem to suggest pre-exilic influence rather
than late borrowing, and they surely justify us in inquiring to what
periods of direct or indirect contact, earlier than the Captivity, the
resemblances between Hebrew and Babylonian ideas may be traced. One
point, which we may regard as definitely settled by our new material, is
that these stories of the Creation and of the early history of the
world were not of Semitic origin. It is no longer possible to regard
the Hebrew and Babylonian Versions as descended from common Semitic
originals. For we have now recovered some of those originals, and they
are not Semitic but Sumerian. The question thus resolves itself into an
inquiry as to periods during which the Hebrews may have come into direct
or indirect contact with Babylonia.

There are three pre-exilic periods at which it has been suggested the
Hebrews, or the ancestors of the race, may have acquired a knowledge
of Babylonian traditions. The earliest of these is the age of the
patriarchs, the traditional ancestors of the Hebrew nation. The second
period is that of the settlement in Canaan, which we may put from 1200
B.C. to the establishment of David's kingdom at about 1000 B.C. The
third period is that of the later Judaean monarch, from 734 B.C. to 586
B.C., the date of the fall of Jerusalem; and in this last period there
are two reigns of special importance in this connexion, those of Ahaz
(734-720 B.C.) and Manasseh (693-638 B.C.).

With regard to the earliest of these periods, those who support the
Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch may quite consistently assume that
Abraham heard the legends in Ur of the Chaldees. And a simple retention
of the traditional view seems to me a far preferable attitude to any
elaborate attempt at rationalizing it. It is admitted that Arabia was
the cradle of the Semitic race; and the most natural line of advance
from Arabia to Aram and thence to Palestine would be up the Euphrates
Valley. Some writers therefore assume that nomad tribes, personified
in the traditional figure of Abraham, may have camped for a time in
the neighbourhood of Ur and Babylon; and that they may have carried
the Babylonian stories with them in their wanderings, and continued to
preserve them during their long subsequent history. But, even granting
that such nomads would have taken any interest in traditions of settled
folk, this view hardly commends itself. For stories received from
foreign sources become more and more transformed in the course of
centuries.(1) The vivid Babylonian colouring of the Genesis narratives
cannot be reconciled with this explanation of their source.

     (1) This objection would not of course apply to M. Naville's
     suggested solution, that cuneiform tablets formed the medium
     of transmission. But its author himself adds that he does
     not deny its conjectural character; see _The Text of the Old
     Testament_ (Schweich Lectures, 1915), p. 32.

A far greater number of writers hold that it was after their arrival in
Palestine that the Hebrew patriarchs came into contact with Babylonian
culture. It is true that from an early period Syria was the scene of
Babylonian invasions, and in the first lecture we noted some newly
recovered evidence upon this point. Moreover, the dynasty to which
Hammurabi belonged came originally from the north-eastern border of
Canaan and Hammurabi himself exercised authority in the west. Thus a
plausible case could be made out by exponents of this theory, especially
as many parallels were noted between the Mosaic legislation and that
contained in Hammurabi's Code. But it is now generally recognized that
the features common to both the Hebrew and the Babylonian legal systems
may be paralleled to-day in the Semitic East and elsewhere,(1) and
cannot therefore be cited as evidence of cultural contact. Thus the
