    was much of doubtful value in the speculations of the Muslim
    Philosophers, but they were Muslims, and if they went too far in their
    efforts to rationalize Islam, they also tried to cast off what to them
    seemed accretions, added on by the Traditionalists and the Canonical
    Legists. They failed because like the earlier scholastics they had no
    gospel to proclaim to men, no tidings to give of a new life which could
    enable wearied humanity to bear the ills to which it was subject.
    Another strong reason was that the orthodoxy against which they strove
    was a logical development of the foundations of Islam, and these
    foundations are too strongly laid for any power other than a spiritual
    one to uproot. They were men of good position in life, voluminous
    writers, profound admirers of Aristotle, and "more or less devoted to
    science, especially to medicine." Yet they did not advance philosophy,
    and science they left much as they found it. They preserved something
    of what Grecian thought had achieved, and so far their labour is not
    lost.

    Thus Islam has, as a religion, no right to claim any of the glory which
    Muslim philosophers are supposed to have shed around it. {186} The
    founders of Islam, the Arabs, produced but one philosopher of
    note.[184] The first impetus to the study was given by heretical
    Khalifs employing Christians at Baghdad to translate Greek books;
    whilst in Spain, where philosophy most flourished, it was due largely
    to the contact of intelligent Muslims with learned Jews. Even there,
    the philosophers were, as a rule, the objects of bitter persecution.
    Now and again, a liberal minded Khalif arose, but a system such as
    Islam survives the liberal tendencies of a generation. From the close
    of the twelfth century (A.D.) downwards it would be difficult to point
    to any Muslim Philosopher, much more to an Arab one, whose work is of
    any real value to the human race. For four hundred years the contest
    raged, a contest such as Islam has never since seen. This great effort
    to bring it into accordance with the main stream of human thought, to
    introduce into it some element of progress utterly failed. The lesson
    is plain. Any project of reform in Islam which admits in any degree its
    fundamental principles must fail. Revolution, not reform, is the only
    hope for the permanence of an independent Muslim state when it enters
    into the circle of civilized nations.

{187}

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER V.

THE PRACTICAL DUTIES OF ISLAM.

The portion of the creed considered in the last chapter was connected with
Iman (faith); the remaining portion is connected with Din (practical
religion). The five principal acts are called Irkan-i-Din, pillars of
religion. They are: (1) The recital of the Kalima, or short confession of
faith; (2) Sulat, the five stated periods of prayer; (3) Roza, the thirty
days' fast of Ramazan; (4) Zakat, legal alms; (5) Hajj, the pilgrimage to
Mecca. These are all _farz_ duties, being based on a Nass-i-Zahir, or
"obvious," sentence of the Quran, a proof derived from which is called
dalil-i-qata'i. This is the strongest of all kinds of proofs.

The authorities, however, specify other religious duties which good Muslims
should perform. Such are the seven duties which are _wajib_, or duties
based on the more obscure texts of the Quran, called Khafi, or "hidden"
sentences, a proof derived from which is called dalil-i-zani. These duties
are: (1) To make the 'Umra, or Pilgrimage to Mecca in addition to the Hajj;
(2) obedience to parents; (3) the obedience of a wife to her husband; (4)
the giving of alms after a fast; (5) the offering of sacrifice; (6) the
saying of Namaz-i-witr, a term which will be explained later on; (7) the
support of relatives. The duties numbered as (4) and (5) are _wajib_ orders
to the rich; but only _mustahab_ to the poor: that is, it is meritorious if
they perform them, but not sinful if they leave them undone.

The duties next in order as regards authority are the _sunnat_ ones. They
are three in number and are based either on the practice of the Prophet, or
are _fitrat_, that is practices of previous prophets, the continuance of
which {188} Muhammad did not forbid. They are (1) circumcision; (2) shaving
off the hair from the head and the body; (3) the paring of the nails. In
addition to these there are actions which are _mustahab_. They are those
which Muhammad sometimes did and sometimes omitted. There is a still lower
class of action which are _mubah_. These are works of supererogation. If
omitted there is no fear of punishment.

It may be mentioned in passing that unlawful actions and things are (1)
_Haram_, actions and food forbidden either in the Quran or the Traditions;
(2) _Mahruh_, actions the unlawfulness of which is not absolutely certain,
but which are generally considered wrong; (3) _Mufsid_, actions corrupting
or pernicious. It is necessary to bear these terms in mind as they will now
frequently occur.

1. TASHAHHUD.--This is the recital of a confession of faith. There are
several forms of this. A common one is: "I testify that there is no deity
but God, I testify to His unity and that He has no partner; I testify that
Muhammad is His servant and His messenger." The shorter form is: "There is
no deity but God and Muhammad is the apostle of God." The power contained
in this latter confession is extraordinary. It embodies the very spirit of
Islam. "It has led everywhere the march of its armies, it has rung for
twelve centuries in the morning air from its minarets, it has been passed
from lip to lip, as no other word has ever been passed, by thousands of
millions of the human race." The power of Islam, its proclamation of the
Unity, is here seen in the closest contact with what is to Muslim
theologians the equally fundamental truth--the apostleship of Muhammad, a
dogma which retards the healthy development, explains the narrowness, and
causes the prostration of Islam, as the world around grows luminant with
the light of science and truth, of faith and reason.

2. SULAT.[185]--All the books on Fiqh (Law) which treat of {189} these
Irkan-i-din, give in connection with Sulat the rules regarding the
necessary purifications. It will be convenient to follow the same order.

Taharat or legal purification is of three kinds: (1) Wazu, the lesser
lustration; (2) Ghusl, the greater lustration; (3) Tayammum, or
purification by sand.

(1). Wazu is an ablution made before saying the appointed prayers. Those
which are 'farz' are four in number, viz:--to wash (1) the face from the
top of the forehead to the chin, and as far as each ear; and (2) the hands
and arms up to the elbow; (3) to rub (masah) with the wet hand a fourth
part of the head; also (4) the feet to the ankles. The authority for these
actions is the text: "O Believers! when ye address yourselves to prayer,
wash your hands up to the elbow, and wipe your heads, and your feet to the
ankles" (Sura v. 8). The Sunnis wash the feet: the Shia'hs are apparently
more correct, for they only wipe, or rather rub, (masah) them. In these
ablutions, if the least portion of the specified part is left untouched,
the whole act becomes useless and the prayer which follows is vain.

The act of making wazu, however, has not been allowed to remain in this
simple form. The Sunnat regulations regarding it are fourteen in number.
They are, (1) to make the intention of wazu, thus: I make this wazu for the
purpose of putting away impurity; (2) to wash the hand up to the wrist, but
care must be taken not to put the hands entirely into the water, until each
has been rubbed three times with water poured on it; (3) to say one of the
names of God at the commencement of the wazu[186] thus: "In the name of the
Great God," or "Thanks be to God for the religion of Islam;" (4) to clean
the teeth; (5) to rinse the mouth three times; (6) to put water into the
{190} nostrils three times; (7) to do all the above in proper order; (8) to
do all without any delay between the various acts; (9) each part is to be
purified three times; (10) the space between the fingers of one hand must
be rubbed with the wet fingers of the other; (11) the beard must be combed
with the fingers; (12) the whole head must be rubbed once; (13) the ears
must be washed with the water remaining on the fingers after the last
operation; (14) to rub under and between the toes with the little finger of
the left hand, drawing it from the little toe of the right foot and between
each toe in succession. Imam Shafa'i holds that (1) and (7) are farz duties
and that (12) should be done three times. Imam Malik considers (8) to be
farz.

The actions may be done in silence, or prayer may be repeated. Such a
recital is a mustahab, not a sunnat or farz order. It is not obligatory. A
specimen of these prayers is given in a note.[187]

(2). Ghusl is an ablution of the whole body after certain legal
defilements, and should be made as follows. The person should put on clean
clothes and perform the wazu, then he should say: "I make ghusl to put away
impurity." All being ready he should wash himself in the following order.
He must pour water over the right shoulder three times, then over the left
three times and, lastly, on his head {191} also the same number of times.
The three farz conditions are that (1) the mouth must be rinsed, (2) water
be put into the nostrils, and (3) the whole body be washed. If one hair
even is left dry the whole act is rendered vain and useless. All other
particulars are sunnat or mustahab.

There are obvious reasons why an explanation of the causes which vitiate a
purification, or of the cases in which ghusl is required, cannot be given
here. Every standard Muslim work on Fikh, or law, deals fully with the
subject. Nothing is more calculated to show the student of Islam how much
the Sunnat rules in the practical life of Muslims. The Traditions have
raised the most trivial ceremonial observances into duties of the greatest
importance. That there may be spiritually minded men in Islam is not to be
denied; but a system of religion which declares that the virtue of prayer
depends practically on an ablution, and that that ablution is useless
unless done in the order prescribed, is one well calculated to make men
formalists and nothing more. It comes to this, that, if a man when making
wazu washes his left hand before his right, or his nose before his teeth,
he cannot lawfully say the daily Namaz enjoined on all Muslims. None but
those who have studied Muslim treatises on the subject can conceive of the
puerile discussions which have taken place on points apparently trivial,
but which from their connection with the Sunnat are deemed by learned
Muslims of great importance.

(3). Tayammum, or purification by sand, is allowable under the following
circumstances. (1) When water cannot be procured except at a distance of
one kos (about 2 miles); (2) in case of sickness when the use of water
might be injurious; (3) when water cannot be obtained without incurring
danger from an enemy, a beast or a reptile; and (4) when on the occasion of
the Namaz of a Feast day or the Namaz at a funeral, the worshipper is late
and has no time to perform the wazu. On ordinary days this substitution of
tayammum for wazu is not allowable.

{192}

The ceremony is performed as follows. The person says: "I make tayammum to
put away impurity;" then, "I seek refuge near God from cursed Satan. I
commence in the name of God, most Merciful and most High, whose praises are
in the religion of Islam." He then strikes the sand with open hands, rubs
his mouth and, at last, the arms to the elbows. Not one hair must be left
untouched or the whole ceremony is useless. The farz acts are to make the
intention of tayammum, to rub the mouth and the hands. "If ye are sick, or
on a journey, or if one of you come from the place of retirement, or if ye
have touched women, and ye find no water, then take clean sand and rub your
faces and your hands with it." (Sura v. 9.)

Minute regulations are laid down with regard to the water which may be used
for purification. The following kinds of water are lawful:--rain, sea,
river, fountain, well, snow and ice-water. Ice is not lawful. The first
kind is authorized by the Quran. "He sent you down water from heaven that
He might thereby cleanse you, and cause the pollution of Satan to pass from
you." (Sura viii. 11.) The use of the others is sanctioned by the
Traditions. I give one illustration. A man one day came to the Prophet and
said: "I am going on a voyage and shall only have a small supply of fresh
water; if I use it for ablutions I shall have none wherewith to quench my
thirst, may I use sea water?" The Prophet replied: "The water of the sea is
pure." Tirmizi states that this is a Hadis-i-Sahih. Great difference of
opinion exists with regard to what constitutes impurity in water, and so
renders it unfit for ablutions. It would be wearisome to the reader to
enter into all details, but I may briefly say that, amongst the orthodox,
it is generally held that if a dead body or any unclean thing falls into
flowing water, or into a reservoir more than 15 feet square it can be used,
provided always that the colour, smell and taste are not changed. It is for
this reason that the pool near a mosque is never less than ten cubits
square. If of {193} that size, it is called a _dah dar dah_, (literally 10
x 10). It may be, and commonly is, larger than this. It should be about one
foot deep.

The necessary ablutions having been made, the worshipper can commence the
Namaz.

(4). Salat or Namaz. The Namaz can be said either in private or in public.
All that is required is that the clothes and person of the worshipper
should be clean, the place free from all impurity, and that the face be
turned towards Mecca. Whether the Namaz is said in public or in private, it
must be preceded by wazu, except when tayammum is allowed. If the
Namaz[188] is said in a mosque which is considered to be more meritorious
than repeating it in private, it must be preceded by the Azan, or call to
prayers, and the Iqamat. Minute particulars regarding the exact attitude in
which the Musalli, one who says the Salat, must stand and the words he is
to say are given in Muslim books. The following account will give some idea
of a Namaz, or Service.[189]

The Mu,azzin[190] calls out loudly in Arabic:--

"Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar[191]!"

All who hear it respond:--

"Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar!"

The Mu,azzin says:--

"I confess there is no God but God, I confess there is no God but God."

Each of his auditors replies:--

"I confess there is no God but God, I confess there is no God but God."

{194}

Mu,azzin:--"I confess Muhammad is the apostle of God."

Auditor:--"I confess Muhammad is the apostle of God."

Mu,azzin:--"Come to prayer."

Auditor:--"I have no power or strength but from God most High and Great."

Mu,azzin:--"Come to do good."

Auditor:--"What God wills will be; what He wills not will not be."

If it is the time of morning prayer, the Mu,azzin adds the words: "Prayer
is better than sleep," to which the response is given: "Thou hast spoken
well." "Allahu Akbar," and "There is no God but God" are then repeated
twice and so the Azan ends.

The Iqamat (literally, "causing to stand") is a repetition of the Azan, but
after the words, "come to do good," the statement "prayer has commenced" is
made.

These preliminaries being now over, the Namaz can commence. It is as
follows:

The Musalli, or worshipper, stands with his hands close to his side and
says in a low voice the Niyyat (intention):--

"I have purposed to offer up to God only, with a sincere heart this morning
(or as the case may be), with my face Qibla-wards, two (or as the case may
be) rak'at prayers, farz (or sunnat or nafl, as the case may be)."

Then follows the Takbir-i-Tahrimah, said with the thumbs touching the lobes
of the ears. The palms of the hands are placed towards the Qibla. The
fingers are slightly separated from each other. In this position the
Musalli says:--"Allahu Akbar!"

The Qiam, or standing position. The palm of the right hand being placed on
the back of the left, the thumb and little finger of the former seize the
wrist of the latter. Both hands are then placed below the navel,[192] the
eyes are {195} directed towards the spot where the head of the worshipper
will touch the ground in prostration, and the Sana is said. It is:--

 "Holiness to Thee O God! and praise be to Thee!
  Great is Thy name! Great is thy Greatness!
  There is no God but Thee!"

The Ta'awwuz is then said:--

 "I seek refuge near God from cursed Satan."

Then follows the Tasmiyah:--

 "In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful."

Then follows the Fatiha,[193] or first chapter of the Quran:--

"Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds! the Compassionate, the Merciful!
King on the day of reckoning! Thee only do we worship, and to Thee do we
cry for help. Guide Thou us on the straight path: the path of those to whom
Thou hast been gracious: with whom Thou art not angry, and who go not
astray."

After this the worshipper can repeat as many chapters of the Quran as he
likes.[194] Some verses he must repeat.

The Surat-ul-Ikhlas (Sura 112) is generally said:--

"Say: He is God alone: God the Eternal, He begetteth not, and is not
begotten; and there is none like unto Him."

The Takbir-i-ruku'--Allahu Akbar!--is said whilst the Musalli makes an
inclination of the head and body, and separating the fingers a little,
places his hands upon his knees.

The Tasbih-i-ruku' is said in the same position. It is:--

 "I extol the holiness of my Lord, the Great!
  I extol the holiness of my Lord, the Great!
  I extol the holiness of my Lord, the Great!"

The Tasmia' is then said with the body erect, but with the hands placed on
either side. Thus:--

{196}

"God hears him who praises Him: O Lord, Thou art praised[195]."

