           feeling of race-pride. The music, though by a foreigner, is
           well suited to the words and is colored by the environment in
           which the composer has spent the best years of his life. The
           whole production seems well fitted to serve as the clarion of
           a people that need every help which art and imagination can
           offer.


                               XIV--Hawaii Ponoi
                            Words by King KALAKAUA
                            Composed by H. BERGER
                                   [Music:]


[Illustration: PU (TRITON TRITONIS)
BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY
BULLETIN 38 PLATE XIX]

[Page 173]


[Page 174]

                 _HAWAI'I PONOI_

                1. Hawai'i ponoi,
                   Nana i kou Moi,
                   Ka lani Ali'i,
                   Ke Ali'i.

                   _Refrain_:

                   Makua lani, e,
                   Kamehameha, e,
                   Na kaua e pale,
                   Me ka ihe.

                2. Hawai'i ponoi,
                   Nana i na 'li'i,
                   Na pua muli kou,
                   Na poki'i.

                   _Refrain_:

                3. Hawai'i ponoi
                   E ka lahui, e,
                   O kau hana nui
                   E ui, e.

                   _Refrain_.

[Page 175]

                      [Translation]

                      _Hawaii Ponoi_

                1. Hawaii's very own,
                   Look to your sovran Lord,
                   Your chief that's heaven-born,
                   Who is your King.

                   _Refrain_:

                   Protector, heaven-sent,
                   Kamehameha great,
                   To vanquish every foe,
                   With conquering spear.

                2. Men of Hawaii's land,
                   Look to your native chiefs,
                   Your sole surviving lords,
                   The nation's pride.

                   _Refrain_:

                3. Men of Hawaiian stock,
                   My nation ever dear,
                   With loins begirt for work,
                   Strive with your might.

                   _Refrain_.
[Page 176]




                                 XXII.--GESTURE


           Gesture is a voiceless speech, a short-hand dramatic picture.
           The Hawaiians were adepts in this sort of art. Hand and foot,
           face and eye, and those convolutions of gray matter which are
           linked to the organs of speech, all worked in such harmony
           that, when the man spoke, he spoke not alone with his vocal
           organs, but all over, from head to foot, every part adding
           its emphasis to the utterance. Von Moltke could be reticent
           in six languages; the Hawaiian found it impossible to be
           reticent in one.

           The hands of the hula dancer are ever going out in gesture,
           her body swaying and pivoting itself in attitudes of
           expression. Her whole physique is a living and moving picture
           of feeling, sentiment, and passion. If the range of thought
           is not always deep or high, it is not the fault of her art,
           but the limitations of her original endowment, limitations of
           hereditary environment, the universal limitations imposed on
           the translation from spirit into matter.

           The art of gesture was one of the most important branches
           taught by the kumu. When the hula expert, the _olohe_, who
           has entered the halau as a visitor, utters the prayer (p.
           47), "O Laka, give grace to the feet of Pohaku, and to her
           bracelets and anklets; give comeliness to the figure and
           skirt of Luukia. To each one give gesture and voice. O Laka,
           make beautiful the _lei_; inspire the dancers to stand before
           the assembly," his meaning was clear and unmistakable, and
           showed his high valuation of this method of expression. We
           are not, however, to suppose that the kumu-hula, whatever his
           artistic attainments, followed any set of formulated
           doctrines in his teaching. His science was implicit,
           unformulated, still enfolded in the silence of
           unconsciousness, wrapped like a babe in its mother's womb. To
           apply a scientific name to his method, it might be called
           inductive, for he led his pupils along the plain road of
           practical illustration, adding example to example, without
           the confusing aid of preliminary rule or abstract
           proposition, until his pupils had traveled over the whole
           ground covered by his own experience.

           Each teacher went according to the light that was in him, not
           forgetting the instructions of his own kumu, but using them
           as a starting point, a basis on which to build as best he
           knew. There were no books, no manuals of instruction, to pass
           from hand to hand and thus secure uniformity of instruction.
           Then, again, it was a long journey from Hawaii to Kauai, or
[Page 177] even from one island to another. The different islands, as a
           rule, were not harnessed to one another under the same
           political yoke; even districts of the same island were not
           unfrequently under the independent sway of warring chiefs; so
           that for long periods the separation, even the isolation, in
           matters of dramatic art and practice was as complete as in
           politics.

           The method pursued by the kumu may be summarized as follows:
           Having labored to fix the song, the mele or oli, in the minds
           of his pupils, the _haumana_, he appointed some one to recite
           the words of the piece, while the class, standing with close
           attention to the motions of the kumu and with ears open at
           the same time to the words of the leader, were required to
           repeat the kumu's gestures in pantomime until he judged them
           to have arrived at a sufficient degree of perfection. That
           done, the class took up the double task of recitation joined
           to that of gesture. In his attempt to translate his concepts
           into physical signs the Hawaiian was favored not only by his
           vivid power of imagination, but by his implicit philosophy,
           for the Hawaiian, looked at things from a physical plane--a
           safe ground to stand upon--albeit he had glimpses at times
           far into the depths of ether. When he talked about spirit, he
           still had in mind a form of matter. A god was to him but an
           amplified human being.

           It is not the purpose to attempt a scientific classification
           of gesture as displayed in the halau. The most that can be
           done will be to give a few familiar generic illustrations
           which are typical and representative of a large class.

           The _pali_, the precipice, stands for any difficulty or
           obstacle of magnitude. The Hawaiian represents this in his
           dramatic, pictorial manner with the hand vertically posed on
           the outstretched arm, the palm of the hand looking away. If
           it is desired to represent this wall of obstacle as being
           surmounted, the hand is pushed forward, and at the same time
           somewhat inclined, perhaps, from its rigid perpendicularity,
           the action being accompanied by a series of slight lifting or
           waving movements as of climbing.

           Another way of dramatically picturing this same concept, that
           of the pali as a wall of obstacle, is by holding the forearm
           and hand vertically posed with the palmar aspect facing the
           speaker. This method of expression, while perhaps bolder and
           more graphic than that before mentioned, seems more purely
           oratorical and less graceful, less subtly pictorial and
           elegant than the one previously described, and therefore less
           adapted to the hula. For it must be borne in mind that the
           hula demanded the subordination of strength to grace and
           elegance. We may at the same time be sure that the halau
           showed individuality in its choice of methods, that it varied
           its technique and manner of expression at different times and
           places, according to the different conception of one or
           another kumu.
[Page 178]
           Progression, as in walking or traveling, is represented by
           means of a forward undulatory movement of the outstretched
           arm and hand, palm downward, in a horizontal plane. This
           gesture is rhythmic and beautifully pictorial. If the other
           hand also is made a partner in the gesture, the significance
           would seem to be extended, making it include, perhaps, a
           larger number in the traveling company. The mere extension of
           the arm, the back-hand advanced, would serve the purpose of
           indicating removal, travel, but in a manner less gracious and
           caressing.

           To represent an open level space, as of a sand-beach or of
           the earth-plain, the Hawaiian very naturally extended his
           arms and open hands--palms downward, of course--the degree of
           his reaching effort being in a sense a measure of the scope
           intended.

           To represent the act of covering or protecting oneself with
           clothing, the Hawaiian placed the hollow of each hand over
           the opposite shoulder with a sort of hugging action. But
           here, again, one can lay down no hard and fast rule. There
           was differentiation; the pictorial action might well vary
           according to the actor's conception of the three or more
           generic forms that constituted the varieties of Hawaiian
           dress, which were the _malo_ of the man, the _pa-u_ of the
           woman, and the decent _kihei_, a toga-like robe, which, like
           the blanket of the North American Indian, was common to both
           sexes. Still another gesture, a sweeping of the hands from
           the shoulder down toward the ground, would be used to
           indicate that costly feather robe, the _ahuula_, which was
           the regalia and prerogative of kings and chiefs.

           The Hawaiian places his hands, palms up, edge to edge, so
           that the little finger of one hand touches its fellow of the
           other hand. By this action he means union or similarity. He
           turns one palm down, so that the little finger and thumb of
           opposite hands touch each other. The significance of the
           action is now wholly reversed; he now means disunion,
           contrariety.

           To indicate death, the death of a person, the finger-tips,
           placed in apposition, are drawn away from each other with a
           sweeping gesture and at the same time lowered till the palms
           face the ground. In this case also we find diversity. One old
           man, well acquainted with hula matters, being asked to
           signify in pantomimic fashion "the king is sick," went
           through the following motions: He first pointed upward, to
           indicate the heaven-born one, the king; then he brought his
           hands to his body and threw his face into a painful grimace.
           To indicate the death of the long he threw his hands upward
           toward the sky, as if to signify a removal by flight. He
           admitted the accuracy of the gesture, previously described,
           in which the hands are moved toward the ground.

           There are, of course, imitative and mimetic gestures galore,
           as of paddling, swimming, diving, angling, and the like,
[Page 179] which one sees every day of his life and which are to be
           regarded as parts of that universal shorthand vocabulary of
           unvocalized speech that is used the world over from Naples to
           Honolulu, rather than stage-conventions of the halau. It will
           suffice to mention one motion or gesture of this sort which
           the author has seen used with dramatic effect. An old man was
           describing the action of Hiiaka (the little sister of Pele)
           while clearing a passage for herself and her female companion
           with a great slaughter of the reptilian demon-horde of _ma'o_
           that came out in swarms to oppose the progress of the goddess
           through their territory while she was on her way to fetch
           Prince Lohiau. The goddess, a delicate piece of humanity in
           her real self, made short work of the little devils who
           covered the earth and filled the air. Seizing one after
           another, she bit its life out, or swallowed it as if it had
           been a shrimp. The old man represented the action most
           vividly: pressing his thumb, forefinger, and middle finger
           into a cone, he brought them quickly to his mouth, while he
           snapped his jaws together like a dog seizing a morsel, an
           action that pictured the story better than any words.

           It might seem at first blush that facial expression,
           important as it is, owing to its short range of
           effectiveness, should hardly be put in the same category with
           what may be called the major stage-gestures that were in
           vogue in the halau. But such a judgment would certainly be
           mistaken. The Greek use of masks on the stage for their
           "carrying power" testified to their valuation of the
           countenance as a semaphore of emotion; at the same time their
           resort to this artifice was an implicit recognition of the
           desirability of bringing the window of the soul nearer to the
           audience. The Hawaiians, though they made no use of masks in
           the halau, valued facial expression no less than the Greeks.
           The means for the study of this division of the subject, from
           the nature of the case, is somewhat restricted and the
           pursuit of illustrations makes it necessary to go outside of
           the halau.

           The Hawaiian language was one of hospitality and invitation.
           The expression _mai_, or _komo mai_, this way, or come in,
           was the most common of salutations. The Hawaiian sat down to
           meat before an open door; he ate his food in the sight of all
           men, and it was only one who dared being denounced as a churl
           who would fail to invite with word and gesture the passer-by
           to come in and share with him. This gesture might be a
           sweeping, downward, or sidewise motion of the hand in which
           the palm faced and drew toward the speaker. This seems to
           have been the usual form when the two parties were near to
           each other; if they were separated by any considerable
           distance, the fingers would perhaps more likely be turned
           upward, thus making the signal more distinctly visible and at
           the same time more emphatic.
[Page 180]
           In the expression of unvoiced assent and dissent the Hawaiian
           practised refinements that went beyond our ordinary
           conventions. To give assent he did not find it necessary so
           much as to nod the head; a lifting of the eyebrows sufficed.
           On the other hand, the expression of dissent was no less
           simple as well as decisive, being attained by a mere grimace
           of the nose. This manner of indicating dissent was not,
           perhaps, without some admixture of disdain or even scorn; but
           that feeling, if predominant, would call for a reenforcement
           of the gesture by some additional token, such as a pouting of
           the lips accompanied by an upward toss of the chin. A more
           impersonal and coldly businesslike way of manifesting a
           negative was by an outward sweep of the hand, the back of the
           hand being turned to the applicant. Such a gesture, when
           addressed to a huckster or a beggar--a rare bird, by the way,
           in old Hawaii--was accepted as final.

           There was another method of signifying a most emphatic, even
           contemptuous, no. In this the tongue is protruded and allowed
           to hang down flat and wide like the flaming banner of a
           panting hound. A friend states that the Maoris made great use
           of gestures with the tongue in their dances, especially in
           the war-dance, sometimes letting it hang down broad, flat,
           and long, directly in front, sometimes curving it to right or
           left, and sometimes stuffing it into the hollow of the cheek
           and puffing out one side of the face. This manner--these
           methods it might be said--of facial expression, so far as
           observed and so far as can be learned, were chiefly of
           feminine practice. The very last gesture--that of the
           protruded tongue--is not mentioned as one likely to be
           employed on the stage in the halau, certainly not in the
           performance of what one would call the serious hulas. But it
           might well have been employed in the hula ki'i (see p. 91),
           which was devoted, as we have seen, to the portrayal of the
           lighter and more comic aspects of daily life.

           It is somewhat difficult to interpret the meaning of the
           various attitudes and movements of the feet and legs. Their
           remoteness from the centers of emotional control, their
           detachment from the vortices of excitement, and their seeming
           restriction to mechanical functions make them seem but
           slightly sympathetic with those tides of emotion that speed
           through the vital parts of the frame. But, though somewhat
           aloof from, they are still under the dominion of, the same
           emotional laws that govern the more central parts.

                Man is all sympathy one part with another;
                For head with, heart hath joyful amity,
                And both with moon and tides.

           The illustrations brought to illuminate this division of the
           subject will necessarily be of the most general application
           and will seem to belong rather to the domain of oratory than
[Page 181] to that of dramatic or stage expression, by which is meant
           expression fitted for the purposes of the halau.

[Illustration: PHYLLODIA AND TRUE LEAVES OF THE KOA (ACACIA KOA)
BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY
BULLETIN 38 PLATE XX]

           To begin with a general proposition, the attitude of the feet
           and legs must be sympathetic with that of the other parts of
           the body. When standing squarely on both feet and looking
           directly forward, the action may be called noncommittal,
           general; but if the address is specialized and directed to a
           part of the audience, or if attention is called to some
           particular region, the face will naturally turn in that
           direction. To attain this end, while the leg and arm of the
           corresponding side will be drawn back, the leg and arm of the
           opposite side will be advanced, thus causing the speaker to
           face the point of address. If the speaker or the actor
           addresses himself, then, to persons, or to an object, on his
           right, the left leg will be the one more in advance and the
           left arm will be the one on which the burden of gesture will
           fall, and vice versa.

           It would be a mistake to suppose that every motion or gesture
           displayed by the actors on the stage of the halau was
           significant of a purpose. To do that would be to ascribe to
           them a flawless perfection and strength that no body of
           artists have ever attained. Many of their gestures, like the
           rhetoric of a popular orator, were mere flourishes and
           ornaments. With a language so full of seemingly superfluous
           parts, it could not well be otherwise than that their
           rhetoric of gesture should be overloaded with flourishes.

           The whole subject of gesture, including facial expression, is
           worthy of profound study, for it is linked to the basic
           elements of psychology. The illustrations adduced touch only
           the skirts of the subject; but they must suffice. An
           exhaustive analysis, the author believes, would show an
           intimate and causal relation between these facial expressions
           and the muscular movements that are the necessary
           accompaniments or resultants of actual speech. To illustrate,
           the pronunciation of the Hawaiian word _ae_ (pronounced like
           our aye), meaning "yes," involves the opening of the mouth to
           its full extent; and this action, when accomplished, results
           in a sympathetic lifting of the eyebrows. It is this ultimate
           and completing part of the action which the Hawaiian woman
           adopts as her semaphore of assent.

           One of the puzzling things about gesture comes when we try to
           think of it as a science rooted in psychology. It is then we
           discover variations presented by different peoples in
           different lands, which force us to the conviction that in
           only a part of its domain does it base itself on the strict
           principles of psychology. Gesture, like language, seems to be
           made up in good measure of an opportunist growth that springs
           up in answer to man's varying needs and conditions. The
           writer hopes he will not be charged with begging the
           question in suggesting that another element which we must
[Page 182] reckon with as influential in fashioning and stereotyping
           gesture is tradition and convention. To illustrate--the actor
           who took the role of Lord Dundreary in the first performance
           of the play of the same name accidentally made a fantastic
           misstep while crossing the stage. The audience was amused,
           and the actor, quick to avail himself of any open door,
           followed the lead thus hinted at. The result is that he won
           great applause and gave birth to a mannerism which has
           well-nigh become a stage convention.
[Page 183]




                           XXIII.--THE HULA PA-HUA


           The hula _pa-hua_ was a dance of the classical times that has
           long been obsolete. Its last exhibition, so far as
           ascertained, was in the year 1846, on the island of Oahu. In
           this performance both the olapa and the hoopaa cantillated
           the mele, while the latter squatted on the floor. Each one
           was armed with a sharp stick of wood fashioned like a
           javelin, or a Hawaiian spade, the _o-o_; and with this he
           made motions, thrusting to right and to left; whether in
           imitation of the motions of a soldier or of a farmer could
           not be learned. The gestures of these actors were in perfect
           time with the rhythm of the mele.

           The dance-movements performed by the olapa, as the author has
           heard them described, were peculiar, not an actual rotation,
           but a sort of half-turn to one side and then to the other, an
           advance followed by a retreat. While doing this the olapa,
           who were in two divisions, marked the time of the movement by
           clinking together two pebbles which they held in each hand.

           The use of the pebbles after the manner of castanets, the
           division of the dancers into two sets, their advance and
           retreat toward and away from each other are all suggestive of
           the Spanish bolero or fandango. The resemblance went deeper
           than the surface. The prime motive of the song, the mele,
           also is the same, love in its different phases even to its
           most frenzied manifestations.

                            _Mele_

                Pa au i ka ihee a Kane;[326]
                Nana ka maka ia Koolau;[327]
                Kau ka opua[327] ma ka moana.
                Lu'u a e-a, lu'u a e-a,[329]
            5   Hiki i Wai-ko-loa.
                Aole loa ke kula
                I ka pai-lani a Kane.[330]
                Ke kane[331] ia no hoi ia
                Ka tula pe-pe'e
           10   A ka hale ku'i.
                Ku'i oe a lono Kahiki-nui;
                Hoolei ia iluna o Kaua-loa,
                Ka lihilihi pua o ka makemake.
                Mao ole ke Koolau i ka lihilihi.
           13   He lihi kuleana ia no Puna.
                O ko'u puni no ia o ka ike maka.
                Aohe makamaka o ka hale, ua hele oe;
                Nawai la au e hookipa
                I keia mahaoi ana mai nei o ka loa?
           20   He makemake no au e ike maka;
                I hookahi no po, le'a ke kaunu,
                Ka hana mao ole a ke anu.
                He anu mawaho, a he hu'i ma-loko.
                A ilaila laua la, la'i pono iho.
           25   Ua pono oe o kaua, ua alu ka moena;
                Ka hana mau a ka Inu-wai;
                Mao ole i ka nui kino.
                Ku'u kino keia mauna ia ha'i.
                E Ku, e hoolei la!
           30   A ua noa!

           [Footnote 327: _The a Kane_. The spear of Kane. What else can
           this he than that old enemy to man's peace and comfort, love,
           passion?]

           [Footnote 328: _Koolau_. The name applied to the weather side
           of an island; the direction in which one would naturally turn
           first to judge of the weather.]

           [Footnote 329: _Opua_. A bunch of clouds; a cloud-omen; a
           heavenly phenomenon; a portent. In this case it probably
           means a lover. The present translation, is founded on this
           view.]

           [Footnote 330: _Lu'u a e-a_. To dive and then come up to take
           breath, as one does in swimming out to sea against the
           incoming breakers, or as one might do in escaping from a
           pursuer, or in avoiding detection, after the manner of a
           loon.]

           [Footnote 331: _A Kane_ and _Ke kane_. Instances of
           word-repetition, previously mentioned as a fashion much used
           in Hawaiian poetry. See instances also of the same figure in
           lines 13 and 14 and in lines 16 and 17.]
[Page 184]

                         [Translation]

                             _Song_

                I am smitten with spear of Kane;
                Mine eyes with longing scan Koolau;
                Behold the love-omen hang o'er the sea.
                I dive and come up, dive and come up;
            5   Thus I reach my goal Wai-ko-loa.
                The width of plain is a trifle
                To the joyful spirit of Kane.
                Aye, a husband, and patron is he
                To the dance of the bended knee,
           10   In the hall of the stamping feet.
                Stamp, till the echo reaches Kahiki;
                Still pluck you a wreath by the way
                To crown your fondest ambition;
                A wreath not marred by the salt wind
           15   That plays with the skirts of Puna.
                I long to look eye into eye.
                Friendless the house, you away;
                Pray who will receive, who welcome,
                This guest uninvited from far?
           20   I long for one (soul-deep) gaze,
                One night of precious communion;
                Such a flower wilts not in the cold--
                Cold without, a tumult within.
                What bliss, if we two were together!
           25   You are the blest of us twain;
                The mat bends under your form.
                The thirsty wind, it still rages,
[Page 185]      Appeased not with her whole body.
                My body is pledged to another.
           30   Crown it, Ku, crown it.
                Now the service is free!

           Some parts of this mele, which is a love-song, have defied
           the author's most strenuous efforts to penetrate their deeper
           meaning. No Hawaiian consulted has made a pretense of
           understanding it wholly. The Philistines of the middle of the
           nineteenth century, into whose hands it fell, have not helped
           matters by the emendations and interpolations with which they
           slyly interlarded the text, as if to set before us in a
           strong light the stigmata of degeneracy from which they were
           suffering.

           The author has discarded from the text two verses which
           followed verse 28:

                Hai'na ia mai ka puana:
                Ka wai anapa i ke kala.

                        [Translation]

                Declare to me now the riddle:
                The waters that flash on the plain.

           The author has refrained from casting out the last two
           verses, though in his judgment they are entirely out of place
           and were not in the mele originally.

[Page 186]


