race as a regulation of a man's relation with his fellows in the
interest of social life. It is quite independent of religion, since it
has entirely different roots in human psychology." (_Joseph McCabe:
"Human Origin of Morals."_)

In the mind of primitive man there is no connection between morality and
the belief in a God. "Society is the school in which men learn to
distinguish between right and wrong. The headmaster is custom and the
lessons are the same for all. The first moral judgments were pronounced
by public opinion; public indignation and public approval are the
prototypes of the moral emotions." (_Edward Westermarck: "Origin and
Development of the Moral Ideas."_)

Moral ideas and moral energy have their source in social life. It is
only in a more advanced society that moral qualities are assumed for the
gods. And indeed, it is known that in some primitive tribes, the gods
are not necessarily conceived as good, they may have evil qualities
also. "If they are, to his mind, good, that is so much the better. But
whether they are good or bad they have to be faced as facts. The Gods,
in short belong to the region of belief, while morality belongs to that
of practice. It is in the nature of morality that it should be implicit
in practice long before it is explicit in theory. Morality belongs to
the group and is rooted in certain impulses that are a product of the
essential conditions of group life. It is as reflection awakens that men
are led to speculate upon the nature and origin of the moral feelings.
Morality, whether in practice or theory, is thus based upon what is. On
the other hand, religion, whether it be true or false, is in the nature
of a discovery--one cannot conceive man actually ascribing ethical
qualities to his Gods before he becomes sufficiently developed to
formulate moral rules for his own guidance, and to create moral laws for
his fellowmen. The moralization of the Gods will follow as a matter of
course. Man really modifies his Gods in terms of the ideal human being.
It is not the Gods who moralize man, it is man who moralizes the Gods."
(_Chapman Cohen: "Theism or Atheism."_)

In the formation of the Old Testament, the moralization of Yahveh led to
the creation of a god who coincided more with the morality of the later
writers, the God Elohim.

"Rather must we say that morality begins in human social relations and
passes from them to the relations maintained with the other life and
with the Gods. Or, if one prefers to consider ghosts and gods as
inseparable elements of the primary organism, then we should say that
morality is born in that all-embracing psychical atmosphere. But it does
not follow from that fact that the rise and development of morality are
conditioned by belief in Gods and in immortality. Merely human relations
are sufficient to the production of ethical appreciations. The invisible
ghosts and Gods would never have been thought interested in the morality
of the tribe, had not the leaders realized the importance of courage, of
loyalty, of respect for neighbors' possessions, and the other elementary
virtues. It is when the disastrous consequences of their absence became
evident that the Gods were made to sanction these virtues. God or no
God, immortality or no immortality, the essential morality of man would
have been what it is." (_J. H. Leuba: "Belief in God and Immortality."_)

The best that is in man is generated in the experiences of his daily
life. The attributing of moral qualities to the gods was a much later
development in the evolution of the moral ideas. At this stage of our
development man is fortified by a sense of human fellowship, and in
practice, as well as in theory, has long since given up the assumption
that he needed superhuman beliefs. He has fully recognized the
independence of morality from superhuman beliefs.

James Mill and J. S. Mill taught the greatest happiness of the greatest
number as the supreme object of action and the basis of morality. And it
was this conception that introduced the new ethical principles of duty
to posterity. This conception is a much nobler one than the religious
interpretation of morality to consist in mainly defining what man's duty
to God is; a morality whose chief selfish inspiration is not the helping
of one's fellowmen but the saving of one's own soul. A secular morality
teaches that what man thinks, says, and does lives after him and
influences for good or ill future generations. This is a higher, nobler,
and greater incentive to righteousness than any life of personal reward
or fear of punishment in a future life. There are today a rapidly
growing number of eminent moral teachers who condemn the clinging to the
belief of personal existence after death as a hindrance to the best life
on earth. Professor J. H. Leuba, in his work, "The Belief in God and
Immortality," concludes that, "These facts and considerations indicate
that the reality of the belief in immortality to civilized nations is
much more limited than is commonly supposed; and that, if we bring into
calculation all the consequences of the belief, and not merely its
gratifying effects, we may even be brought to conclude that its
disappearance from among the most civilized nations would be, on the
whole, a gain."

There are few educated men nowadays who would claim that morality cannot
exist apart from religion. Theists are desperately attempting to
harmonize a primitive theory of things, with a larger knowledge and a
more developed moral sense. Morality is fundamentally the expression of
those conditions under which associated life is found possible and
profitable, and that so far as any quality is declared to be moral its
justification and meaning must be found in that direction. "Our alleged
essential dependence upon transcendental beliefs is belied by the most
common experiences of daily life. Who does not feel the absurdity of the
opinion that the lavish care for a sick child by a mother is given
because of a belief in God and immortality? Are love of father and
mother on the part of children, affection and serviceableness between
brothers and sisters, straight-forwardness and truthfulness between
business men, essentially dependent upon these beliefs? What sort of
person would be the father who would announce divine punishment or
reward in order to obtain the love and respect of his children? And if
there are business men preserved from unrighteousness by the fear of
future punishment, they are far more numerous who are deterred by the
threat of human law. Most of them would take their chances with heaven a
hundred times before they would once with society, or perchance with the
imperative voice of humanity heard in the conscience." (_Leuba._)

The primary motive of moral standards and practices is man's desire to
seek happiness and avoid pain. And so it is not strange that morality
has become stronger as the power of religion has weakened. "Right
through history it has been the social instincts that have acted as a
corrective to religious extravagances. And it is worth noting that with
the exception of a little gain from the practice of casuistry, religions
have contributed nothing towards the building up of a science of ethics.
On the contrary, it has been a very potent cause of confusion and
obstruction. Fictitious vices and virtues have been created and the real
moral problems lost sight of. It gave the world the morality of the
prison cell, instead of the tonic of the rational life. And it was
indeed fortunate for the race that conduct was not ultimately dependent
upon a mass of teachings that had their origin in the brains of savages,
and were brought to maturity during the darkest period of European
civilization.... And we know that the period during which the influence
of Christian theism was strongest, was the period when the intellectual
life of civilized man was at its lowest, morality at its weakest, and
the general outlook hopeless. Religious control gave us heresy hunts,
Jew hunts, burning for witchcraft, and magic in place of medicine. It
gave us the Inquisition and the _auto da fe_, the fires of Smithfield,
and the night of St. Bartholomew. It gave us the war of sects, and it
helped powerfully to establish the sect of war. It gave us life without
happiness, and death cloaked with terror. The Christian record is before
us, and it is such that every Church blames the others for its
existence. Quite as certainly we cannot point to a society that has been
dominated by Freethinking ideals, but we can point to their existence in
all ages, and can show that all progress is due to their presence. We
can show that progressive ideals have originated with the least, and
have been opposed by the most religious sections of society."
(_Cohen._)

The puerile conception of heaven and the savage conception of hell are
still, in modified form, deemed necessary for a religious morality. Why
it should be necessary for a supreme intelligence to make all things
straight in another world, that he could more convincingly rectify in
this one, is a conception which has escaped the reason of a freethinker,
but has been very profitable to those on earth that lead their adherents
to believe that they hold the keys to our future abodes. Winwood Reade
in his "Martyrdom of Man," discussing the moral value of the fears of
hell-fire, states, "a metaphysical theory cannot restrain the fury of
the passions; as well attempt to bind a lion with a cobweb. Prevention
of crime, it is well known, depends not on the severity, but on the
certainty of retribution. The supposition that the terrors of hell-fire
are essential or even conducive to good morals is contradicted by the
facts of history. In the Dark Ages there was not a man or woman from
Scotland to Naples, who doubted that sinners were sent to hell. The
religion which they had was the same as ours, with this exception, that
everyone believed in it. The state of Europe in that pious epoch need
not be described. Society is not maintained by the conjectures of
theology, but by those moral sentiments, those gregarious virtues which
elevated men above the animals, which are now instinctive in our natures
and to which intellectual culture is propitious. For, as we become more
and more clearly enlightened, we perceive more and more clearly that it
was with the whole human population as it was with the primeval clan;
the welfare of every individual is dependent on the welfare of the
community, and the welfare of the community depends on the welfare of
every individual."

The teachings of Christianity towards marriage furnishes a well known
example of a reactionary philosophy of morals. The views of St. Paul on
marriage are set forth in I Corinthians VII 1-9:

1. Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for a
man not to touch a woman.

2. Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife,
and let every woman have her own husband.

3. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence; and likewise
also the wife unto the husband.

4. The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband; and
likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife.

5. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time,
that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together
again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.

6. But I speak this by permission, and not of commandment.

7. For I would that all men were even as I myself. But every man has his
proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that.

8. I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them to
abide even as I.

9. But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to marry
than to burn.

These precepts furnish an example of the harm that can be done when man
follows the absurd and unsocial decrees of an ascetic individual written
in a barbaric age and maintained as law in a more advanced period. The
enlightened physician holds that it is not good for a man not to touch a
woman; and one wonders what would have become of our race if all women
had carried St. Paul's teaching, "It is good for them if they abide even
as I," into practice. Bertrand Russell, in his "Marriage and Morals,"
has gone to the root of the matter when he states, "He does not suggest
for a moment that there may be any positive good in marriage, or that
affection between husband and wife may be a beautiful and desirable
thing, nor does he take the slightest interest in the family;
fornication holds the center of the stage in his thoughts, and the whole
of his sexual ethics is arranged with reference to it. It is just as if
one were to maintain that the sole reason for baking bread is to prevent
people from stealing cake." But then it is too much to expect of a man
living nearly two thousand years ago to have known the psychology of the
emotions, but we do know the great harm that his ascetic principles have
done. St. Paul took the standpoint that sexual intercourse, even in
marriage, is regrettable. This view is utterly contrary to biological
facts, and has caused in its adherents a great deal of mental disorder.
St. Paul's views were emphasized and exaggerated by the early Church and
celibacy was considered holy. Men retired into the desert to wrestle
with Satan, and when their abnormal manner of living fired their
imagination with erotic visions, mutilated their bodies to cleanse their
souls. "There is no place in the moral history of mankind of a deeper or
more painful interest than this ascetic epidemic. A hideous, sordid, and
emaciated maniac, without knowledge, without patriotism, without natural
affections, passing his life in a long routine of useless and atrocious
self-torture, and quailing before the ghastly phantoms of his delirious
brain, had become the ideal of the nations which had known the writings
of Plato and Cicero, and the lives of Socrates and Cato." (_Lecky:
"History of European Morals."_)

This concept that the closest of association between man and wife is an
obnoxious deed, has strewn its evil influence down through the ages to
the present day. The stealth and obscurity placed upon sexual matters
has had its roots so firmly fixed in our manner of dealing with this
purely normal function, that at this late date medical science is just
beginning to eradicate the evils. It is now well recognized by educators
and physicians and all clear-thinking individuals that it is extremely
harmful for men, women, and children to be kept in artificial ignorance
of the facts relating to sexual affairs. The obscurantism placed upon
sexual matters has caused more physical and mental distress than most of
our organic diseases. The physician is constantly correcting the
abnormal conceptions that exist. The sex act had become something in the
nature of a crime which could not be avoided, instead of assuming the
manifestation of the consummation of the greatest love and tenderness
that can exist between two individuals keenly attuned to the natural
desires of a natural act. "The love of man and woman at its best is free
and fearless, compounded of body and mind in equal proportions, not
dreading to idealize because there is a physical basis, not dreading the
physical basis lest it should interfere with the idealization. To fear
love is to fear life and those who fear life are already three parts
dead." (_Bertrand Russell: "Marriage and Morals."_)

Religion has brutalized the marital relations, and Lecky, dealing with
this subject, states, "The tender love which it elicits, the holy and
beautiful domestic qualities that follow in its train, were almost
absolutely omitted from consideration. The object of the ascetic was to
attract men to a life of virginity, and as a necessary consequence
marriage was treated as an inferior state. It was regarded as being
necessary, indeed, and therefore justifiable, for the propagation of the
species, and to free men from great evils; but still as a condition of
degradation from which all who aspired to real sanctity could fly. To
'cut down by the axe of Virginity the wood of Marriage' was, in the
energetic language of St. Jerome, the end of the saint; and if he
consented to praise marriage it was merely because it produced virgins."

Indeed, the entire ascetic attitude was well summed up by St. Jerome
when exhorting Heliodorus to desert his family and become a hermit; he
expatiated with foul minuteness on every form of natural affection he
desired him to violate: "Though your little nephew twine his arms around
your neck, though your mother, with dishevelled hair and tearing her
robe asunder, point to the breast with which she suckled you, though
your father fall down on the threshold before you, pass over your
father's body ... You say that Scripture orders you to obey parents, but
he who loves them more than Christ loses his soul."

It has only been with the advance of secular literature that the
degrading assumption of St. Paul that marriage is to be regarded solely
as a more or less legitimate outlet for lust has been discarded, and the
act of love as applied to marriage has come to have any meaning. And in
this modern day the conception of the relationship of the sex act to
marriage is far from being on the high plane where it rightly belongs.
Bertrand Russell comments, "Marriage in the orthodox Christian doctrine
has two purposes: one, that recognized by St. Paul, the other, the
procreation of children. The consequence has been to make sexual
morality even more difficult than it was made by St. Paul. Not only is
sexual intercourse only legitimate within marriage, but even between
husband and wife it becomes a sin unless it is hoped that it will lead
to pregnancy. The desire for legitimate offspring is, in fact, according
to the Catholic Church, the only motive which can justify sexual
intercourse. But this motive always justifies it, no matter what
cruelty may accompany it. If the wife hates sexual intercourse, if she
is likely to die of another pregnancy, if the child is likely to be
diseased or insane, if there is not enough money to prevent the utmost
extreme of misery, that does not prevent the man from being justified in
insisting on his conjugal rights, provided only that he hopes to beget a
child."

What effect has Christianity had upon our moral life, upon crime,
drug-addiction, sexual immorality, prostitution, and perversion? These
blights upon our moral character existed long before Christianity, and
after Christianity. But what effectual check has Christianity
contributed?

The agitation concerning increased crime after the recent world conflict
has brought this subject to the fore, and aroused a great deal of
discussion and consideration of this problem. In its relation to
religion, we have but one undeniable fact to bring before the thinking
public. An examination of the statistics of penal institutions reveals
that practically all criminals are religious. _Absolutely and
proportionately smaller numbers of criminals are freethinkers._ Although
church members nowhere constitute even half the population outside the
prisons, they constitute from eighty to ninety-five per cent of the
population inside the prison. This can be verified by reference to any
census of any penal institution. As strangely as this may strike a great
many readers, just so strange did it appear at one time to the multitude
that the earth was round. (It is 500 years since the earth was proven to
be round, yet there is a large colony of Christians near Chicago
officially maintaining that the earth is as flat and four-cornered as
the Bible states.) Neither Christianity nor any religious creed has
proved an effectual check on civil crime.

The prostitute has been hounded and abused by ecclesiastics since
Biblical times, yet, it is only true to say that the religionist is not
vitally interested in prostitution. Outwardly, he may pour forth a
verbal barrage of condemnation, but if he believes he can save her
immortal soul, ahunting he goes. He does not attempt to ameliorate the
social welfare of this poor, degraded individual, as he thinks; her
