not sufficient to atone for the sins of the whole world. Against this
temptation, let us call to mind, that "where sin abounded, there grace did
much more abound." Rom. 5:20. For our misery appeals to the mercy of God,
our weakness to his power, our unworthiness to his majesty, our
unrighteousness to his righteousness.

"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief." 1 Tim.
1:15.

"As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live." Ezek. 33:11.

"There is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus." Rom. 8:1.

"As for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day
that he turneth from his wickedness." Ezek. 18:21; 33:12.

"For this (the remission of sins) shall every one that is godly pray." Ps.
32:6.

"Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thyself over wise." Eccles. 7:16.

"If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 1 John 1:9.

"Righteousness shall look down from heaven." Ps. 85:11.

3. If I resolve not to pray till I know myself to be worthy, I shall
certainly never do it at all. And if I should not desire God to bestow
upon me his grace and favor, till by my own strength I became just and
holy, I should never obtain anything. Alas, poor man, what canst thou
bestow upon him who standeth not in need of thy gifts? Rom. 11:35. Or what
canst thou obtain by the workings of thy corrupt nature, which, however
specious in thine own eyes, are of no value in the sight of God? Rom.
3:24. Verily, nothing at all. Away, then, with all those who glory in
their own righteousness, and pretend to justify themselves; yea, let all
creatures keep silence before God. Thine own worthiness will here avail
thee nothing, and thine unworthiness shall do thee no harm; for the Lord
Jesus Christ, thy Saviour, is he that "forgiveth thy unrighteousness, and
covereth all thy sin." Ps. 32:1. But rather conclude with thyself, that as
a drop of water is swallowed up in the sea, so are all thy transgressions
in the boundless and incomprehensible mercies of Jesus Christ.

A PRAYER.

O Merciful and compassionate Father! who teachest me in thy holy word how
I ought, in thy Son Jesus Christ, to walk in the narrow way, turning
neither to the right hand nor to the left; that I may neither fall through
a vain presumption of my own piety, nor be cast into despair by the gloomy
prospect of my guilt, and so die in my sins; grant that I may seriously
consider that neither my good works can merit, nor my sins hinder, the
grace of Christ, my Redeemer; that so I may continue firm and steadfast
amidst all my temptations; that I may neither be misled by the evil spirit
of presumption and spiritual pride that walketh at noonday, nor be afraid
of the destroying angel of despair that walketh in darkness; but that,
having conquered the weakness of my nature, I may continue steadfast in
the faith, filled with spiritual joy and consolation. Let thy grace,
blessed Lord Jesus, begin, carry on, and perfect this good work in me.
Amen.



Section X.


 The True Worshipper Ought Not To Seek After God In Any Particular Place;
           For He Finds Him Everywhere In Spirit And In Truth.


    _The hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet
    at Jerusalem, worship the Father. The true worshippers shall
    worship the Father in spirit and in truth._--JOHN 4:21, 23.


1. Where shall we find God? Jer. 23:23. Must we look for him in
consecrated temples? Must we seek him in the ends of the earth? Must we
search for him in the stars, or at Jerusalem, or upon the top of Mount
Tabor? No! but "in spirit and in truth" (John 4:23) seek and find him. We
are, indeed, sometimes forced to the fatigue of long journeys, in order to
make our complaints, and beg the protection of the princes of this world;
but God is everywhere; "He filleth heaven and earth" (Jer. 23:24), and is
nearer to all creatures than they are to themselves. "He is above all, and
through all, and in us all." Eph. 4:6. The utmost dimensions of space, and
even the boundless extent of eternity, appear to him as but a single
point. Ps. 139:7. As a man that walks at noonday, in an open field, is
environed with light, whether he discern it or be blind, so are all
creatures surrounded with the presence of God. These are the waters upon
which the Spirit of God moves, penetrating through all beings and all
spirits, though ever so pure and glorious. God is always near to us,
though many are not so to him, having no more perception of the
communications of his presence than a blind man has of the light, which he
sees not, though surrounded by it. God never turns away from us; but we,
being turned away from him, fall into that degree of blindness, as to say,
that God has withdrawn himself from us, and is become unkind to us;
whereas, the change is only in ourselves, and in our own hearts, by which
we are tempted to charge God foolishly. Thus the sinner, by turning away
from God, becomes his own tormentor; whilst God continues unchangeably
just and good in all his works (Ps. 145:8); however often man, being
blinded and turned away from God, may represent him as an angry, unjust,
and unmerciful being.

2. Hence, then, we may gather the genuine sense of those passages of
Scripture, which say that "the kingdom of God is within us," and not
without us (Luke 17:21), and that we have nothing to do with "them that
are without." 1 Cor. 5:12. These, without all dispute, are not to be
understood of any external place, but of the spirit or inward man,
according to the faith. To confine the kingdom of God to any certain
place, is antichristian, even as our blessed Lord has told us that men
will say, "Lo, here is Christ, or lo, there." Matt. 24:23. But if any
place could save or condemn a man, then Lucifer himself could never have
become a devil in heaven; nor would Adam ever have sinned in paradise. So
if any place would condemn a man, then should no man living be saved;
since this whole world lieth in darkness, and all the inhabitants thereof
are under the dominion of the devil, who is the prince of it. John 12:31.
He therefore that has faith, though with Jonah he were in the depths of
the sea, yet would be in the kingdom of God; and he that has it not,
though he were in the church, heard sermons, and would join in acts of
communion, yet in the sight of God he is _without_, and has no part in, or
title to, the kingdom of God.

A PRAYER.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who art the only way, light, and gate of heaven, I
praise thee from the bottom of my heart, that by this meditation, thou
teachest me how I am in thee, and thou in me, in whatsoever place I am;
how thou, my true and only High Priest, art with me, and deliverest me
from my sins, whensoever I lift up my heart to thee. Though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with
me. Teach me, O Lord, always to acknowledge this, and not after the manner
of this ungrateful world, to undervalue or despise this hidden treasure;
but that I may in true faith seek, find, taste, and enjoy it. Amen.



Section XI.


 The Worshipper Is Not Restricted To Certain Times Of Prayer, But May At
Any Hour Address God In Prayer, Provided That He Does Not Hinder Himself.


    _In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of
    salvation have I helped thee.--Seek ye the Lord while he may be
    found, call ye upon him while he is near._--ISA. 49:8; 55:6.
    _Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of
    salvation._--2 COR. 6:2.


1. From what has been already said concerning _the place_, and what we are
now observing further upon that head, it is plain, that he is truly happy
who is in the kingdom of God. The reason of this is, because he has the
treasure within him, wheresoever he is; and that he, who, through
unbelief, is not in the kingdom of God, is truly a stranger and foreigner,
however he may with other Christians, hear sermons and receive the
Sacrament. The _place_ will neither save us nor condemn us; that can be
done by nothing but _faith_ or _unbelief_ existing in the heart and spirit
of man. The true Christian, in whatever place he lives, as he has the
Spirit of Christ within him, so he has, by consequence, a principle of
grace, pardon, and remission of sins; for Christ is in him. I speak not
this to discourage the external exercise of preaching; but for the comfort
of all sincere souls under necessities, sickness, or in strange lands;
when they are assured that they are truly in Christ, that Christ is in
them, and that they are not "without" but "within." This should also alarm
the sinner, who, though living among Christians, yet, in the sight of God
is excluded. For every unbeliever cuts himself off from the body of
Christ, and from the most valuable privileges of his communion; so that a
wicked man, under the agonies of sickness, would receive no benefit by
having the Holy Sacrament, though the priest, or even the pope himself
stood by him; or by being brought and laid in the midst of the church. But
if a man has within him a true and living faith, it could do him no harm,
though he should die in a heathen country, or on the sea, without the
comfort of the Holy Sacrament, or a priest; because Jesus Christ, the true
High Priest, is in him, and even the kingdom of God, as our blessed Lord
abundantly testifies John 4:21; Luke 17:21; Matt. 24:23. How blind then
and miserable are those men who seek for blessedness from man, confining
it to a certain place, and look to external things. This, however, is the
case with many thousands who thus lose the internal treasure. Externals
are but means, which though not to be despised, yet are not to be valued
as the end itself, to which they are intended to lead. Christ is the great
treasure of man, who can bestow himself without the use of means, where
they cannot be had. We come together in the church, that with one accord
we may exhort and admonish one another in the divine Presence, call upon
God to avert public evils and calamities, and exercise one another in
divine matters, that so we, who are otherwise totally blind in spiritual
things, being excited by these means, may at length understand and see
that God is not contained "in the heaven of heavens" (1 Kings 8:27), nor
confined to any place; being, as Job witnesseth, "high as heaven, deeper
than hell, longer than the earth, and broader than the sea." Job 11:8, 9.

2. What we have observed of place, may be also applied to _time_, to which
the eternal and unchangeable God is by no means confined, so as not to be
always at liberty to hear our prayers. Great men and princes of this world
are not always to be spoken with, and frequently refuse admittance to
their petitioners; being engaged either by the necessities or diversions
of life. But our God cannot be thus separated from his creatures; at one
view, He sees, and hears, and considers all things that are done upon the
earth, and "understandeth our thoughts afar off." Ps. 139:2. He numbereth
"the very hairs of our heads" (Matt. 10:30); and "a thousand years in his
sight are but as one day." Ps. 90:4; 2 Pet. 3:8. God is not capable of
alteration or change; is confined to no time, limited by no place, always
ready to hear and to help us; yea, he is continually "standing at the
door, and knocking, that we may open to him." Rev. 3:20. So that he is
always ready, but we are not. Whereas if we would constantly and without
ceasing wait for Him, we should never fail to receive a ready answer to
all our prayers.

3. But alas! the concerns of this lower world have so great an influence
upon our minds, distracting our thoughts, and withholding us from devout
retirement, that we must endeavor to purify our minds from all thoughts of
the creature, according to a devout writer, who advises us, "to lay aside
all thoughts of this or that thing, time or place, and bring all the
powers of our souls into profound repose." And in this sabbath or rest of
the soul, in this quiet cessation from the cares and labors of corrupt
nature, when we pray, God descends with his living word, and the soul of
man perceives and tastes the truth and love of God; of which, before this
patient preparation, it was wholly ignorant and insensible. So that the
soul cannot forbear crying out in the words: "The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth!" (Exod. 34:6.) "Now, I find thy prevenient grace helping my
infirmities, and assisting me to pray as I ought." Then thou wilt be
amazed at the blindness of thy own heart, which gave thee so imperfect a
notion of God, as to believe that God was to be persuaded with external
ceremonies, and clamorous prayers, and that he stood in need of a long
relation of thy wants and necessities; whereas He sees to the very bottom
of thy soul, and "understandeth all thy thoughts afar off."

A PRAYER.

Almighty, eternal, and most merciful God and Father! Thy goodness and
truth are higher than the heavens, deeper than the sea, wider than the
earth; all places are to Thee the same, and in thy sight all times are
alike. Thou art above all places and all times, and yet dost penetrate and
fill all things. Thou art nearer to me than I am to myself; thou
anticipatest me with thy grace, and embracest me with thy mercy, which,
through my blindness and misery, I could neither know nor hope for. Grant,
that by thy Holy Spirit, I may seriously lay these things to heart, and
for the future, look up to thee as my merciful Father, who knowest all
things, and art present at all times, and in all places, that I may no
more presume to judge of Thee by any natural blindness, and no more
persuade myself that Thou art to be awakened, or prevailed upon by my
crying; that thou needest any long discourses of mine, or requirest any
certain time for prayer. But give me grace to consider, that the true
worshipper may have access to Thee at all times, and in all places, and
that thy goodness is always and everywhere present with us; but that no
man can enjoy it, or taste of thy sweetness, unless he be first awakened
and encouraged by Thee to engage in devout prayer. That I may worthily and
effectually perform this, give me thy Holy Spirit, who may work in me to
will and to do according to thy good pleasure. Amen.



Section XII.


   The Considerations Stated Above, Not Only Dispose The Heart To True
             Prayer, But Also Furnish Various Useful Lessons.


    _It shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and
    while they are yet speaking, I will hear._--ISA. 65:24.


1. The _first_ lesson which we learn is, that God has not commanded us to
pray for his own sake, for he knoweth all things; but that we, being
excited by these means, may be led to understand that he does know all
things. God has so tender a concern for us, that he seems not to know
anything, till we reflect within ourselves, that he does indeed know it.
Hence it comes to pass, that when men do not diligently pray, they seem to
think that God does not know. And, on the contrary, when we exercise
ourselves in prayer, we soon learn that God knoweth all our necessities,
and hath numbered the very hairs of our heads before we were born. These
are thoughts that cannot enter into the hearts of those who despise the
duty of prayer.

2. _Secondly._ We need not apply to God, as we do to one another, with a
long account of our wants: all that we have to do is, daily to exercise
ourselves in prayer, so that the inner man may enter into the kingdom of
God.

3. _Thirdly._ God is (as Dr. Tauler says) a thousand times more ready to
give, than we are to receive, through prayer and hope.

4. _Fourthly._ God stands in no need of any external ceremonies of ours,
our watchings, fastings, or cryings, to awaken him, who "neither
slumbereth nor sleepeth." Ps. 121:4. He not only foreknows our desires and
prayers, but even our existence (Jer. 1:5); yet, on the other hand, the
dulness and stupidity of men may by these exercises be excited,
encouraged, and instructed to consider and understand the tender mercies
of God towards all mankind.

5. _Fifthly._ Hence we discover the goodness, truth, and loving-kindness
of God towards all men; and, on the other hand, the blindness and
unbelief, the stupidity and unspeakable dulness of mankind towards God,
who have so great a contempt of the mercies of God, and are so backward in
their prayers and endeavors to obtain his grace.

6. _Sixthly._ God is righteous in all his works; and so far from his being
the author of our miseries, blindness, and ignorance, we are indeed the
cause of it ourselves; whilst, in contempt of his commands, we neglect to
implore his mercies, and beg the blessings which he has promised to bestow
on all that ask him. This is sufficient to vindicate the justice and
impartiality of God in all his dealings towards us, and to lay the blame
of all our sins and punishments upon ourselves, who are indeed the authors
of both.

7. _Seventhly._ God is not confined to any certain time and place, but
desires to be worshipped at _all times_, and in _all places_, in spirit
and in truth.

8. These observations will rectify many mistakes, and open a man's eyes to
discover things, of which he would otherwise have been ignorant. But
though it is a shameful thing for a Christian to be ignorant of these
matters, yet it is much more so to know, and not to reduce them to
practice.

A PRAYER.

Awaken us, O God, that we may watch; draw us to Thee, and we will run in
the true way, which conducts to the kingdom of God; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.




Chapter XXXV.


Prayer Is The Sign Of A True Christian, That Is, Of One Who Is Anointed Of
                                The Lord.


    _Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and
    needy._--PS. 86:1.


These words give us an admirable account of the grounds and reasons of
prayer; that it is quickened by affliction and a sense of misery, and is a
mark of a true Christian.

2. I. For, first, every Christian is anointed and baptized with the Holy
Spirit (1 John 2:20), who, when he is not resisted nor grieved, but
obeyed, is continually groaning (Rom. 8:26) in the heart of man, raising
and exalting the devout soul from earth to heaven. For as spirituous
liquor extracts the strength and virtue of the herbs and flowers on which
it is poured; so man, who is the flower of God, planted by the Lord
himself, "a plant in the house of God" (Isa. 61:3; Ps. 92:13), must
receive the preparation of the Holy Spirit, that his odor and sweet smell
may therewith ascend up to God. Whosoever will faithfully attend to the
workings of the Holy Spirit, and not resist his operations, will soon be
convinced of the truth of these observations; he will perceive a devout
sigh springing up from his heart, and breaking forth into these or the
like words: "Great God, Holy Father, have mercy upon me!" As myrrh,
frankincense, or other sweet perfumes, by being thrown upon burning coals,
send forth a smoke and delicious fragrance, which they would not do
without the help of fire; so whenever the fire of the Holy Spirit touches
our hearts, and He is not hindered, there immediately arises a most
fragrant perfume of sighs and prayers. And these are "golden vials full of
odors, which are the prayers of saints." Rev. 5:8. Whence it appears, that
devout sighs and prayers are the truest sign or indication of the Holy
Spirit in the heart of man.

3. II. The soul of man is also called the temple or habitation of the Holy
Ghost; and what is more likely to be heard there, than the prayers of its
divine Inhabitant, who is emphatically called, "The Spirit of grace and of
supplication"? Zech. 12:10. Hence prayer, when it proceeds from the very
bottom of the heart, is a certain sign of the indwelling of the Holy
Spirit. I do not here refer to the prayers of hypocrites, of whom God
speaketh by the mouth of his prophet, saying: "This people draw near me
with their mouth, but have removed their heart far from me" (Isa. 29:13);
but the true prayer, which is of the operation of the Holy Spirit, arises
from the depth of the soul; and is like plentiful springs of water, for
which the more deeply you dig, the higher you may raise them. Christ is
the pure and beautiful fountain of salvation. Let every one, therefore,
that thirsteth, come and drink. Isa. 55:1. His spring is very deep,
namely, his eternal Divinity. "He that believeth on him, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water" (John 7:38); that is, prayers and the
gifts of the Holy Ghost.

4. III. This is confirmed by the office of the Holy Spirit, which is, "to
teach and to comfort" (John 16:7-13), neither of which he can do, unless
He speaks; and that He cannot do, unless He have a church and a temple to
speak in. This temple is the heart of man; and his language consists of
the devout aspirations of the souls in which He operates; he has a secret
and heavenly voice, which our heart hears, for he beareth witness with our
spirit, that we are the children of God,--whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
Rom. 8:15, 16. Man cannot receive comfort, unless his heart, by being
broken and contrite, be made capable of consolation. Ps. 51:17. This is a
very significant figure taken from human bodies. For when the arm, or any
other part, is broken, or bruised by some accident, what pleasure the
broken and bruised part feels when soothed with some healing ointment! How
does it assuage the throbbing pains of the limb, and, as it were, lull it
into soft repose! So when the heart is wounded with affliction and sorrow,
is broken and bruised with a lively sense of its misery, then the Holy
Spirit shows himself truly a Comforter, shedding forth the oil of heavenly
consolation into our afflicted breasts. For "he healeth the broken in
heart, and bindeth up their wounds." Ps. 147:3. "Heal me, O Lord, and I
shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise."
Jer. 17:14.

5. IV. Hence then we may learn the advantage of afflictions, and the
benefit of the cross. Our blessed Lord has told us, "They that be whole
need not a physician, but they that are sick." Matt. 9:12. Come,
therefore, thou divine Physician of souls; for we all have need of thee!
"Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy" (Ps.
86:1),--poor in righteousness and true holiness. So great is the poverty of
man, that unless he be covered with the mercy of God, and clothed with the
righteousness of Jesus Christ (Isa. 61:10), he must appear with shame and
nakedness before the judgment of God and all his holy angels; and in this
respect, man is by nature reduced so very low, that there is not a more
indigent creature in the world. We may here apply that which was spoken to
the church of Laodicea, "Thou knowest not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." Rev. 3:17.

6. Moreover, the misery of which the Psalmist complains, is the effect of
poverty. He that is poor, may easily be conceived to be miserable. He
certainly is so, who is forsaken by all, has none to help him, wanders
about, having neither house nor home, nor a place where to lay his head.
And now, what state can we conceive to be more wretched, than that of a
man by nature? He has no place where to rest himself, and knows not
whither to fly for refuge! "If in this life only we have hope in Christ,
we are of all men most miserable." 1 Cor. 15:19. Let us then acknowledge
our poverty and spiritual misery in this life; we shall then receive the
instructions and consolations of the Holy Spirit. He will teach us in our
poverty, to sigh earnestly after the riches of divine grace and mercy; and
in our spiritual misery and banishment, to lift up our eyes to God that
dwelleth in the heavens. For our blessed Lord has assured us, that "in his
Father's house are many mansions" (John 14:2); and the Psalmist, that
"when our fathers and mothers forsake us, the Lord will take us up." Ps.
27:10. Come then, ye that are in want and banishment, think upon your
heavenly country. Ye that are poor, naked, and destitute, remember that
the righteousness of Christ is your clothing, and the garment of salvation
(Isa. 61:10); therefore, take ye care to preserve this clothing, "lest ye
walk naked, and men see your shame." Rev. 16:15.




Chapter XXXVI.


On The Benefits And Power Of Prayer, And On Its True Ground Or Foundation.


    _Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we
    may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need._--HEB.
    4:16.


"Hear my voice according to thy lovingkindness, O Lord" (Ps. 119:149),
saith David; pointing out thereby the foundation of our prayer, namely,
the grace of God; and this is conveyed to us through our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is "full of grace and truth," and of whose fulness we ought
all to receive. John 1:14, 16. For this reason he is also called the
_Throne of Grace_ (Heb. 4:16; Rom. 3:25), upon which the eye of faith in
prayer ought continually to be fixed, according to the example of the
children of Israel, who always offered up their prayers with their faces
towards the mercy-seat. For in his name, and for his sake alone it is,
that God has promised to hear our prayers (John 16:23); and thus even the
holy prophets of old prayed: "O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant,
for the Lord's sake." Dan. 9:17.

2. I. _First_, the benefit of our prayers is well expressed by holy David
in the latter part of the above-mentioned verse (Ps. 119:149): "Quicken me
according to thy judgments." For life proceeds from the grace of God. But
what is our life without divine grace? Therefore says the holy Psalmist,
"Thy lovingkindness is better than life." Ps. 63:4. This quickening virtue
is also derived to us through Christ Jesus. It was for this purpose that
he took our flesh and blood, that by the quickening virtue of his body, we
also might be quickened. And this we receive only by the means of prayer,
which draws down a quickening power into our souls, to heal all our
spiritual infirmities; like that which flowed from His body whilst on
earth, to cure and heal the diseases and distempers of all those that
touched him. Luke 6:19. Thus when we are afflicted and sorrowful, and can
lay hold on Jesus Christ by the prayer of faith, we immediately find, as
it were, new life and vigor flowing into our souls from that inexhaustible
fountain of divine grace. This may be attested by the experience of many
languishing and afflicted souls.

3. Whence we may learn: 1. That an afflicted soul cannot be refreshed or
comforted without prayer; as appears from the example of Christ, in the
history of his passion (Matt. 26:39), who has himself also for that reason
given us a form of prayer. Matt. 6:9, etc. And we have, indeed, great
reason to be thankful to God, who has given us prayer to be as an
universal remedy to all afflicted souls. 2. Where the prophet says, "Hear
me according to thy lovingkindness" (Ps. 119:149), he shows us that prayer
is the proper means of obtaining mercy and the graces of the Holy Spirit,
such as the increase of faith, charity, patience, the knowledge of God,
devotion, inward peace and joy. These are such gifts, such graces, such
heavenly treasures, as are better than heaven and earth. Moreover, hence
we obtain strength and victory against the world, the devil, and all our
enemies; which spiritual strength consists only in prayer. That was the
power by which David and all the saints conquered their enemies, as
appears by the example of Moses, Elias, Jehoshaphat, and others, who
always prevailed by faith and prayer. 3. Every man has need of prayer in
respect to his office, condition, and employment, in which no man can act
either prudently or successfully without prayer. We are, indeed, in this
miserable world, like people sailing amidst rocks and quicksands, and
exposed to innumerable dangers; for which reason we ought the more
fervently to implore the guidance and protection of the Holy Spirit.

4. II. Therefore, holy David adds, "They draw nigh that follow after
mischief; they are far from thy law." Ps. 119:150. And this is a proper
season for prayer. For what the devil cannot do himself, he leaves to be
accomplished by wicked men, who are as so many executioners of his malice,
and who make it their continual employment to disturb and injure good men.
From these no man is secure; but here the most effectual help is prayer.
Thus, "I will call upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised; so shall I
be saved from mine enemies." Ps. 18:2. "Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my
soul. O my God, I trust in thee; let me not be ashamed; let not mine
enemies triumph over me. Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed; but
let them be ashamed which transgress without cause." Ps. 25:1-3.

5. But it ought to be carefully noticed that David says, his enemies are
far from the law of God. These are all they that persecute others,
forsaking the word of God, and being far from his fear; whence it follows,
that as they are far from God, so God is far from them, and nothing but
destruction hangs over their heads. On the other hand, the faithful,
pious, and devout soul approaches God through prayer.

6. When, therefore, we are daily lifting up our hearts to God, and learn
to converse with him, we approach continually nearer and nearer to him,
and by degrees, forgetting this lower world, from earthly we become
heavenly and spiritual; like Moses, whose face, when he had conversed
forty days and forty nights with God, shone like the sun. Exod. 34:29. For
as we easily learn the customs and manners of those with whom we converse,
and are not so well pleased with any company as that to which we are
accustomed, so by continual and daily prayer, we grow daily more and more
acquainted with the manners and language of our heavenly country, and are
more and more inflamed with divine love. Moreover, prayer is a
preservative against sins, temptations, and all kinds of evils; according
to that saying of Christ: "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation." Matt. 26:41. But if even then anything befall us, we know
that it is by the immediate permission of God; and from it with all due
submission and resignation to his will, we may lawfully pray to be
delivered.

7. III. David proceeds: "Thou art near, O Lord: and all thy commandments
are truth." Ps. 119:151. Here he assures us, that the second and the third
foundation of prayer, are the presence and the truth of God.

8. How great soever our calamities may be, there is no one consideration
that gives us so much ease and comfort, as that of the presence of God
with us: according to that Scripture: "Fear thou not, for I am with thee:
be not dismayed, for I am thy God." Isa. 41:10. In consideration of his
presence, we may with assurance call upon him in all places, and upon all
occasions. For though our Saviour tells us, "Thou, when thou prayest,
enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy
Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall
reward thee openly" (Matt. 6:6): yet we are to consider, that these words
were spoken against the hypocrites of those times, who, from a vain
ostentation, used to pray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners
of the street; but they are by no means binding on any man to pray in any
one particular place.

9. We read of the patriarch Isaac (Gen. 24:63), that he went out at the
eventide into the field to meditate. And it is plain (Luke 6:12), that our
blessed Lord went alone "into a mountain to pray, and continued all night
in prayer to God." We may, therefore, in all places, and at any time, pray
to God; but more especially when we are alone, and not disturbed by the
conversation of others. Let us continually stir ourselves up to this
divine conversation with God, remembering the words of the Psalmist, "Thou
art near, O Lord." Now if this be true, as it most certainly is, we cannot
do better than to be often conversing with him; according to that
Scripture, "Call ye upon him while he is near." Isa. 55:6. "The Lord is
nigh unto all them that call upon him." Ps. 145:18.

10. IV. So, too, the veracity of God is a strong obligation upon us to
pray, because we know, 1. That he has commanded it; "Call upon me." Ps.
50:15. 2. That he has promised to hear us; "Before they call, I will
answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear." Isa. 65:24. 3. That
he has not only promised to hear, but has actually heard the prayers of
the faithful. This is plain, from the examples of Moses, David, Samuel,
Joshua, and of Cornelius in the Acts, whose "prayers and alms ascended up
for a memorial before God." Acts 10:4.

11. Many other examples are to be found in the Holy Scriptures. And that
thou mayest not think that, because thou art not such a one as Moses,
David, Elias, or Joshua, therefore thou shalt not be heard as easily as
they were, thou art to consider that they all were men "subject to like
passions as we are." James 5:17.

12. Who was Cornelius? Acts, ch. 10. He was a heathen. Who was Manasseh? 2
Chron. 33:12, 13. A most grievous sinner. Yet God has promised that he
will hear the miserable. Ps. 34:7. "This poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him." And "He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not
despise their prayer." Ps. 102:17. "The expectation of the poor shall not
perish for ever." Ps. 9:18. The cases just mentioned illustrate these
promises.

13. V. But as the Psalmist adds: "Concerning thy testimonies, I have known
of old, that thou hast founded them for ever" (Ps. 119:152), this
consideration exceedingly encourages our prayers and strengthens our
faith, and is another immovable foundation of prayer. The word and promise
of God are built upon an eternal foundation, being nothing else but God
himself and his Son Jesus Christ; in him the Word of God, and the
salvation of man were founded "before the foundation of the world." Eph.
1:4. Whatsoever is built upon an eternal basis, no temporal thing can
overturn. It is this that St. Paul had in his eye when he tells us that
neither height, nor depth, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
angels, nor principalities shall be able to separate us from the love of
God. Rom. 8:38.

14. And what greater consolation can we wish? Or who can refrain from
rejoicing, when he considers that our faith and prayer are founded upon
that which is eternal? Hence it is said, "Behold, I lay in Zion for a
foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste" (Isa. 28:16); or, as
St. Peter explains it, "shall not be confounded" (1 Peter 2:6): and St.
Paul, "Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ" (1 Cor. 3:11); and again, "The foundation of God standeth sure,
having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his." 2 Tim. 2:19.

15. Against this foundation even the gates of hell shall not prevail.
Matt. 16:18. This, in short, is the foundation of our salvation, our faith
and blessedness, which is more secure than heaven and earth.

16. For prayer is a conversation with God--a key of heaven--a free access to
God--a familiarity with God--an opener of his mysteries--a spiritual
banquet--a heavenly enjoyment--a nurse of virtues--a conqueror of vices--a
medicine of the soul--a remedy against infirmities--an antidote against
sin--a pillar of the world--a seed of blessing--an increase of faith--a
support of hope--a parent of charity--a path of righteousness--a preserver of
constancy--an ornament of holiness--a fire of devotion--a light of
knowledge--a repository of wisdom--the strength of the soul--a remedy against
faint-heartedness--a foundation of peace--the joy of the heart--a jubilee of
the soul--a faithful companion in this earthly pilgrimage--the shield of a
Christian soldier--a rule of humility--a forerunner of honor--a nurse of
patience--a guardian of obedience--a fountain of quietness--the conquest of
devils--a comfort of the sorrowful--a triumph of the just--the joy of the
saints--a helper of the oppressed--the ease of the afflicted--the rest of the
weary--an ornament of the conscience--an advancement of graces--an acceptable
sacrifice--an encourager of mutual goodwill--the refreshment of this
miserable life--the sweetening of death--a foretaste of the heavenly
life--the earnest desire of everlasting salvation.




Chapter XXXVII.


               Reasons Why God Certainly Hears Our Prayers.


    _Thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in
    mercy unto all them that call upon thee. Give ear, O Lord, unto my
    prayer; and attend to the voice of my supplications. In the day of
    my trouble I will call upon thee; for thou wilt answer me._--PS.
    86:5-7.


Thus saith the prophet Jeremiah, "It is of the Lord's mercies that we are
not consumed, because his compassions fail not. They are new every
morning; great is thy faithfulness. The Lord is my portion, saith my soul;
therefore will I hope in him." Lam. 3:22-24.

2. In these words the Holy Spirit gives us strong consolation in our
afflictions, drawn from the goodness and lovingkindness of God; without
which we should immediately be consumed. As in the natural world light and
darkness, by the appointment of God, alternately succeed each other, so do
light and darkness, joy and sorrow, in the spiritual world. Hence there is
a necessity that the light should spring up after darkness, and joy after
sorrow, in the souls of the righteous. Ps. 97:11. For both our life and
our well-being depend entirely upon the loving-kindness of God: "For in
him we live, and move, and have our being." Acts 17:28. He is the
never-failing fountain and spring of life and happiness. His works testify
this, for by the effects we judge of the cause. Since, therefore, God is
the Maker and Creator of all things that have life, it follows that He is
LIFE itself; and as He is the original of all that is good, it follows,
that He himself is the Supreme GOOD and LOVE itself. For this reason He is
called the Living God, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God"
(Matt. 16:16); not only from his essence, as being an original, necessary
Being, but also from the effects which he produces; because he giveth and
preserveth breath, and life, and motion to all things. Acts 17:25; Ps.
104:27. "Thou (O Belshazzar), hast praised the gods of silver and gold, of
brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the
God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not
glorified." Dan. 5:23. "They have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no
water." Jer. 2:13. "The Lord is thy life, and the length of thy days."
Deut. 30:20. "The Lord is the strength of my life." Ps. 27:1. Whence it
follows, that God is in effect the life of every living creature, and
produces and preserves life in all, according to the words of St. Paul,
"Of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for
ever." Amen. Rom. 11:36. "Christ is all in all." Col. 3:11.

3. Now though all creatures derive their life from God, yet man has
received it from his Maker in a more eminent degree; for as he is endowed
with a rational soul, it follows that he enjoys a more noble life than the
rest of the creatures. The life of angels again is more noble and glorious
than that of men, because the glory and majesty of God manifest themselves
more illustriously in them. Hence also, angels are described in 2 Thess.
1:7, as "mighty," because they are not subject to vanity and change like
man. But the most noble life is that of Jesus Christ our Lord, because he
is _God_ and _Life_ itself; according to St. John, "This is the true God,
and eternal life" (1 John 5:20); that is, He is God of God, Light of
Light, very God of very God. (Nicene Creed.)

4. And as God is the fountain and principle of life, so he is also of all
good. For he is the supreme and eternal GOOD, and whatsoever bears the
marks and characters of good, is derived from this original. Thus, every
creature has received a small portion of the divine goodness, by which it
bears witness of its Maker, and in some manner calls upon man to do the
same. Thus the vine speaks to us, "Consider, O man, that the sweetness of
my juice, with which I cheer thy heart (Ps. 104:15), is the gift of my
Maker." And so the bread: "That virtue, O man, by which I satisfy thy
hunger, is bestowed on me by my Creator and thine." This is the meaning of
that saying of St. Augustine: "That God has, as it were, shed some drops
of his divine goodness upon all the creatures, that they might thereby
contribute to the happiness of man." And the Psalmist says: "Thou crownest
the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop fatness." Ps. 65:11.

5. That which, in nature, we call the _goodness_ of God, is, by the
Scriptures, called the _grace_ of God; this bearing relation to the soul,
and that to the body. And as God has, by a thousand ways, discovered his
goodness in the great Book of nature, so he has, in innumerable instances,
discovered his grace and mercy in the Book of his word, all which are
completed in Christ, who is the great centre of all the treasures of
divine goodness and love that are distributed in heaven and earth.

6. Now, as it is the nature of every good being to be communicative, and
otherwise it ceases to be good (for who can tell what is good, unless it
thus discover itself?); so no man could know whether God were good and
gracious unless he had communicated his grace and goodness to others. Who
could have known the inestimable benefits of Christ as a Saviour, if he
had not so abundantly manifested his love towards us?

7. But why was God pleased to manifest his goodness, grace, and mercy to
mankind? It was for this reason: that we might believe in him, love him
above all things, and call upon him in all our troubles; and he was
pleased to make this manifestation of himself, that it might be, as it
were, the first incentive to kindle the flames of devotion in our hearts.
For how should we call on him of whom we have not heard? Rom. 10:14. As
Almighty God discovered himself to Moses, when he passed by, and he, upon
the sense of his goodness, grace, and mercy, immediately began to pray
(Exod. 34:8, 9), so has He, in like manner, manifested himself to us, and
made all his goodness pass before us, that we also might learn to praise
him.

8. But you will say, How has God manifested himself to me? If he would
show himself to me, as he did to Moses, why should I not praise him as he
did? To which I answer: This is done in Christ Jesus, in whom he
manifested all his goodness after a visible manner. "We beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth."
John 1:14. And did we but seriously consider all that our blessed Saviour
has done for us, we should, doubtless, exclaim: "The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and in
truth."

10. And thus we see in what sense the type, which may be discerned in this
narrative of Moses, was fulfilled by the incarnation of Christ. For God,
descending from heaven in him, was pleased to make his glory pass before
us.

11. When Paul and Barnabas wrought great miracles at Athens, the heathens
cried out, "The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men." Acts
14:11. This was their judgment of the matter; but we may in a very proper
sense say, that all the goodness and grace of God did, by Christ, come
down to us upon earth, in order that we might thereby be drawn to God, and
that the spirit of faith and prayer might be bestowed on us. For by prayer
only we obtain the grace and favor of God.

12. Let us now produce some reasons which may convince us, that God hears
our prayers.

13. And _first_, such is the power of prayer and entreaty, that they often
pacify and prevail upon, not only the compassionate and kind, but even
morose and harsh tempers; of which we have an instance in the case of the
widow, who by her continual prayers, prevailed even upon that unjust
judge, who neither feared God, nor regarded man. Luke 18:4, 5. For prayer,
as it proceeds from the spirit, and is, as it were, the strength of the
soul, has a marvellous power and influence upon the minds of others, so as
to be able to soften and mould them into any form of benevolence. Now as
God is not a harsh Being, but merciful in the highest degree, the most
sincere love, the most perfect patience, the most generous compassion, the
most ardent love itself, and in a word, the most absolute perfection; so
he cannot but be tenderly moved by the ardent and devout prayers of his
servants. Were it otherwise, it would follow, that God is not supremely
good, loving, and merciful. Now, as true as it is that he is all this; so
true it is that he is easy to be entreated by devout and humble prayer.

14. Tauler says: "God is moved with so vehement a love towards us, as if
his divinity itself depended on us, and his only aim and design were, to
discover to us the abyss of his divinity, and the fulness of his essence
and nature; so that all may belong to us, even as it belongs to him." And
again, "We were created, and are called and invited to things immeasurably
great, and eternal; wherefore God is exceedingly displeased with us, when
we prefer the empty and trifling vanities of the world before him, who is
ready, not only to bestow all things else, but even Himself upon us."
Again, "So great is the love of God towards us, that he will deny us
nothing: yea, he anticipates our prayers, meets us (as it were) half-way,
and courts our friendship, being a thousand times more ready to give, than
we are to receive."

15. The _second_ argument is found in the _truth and promise of God_.
"Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee." Ps. 50:15.
"Thou, Lord, art good and ready to forgive; and plenteous in mercy unto
all them that call upon thee." Ps. 86:5. The Lord, we see, is _good_; and
if this be not sufficient, he is also _ready to forgive_; and if this do
not satisfy us, he is also _plenteous in mercy_. But to whom? Even _to all
those that call upon him_. Hence, it is said, "The Lord is nigh unto all
them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. He will
fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and
will save them." Ps. 145:18, 19; Isa. 65:24; John 16:23; Matt. 7:7, 8.
_Ask_, but rest not there; _seek_ also; neither think this sufficient, but
_knock_. "For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh,
findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened." "What things
soever ye desire, when you pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them." Mark 11:24. Compare this with Luke 11:9. And that God
will keep his promise, is as certain, as that he really is what he, in his
holy word, has declared himself to be. And that he may hear us, and pour
his abundant goodness upon us, he has commanded us to pray often, to pray
earnestly, and without ceasing. Luke 18:1; 1 Thess. 5:17.

16. A _third_ argument for our prayer, is God's paternal tenderness, which
is thus illustrated. "If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a
father, will he give him a stone?--If ye, then, being evil, know how to
give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" Luke 11:11, 13. And is
not God this Father, "of whom the whole family in heaven and in earth is
named"? (Eph. 3:15) whom St. Paul calls, "The Father of mercies, and God
of all comfort?" 2 Cor. 1:3. Shall man then be merciful, and shall God,
that created that merciful heart, be unmerciful? Shall he that gave to
parents such tender affection, be without compassion himself? Why should
God call himself a Father, if he be not of a paternal disposition? So
that, in short, we must conclude, either that God is unjustly styled our
Father, or else he will hear the prayers of his children that call upon
him. Hence, it is said, "Thou, O Lord, art our Father." Isa. 63:16. And,
"I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn." Jer. 31:9. But if
the affections of a mother be so great, that she cannot but have
"compassion on the son of her womb" (Isa. 49:15), why should we think God
so void of mercy? Why should we question God's compassions toward us, if
we approach him with penitent and contrite hearts? How do the mother's
bowels yearn over her beloved son, when she sees him laboring under any
dangerous disease? So the Almighty God says of himself: "Therefore, my
bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the
Lord." Jer. 31:20.

17. A _fourth_ argument is, the _intercession of Christ_. With what ardent
prayer did he, in the time of his humiliation upon earth, recommend his
Church to his Father, and intercede for all believers!

18. Thus, "Holy Father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou hast
given me; that they may be one, as we are. Sanctify them through thy
truth; thy word is truth. I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of
the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. Neither pray I
for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their
word. Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me
where I am; that the love wherewith thou hast loved me, may be in them,
and I in them." John 17:11, 17, 15, 20, 24, 26. Nor did he pray so for us
only upon earth; for even now he continues his intercessions for us at the
right hand of God. "Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is
passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God;--let us come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time
of need." Heb. 4:14, 16; 7:26; 9:11; Rom. 8:34.

19. A _fifth_ argument is, _the testimony of the Holy Spirit_, who
"beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God" (Rom.
8:16), and this witness in our hearts cannot deceive us. For if this
testimony be in us of a truth, we shall have a demonstrative evidence that
we are God's children, and that he hears us in Christ when we pray unto
him.

20. _Sixthly_, because God and Christ are with us, and dwell in us _by
faith_, how can we suppose that God will not hear our sighs and groans?
"Thou understandest my thought afar off. There is not a word in my tongue,
but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether." Ps. 139:2, 4. Think not,
therefore, that God is separated from thee by any distance of place, that
may hinder thy prayers from coming to him, "for he is in thee, and thou in
him." Acts 17:28; John 17:23. Since, therefore, he lives and works in
thee, why should he not hear thy prayers? "Lord, all my desire is before
thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee?" Ps. 38:10. "Let the words of
my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight." Ps.
19:14.

21. _Seventhly_, because the Holy Spirit, who is truly God, is also the
Spirit of prayer, and himself maketh intercession in us with sighs and
groanings unutterable. Zech. 12:10; Rom. 8:26. Why then shouldest thou
imagine that God will not see, hear, and regard that which he himself
works in thee? Therefore it is impossible that even the feeblest sigh
proceeding from the Holy Spirit in us, and tending towards God, can be
lost or come to nought. For as it proceeds from God, so it goes to him;
and whatsoever is in him cannot perish. The deeds are wrought in God, and
will be made manifest. John 3:21.

22. _Eighthly_, God is not forgetful like men, as "a book of remembrance
is written before him, for them that fear the Lord, and that think upon
his name" (Mal. 3:16): so that he cannot be forgetful of our prayers. God
cannot forget that which is good, nor will he call the sins of the
penitent to remembrance. So mighty and so abundant is the grace of God,
that he blots out our sins, and calls not our transgressions to mind. But
the good which he himself has wrought in us, he can never forget; for then
he must forget himself and his own works. It is therefore impossible that
God should disregard those prayers which his own Holy Spirit works in us;
any more than he can forget his word, or be unmindful of his promise.
"Since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still," saith God
by the prophet. Jer. 31:20. And again, "Thou tellest my wanderings; put
thou my tears into thy bottle." Ps. 56:8. So he assures us that "He will
ever be mindful of his covenant." Ps. 111:5. And what is this covenant?
Nothing else but the remission of our sins, confirmed to us by the death
of Christ, and sealed by his Holy Spirit. Eph. 1:13.

23. And now, perhaps, thou wilt say, If these things are so, how comes it
to pass that God does not hear and grant my petitions? I have often
prayed, and called, and sighed, and all to no purpose.

24. Thus much, indeed, must be granted, that many a man prays a great
while for that which he does not obtain; and thence we judge that his
prayers are not heard. What then becomes of these our reasons for
believing that prayer will assuredly be heard? This is a very great trial,
and has given much disturbance to many sincere and well-disposed souls.

25. But here we must observe, that the certainty of God's hearing our
prayers, is incontestably proved by the arguments already produced, which
are built upon an immovable foundation; whence it appears, that God does
as certainly hear our prayers, as He is (1.) merciful, and a lover of
mankind. (2.) As he is true in all his promises, yea, eternal truth
itself. (3.) As he has a fatherly tenderness for us. (4.) As Jesus Christ
is our mediator. (5.) As God and Christ dwell in us; which are all truths
so certain and evident, that no believing heart ought to question them.

26. But we complain that God does not presently give us what we ask for,
and, therefore, that our prayers are not heard. For this two reasons may
be given: 1. That God hears our prayers, regarding more our happiness than
our desires. 2. That he reserves to himself the liberty of bestowing the
blessings which we ask, either upon our bodies or our souls, as he shall
think most proper. Thus, perhaps, we ask of God some temporal blessings,
who seeing them to be unfit for us, gives us spiritual ones; by which
means we not only receive what we prayed for, but so much the more, as the
good of the soul is to be preferred to that of the body. For as the soul
is much more noble than the body, and spiritual blessings are more
excellent than earthly; so much better is it for us, that God should give
us his eternal and spiritual blessings rather than those transitory and
fading enjoyments in which we are generally most delighted. He hears our
prayers, not always with respect to our bodies, but to our souls; which is
of far greater importance. If it should please God to visit you with some
bodily disease, and you pray for health, doubt not; your prayers will be
heard, and you shall certainly enjoy, if not the health of your body, yet
the health of your soul, which is much to be preferred. Every man in his
sound senses must think so. What advantage would it be to have the body in
health, but a sinful, distempered soul, liable to eternal death? When it
is well with the soul, a man may say with David, "Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. My
flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion forever." Ps. 73:25, 26. And with the suffering Job, "I know that
my Redeemer liveth." Job 19:25. And from Him the soul may derive life.
Therefore David, comparing spiritual blessings with earthly, tells us:
"The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and
silver." Ps. 119:72.

27. But, perhaps, you will say that you pray for both; the health of your
soul as well as of your body; and for spiritual blessings, as well as
temporal. To this the Lord himself answers thee, "My grace is sufficient
for thee" (2 Cor. 12:9); which was the reply given to St. Paul, though he
had desired to be answered in his own way. And thus it appears, that God
always hears our prayers, if not with regard to our bodies, yet certainly
to our souls.

28. Besides, God has reserved to himself the liberty of accomplishing our
desires either in this world, or the next, as he shall deem most proper.
Wherefore if thou dost not receive the blessings for which thou prayest,
consider that it is not good for thee to enjoy them here, but that the
answer to thy prayers is reserved for the other life, which is more noble
and durable, and more capable of pure enjoyments than this. There the Lord
will bestow on thee a thousandfold, for all that He seemed to deny thee
here. As He cannot forget our prayers, so He cannot fail to answer them
