against them! How much sheer worldliness disguises itself from
itself and from others in glistering garments of noble sentiments,
which fall at a touch when real giving up is called for, and show
the ugly thing below! How much 'religion' goes about the world, and
gets made 'a ruler' of the synagogue in recognition of its
excellence, which needs but this Ithuriel's spear to start up in its
own shape! The completeness  and immediateness of the collapse are
noticeable. The young man seems to speak no word, and to take no
time for reflection. He stands for a moment as if stunned, and then
silently turns away. What a moment! his fate hung on it. Once more
we see the awful mystery enacted before our eyes, of a soul
gathering up its power to put away life. Who will say that the
decision of a moment, which is the outcome of all the past, may not
fix the whole future? This man had never before been consciously
brought to the fork in the road; but now the two ways are before
him, and, knowingly, he chooses the worse. Christ did not desire him
to do so; but He did desire that he should choose, and should know
that he did. It was the truest kindness to tear away the veil of
surface goodness which hid him from himself, and to force him to a
conscious decision.

One sign of grace he does give, in that he went away 'sorrowful.' He
is not angry nor careless. He cannot see the fair prospect of the
eternal life, which he had in some real fashion desired, fade away,
without a pang. If he goes back to the world, he goes back feeling
more acutely than ever that it cannot satisfy him. He loves it too
well to give it up, but not enough to feel that it is enough.
Surely, in coming days, that godly sorrow would work a change of the
foolish choice, and we may hope that he found no rest till he cast
away all else to make Christ his own. A soul which has travelled as
far on the road to life eternal as this man had done, can scarcely
thereafter walk the broad road of selfishness and death with entire
satisfaction.

IV. The section closes with Christ's comment on the sad incident. He
speaks no word of condemnation, but passes at once from the
individual to the general lesson of the difficulty which rich men
(or, as He explains it in Mark, men who 'trust in riches') have in
entering the kingdom. The reflection breathes a tone of pity, and is
not so much blame as a merciful recognition of special temptations
which affect His judgment, and should modify ours. A camel with its
great body, long neck, and hump, struggling to get through a
needle's eye, is their emblem. It is a new thing to pity rich men,
or to think of their wealth as disqualifying them for anything. The
disciples, with childish _naivete_, wonder. We may wonder that
they wondered. They could not understand what sort of a kingdom it
was into which capitalists would find entrance difficult. All doors
fly open for them to-day, as then. They do not find much difficulty
in getting into the church, however hard it may be to get into the
kingdom. But it still remains true that the man who has wealth has a
hindrance to his religious character, which, like all hindrances,
may be made a help by the use he makes of it; and that the man who
trusts in riches, which he who possesses them is wofully likely to
do, has made the hindrance into a barrier which he cannot pass.

That is a lesson which commercial nations, like England, have need
to lay to heart, not as a worn-out saying of the Bible, which means
very little for us, but as heavy with significance, and pointing to
the special dangers which beset Christian perfection.

So real is the peril of riches, that Christ would have His disciples
regard the victory over it as beyond our human power, and beckons us
away from the effort to overcome the love of the world in our
strength, pointing us to God, in whose mighty grace, breathed into
our feeble wills and treacherous hearts, is the only force which can
overcome the attraction of perishable riches, and make any of us
willing or able to renounce them all that we may win Christ. The
young ruler had just shown that 'with men this is impossible.'
Perhaps he still lingered near enough to catch the assurance that
the surrender, which had been too much for him to achieve, might yet
be joyfully made, since 'with God all things are possible.'




NEAREST TO CHRIST


    'To sit on My right hand, and on My left, is not Mine
    to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is
    prepared of My Father.'--MATT. xx. 23.

You will observe that an unusually long supplement is inserted by
our translators in this verse. That supplement is quite unnecessary,
and, as is sometimes the case, is even worse than unnecessary. It
positively obscures the true meaning of the words before us.

As they stand in our Bibles, the impression that they leave upon
one's mind is that Christ in them abjures the power of giving to His
disciples their places in the kingdom of heaven, and declares that
it belongs not to His function, but relegates it, to His own
exclusion, to the Father; whereas what He says is the very opposite
of this. He does not put aside the granting of places at His right
hand or His left as not being within His province, but He states the
principles and conditions on which He does make such a grant, and so
is really claiming it as in His province. All that would have been a
great deal clearer if our translators had been contented to render
the words that they found before them in the Book, without addition,
and to read, 'To sit on My right hand, and on My left, is not Mine
to give, but to them for whom it is prepared of My Father.'

Another introductory remark may be made, to the effect that our Lord
does not put aside this prayer of His apostles as if they were
seeking an impossible thing. It is never safe, I know, to argue from
the silence of Scripture. There may be many reasons for that silence
beyond our ken in any given case; but still it does strike one as
noteworthy that, when this fond mother and her ambitious sons came
with their prayer for pre-eminence in His kingdom, our Lord did not
answer what would have been so obvious to answer if it had been
true, 'You are asking a thing which cannot be granted to anybody,
for they are all upon one level in that kingdom of the heavens.' He
says by implication the very opposite. Not only does His silence
confirm their belief that when He came in His glory, some would be
closer to His side than others; but the plain statement of the text
is that, in the depth of the eternal counsels, and by the
preparation of divine grace, there were thrones nearest to His own
which some men should fill. He does _not_ say, 'You are asking
what cannot be.' He does say, 'There are men for whom it is prepared
of My Father.'

And then, still further, Jesus does not condemn the prayer as
indicating a wrong state of mind on the part of James and John,
though good and bad were strangely mingled in it. We are told
nowadays that it is a very selfish thing, far below the lofty height
to which our transcendental teachers have attained, to be heartened
and encouraged, strengthened and quickened, by the prospect of the
crown and the rest that remain for the people of God. If so, Christ
ought to have turned round to these men, and have rebuked the
passion for reward, which, according to this new light, is so
unworthy and so low. But, instead of that, He confines Himself to
explaining the conditions on which the fulfilment of the desire is
possible, and by implication permits and approves the desire. 'You
want to sit on My right hand and on My left, do you? Then be it so.
You may do so if you like. Are you ready to accept the conditions?
It is well that you should want it,--not for the sake of being above
your brethren, but for the sake of being nearest to Me. Hearken! Are
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?' They say unto
Him (and I do not know that there are anywhere grander words than
the calm, swift, unhesitating, modest, and yet confident answer of
these two men), 'We are able.' 'You shall have your desire if you
fulfil the conditions. It is given to them for whom it is prepared
of My Father.'

I. So, then, if we rightly understand these words, and take them
without the unfortunate comment which our translators have inserted,
they contain, first, the principle that some will be nearer Christ
than others in that heavenly kingdom.

As I have said, the words of our Lord do not merely imply, by the
absence of all hint that these disciples' petition was impossible,
the existence of degrees among the subjects of His heavenly kingdom,
but articulately affirm that such variety is provided for by the
preparation of the Father. Probably the two brothers thought that
they were only asking for preeminence in an earthly kingdom, and had
no idea that their prayer pointed beyond the grave; but that
confusion of thought could not be cured in their then stage of
growth, and our Lord therefore leaves it untouched. But the other
error, if it were an error, was of a different kind, and might, for
aught that one sees, have been set right in a moment. Instead of
which the answer adopts it, and seems to set Christ's own
confirmation on it, as being no Jewish dream, but a truth.

They were asking for earth. He answers--for heaven. He leaves them
to learn in after days--when the one was slain with the sword, first
martyr among the apostles, and the other lived to see them all pass
to their thrones, while he remained the 'companion in tribulation'
of the second generation of the Church--how far off was the
fulfilment which they fancied so near.

We need not be surprised that so large a truth should be spoken by
Christ so quietly, and as it were incidentally. For that is in
keeping with His whole tone when speaking of the unseen world. One
knows not whether to wonder more at the decisive authority with
which He tells us of that mysterious region, or at the small space
which such revelations occupy in His words. There is an air of
simplicity and unconsciousness, and withal of authority, and withal
of divine reticence about them all, which are in full harmony with
the belief that Christ speaking of heaven speaks of that He knows,
and testifies that He hath seen.

That truth to which, as we think, our Lord's words here inevitably
lead, is distinctly taught in many other places of Scripture. We
should have had less difficulty about it, and should have felt more
what a solemn and stimulating thought it is, if we had tried a
little more than most of us do to keep clear before us what really
is the essential of that future life, what is the lustre of its
light, the heaven of heaven, the glory of the glory. Men talk about
physical theories of another life. I suppose they are possible. They
seem to me infinitely unimportant. Warm imaginations, working by
sense, write books about a future state which wonderfully succeed in
making it real by making it earthly. Some of them read more like a
book of travels in this world than forecastings of the next. They
may be true or not. It does not matter one whit. I believe that
heaven is a place. I believe that the corporeity of our future life
is essential to the perfection of it. I believe that Christ wears,
and will wear for ever, a glorified human body. I believe that that
involves locality, circumstance, external occupations; and I say,
all that being so, and in its own place very important, yet if we
stop there, we have no vision of the real light that makes the
lustre, no true idea of the glory that makes the blessedness.

For what is heaven? Likeness to God, love, purity, fellowship with
Him; the condition of the spirit and the relation of the soul to
Him. The noblest truth about the future world flows from the words
of our Master--'This is life eternal, to know Thee, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent.' Not 'this brings'; not
'this will lead up to'; not 'this will draw after it'; but 'this
is'; and whosoever possesses that eternal life hath already in him
the germ of all the glories that are round the throne, and the
blessedness that fills the hearts of perfected spirits.

If so, if already eternal life in the bud standeth in the knowledge
of God in Christ, what makes its fruitage and completeness? Surely,
not physical changes or the circumstances of heaven, at least not
these primarily, however much such changes and circumstances may
subserve our blessedness there, and the anticipation of them may
help our sense-bound hopes here. But the completeness of heaven is
the completion of our knowledge of God and Christ, with all the
perfecting of spirit which that implies and produces. The faith, and
love, and happy obedience, and consecration which is calm, that
partially occupied and ruled the soul here, are to be thought of as
enlarged, perfected, delivered from the interruption of opposing
thoughts, of sensuous desires, of selfish purposes, of earthly and
sinful occupations. And that perfect knowledge and perfect union and
perfect likeness are perfect bliss. And that bliss is heaven. And
if, whilst heaven is a place, the heaven of heaven be a state, then
no more words are needed to show that, then, heaven can be no dead
level, nor can all stand at the same stage of attainments, though
all be perfect; but that in that solemn company of the blessed, 'the
spirits of just men made perfect,' there are indefinitely numerous
degrees of approximation to the unattainable Perfection, which
stretches above them all, and draws them all to itself. We have not
to think of that future life as oppressed, if I may so say, with the
unbroken monotony of perfect identity in character and attainments.
All indeed are like one another, because all are like Jesus, but
that basis of similarity does not exclude infinite variety. The same
glory belongs to each, but it is reflected at differing angles and
received in divers measures. Perfect blessedness will belong to
each, but the capacity to receive it will differ. There will be the
same crown on each head, the same song on each lip, the same fulness
of joy filling each heart; but star differeth from star, and the
great condition of happy intercourse on earth will not be wanting in
heaven--a deep-seated similarity and a superficial diversity.

Does not the very idea of an endless progress in that kingdom involve
such variety? We do not think of men passing into the heavens, and
being perfected by a bound so as that there shall be no growth. We
think of them indeed as being perfected up to the height of their
then capacity, from the beginning of that celestial life, so as that
there shall be no sin, nor any conscious incompleteness, but not so
as that there shall be no progress. And, if they each grow through
all the ages, and are ever coming nearer and nearer to Christ, that
seems necessarily to lead to the thought that this endless progress,
carried on in every spirit, will place them at different points of
approximation to the one centre. As in the heavens there are planets
that roll nearer the central sun, and others that circle farther out
from its rays, yet each keeps its course, and makes music as it moves,
as well as planets whose broader disc can receive and reflect more
of the light than smaller sister spheres, and yet each blazes over
its whole surface and is full to its very rim with white light; so
round that throne the spirits of the just made perfect shall move in
order and peace--every one blessed, every one perfect, every one
like Christ at first, and becoming liker through every moment of
the eternities. Each perfected soul looking on his brother shall
see there another phase of the one perfectness that blesses and
adorns him too, and all taken together shall make up, in so far as
finite creatures can make up, the reflection and manifestation of
the fulness of Christ. 'Having then gifts differing according to
the grace that is given to us' is the law for the incompleteness
of earth. 'Having then gifts differing according to the glory that
is given to us' will be the law for the perfection of the heavens.
There are those for whom it is prepared of His Father, that they
shall sit in special nearness to Him.

II. Still further, these words rightly understood assert that truth
which, at first sight, our Authorised Version's rendering seems to
make them contradict, viz. that Christ is the giver to each of these
various degrees of glory and blessedness. 'It is not Mine to give,
save to them for whom it is prepared.' Then it is Thine to give it
to them. To deny or to doubt that Christ is the giver of the
blessedness, whatsoever the blessedness may be, that fills the
hearts and souls of the redeemed, is to destroy His whole work, to
destroy all the relations upon which our hopes rest, and to
introduce confusion and contradiction into the whole matter.

For Scripture teaches us that He is God's unspeakable gift; that in
Him is given to us everything; that He is the bestower of all which
we need; that 'out of His fulness,' as one of those two disciples
long afterwards said, 'all we have received, and grace for grace.'
There is nothing within the compass of God's love to bestow of which
Christ is not the giver. There is nothing divine that is done in the
heavens and the earth, as I believe, of which Christ is not the
doer. The representation of Scripture is uniformly that He is the
medium of the activity of the divine nature; that he is the energy
of the divine will; that He is, to use the metaphor of the Old
Testament, 'the arm of the Lord'--the forthputting of God's power;
that He is, to use the profound expression of the New Testament, the
Word of the Lord, cognate with, and the utterance of, the eternal
nature, the light that streams from the central brightness, the
river that flows from the else sealed fountain. As the arm is to the
body, and as is the word to the soul, so is Christ to God--the
eternal divine utterance and manifestation of the divine nature.
And, therefore, to speak of anything that a man can need and
anything that God can give as not being given by Christ, is to
strike at the very foundation, not only of our hopes, but at the
whole scheme of revealed truth. He is the giver of heaven and
everything else which the soul requires.

And then, again, let me remind you that on this matter we are not
left to such general considerations as those that I have been
suggesting, but that the plain statements of Scripture do confirm
the assertion that Christ is the determiner and the bestower of all
the differing grades of glory and blessedness yonder. For do we not
read of Him that He is the Judge of the whole earth? Do we not read
of Him that His word is acquittal and His frown condemnation--that
to 'be accepted of Him' is the highest aim and end of the Christian
life? Do we not read that it is He who says, 'Come, ye blessed of My
Father, enter into the kingdom prepared for you'? Do we not read
that the apostle, dying, solaced himself with the thought that
'there was laid up for him a crown of glory, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge, would give him at that day'? And do we not read in
the very last book of Scripture, written by one of those two
brothers, and containing almost verbal reference to the words of my
text, the promise seven times spoken from the immortal lips of the
glorified Son of Man, walking in the midst of the candlesticks, 'To
him that overcometh will I give'? The fruit of the tree of life is
plucked by His hands for the wearied conquerors. The crown of life
is set by Him on the faithful witnesses' brows. The hidden manna and
the new name are bestowed by Him on those who hold fast His name. It
is He who gives the victors kingly power over the nations. He
clothes in white garments those who have not defiled their robes.
His hand writes upon the triumphant foreheads the name of God. And
highest of all, beyond which there is no bliss conceivable, 'To him
that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My throne.'

Christ is the bestower of the royalties of the heavens as of the
redemptions of earth, and it is His to give that which we crave at
His hands, when we ask pardon here and glory hereafter. 'To him that
is athirst will He give of the water of life freely,' and to him
that overcometh will He give the crown of glory.

III. These words lead us, in the third place, to the further
thought, that these glorious places are not given to mere wishing,
nor by mere arbitrary will.

'You would sit on My right hand and on My left? You think of that
pre-eminence as conferred because you chose to ask it--as given by a
piece of favouritism. Not so. I cannot make a man foremost in my
kingdom in that fashion. There are conditions which must precede
such an elevation.'

And there are people who think thus still, as if the mere desire,
without anything more, were enough--or as if the felicities of the
heavenly world were dependent solely on Christ's arbitrary will, and
could be bestowed by an exercise of mere power, as an Eastern prince
may make this man his vizier and that other one his water-carrier.
The same principles which we have already applied to the elucidation
of the idea of varieties and stages of nearness to Christ in His
heavenly kingdom have a bearing on this matter. If we rightly
understand that the essential blessedness of heaven is likeness to
Christ, we shall feel that mere wishing carries no man thither, and
that mere sovereign will and power do not avail to set us there.
There are conditions indispensable, from the very nature of the
case, and unless they are realised it is as impossible for us to
receive, as for Him to give, a place at His side. If, indeed, the
future blessedness consisted in mere external circumstances and
happier conditions of life, it might be so bestowed. But if place
and surroundings, and a more exquisite and ethereal frame, are but
subordinate sources of it, and its real fountain is union with Jesus
and assimilation to Him, then something else than idle desires must
wing the soul that soars thither, and His transforming grace, not
His arbitrary will, must set us at His own right hand 'in the
heavenly places.'

Of all the profitless occupations with which men waste their lives,
none are more utterly useless than wishing without acting. Our
wishes are meant to impel us to the appropriate forms of energy by
which they can be realised. When a pauper becomes a millionaire by
sitting and vehemently wishing that he were rich, when ignorance
becomes learning by standing in a library and wishing that the
contents of all these books were in its head, there will be some
hope that the gates of heaven will fly open to your desire. But till
then, 'many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in and not be
able.' Many shall _seek_; you must _strive_. For wishing is one thing,
and _willing_ is another, and _doing_ is yet another. And in regard
to entrance into Christ's kingdom, our 'doing' is trusting in Him who
has done all for us. 'This is the work of God, that ye should believe
on Him whom He hath sent.' Does our wish lead us to the acceptance
of the condition? Then it will be fulfilled. If not, it will remain
fruitless, will die into apathy, or will live as a pang and a curse.

You wish, or fancy you wish, to pass into heaven when you die, I
suppose. Some of its characteristics attract you. You believe in
punishment for sin, and you would willingly escape that. You believe
in a place of rest after toil, of happiness after sorrow, where
nipping frosts of disappointment, and wild blasts of calamity, and
slow, gnawing decay no more harm and kill your joys--and you would
like that. But do you wish to be pure and stainless, to have your
hearts fixed on God alone, to have your whole being filled with Him,
and emptied of self and sense and sin? The peace of heaven attracts
you--but its praise repels, does it not? Its happiness draws your
wishes--does its holiness seem inviting? It would be joyful to be
far away from punishment--would it be as joyful to be near Christ?
Ah! no; the wishes lead to no resolve, and therefore to no result,
for this among other reasons, because they are only kindled by a
part of the whole, and are exchanged for positive aversion when the
real heaven of heaven is presented to your thoughts. Many a man who,
by the set of his whole life, is drifting daily nearer and nearer to
that region of outer darkness, is conscious of an idle wish for
peace and joy beyond the grave. In common matters a man may be
devoured by vain desires all his lifetime, because he will not pass
beyond wishing to acting accordingly. 'The desire of the slothful
killeth him; because his hands refused to labour, he coveteth
greedily all the day long.' And with like but infinitely more
tragical issues do these vain wishes for a place in that calm world,
where nothing but holiness enters, gnaw at many a soul. 'Let me die
the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his,' was
the aspiration of that Gentile prophet, whose love of the world
obscured even the prophetic illumination which he possessed--and his
epitaph is a stern comment on the uselessness of such empty wishes,
'Balaam, the son of Beor, they slew with the sword.' It needs more
than a wish to set us at Christ's right hand in His kingdom.

Nor can such a place be given by mere arbitrary will. Christ could
not, if He would, set a man at His right hand whose heart was not
the home of simple trust and thankful love, whose nature and desires
were unprepared for that blessed world. It would be like taking one
of those creatures--if there be such--that live on the planet whose
orbit is farthest from the sun, accustomed to cold, organised for
darkness, and carrying it to that great central blaze, with all its
fierce flames and tongues of fiery gas that shoot up a thousand
miles in a moment. It would crumble and disappear before its
blackness could be seen against the blaze.

His loving will embraces us all, and is the foundation of all our
hopes. But it had to reach its purpose by a bitter road which He did
not shrink from travelling. He desires to save us, and to realise
the desire He had to die. 'It became Him for whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their
salvation perfect through suffering.' What He had to do, we have to
accept. Unless we accept the mercy of God in Christ, no wish on our
parts, nor any exercise of power on His, will carry us to the heaven
which He has died to open, and of which He is at once the giver and
the gift.

IV. These glorious places are given as the result of a divine
preparation.

'To them for whom it is prepared of My Father.' We have seen that
Christ is not to be regarded as abjuring the office, with which His
disciples' confidence led them to invest Him--that of allotting to
His servants their place in His kingdom. He neither refers it to the
Father without Himself, nor claims it for Himself without the
Father. The living unity of will and work which subsists between the
Father and the Son forbids such a separation and distribution of
office. And that unity is set forth on both its sides in His own
deep words, 'The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth
the Father do: for whatsoever things He doeth, these also doeth the
Son likewise.'

So, then, while the gift of thrones at His side is His act and the
Father's, in like manner the preparation of the royal seats for
their occupants, and of the kings for their thrones, is the Father's
act and His.

Our text does not tell us directly what that preparation is, any
more than it tells us directly what the principles are on which
entrance into and pre-eminence in the kingdom are granted. But we
know enough in regard to both, for our practical guidance, for the
vigour of our hope, and the grasp of our faith.

There is a twofold divine preparation of the heavens for men. One is
from of old. The kingdom is 'prepared for you before the foundation
of the world.' That preparation is in the eternal counsel of the
divine love, which calleth the things that are not as though they
were, and before which all that is evolved in the generations of men
and the epochs of time, lies on one plane, equally near to dim from
whose throne diverge far beneath the triple streams of past,
present, and future.

And beside that preparation, the counsel of pardoning mercy and
redeeming grace, there is the other preparation--the realisation of
that eternal purpose in time through the work of Jesus Christ our
Lord. His consolation to His disciples in the parting hour was, 'I
go to prepare a place for you.' How much was included in these words
we shall never know till we, like Him, see of the travail of His
soul, and like Him are satisfied. But we can dimly see that on the
one hand His death, and on the other hand His entrance into that
holiest of all, make ready for us the many mansions of the Father's
house. He was crucified for our offences, He was raised again for
our justification, He is passed through the heavens to stand our
Forerunner in the presence of God--and by all these mighty acts He
prepares the heavenly places for us. As the sun behind a cloud,
which hides it from us, is still pouring out its rays on far-off
lands, so He, veiled in dark, sunset clouds of Calvary, sent the
energy of His passion and cross into the unseen world and made it
possible that we should enter there. 'When Thou didst overcome the
sharpness of death, Thou didst open the gates of the kingdom of
heaven to all believers.' As one who precedes a mighty host provides
and prepares rest for their weariness, and food for their hunger, in
some city on their line of march, and having made all things ready,
is at the gates to welcome their travel-stained ranks when they
arrive, and guide them to their repose; so He has gone before, our
Forerunner, to order all things for us there. It may be that unless
Christ were in heaven, our brother as well as our Lord, it were no
place for mortals. It may be that we need to have His glorified
bodily presence in order that it should be possible for human
spirits to bear the light, and be at home with God. Be that as it
may, this we know, that the Father prepares a place for us by the
eternal counsel of His love, and by the all-sufficient work of
Christ, by whom we have access to the Father.

And as His work is the Father's preparation of the place for us by
the Son, the issue of His work is the Father's preparation of us for
the place, through the Son, by the Spirit. 'He that hath wrought us
for the self-same thing is God.'

If so, then what follows? This, among other things, that wishes are
vain, for heaven is no gift of arbitrary favouritism, but that faith
in Christ, and faith alone, leads us to His right hand--and the
measure of our faith and growing Christlikeness here, will be the
measure of our glory hereafter, and of our nearness to Him. It is
possible to be 'saved, _yet so as by fire_.' It is possible to
have 'an entrance ministered unto us _abundantly_ into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.' If we
would be near Him then, we must be near Him now. If we would share
His throne, we must bear His cross. If we would be found in the
likeness of His resurrection, we must be 'conformable unto His
death.' Then such desires as these true-hearted, and yet mistaken,
disciples expressed will not be the voice of selfish ambition, but
of dependent love. They will not be vain wishes, but be fulfilled by
Him, who, stooping from amid the royalties of heaven, with love upon
His face and pity in His heart, will give more than we ask. 'Seekest
thou a place at My right hand? Nay, I give thee a more wondrous
dignity. To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My
throne.'




THE SERVANT-LORD AND HIS SERVANTS


    'Even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto,
    but to minister.'--MATT. xx. 28.

It seems at first sight strangely unsympathetic and irrelevant that
the ambitious request of James and John and their foolish mother,
that they should sit at Christ's right hand and His left in His
kingdom, should have been occasioned by, and have followed
immediately upon, our Lord's solemn and pathetic announcement of His
sufferings. But the connection is not difficult to trace. The
disciples believed that, in some inexplicable way, the sufferings
which our Lord was shadowing forth were to be the immediate
precursors of His assuming His regal dignity. And so they took time
by the forelock, as they thought, and made haste to ensure their
places in the kingdom, which they believed was now ready to burst
upon them. Other occasions in the Gospels in which we find similar
quarrelling among the disciples as to pre-eminence are similarly
associated with references made by our Lord to His approaching
crucifixion. On a former occasion He cured these misplaced ambitions
by setting a child in the midst of them. On this He cures them by a
still more pathetic and wonderful example, His own; and He says, 'I,
in My lowliness and service, am to be your Pattern. In Me see the
basis of all true greatness, and the right use of all influence and
authority. The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister.'

I. So, then, let us look first at the perfect life of service of the
Servant-Lord.

Now, in order to appreciate the significance of that life of service,
we must take into account the introductory words, 'The Son of Man
came.' They declare His pre-existence, His voluntary entrance into
the conditions of humanity, and His denuding Himself of 'the glory
which He had with the Father before the world was.' We shall never
understand the Servant-Christ until we understand that He is the
Eternal Son of the Father. His service began long before any of His
acts of sympathetic and self-forgetting lowliness rendered help to
the miserable here upon earth. His service began when He laid aside,
not the garments of earth, but the vesture of the heavens, and
girded Himself, not with the cincture woven in man's looms, but with
the flesh of our humanity, 'and being found in fashion as a man,'
bowed Himself to enter into the conditions of earth. This was the
first, the chiefest of all His acts of service, and the sanctity and
awfulness of it run through the list of all His deeds and make them
unspeakably great. It was much that His hands should heal, that His
lips should comfort, that His heart should bleed with sympathy for
sorrow. But, oh! it was more that He _had_ hands to touch, lips to
speak to human hearts, and the heart of a man and a brother to feel
_with_ as well as _for_ us. 'The Son of Man came'--there is
the transcendent example of the true use of greatness; there is the
conspicuous instance of the true basis of authority and rule. For it
was because He was 'found in fashion as a Man' that He has won a 'name
that is above every name,' and that there have accrued to Him the
'many crowns' which He wears at the Father's side.

But then, passing beyond this, we may dwell, though all imperfectly,
upon the features, familiar as they are, of that wonderful life of
self-oblivious and self-sacrificing ministration to others. Think of
the purity of the source from all which these wonders and
blessednesses of service for man flowed. The life of Jesus Christ is
self-forgetting love made visible. Scientists tell us that, by the
arrangement of particles of sand upon plates of glass, there can be
made, as it were, perceptible to the eye, the sweetness of musical
sounds; and each note when struck will fling the particles into
varying forms of beauty. The life of Jesus Christ presents in shapes
of loveliness and symmetry the else invisible music of a divine
love. He lets us see the rhythm of the Father's heart. The source
from which His ministrations have flowed is the pure source of a
perfect love. Ancient legends consolidated the sunbeams into the
bright figure of the far-darting god of light. And so the sunbeams
of the divine love have, as it were, drawn themselves together and
shaped themselves into the human form of the Son of Man who 'came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister.'

No taint of bye-ends was in that service; no sidelong glances at
possible advantages of influence or reputation or the like, which so
often deform men's philanthropies and services to one another. No
more than the sunbeam shines for the sake of collateral issues which
may benefit itself, did Jesus Christ seek His own advantage in
ministering to men. There was no speck of black in that lustrous
white robe, but all was perfectly unselfish love. Like the clear
sea, weedless and stainless, that laves the marble steps of the
palaces of Venice, the deep ocean of Christ's service to man was
pure to the depths throughout.

That perfect ministry of the Servant-Lord was rendered with strange
spontaneity and cheerfulness. One of the evangelists says, in a very
striking and beautiful phrase, that 'He healed them that had need of
healing,' as if the presence of the necessity evoked the supply, by
the instinctive action of a perfect love. There was never in Him one
trace of reluctance to have leisure broken in upon, repose
disturbed, or even communion with God abbreviated. All men could
come always; they never came inopportunely. We often cheerfully take
up a burden of service, but find it very hard to continue bearing
it. But He was willing to come down from the mountain of
Transfiguration because there was a demoniac boy in the plain; and
therefore He put aside the temptation--'Let us build here three
tabernacles.' He was willing to abandon His desert seclusion because
the multitude sought Him. Interrupted in His communion with the
Father by His disciples, He had no impatient word to say, but 'Let
us go into other cities also, for therefore am I sent.' When He
stepped from the fishing-boat on the other side of the lake to which
He had fled for a moment of repose, He was glad when He saw the
multitude who had pertinaciously outrun Him, and were waiting for
Him on the beach. On His Cross He had leisure to turn from His own
physical sufferings and the weight of a world's sin, which lay upon
Him, to look at that penitent by His side, and He ended His life in
the ministry of mercy to a brigand. And thus cheerfully, and always
without a thought of self, 'He came to minister.'

Think, too, of the sweep of His ministrations. They took in all men;
they were equally open to enemies and to friends, to mockers and to
sympathisers. Think of the variety of the gifts which He brought in
His ministry--caring for body and for soul; alleviating sorrow,
binding up wounds, purifying hearts; dealing with sin, the fountain,
and with miseries, its waters, with equal helpfulness and equal
love.

And think of how that ministering was always ministration by 'the
LORD.' For there is nothing to me more remarkable in the Gospel
narrative than the way in which, side by side, there lie in Christ's
life the two elements, so difficult to harmonise in fact, and so
impossible to have been harmonised in a legend, the consciousness of
authority and the humility of a servant. The paradox with which John
introduces his sweet pathetic story of our Lord's washing the
disciples' feet is true of, and is illustrated by, every instance of
more than ordinary lowliness and self-oblivion which the Gospel
contains. 'Jesus, knowing that He had come from God, and went to
God, and that the Father had given all things into His hand'--did
what? 'Laid aside His garments and took a towel and girded Himself.'
The two things ever go together. And thus, in His lowliest
abasement, as in a star entangled in a cloud, there shine out, all
the more broad and conspicuous for the environment which wraps them,
the beams of His uncreated lustre.

That ministration was a service that never shrank from stern rebuke.
His service was no mere soft and pliant, sympathetic helpfulness,
but it could smite and stab, and be severe, and knit its brow, and
speak stern words, as all true service must. For it is not service
but cruelty to sympathise with the sinner, and say nothing in
condemnation of his sin. And yet no sternness is blessed which is
not plainly prompted by desire to help.

Now, I know far better than you do how wretchedly inadequate all
these poor words of mine have been to the great theme that I have
been trying to speak of, but they may at least--like a little water
poured into a pump--have set your minds working upon the theme, and,
I hope, to better purpose. 'The Son of Man came ... to minister.'

II. Now, secondly, note the service that should be modelled on His.

Oh! brethren, if we, however imperfectly, have taken into mind and
heart that picture of Him who was and is amongst us as 'One that
serveth,' how sharp a test, and how stringent, and, as it seems to
us sometimes, impossible, a commandment are involved in the 'even
as' of my text. When we think of our grudging services; when we
think of how much more apt we are to insist upon what men owe to us
than of what we owe to them; how ready we are to demand, how slow we
are to give; how we flame up in what we think is warranted
indignation if we do not get the observance, or the sympathy, or the
attention that we require, and yet how little we give of these, we
may well say, 'Thou hast set a pattern that can only drive us to
despair.' If we would read our Gospels more than we do with the
feeling, as we trace that Master through each of His phases of
sympathy and self-oblivion and self-sacrifice and service, 'that is
what I should be,' what a different book the New Testament would be
to us, and what different people you and I would be!

There is no ground on which we can rest greatness or superiority in
Christ's kingdom except this ground of service. And there is no use
that we can make either of money or of talents, of acquirements or
opportunities, except the use of helping our fellows with them,
which will stand the test of this model and example. 'It is more
blessed to give than to receive.' The servant who serves for love is
highest in the hierarchy of Heaven. God, who is supreme, has stooped
lower than any that are beneath Him, and His true rule follows, not
because He is infinite, omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, or any
of those other pompous Latin words which describe what men call His
attributes, but because He loves best, and does most for the most.
And that is what you and I ought to be. We may well take the lesson
to ourselves. I have no space, and, I hope, no need to enlarge upon
it; but be sure of this, that if we are ever to be near the right
and the left of the Master in His kingdom, there is one way, and
only one way, to come thither, and that is to make self abdicate its
authority as the centre of our lives, and to enthrone there Christ,
and for His sake all our brethren. Be ambitious to be first, but
remember, _Noblesse oblige_. He that is first must become last.
He that is Servant of all is Master of all. That is the only mastery
that is worth anything, the devotion of hearts that circle round the
source from which they draw light and warmth. What is it that makes
a mother the queen of her children? Simply that all her life she has
been their servant, and never thought about herself, but always
about them.

Now much might be said as to the application of these threadbare
principles in the Church and in society, but I do not enlarge on
that; only let me say in a word--that here is the one law on which
preeminence in the Church is to be allocated.

What becomes of sacerdotal hierarchies, what becomes of the 'lords
over God's heritage,' if the one ground of pre-eminence is service?
I know, of course, that there may be different forms embodying one
principle, but it seems to me that that form of Church polity is
nearest the mind of Christ in which the only dignity is dignity of
service, and the only use of place is the privilege of stooping and
helping.

This fruitful principle will one day shape civil as well as
ecclesiastical societies. For the present, our Lord draws a contrast
between the worldly and the Christian notions of rank and dignity.
'It shall not be so among you,' says He. And the nobler conception
of eminence and service set forth in His disciples, if they are true
to their Lord and their duty, will leaven, and we may hope finally
transform society, sweeping away all vulgar notions of greatness as
depending on birth, or wealth, or ruder forms of powers, and
marshalling men according to Christ's order of precedence, in which
helpfulness is preeminence and service is supremacy, while
conversely pre-eminence is used to help and superiority stoops to
serve.

One remark will close my sermon. You have to take the last words of
this verse if you are ever going to put in practice its first words.
'Even as the Son of Man came, not to be ministered unto, but to
minister,'--if Jesus Christ had stopped there He would only have
been one more of the long roll of ineffectual preachers and prophets
who show men the better way, and leave them struggling in the mire.
But He did not stop there: 'Even as the Son of Man came ... to give
His life a ransom for many.'

Ah! the Cross, with its burden of the sacrifice for the world's sin,
is the only power which will supply us with a sufficient motive for
the loftiness of Christlike service. I know that there is plenty of
entirely irreligious and Christless beneficence in the world. And
God forbid that I should say a word to seem to depreciate that. But
sure I am that for the noblest, purest, most widely diffused and
blessedly operative kinds of service of man, there is no motive and
spring anywhere except 'He loved me, and gave Himself for me.' And,
bought by that service and that blood, it will be possible, and it
is obligatory upon all of us, to 'do unto others,' as He Himself
said, 'as I have done to you.' 'The servant is not greater than his
Lord.'




WHAT THE HISTORIC CHRIST TAUGHT ABOUT HIS DEATH


    'The Son of Man came... to give His life a ransom for
    many.'--Matt. xx. 28.

We hear a great deal at present about going back to 'the Christ of
the Gospels.' In so far as that phrase and the movement of thought
which it describes are a protest against the substitution of
