will not take. Let us remember that the two halves of the divine
dealings are not regulated by the same principle, though they be
regulated by the same motive; and that the love which often delays for
our good, in regard to the desires that have reference to outward
things, is swift as the lightning to answer every petition which moves
within the circle of our spiritual life.

'Whatsoever things ye desire, when ye stand praying, believe that'
then and there 'ye receive them'; and the undelaying God will take
care that 'you shall have them.'




CHRIST'S QUESTION TO EACH

_For the Young_


'... Believest then this? She saith unto Him, Yea, Lord.'--JOHN
xi. 26, 27.

As each of these annual sermons which I have preached for so long
comes round, I feel more solemnly the growing probability that it may
be the last. Like a man nearing the end of his day's work, I want to
make the most of the remaining moments. Whether this is the last
sermon of the sort that I shall preach or not, it is certainly the
last of the kind that some of you will hear from me, or possibly from
any one.

So, dear friends, I have felt that neither you nor I can afford to
waste this hour in considering subjects of secondary interest,
appropriate as some of them might be. I wish to come to the main point
at once, and to press upon you all, and especially on the younger
portion of this audience, the question of your own personal religion.

The words of my text, as you will probably remember, were addressed by
our Lord to Martha, as she was writhing in agony over her dead
brother. Christ proclaims, with singular calmness and majesty, His
character and work as the Resurrection and the Life, and then seeks to
draw her from her absorbing sorrow to an effort of faith which shall
grasp the truths He proclaims. He flashes out this sudden question,
like the swift thrust of a gleaming dagger. It is a demand for
credence to His assertion--on His bare word--tremendous as that
assertion is. And nobly was the demand met by the as swift,
unfaltering answer, 'Yea, Lord,' I believe in Thee, and so I believe
in Thy word.

Now, friends, Jesus Christ is putting the same question to each of us.
And I pray that our answers may be Martha's.

I. Note, first, the significance of the question.

'This.' What is _this_? The answer will tell us what are the central
essential facts, faith in which makes a Christian. Of course the form
in which our Lord's previous utterance was cast was coloured by the
circumstances under which He spoke, and was so shaped as to meet the
momentary exigency. But whilst thus the form is determined by the fact
that He was speaking to a heart wrung by separation, and as a
preliminary to a mighty act of resurrection, the essential truths
which are so expressed are those which, as I believe, constitute the
fundamental truths of Christianity--the very core and heart of the
Gospel.

Turn, then, but for a moment, to what immediately precedes my text.
Our Lord says three things. First, He asserts His supernatural
character and divine relation to life: 'I am the Resurrection and the
Life.' Next, He declares that it is possible for Him to communicate to
dying and to dead men a life which triumphs over death, and laughs at
change, and persists through the superficial experience which we
christen by the name of Death, unaffected, undiminished, as some sweet
spring might gush up in the heart of a salt, solitary sea. And then He
declares that the condition on which He, the Life-giver, gives of His
immortal life to dying men, is their trust in Him. These three--His
character and work, the gifts of which His hands are full, and the way
by which the gifts may be appropriated by us men--these three are, as
I take it, the central facts of Christianity. 'Believest thou this?'

The question comes to us all; and in these days of unsettlement it is
well to have some clear understanding of what is the 'irreducible
minimum' of Christian teaching. I take it that it lies here. There are
two opposite errors which, like all opposite errors, are bolted
together, and revolve round a common centre. The one of them is the
extreme conservative tendency which regards every pin and bolt of the
tabernacle as if it were equally sacred with the altar and the ark.
And the other is the tendency which christens itself 'liberal and
progressive,' and which is always ready to exchange old lamps, though
they have burnt brightly in the past, for new ones that are as yet
only glittering metal and untried. In these days, when it is a
presumption against any opinion, that our fathers believed it (an
error into which young people are most prone to fall), and when, by
the energy of contradiction, that error has evoked, and is evoking,
the opposite exaggeration that adheres to all that is traditional, to
all that has been regarded as belonging to the essentials of the
Christian faith, and so is fearful, trembling for the Ark of God when
there is no need, let us fall back upon these great words of the
Master, and see that the things which constitute the living heart of
His message and gift to the world are neither more nor less than these
three: the supernatural Christ, the life which He imparts, and the
condition on which He bestows it. 'Believest thou this?' If you do,
you need take very little heed of the fluctuations of contemporary
opinion as to other matters, valuable and important as these may be in
their place; and may let men say what they will about disputed
questions--about the method by which the vehicle of revelation has
been created and preserved, about the regulation of the external forms
of the Church, about a hundred other things that men often lose their
tempers and spoil their Christianity by fighting for, and fall back
upon the great central verity, a Christ from above, the Giver of Life
to all that put their trust in Him.

Let me expand this question for you. 'We all have sinned and come
short of the glory of God'--'believest thou this?' 'We must all appear
before the judgment-seat of Christ'--'believest thou this?' 'God so
loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth on Him should not perish'--'believest thou this?' 'The Son
of Man came... to give His life a ransom for many'--'believest thou
this?' 'Being justified by faith we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ'--'believest thou this?' 'Now is Christ risen from
the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept'--'believest
thou this?' 'I go to prepare a place for you'--'believest thou this?'
'Where I am there shall also My servant be'--'believest thou this?'
'So shall we ever be with the Lord'--'believest thou this?' That is
Christianity; and not theories about inspiration, and priesthood, and
sacramental efficacy, or any of the other thorny questions which have,
in the course of ages, started up. Here is the living centre; hold
fast, I beseech you, by it.

Then, again, the significance of this question is in the direction of
making clear for us the way by which men lay hold of these great
truths. The truths are of such a sort as that merely to say, 'Oh yes,
I believe it; it is quite true!' is by no means sufficient. If a man
tells me that two parallel lines produced ever so far will never meet,
I say, 'Yes, I believe it'; and there is nothing more to be done or
said. If a man says to me, 'Two and two make four,' I say, 'Yes'; and
there my assent ends. If a man says, 'It is right to do right,' it is
quite clear that the attitude of intellectual assent, which was quite
enough for the other order of statements, is not enough for this one;
and to merely say, 'Oh yes, it is right to do right,' is by no means
the only attitude which we ought to take in regard to such a truth.
And if God comes to me and says, 'Thou art a sinful man, and Jesus
Christ has died for thee; and if thou takest Him for thy Saviour thou
shalt be saved in this life, and saved for ever,' it is just as clear
that no mere acceptance of the saying as a verity exhausts my proper
attitude in reference to it. Or to come to plainer words, no man will
really, and out and out, and adequately, believe this gospel unless he
does a great deal more than assent to it or refrain from contradicting
it.

So I desire to urge this form of the question on you now. Dear
brethren, do you _trust_ in 'this,' which you say you believe? There
is no greater enemy of the Christian faith than the ordinary
lazy--what the philosophers call _otiose_, which is only a grand word
for lazy--assent of the understanding, because men will not take the
trouble to contradict it or think about it.

That is the sort of Christianity which is the Christianity of a good
many church and chapel-goers. They do not care enough about the
subject to contradict the ordinary run of belief. Of all impotent
things there is nothing more impotent than a creed which lies idly in
a man's head, and never has touched his heart or his will. Why, I
should get on a great deal better if I were talking to people that had
never heard anything about the gospel than I have any chance of
getting on with you, who have been drenched with it all your days,
till it goes over you and runs off like water off a duck's back. The
shells that were hurled against the earthworks of Sebastopol broke
away the front surface of the mounds, and then the rubbish protected
the fortifications; and that is what happens with many of my hearers.
You have heard the gospel so often that the _debris_ of your old
hearings is raised between you and me, and my words cannot get at you.
'Believest thou this?'--not in the fashion in which people stand up in
church or chapel and look about them and rattle off the Creed every
Sunday of their lives, and attach not the ghost of an idea to a single
clause of it; but in the sense that the conviction of these truths is
so deep in your hearts that it moves your whole nature to cast
yourselves on Jesus Christ as your Saviour and your all. That is the
belief to which alone the life that is promised here will come. Oh!
brethren, I have no business to ask you the question, and you have no
need to answer it to me! Sometimes good, well-meaning people do a mint
of harm by pushing such questions into the faces of people unprepared.
But take the question into your own hearts, and remember what belief
is, and what it is that you have to believe, and answer according to
its true significance, and in the light of conscience, the solemn
question that I press upon you.

II. Now, secondly, let me ask you to think of what depends upon the
answer.

In the case before us--if I may look back to it for an instant--there
is a very illuminative instance of what did depend upon it. Martha had
to believe that Christ was the Resurrection and the Life as a
condition precedent to her seeing that He was so. For, as He said
Himself before He spoke the mighty word which raised Lazarus, 'Said I
not unto thee that if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the
glory of God?' and so her faith was the condition of her being able to
verify the facts which her faith grasped. Well, let me put that into
plainer words. It is just this--a man gets from Christ what he trusts
Christ to give him, and there is no other way of proving the truth of
His promises than by accepting His promises, and then they fulfil
themselves. You cannot know that a medicine will cure you till you
swallow it. You must first 'taste' before you 'see that God is good.'
Faith verifies itself by the experience it brings.

And what does it bring? I said, all for which a man trusts Christ. All
is summed up in that one favourite word of our Lord as revealed in
this fourth Gospel, which includes in itself everything of blessedness
and of righteousness--life, life eternal. Dear brethren, you and I,
apart from Jesus Christ, are dead in trespasses and sins. The life
that we live in the flesh is an apparent life, which covers over the
true death of separation from God. And you young people, fix this in
your minds at the beginning, it will save you many a heartache, and
many an error--there is nothing worth calling life, except that which
comes to a quiet heart submissive and enfranchised through faith in
Jesus Christ. And if you will trust yourselves to Him, and answer this
question with your ringing 'Yea, Lord!' then you will get a life which
will quicken you out of your deadness; a life which will mould you day
by day into more entire beauty of character and conformity with
Himself; a life which will shed sweetness and charm over dusty
commonplaces, and make sudden verdure spring in dreary, herbless
deserts; a life which will bring a solemn joy into sorrow, a strength
for every duty; which will bring manna in the wilderness, honey from
the rock, light in darkness, and a present God for your sufficient
portion; a life which will run on into the dim glories of eternity,
and know no change but advancement, through the millenniums of ages.

But, dear brethren, whilst thus, on condition of their faith, the door
into all divine and endless blessedness and progress is flung wide
open for men, do not forget the other side of the issues which depend
on this question. For if it is true that Jesus Christ is Life, and the
Source of it, and that faith in Him is the way by which you and I get
it, then there is no escape from the solemn conclusion that to be out
of Christ, and not to be exercising faith in Him, is to be infected
with death, and to be shut up in a charnel-house. I dare not suppress
the plain teaching of Jesus Christ Himself: 'He that hath the Son hath
life; he that hath not the Son hath not life.' The issues that depend
upon the answer to this question of my text may be summed up, if I may
venture to say so, by taking the words of our Lord Himself and
converting them into their opposite. He said, 'He that believeth ...
though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth and
believeth on Me shall never die.' That implies, He that believeth
_not_ in Christ, though he were living, yet shall he die, and
whosoever liveth and believeth _not_ shall never live. _These_ are the
issues--the alternative issues--that depend on your answer to this
question.

III. And now, lastly, let me ask you to think of the direct personal
appeal to every soul that lies in this question.

I have dwelt upon two out of the three words of which the question is
composed--'_believest_ thou _this_?' Let me dwell for a moment on the
third of them--'believest _thou_?'

Now that suggests the thought on which I do not need to dwell, but
which I seek briefly to lay upon your hearts and consciences--viz.,
the intensely personal act of your own faith, by which alone Jesus
Christ can be of any use to you. Do not be led away by any vague
notions which people have about the benefits of a Church or its
ordinances. Do not suppose that any sacraments or any priest can do
for you what you have to do in the awful solitude of your own
determining will--put out your hand and grasp Jesus Christ. Can any
person or thing be the condition or channel of spiritual blessing to
you, except in so far as your own individual act of trust comes into
play? You must take the bread with your own hands, you must masticate
it with your own teeth, you must digest it with your own organs,
before it can minister nourishment to your blood and force to your
life. And there is only one way by which any man can come into any
vital and life-giving connection with Jesus Christ, and that is, by
the exercise of his own personal faith.

And remember, too, that as the exercise of uniting trust in Jesus
Christ is exclusively your own affair, so exclusively your own affair
is the responsibility of answering this question. To you alone is it
addressed. You, and only you, have to answer it.

There was once a poor woman who went after Jesus Christ, and put out a
pale, wasted, tremulous finger to touch the hem of His garment. His
fine sensitiveness detected the light pressure of that petitioning
finger, and allowed virtue to go out, though the crowd surged about
Him and thronged Him. No crowds come between you and Jesus Christ. You
and He, the two of you, have, so to speak, the world to yourselves,
and straight to _you_ comes this question, 'Believest _thou_?'

Ah! brethren, that habit of skulking into the middle of the multitude,
and letting the most earnest appeal from the pulpit go diffused over
the audience is the reason why you sit there quiet, complacent,
perhaps wholly unaffected by what I am trying to make a pointed,
individual address. Suppose all the other people in this place of
worship were away but you and I, would not the word that I am trying
to speak come with more force to your hearts than it does now? Well,
think away the world and all its millions, and realise the fact that
you stand in Christ's presence, with all His regard concentrated upon
you, and that to thee individually this question comes from a
gracious, loving heart, which longs that you answer, 'Yea, Lord, I
believe!'

Why should you not? Suppose you said to Him, 'No, Lord, I do not'; and
suppose He said, 'Why do you not?' what do you think you would say
then? You will have to answer it one day, in very solemn
circumstances, when all the crowds will fall away, as they do from a
soldier called out of the ranks to go up and answer for mutiny to his
commanding officer. 'Every one of us shall give an account of
himself,' and the lips that said so lovingly at the grave of Lazarus,
'Believest thou this?' and are saying it again, dear friend, to you,
even through my poor words, will ask it once more. For this is the
question the answer to which settles whether we shall stand at His
right hand or at His left. Say now, with humble faith, 'Yea, Lord!'
and you will have the blessing of them who have not seen, and yet have
believed.




THE OPEN GRAVE AT BETHANY

'Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where
Martha met Him. The Jews then which were with her in the house, and
comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went
out, followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there.
Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw Him, she fell down at
His feet, saying unto Him, Lord, if Thou hadst been here, my brother
had not died. When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also
weeping which came with her, He groaned in the spirit, and was
troubled, And said, Where have ye laid him? They say unto Him, Lord,
come and see. Jesus wept. Then said the Jews, Behold how He loved him!
And some of them said. Could not this Man, which opened the eyes of
the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died! Jesus
therefore again groaning in Himself, cometh to the grave. It was a
cave, and a stone lay upon it. Jesus said, Take ye away the stone.
Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto Him, Lord, by this
time he stinketh: for he hath been dead four days. Jesus saith unto
her, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou
shouldest see the glory of God? Then they took away the stone from the
place where the dead was laid. And Jesus lifted up His eyes, and said,
Father, I thank Thee that Thou hast heard Me. And I know that Thou
hearest Me always: but because of the people which stand by I said it,
that they may believe that Thou hast sent Me. And when He thus had
spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. And he that
was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes: and his
face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him,
and let him go. Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen
the things which Jesus did, believed on Him.'--JOHN xi. 30-45.

Why did Jesus stay outside Bethany and summon Martha and Mary to come
to Him? Apparently that He might keep Himself apart from the noisy
crowd of conventional mourners whose presence affronted the majesty
and sanctity of sorrow, and that He might speak to the hearts of the
two real mourners. A divine decorum forbade Him to go to the house.
The Life-bringer keeps apart. His comforts are spoken in solitude. He
reverenced grief. How beautifully His sympathetic delicacy contrasts
with the heartless rush of those who 'were comforting' Mary when they
thought that she was driven to go suddenly to the grave by a fresh
burst of sorrow! If they had had any real sympathy or perception, they
would have stayed where they were, and let the poor burdened heart
find ease in lonely weeping. But, like all vulgar souls, they had one
idea--never to leave mourners alone or let them weep.

Three stages seem discernible in the self-revelation of Jesus in this
crowning miracle: His agitation and tears, His majestic confidence in
His life-giving power now to be manifested, and His actual exercise of
that power.

I. The repetition by Mary of Martha's words, as her first salutation,
tells a pathetic story of the one thought that had filled both
sisters' hearts in these four dreary days. Why had He not come? How
easily He could have come! How surely He could have prevented all this
misery! Confidence in His power blends strangely with doubt as to His
care. A hint of reproach is in the words, but more than a hint of
faith in His might. He does not rebuke the rash judgment implied, for
He knew the true love underlying it; but He does not directly answer
Mary, as He had done Martha, for the two sisters needed different
treatment.

We note that Mary has no such hope as Martha had expressed. Her more
passive, meditative disposition had bowed itself, and let the grief
overwhelm her. So in her we see a specimen of the excess of sorrow
which indulges in the monotonous repetition of what would have
happened if something else that did not happen had happened, and which
is too deeply dark to let a gleam of hope shine in. Words will do
little to comfort such grief. Silent sharing of its weeping and
helpful deeds will do most.

So a great wave of emotion swept across the usually calm soul of
Jesus, which John bids us trace to its cause by 'therefore' (ver. 33).
The sight of Mary's real, and the mourners' half-real, tears, and the
sound of their loud 'keening,' shook His spirit, and He yielded to,
and even encouraged, the rush of feeling ('troubled Himself'). But not
only sympathy and sorrow ruffled the clear mirror of His spirit;
another disturbing element was present. He 'was moved with
indignation' (Rev. Ver. marg.). Anger at Providence often mingles with
our grief, but that was not Christ's indignation. The only worthy
explanation of that strange ingredient in Christ's agitation is that
it was directed against the source of death,--namely, sin. He saw the
cause manifested in the effects. He wept for the one, He was wroth at
the other. The tears witnessed to the perfect love of the man, and of
the God revealed in the man; the indignation witnessed to the recoil
and aversion from sin of the perfectly righteous Man, and of the holy
God manifested in Him. We get one glimpse into His heart, as on to
some ocean heaving and mist-covered. The momentary sight proclaims the
union in Him, as the Incarnate Word, of pity for our woes and of
aversion from our sins.

His question as to the place of the tomb is not what we should have
expected; but its very abruptness indicates effort to suppress
emotion, and resolve to lose no time in redressing the grief. Most
sweetly human are the tears that start afresh after the moment's
repression, as the little company begin to move towards the grave. And
most sadly human are the unsympathetic criticisms of His sacred
sorrow. Even the best affected of the bystanders are cool enough to
note them as tokens of His love, at which perhaps there is a trace of
wonder; while others snarl out a sarcasm which is double-barrelled, as
casting doubt on the reality either of the love or of the power. 'It
is easy to weep, but if He had cared for him, and could work miracles,
He might surely have kept him alive.' How blind men are! 'Jesus wept,'
and all that the lookers-on felt was astonishment that He should have
cared so much for a dead man of no importance, or carping doubt as to
the genuineness of His grief and the reality of His power. He shows us
His pity and sorrow still--to no more effect with many.

II. The passage to the tomb was marked by his continued agitation. But
his arrival there brought calm and majesty. Now the time has come
which He had in view when He left his refuge beyond Jordan; and, as is
often the case with ourselves, suddenly tremor and tumult leave the
spirit when face to face with a moment of crisis. There is nothing
more remarkable in this narrative than the contrast between Jesus
weeping and indignant, and Jesus serene and authoritative as He stands
fronting the cave-sepulchre. The sudden transformation must have awed
the gazers.

He points to the stone, which, probably like that of many a grave
discovered in Palestine, rolled in a groove cut in the rocky floor in
front of the tomb. The command accords with His continual habit of
confining the miraculous within the narrowest limits. He will do
nothing by miracle which can be done without it. Lazarus could have
heard and emerged, though the stone had remained. If the story had
been a myth, he very likely would have done so. Like 'loose him, and
let him go,' this is a little touch that cannot have been invented,
and helps to confirm the simple, historical character of the account.

Not less natural, though certainly as unlikely to have been told
unless it had happened, is Martha's interruption. She must have heard
what was going on, and, with her usual activity, have joined the
procession, though we left her in the house. She thinks that Jesus is
going into the grave; and a certain reverence for the poor remains, as
well as for Him, makes her shrink from the thought of even His loving
eyes seeing them now. Clearly she has forgotten the dim hopes which
had begun in her when she talked with Jesus. Therefore He gently
reminds her of these; for His words (ver. 40) can scarcely refer to
anything but that interview, though the precise form of expression now
used is not found in the report of it (vers. 25-27).

We mark Christ's calm confidence in His own power. His identification
of its effect with the outflashing of the glory of God, and His
encouragement to her to exercise faith by suspending her sight of that
glory upon her faith. Does that mean that He would not raise her
brother unless she believed? No; for He had determined to 'awake him
out of sleep' before He left Peraea. But Martha's faith was the
condition of her seeing the glory of God in the miracle. We may see a
thousand emanations of that glory, and see none of it. We shall see it
if we exercise faith. In the natural world, 'seeing is believing'; in
the spiritual, believing is seeing.

Equally remarkable, as breathing serenest confidence, is the wonderful
filial prayer. Our Lord speaks as if the miracle were already
accomplished, so sure is He: 'Thou heardest Me.' Does this
thanksgiving bring Him down to the level of other servants of God who
have wrought miracles by divine power granted them? Certainly not; for
it is in full accord with the teaching of all this Gospel, according
to which 'the Son can do nothing of Himself,' but yet, whatsoever
things the Father doeth, 'these also doeth the Son likewise.' Both
sides of the truth must be kept in view. The Son is not independent of
the Father, but the Son is so constantly and perfectly one with the
Father that He is conscious of unbroken communion, of continual
wielding of the whole divine power.

But the practical purpose of the thanksgiving is to be specially
noted. It suspends His whole claims on the single issue about to be
decided. It summons the people to mark the event. Never before had He
thus heralded a miracle. Never had He deigned to say thus solemnly,
'If God does not work through Me now, reject Me as an impostor; if He
does, yield to Me as Messiah.' The moment stands alone in His life.
What a scene! There is the open tomb, with its dead occupant; there
are the eager, sceptical crowd, the sisters pausing in their weeping
to gaze, with some strange hopes beginning to creep into their hearts,
the silent disciples, and, in front of them all, Jesus, with the
radiance of power in the eyes that had just been swimming in tears,
and a new elevation in His tones. How all would be hushed in
expectance of the next moment's act!

III. The miracle itself is told in the fewest words. What more was
there to tell? The two ends, as it were, of a buried chain, appear
above ground. Cause and effect were brought together. Rather, here was
no chain of many links, as in physical phenomena, but here was the
life-giving word, and there was the dead man living again. The 'loud
voice' was as needless as the rolling away of the stone. It was but
the sign of Christ's will acting. And the acting of His will, without
any other cause, produces physical effects.

Lazarus was far away from that rock cave. But, wherever he was, he
could hear, and he must obey. So, with graveclothes entangling his
feet, and a napkin about his livid face, he came stumbling out into
the light that dazed his eyes, closed for four dark days, and stood
silent and motionless in that awestruck crowd. One Person there was
not awestruck. Christ's calm voice, that had just reverberated through
the regions of the dead, spoke the simple command, 'Loose him, and let
him go.' To Him it was no wonder that He should give back a life. For
the Christ who wept is the Christ whose voice all that are in the
graves shall hear, and shall come forth.




THE SEVENTH MIRACLE IN JOHN'S GOSPEL--THE
RAISING OF LAZARUS

'And when Jesus thus had spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus,
Come forth. 44. And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot
with grave-clothes; and his face was bound about with a napkin.'--JOHN
xi. 43, 44.

The series of our Lord's miracles before the Passion, as recorded in
this Gospel, is fitly closed with the raising of Lazarus. It crowns
the whole, whether we regard the greatness of the fact, the manner of
our Lord's working, the minuteness and richness of the accompanying
details, the revelation of our Lord's heart, the consolations which it
suggests to sorrowing spirits, or the immortal hopes which it kindles.

And besides all this, the miracle is of importance for the development
of the Evangelist's purpose, in that it makes the immediate occasion
of the embittered hostility which finally precipitates the catastrophe
of the Cross. Therefore the great length to which the narrative
extends.

Of course it is impossible for us to attempt, even in the most cursory
manner, to go over the whole. We must content ourselves with dealing
with one or two of the salient points. And there are three things in
this narrative which I think well worthy of our notice. There is the
revelation of Christ as our Brother, by emotion and sorrow. There is
the revelation of Christ as our Lord by His consciousness of divine
power. There is the revelation of Christ as our Life by His mighty
life-giving word. And to these three points I ask you to turn briefly.

I. First, then, we have here a revelation of Christ as our Brother, by
emotion and sorrow.

This miracle stands alone in the whole majestic series of His mighty
works by the fact that it is preceded by a storm of emotion, which
shakes the frame of the Master, which He is represented by the
Evangelist not so much as suppressing as fostering, and which diverges
and parts itself into the two feelings expressed by His groans and by
His tears. The word which is rendered in our version 'He groaned in
the spirit,' and which is twice repeated in the narrative, is,
according to the investigations of the most careful philological
commentators, expressive not only of the outward sign of an emotion,
but of the nature of it. And the nature of the emotion is not merely
the grief and the sympathy which distilled in tears, but it is
something deeper and other than that. The word contains in it at least
a tinge of the passion of 'indignation' (as it is expressed in the
margin of the Revised Version). What caused the indignation? Cannot we
fancy how there rose up, as in pale, spectral procession before His
vision, the whole long series of human sorrows and losses, of which
one was visible there before Him? He saw, in the one individual case,
the whole _genus_. He saw the whole mass represented there, the ocean
in the drop, and He looked beyond the fact and linked it with its
cause. And as there rose before Him the reality of man's desolation
through sin, and the thought that all this misery, loss, pain,
parting, death, was a contradiction of the divine purpose, and an
interruption of God's order, and that it had all been pulled down upon
men's desperate heads by their own evil and their own folly, there
rose in His heart the anger which is part of the perfectness of
humanity when it looks upon sorrow linked by adamantine chains with
sin.

But the lightning of the wrath dissolved soon into the rain of pity
and of sorrow, and, as we read, 'Jesus wept.' Looking upon the weeping
Mary and the lamenting crowd, and Himself feeling the pain of the
parting from the friend whom He loved, the tears, which are the
confession of human nature that it is passing through an emotion too
deep for words, came to His all-seeing eyes.

Oh! brethren, surely--surely in this manifestation, or call it better,
this revelation of Christ the Lord, expressed in these two
emotions--surely there are large and blessed lessons for us! On them I
can only touch in the lightest manner. Here, for one thing, is the
blessed sign and proof of His true brotherhood with us. This
Evangelist, to whom it was given to tell the Church and the world more
than any of the others had imparted to them of the divine uniqueness
of the Master's person, had also given to him in charge the
corresponding and complementary message--to insist upon the reality
and the verity of His manhood. His proclamation was 'the Word was made
flesh,' and he had to dwell on both parts of that message, showing Him
as the Word and showing Him as flesh. So he insists upon all the
points which emerge in the course of his narrative that show the
reality of Christ's corporeal manhood.

He joins with the others, who had no such lofty proclamation entrusted
to them, in telling us how He was 'bone of our bone, and flesh of our
flesh,' in that He hungered and thirsted and slept, and was wearied;
how He was man, reasonable soul and human spirit, in that He grieved
and rejoiced, and wondered and desired, and mourned and wept. And so
we can look upon Him, and feel that this in very deed is One of
ourselves, with a spirit participant of all human experiences, and a
heart tremulously vibrating with every emotion that belongs to man.

Here we are also taught the sanction and the limits of sorrow.
Christianity has nothing to do with the false Stoicism and the false
religion which is partly pride and partly insincerity, that proclaims
it wrong to weep when God smites. But just as clearly and distinctly
as the story before us says to us, 'Weep for yourselves and for the
loved ones that are gone,' so distinctly does it draw the limits
within which sorrow is sacred and hallowing, and beyond which it is
harmful and weakening. Set side by side the grief of these two poor
weeping sisters, and the grief of the weeping Christ, and we get a
large lesson. They could only repine that something else had not
happened differently which would have made all different. 'If Thou
hadst been here, my brother had not died.' One of the two sits with
folded arms in the house, letting her sorrow flow over her pained
head. Martha is unable, by reason of her grief, to grasp the
consolation that is held out to her; her sorrow has made the hopes of
the future seem to her very dim and of small account, and she puts
away 'Thy brother shall rise again' with almost an impatient sweep of
her hand. 'I know that he will rise in the resurrection at the last
day. But oh! that is so far away, and what I want is present comfort.'
Thus oblivious of duty, murmuring with regard to the accidents which
might have been different, and unfitted to grasp the hopes that fill
the future, these two have been hurt by their grief, and have let it
overflow its banks and lay waste the land. But this Christ in His
sorrow checks His sorrow that He may do His work; in His sorrow is
confident that the Father hears; in His sorrow thinks of the
bystanders, and would bring comfort and cheer to them. A sorrow which
makes us more conscious of communion with the Father who is always
listening, which makes us more conscious of power to do that which He
has put it into our hand to do, which makes us more tender in our
sympathies with all that mourn, and swifter and readier for our
work--such a sorrow is doing what God meant for us; and is a blessing
in so thin a disguise that we can scarcely call it veiled at all.

And then, still further, there are here other lessons on which I
cannot touch. Such, for instance, is the revelation in this emotion of
the Master's, of a personal love that takes individuals to His heart,
and feels all the sweetness and the power of friendship. That personal
love is open to every one of us, and into the grace and the tenderness
of it we may all penetrate. 'The disciple whom Jesus loved' is the
Evangelist who, without jealousy, is glad to tell us that the same
loving Lord took into the same sanctuary of His pure heart, Mary and
Martha, and her brother. That which was given to them was not taken
from him, and they each possessed the whole of the Master's love. So
for every one of us that heart is wide open, and you and I, brethren,
may contract such personal relations to the Master that we shall live
with Christ as a man with his friend, and may feel that His heart is
all ours.

So much for the lessons of the emotions whereby Christ is manifested
to us as our Brother.

II. And now turn, in the next place, and that very briefly, to what
lies side by side with this in the story, and at first sight may seem
strangely contradictory of it, but in fact only completes the idea,
viz. the majesties, calm consciousness of divine power by which He is
revealed as our Lord.

At one step from the agitation and the storm of feeling there comes,
'Take ye away the stone.' And in answer to the lamentations of the
sister are spoken the great and wonderful words, 'Said I not unto thee
that if thou wouldst believe, thou shouldst see the glory of God?' And
He looks back there to the message that had been sent to the sisters
in response to their unspoken hope that He would come, 'This sickness
is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may
be glorified thereby.' And He shows us that from the first moment,
with the spontaneousness which, as I have already remarked in previous
sermons on these 'signs,' characterises all the miracles of John's
Gospel, 'He Himself knew what He would do,' and in the consciousness
of His divine power had resolved that the dead Lazarus should be the
occasion for the manifestation, the flashing out to the world, of the
glory of God in the life-giving Son.

And then, in the same tone of majestic consciousness, there follows
that thanksgiving _prior_ to the miracle as for the accomplished
miracle. 'I thank Thee that Thou hast heard Me, and I knew that Thou
hearest Me always: but because of the people which stand by I said it,
that they may believe that Thou hast sent Me.' The best commentary
upon these words, the deepest and the fullest exposition of the large
truths that lie in them concerning the co-operation of the Father and
the Son, is to be found in the passage from the fifth chapter of this
Gospel, wherein there is set forth, drawn with the firmest hand, the
clearest lines of truth upon this great and profound subject. 'The Son
does nothing of Himself,' but 'whatsoever the Father doeth, that doeth
the Son likewise.' A consciousness of continual co-operation with the
Almighty Father, a consciousness that His will continually coincides
with the Father's will, that unto Him there comes the power ever to do
all that Omnipotence can do, and that though we may speak of a gift
given and a power derived, the relation between the giving Father and
the recipient Son is altogether different from, and other than the
relation between, the man that asks and the God that bestows. Poor
Martha said, 'I know that even now, whatsoever Thou askest of God He
will give Thee.' She thought of Him as a good Man whose prayers had
power with Heaven. But up into an altogether other region soars the
consciousness expressed in these words as of a divine Son whose work
is wholly parallel with the Father's work, and of whom the two things
that sound contradictory can both be said. His omnipotence is His own;
His omnipotence is the Father's: 'As the Father hath life' and
therefore power in Himself, 'so hath He _given_'--there is the one
half of the paradox--'so hath He given to the Son to have life _in
Himself_'; there is the other. And unless you put them both together
you do not think of Christ as Christ has taught us to think.

III. Lastly, we have here the revelation of Christ as our Life in His
mighty, life-giving word.

The miracle, as I have said, stands high in the scale, not only by
reason of what to us seems the greatness of the fact, though of
course, properly speaking, in miracles there is no distinction as to
the greatness of the fact, but also by reason of the manner of the
working. The voice thrown into the cave reaches the ears of the
sheeted dead: 'Lazarus, come forth!' And then, in words which convey
the profound impression of awfulness and solemnity which had been made
upon the Evangelist, we have the picture of the man with the
graveclothes wrapped about his limbs, stumbling forth; and loving
hands are bidden to take away the napkin which covered his face.
Perhaps the hand trembled as it was put forth, not knowing what awful
sight the veil might cover.

With tenderest reticence, no word is spoken as to what followed. No
hint escapes of the joy, no gleam of the experiences which the
traveller brought back with him from that 'bourne' whence he had come.
Surely some draught of Lethe must have been given him, that his spirit
might be lulled into a wholesome forgetfulness, else life must have
been a torment to him.

But be that as it may, what we have to notice is the fact here, and
what it teaches us as a fact. Is it not a revelation of Jesus Christ
as the absolute Lord of Life and Death, giving the one, putting back
the other? Death has caught hold of his prey. 'Shall the prey be taken
from the mighty, and the lawful captive delivered? Yea, the prey shall
be taken from the mighty.' His bare word is divinely operative. He
says to that grisly shadow 'Come!' and he cometh; He says to him 'Go!'
and he goeth. And as a shepherd will drive away the bear that has a
lamb between his bloody fangs, and the brute retreats, snarling and
growling, but dropping his prey, so at the Lord's voice Lazarus comes
back to life, and disappointed Death skulks away to the darkness.

The miracle shows Him as Lord of Death and Giver of Life. And it
teaches another lesson, namely, the continuous persistency of the bond
between Christ and His friend, unbroken and untouched by the
superficial accident of life or death. Wheresoever Lazarus was he
heard the voice, and wheresoever Lazarus was he knew the voice, and
wheresoever Lazarus was he obeyed the voice. And so we are taught that
the relationship between Christ our life, and all them that love and
trust Him, is one on which the tooth of death that gnaws all other
bonds in twain hath no power at all. Christ is the Life, and,
therefore, Christ is the Resurrection, and the thing that we call
death is but a film which spreads on the surface, but has no power to
penetrate into the depths of the relationship between us and Him.

Such, in briefest words, are the lessons of the miracle as a fact, but
