
The purpose of the three parables in this chapter has to be kept in
mind. Christ is vindicating His action in receiving sinners, which
had evoked the murmurings of the Pharisees. The first two parables,
those of the lost sheep and the lost drachma, appeal to the common
feeling which attaches more importance to lost property just because
it is lost than to that which is possessed safely. This parable
rises to a higher level. It appeals to the universal emotion of
fatherhood, which yearns over a wandering child just because he has
wandered.

We note a further advance, in the proportion of one stray sheep to
the ninety-nine, and of one lost coin to the nine, contrasted with
the sad equality of obedience and disobedience in the two sons. One
per cent., ten per cent., are bearable losses, but fifty per cent.
is tragic.

I. The first part (vs. 11-16) tells of the son's wish to be his own
master, and what came of it. The desire to be independent is good,
but when it can only be attained by being dependent on him whose
authority is irksome, it takes another colour. This foolish boy
wished to be able to use his father's property as his own, but he
had to get the father's consent first. It is a poor beginning of
independence when it has to be set up in business by a gift.

That is the essential absurdity in our attempts to do without God
and to shake off His control. We can only get power to seem to do it
by misusing His gifts. When we say, 'Who is Lord over us?' the
tongues which say it were given us by Him. The next step soon
followed. 'Not many days after,' of course, for the sense of
ownership could not be kept up while near the father. A man who
wishes to enjoy worldly good without reference to God is obliged, in
self-defence, to hustle God out of his thoughts as soon and as
completely as possible.

The 'far country' is easily reached; and it is far, though a step
can land us in it. A narrow bay may compel a long journey round its
head before those on its opposite shores can meet. Sin takes us far
away from God, and the root of all sin is that desire of living to
one's self which began the prodigal's evil course.

The third step in his downward career, wasting his substance in riotous
living, comes naturally after the two others; for all self-centred life
is in deepest truth waste, and the special forms of gross dissipation
to which youth is tempted are only too apt to follow the first sense
of being their own masters, and removed from the safeguards of their
earthly father's home. Many a lad in our great cities goes through the
very stages of the parable, and, when a mother's eye is no longer on
him, plunges into filthy debauchery. But living which does not outrage
the proprieties may be riotous all the same; for all conduct which
ignores God and asserts self as supreme is flagrantly against the
very nature of man, and is  reckless waste.

Such a 'merry' life is sure to be 'short.' There is always famine in
the land of forgetfulness of God, and when the first gloss is off
its enjoyments, and one's substance is spent, its pinch is felt. The
unsatisfied hunger of heart, which dogs godless living, too often
leads but to deeper degradation and closer entanglement with low
satisfactions. Men madly plunge deeper into the mud in hope of
finding the pearl which has thus far eluded their search.

A miserable thing this young fool had made of his venture, having
spent his capital, and now being forced to become a slave, and being
set to nothing better than to feed swine. The godless world is a
hard master, and has very odious tasks for its bondsmen. The unclean
animals are fit companions for one who made himself lower than they,
since filth is natural to them and shameful for him. They are better
off than he is, for husks do nourish them, and they get their fill,
but he who has sunk to longing for swine's food cannot get even
that. The dark picture is only too often verified in the experience
of godless men.

II. The wastrel's returning sanity is described in verses 17-20_a_.
'He came to himself.' Then he had been beside himself before. It is
insanity to try to shake off God, to aim at independence, to wander
from Him, to fling away our 'substance,' that is, our true selves,
and to starve among the swine-troughs. He remembers the bountiful
housekeeping at home, as starving men dream of feasts, and he thinks
of himself with a kind of pity and amazement.

There is no sign that his conscience smote him, or that his heart
woke in love to his father. His stomach, and it only, urged him to
go home. He did, indeed, feel that he had been wrong, and had
forfeited the right to be called a son, but he did not care much for
losing that name, or even for losing the love to which it had the
right, if only he could get as much to eat as one of the hired
servants, whose relation to the master was less close, and, in
patriarchal times, less happy, than that of slaves born in the
house.

One good thing about the lad was that he did not let the grass grow
under his feet, but, as soon as he had made the resolution, began to
carry it into effect. The bane of many a resolve to go back to God
is that it is 'sicklied o'er' by procrastination. The ragged
prodigal has not much to leave which need hold him, but many such a
one says, 'I will arise and go to my father to-morrow,' and lets all
the to-morrows become yesterdays, and is sitting among the swine
still.

Low as the prodigal's motive for return was, the fact of his return
was enough. So is it in regard to our attitude to the gospel. Men
may be drawn to give heed to its invitations from the instinct of
self-preservation, or from their sense of hungry need, and the
belief that in it they will find the food they crave for, while
there may be little consciousness of longing for more from the
Father than the satisfaction of felt wants. The longing for a place
in the Father's heart will spring up later, but the beginning of
most men's taking refuge in God as revealed in Christ is the gnawing
of a hungry heart. The call to all is, 'Ho, every one that
thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come
ye, buy, and eat.'

III. The climax of the parable, for which all the rest is but as
scaffolding, is the father's welcome (vs. 20_b_-24). Filial
love may die in the son's heart, but paternal yearning lives in the
father's. The wanderer's heart would be likely to sink as he came
nearer the father's tent. It had seemed easy to go back when he
acted the scene in imagination, but every step homewards made the
reality more difficult.

No doubt he hesitated when the old home came in sight, and perhaps
his resolution would have oozed out at his finger ends if he had had
to march up alone in his rags, and run the gauntlet of servants
before he came to speech with his father. So his father's seeing him
far off and running to meet him is exquisitely in keeping, as well
as movingly setting forth how God's love goes out to meet His
returning prodigals. That divine insight which discerns the first
motions towards return, that divine pity which we dare venture to
associate with His infinite love, that eager meeting the shamefaced
and slow-stepping boy half-way, and that kiss of welcome before one
word of penitence or request had been spoken, are all revelations of
the heart of God, and its outgoings to every wanderer who sets his
face to return.

Beautifully does the father's welcome make the son's completion of
his rehearsed speech impossible. It does not prevent his expression
of penitence, for the more God's love is poured over us, the more we
feel our sin. But he had already been treated as a son, and could
not ask to be taken as a servant. Beautifully, too, the father gives
no verbal answer to the lad's confession, for his kiss had answered
it already; but he issues instructions to the servants which show
that the pair have now reached the home and entered it together.

The gifts to the prodigal are probably significant. They not only
express in general the cordiality of the welcome, but seem to be
capable of specific interpretations, as representing various aspects
of the blessed results of return to God. The robe is the familiar
emblem of character. The prodigal son is treated like the high-priest
in Zechariah's vision; his rags are stripped off, and he is clothed
anew in a dress of honour. 'Them he also justified: and whom he
justified, them he also sanctified.' The ring is a token of wealth,
position, and honour. It is also a sign of delegated authority, and
is an ornament to the hand. So God gives His prodigals, when they
come back, an elevation which unforgiven beings do not reach, and
sets them to represent Him, and arrays them in strange beauty. No
doubt the lad had come back footsore and bleeding, and the shoes
may simply serve to keep up the naturalness of the story. But probably
they suggest equipment for the journey of life. That is one of the
gifts that accompany forgiveness. Our feet are shod with the
preparedness of the gospel of peace.

Last of all comes the feast. Heaven keeps holiday when some poor
waif comes shrinking back to the Father. The prodigal had been
content to sink his sonship for the sake of a loaf, but he could not
get bread on such terms. He had to be forgiven and bathed in the
outflow of his father's love before he could be fed; and, being thus
received, he could not but be fed. The feast is for those who come
back penitently, and are received forgivingly, and endowed richly by
the Father in heaven.




GIFTS TO THE PRODIGAL


    '... Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and
    put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: 23. And
    bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it....'
    --LUKE XV. 22, 23.

God's giving always follows His forgiving. It is not so with us. We
think ourselves very magnanimous when we pardon; and we seldom go on
to lavish favours where we have overlooked faults. Perhaps it is right
that men who have offended against men should earn restoration by acts,
and should have to ride quarantine, as it were, for a time. But I
question whether forgiveness is ever true which is not, like God's,
attended by large-hearted gifts. If pardon is only the non-infliction
of penalty, then it is natural enough that it should be considered
sufficient by itself, and that the evildoer should not be rewarded
for having been bad. But if pardon is the outflow of the love of the
offended to the offender, then it can scarcely be content with simply
giving the debtor his discharge, and turning him into the world
penniless.

However that may be with regard to men, God's forgiveness is
essentially the communication of God's love to us sinners, as if we
had never sinned at all. And, that being so, that love cannot stay
its working until it has given all that it can bestow or we can
receive. God does not do things by halves; and He always gives when
He forgives.

Now that is the great truth of the last part of this immortal
parable. And it is one of the points in which it differs from, and
towers high above, the two preceding ones. The lost sheep was
carried back to the pastures, turned loose there, needed no further
special care, and began to nibble as if nothing had happened. The
lost drachma was simply put back in the woman's purse. But the lost
son was pardoned, and, being pardoned, was capable of receiving, and
received, greater gifts than he had before. These gifts are very
remarkably detailed in the words of our text.

Now, of course, it is always risky to seek for a spiritual
interpretation of every point in a parable, many of which points are
mere drapery. But, on the other hand, we may very easily fall into the
error of treating as insignificant details which really are meant to
be full of instruction. And I cannot help thinking--although many
would differ from me,--that this detailed enumeration of the gifts
to the prodigal is meant to be translated into the terms of spiritual
experience. So I desire to look at them as suggesting for us the
gifts of God which accompany forgiveness. I take the catalogue as
it stands--the Robe, the Ring, the Shoes, the Feast.

I. First, the Robe.

'Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him.' That was the
command. This detail, of course, like all the others, refers back
to, and casts light upon, the supposed condition of the spendthrift
when he came back. There he stood, ragged, with the stain of travel
and the stench of the pig-sty upon his garments, some of them, no
doubt, remains of the tawdry finery that he had worn in the world;
wine-spots, and stains, and filth of all sorts on the rags. The
father says, 'Take them all off him, and put the best robe upon
him.' What does that mean?

Well, we all know the very familiar metaphor by which qualities of
mind, traits of character, and the like are described as being the
dress of the spirit. We talk about being 'arrayed in purity,' 'clad
in zeal,' 'clothed with humility,' 'vested with power,' and so on.
If we turn to Scripture, we find running through it a whole series
of instances of this metaphor, which guide us at once to its true
meaning. Zechariah saw in vision the high priest standing at the
heavenly tribunal, clad in filthy garments. A voice said, 'Take away
the filthy garments from him,' and the interpretation is added:
'Behold! I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will
clothe thee with a change of raiment.' You remember our Lord's
parable of the man with a wedding garment. You remember the Apostle
Paul's frequent use of the metaphor of 'putting off the old man,
putting on the new.' You remember, finally, the visions of the last
days, in which the Seer in Patmos saw the armies in heaven that
followed their victorious Commander, 'clothed in fine linen, white and
pure, which is the righteousness of the saints.' If we put all these
together, surely I am not forcing a meaning on a non-significant
detail, when I say that here we have shadowed for us the great thought,
that the result of the divine forgiveness coming upon a man is that he
is clothed with a character which fits him to sit down at his Father's
table. They tell us that forgiveness is impossible, because things
done must have their consequences, and that character is the slow
formation of actions, precipitated, as it were, from our deeds. That
is all true. But it does not conflict with this other truth that there
may and does come into men's hearts, when they set their faith on
Jesus Christ, a new power which transforms the nature and causes
old things to pass away.

God's forgiveness revolutionises a life. Similar effects follow even
human pardons for small offences. Brute natures are held in by
penalties, and to them pardon means impunity, and impunity means
licence, and licence means lust. But wherever there is a heart with
love to the offended in it, there is nothing that will so fill it
with loathing of its past self as the assurance that the offended,
though loved, One loves, and is not offended, and that free
forgiveness has come. Whether is it the rod or the mother's kiss
that makes a child hate its sin most? And if we lift our thoughts to
Him, and think how He, up there in the heavens,

 'Who mightest vengeance best have took,'

bends over us in frank, free forgiveness, then surely that, more
than all punishments or threatenings or terrors, will cause us to
turn away from our evil, and to loathe the sins which are thus
forgiven. The prophet went very deep when he said, 'Thou shalt be
ashamed and confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of
thine iniquity, when I am pacified towards thee for all that thou
hast done, saith the Lord.'

But not only so, there is given along with forgiveness, and wrapped
up in it, a new power, which makes all things new, and changes a
man. It would be a poor Gospel for me to stand up and preach if I
had only to proclaim to men the divine forgiveness; and if that only
meant that hell's door was barred and some outward heaven was flung
open. But the true Gospel offers forgiveness as preliminary to the
bestowal of the highest gifts of God. The pardoned man is stripped
of his rags and clothed with a new nature which God Himself bestows.

That is what we all need. We have not all been in the pig-sty; we
have not all fallen into gross sin. We _have_ all turned our
backs on our Father; we _have_ all wanted to be independent; we
_have_ all preferred the far-off land to being near home. And,
dear brethren, the character that you have made for yourselves
clings to you like the poisoned Nessus' shirt to Hercules. You
cannot strip it off. You may get part of it away, but you cannot
entirely cast it from your limbs, nor free yourselves from the
entanglements of its tatters. Go to God, and He will smile away your
sin, and His forgiving love will melt the stains and the evil, as
the sun this morning drank up the mists; and they who come knowing
themselves to be foul, and needing forgiveness, will surely receive
from Him 'the fine linen white and pure, the righteousness of
saints.'

II. The Ring.

This prodigal lad only wanted to be placed in the position of a
slave, but his father said, 'Put a ring on his finger.' The ring is
an emblem of wealth, position, honour; that is one signification of
this gift to the penitent. Still further, it is an ornament to the
hand on which it glistens; that is another. It is a sign of
delegated authority and of representative character; as when Joseph
was exalted to be the second man in Egypt, and Pharaoh's signet ring
was plucked off and placed upon his finger. All these thoughts are,
as it seems to me, clustered in, and fairly deducible from, this one
detail.

Freedom, exaltation, dignity of position are expressed. And that
opens up a thought which needs to be set forth with many
reservations, and much guarding, but still is true--viz., that, by
the mercy and miraculous loving-kindness and quickening power of God
in the Gospel, it is possible that the lower a man falls the higher
he may rise. I know, of course, that it is better to be innocent
than to be cleansed. I know, and every man that looks into his own
heart knows, that forgiven sins may leave scars; that the memory may
be loaded with many a foul and many a painful remembrance; that the
fetters may be stricken off the limbs, but the marks of them, and
the way of walking that they compelled, may persist long after
deliverance. But I know, too, that redeemed men are higher in final
position than angels that never fell; and that, though it is too
much to say that the greater the sinner the greater the saint, it
still remains true that sin repented and forgiven may be, as it
were, an elevation upon which a man may stand to reach higher than,
apparently, he otherwise would in the divine life.

And so, though I do not say to any man, Make the experiment; for,
indeed, the poorest of us has sins enough to get all the benefit out
of repentance and forgiveness which is included in them, yet, if
there is any man here--and I hope there is--saying to himself,
'I have got too low down ever to master this, that, or the other
evil; I have stained myself so foully that I cannot hope to have the
black marks erased,' I say to such; 'Remember that the man who ended
with a ring on his finger, honoured and dignified, was the man that
had herded with pigs, and stank, and all but rotted, with his
fleshly crimes.' And so nobody need doubt but that for him, however
low he has gone, and however far he has gone, there is restoration
possible to a higher dignity than the pure spirits that never
transgressed at any time God's commandment will ever attain; for he
who has within himself the experience of repentance, of pardon, and
who has come into living contact with Jesus Christ as Redeemer, can
teach angels how blessed it is to be a child of God.

Nor less distinctly are the other two things which I have referred
to brought out in this metaphor. Not only is the ring the sign of
dignity, but it is also the sign of delegated authority and
representative character. God sets poor penitents to be His
witnesses in His world, and to do His work here. And a ring is an
ornament to the hand that wears it; which being translated is this:
where God gives pardon, He gives a strange beauty of character, to
which, if a man is true to himself, and to his Redeemer, he will
assuredly attain. There should be no lives so lovely, none that
flash with so many jewelled colours, as the lives of the men and
women who have learned what it is to be miserable, what it is to
repent, what it is to be forgiven. So, though our 'hands have been
full of blood,' as the prophet says, though they have dabbled in all
manner of pollution, though they have been the ready instruments of
many evil things, we may all hope that, cleansed and whitened, even
our hands will not want the lustre of that adornment which the
loving father clasped upon the fingers of his penitent boy.

III. Further, 'Shoes on his feet.'

No doubt he had come back barefooted and filthy and bleeding, and it
was needful for the 'keeping' of the narrative that this detail
should appear. But I think it is something more than drapery.

Does it not speak to us of equipment for the walk of life? God
_does_ prepare men for future service, and for every step that
they have to take, by giving to them  His forgiveness for all that
is past. The sense of the divine pardon will in itself fit a man, as
nothing else will, for running with patience the race that is set
before him. God does communicate, along with His forgiveness, to
every one who seeks it, actual power to 'travel on life's common way
in cheerful godliness'; and his feet are 'shod with the preparedness
of the gospel of peace.'

Ah, brethren, life is a rough road for us all, and for those whose
faces are set towards duty, and God, and self-denial, it is
especially so, though there are many compensating circumstances.
There are places where sharp flints stick up in the path and cut the
feet. There are places where rocks jut out for us to stumble over.
There are all the trials and sorrows that necessarily attend upon
our daily lives, and which sometimes make us feel as if our path
were across heated ploughshares, and every step was a separate
agony. God will give us, if we go to Him for pardon, that which will
defend us against the pains and the sorrows of life. The bare foot
is cut by that which the shod foot tramples upon unconscious.

There are foul places on all our paths, over which, when we pass, if
we have not something else than our own naked selves, we shall
certainly contract defilement. God will give to the penitent man, if
he will have it, that which will keep his feet from soil, even when
they walk amidst filth. And if, at any time, notwithstanding the
defence, some mud should stain the foot, and he that is washed needs
again to wash his feet, the Master, with the towel and the basin,
will not be far away.

There are enemies and dangers in life. A very important part of the
equipment of the soldier in antiquity was the heavy boot, which
enabled him to stand fast, and resist the rush of the enemy. God
will give to the penitent man, if he will have it, that which will
set his foot upon a rock, 'and establish his goings,' and which
'will make him able to withstand in the evil day, and having done
all, to stand.'

Brethren, defence, stability, shielding from pains, and protection
against evil are all included in this great promise, which each of
us may realise, if we will, for ourselves.

IV. Lastly, the Feast.

Now that comes into view in the parable, mainly as teaching us the
great truth that Heaven keeps holiday, when some poor waif comes
shrinking back to his Father. But I do not touch upon that truth
now, though it is the main significance of this last part of the
story.

The prodigal was half starving, and the fatted calf was killed 'for
him,' as his ill-conditioned brother grumbled. Remember what it was
that drove him back--not his heart, nor his conscience, but his
stomach. He did not bethink himself to go back, because dormant
filial affection woke up, or because a sense that he had been wrong
stirred in him, but because he was hungry; and well he might be,
when 'the husks that the swine did eat' were luxuries beyond his
reach. Thank God for the teaching that even so low a motive as that
is accepted by God; and that, if a man goes back, even for no better
reason--as long as he does go back, he will be welcomed by the
Father. This poor boy was quite content to sink his sonship for the
sake of a loaf; and all that he wanted was to stay his hunger. So he
had to learn that he could not get bread on the terms that he
desired, and that what he wished most was not what he needed first.
He had to be forgiven and bathed in the outflow of his father's love
before he could be fed. And, being thus received, he could not fail
to be fed. So the message for us is, first, forgiveness, and then
every hunger of the heart satisfied; all desires met; every needful
nourishment communicated, and the true bread ours for ever, if we
choose to eat. 'The meek shall eat and be satisfied.'

I need not draw the picture--that picture of which there are many
originals sitting in these pews before me--of the men that go for
ever roaming with a hungry heart, through all the regions of life
separate from God; and whether they seek their nourishment in the
garbage of the sty, or whether fastidiously they look for it in the
higher nutriment of mind and intellect and heart, still are
condemned to be unfilled.

Brethren, 'Why do you spend your money for that ... which satisfies
not?' Here is the true way for all desires to be appeased. Go to God
in Jesus Christ for forgiveness, and then everything that you need
shall be yours. 'I counsel thee to buy of Me ... white raiment that
thou mayest be clothed.' 'He that eateth of this bread shall live
for ever.'




THE FOLLIES OF THE WISE


    'The children of this world are in their generation
    wiser than the children of light.'--LUKE xvi. 8.

The parable of which these words are the close is remarkable in that
it proposes a piece of deliberate roguery as, in some sort, a
pattern for Christian people. The steward's conduct was neither more
nor less than rascality, and yet, says Christ, 'Do like that!'

The explanation is to be found mainly in the consideration that what
was faithless sacrifice of his master's interests, on the part of the
steward, is, in regard to the Christian man's use of earthly gifts,
the right employment of the possessions which have been entrusted to
him. But there is another vindication of the singular selection of
such conduct as an example, in the consideration that what is praised
is not the dishonesty, but the foresight, realisation of the facts of
the case, promptitude, wisdom of various kinds exhibited by the
steward. And so says our Lord--shutting out the consideration of ends,
and looking only for a moment at means,--the world can teach the
Church a great many lessons; and it would be well for the Church if
its members lived in the fashion in which the men of the world do.
There is eulogium here, a recognition of splendid qualities,
prostituted to low purposes; a recognition of wisdom in the adaptation
of means to an end; and a limitation of the recognition, because it is
only _in their generation_ that 'the children of this world are
wiser than the children of light.'

I. So we may look, first, at these two classes, which our Lord
opposes here to one another.

'The children of this world' would have, for their natural
antithesis, the children of another world. The 'children of light'
would have, for their natural antithesis, 'the children of
darkness.' But our Lord so orders His words as to suggest a double
antithesis, one member of which has to be supplied in each case, and
He would teach us that whoever the children of this world may be,
they are 'children of darkness'; and that the 'children of light'
are so, just because they are the children of another world than
this. Thus He limits His praise, because it is the sons of darkness
that, in a certain sense, are wiser than the enlightened ones. And
that is what makes the wonder and the inconsistency to which our
Lord is pointing. We can understand a man being a consistent,
thorough-paced fool all through. But men whose folly is so dashed
and streaked with wisdom, and others whose wisdom is so spotted and
blurred with folly, are the extraordinary paradoxes which experience
of life presents to us.

The children of this world are of darkness; the children of light
are the children of another world. Now I need not spend more than a
sentence or two in further explaining these two antitheses. I do not
intend to vindicate them, or to vindicate our Lord's distinct
classification of men into these two halves. What does He mean by
the children of this world? The old Hebrew idiom, the children of
so-and-so, simply suggests persons who are so fully possessed and
saturated with a given quality, or who belong so entirely to a given
person, as that they are spoken of as if they stood to it, or to
him, in the relation of children to their parents. And a child of
this world is a man whose whole thoughts, aims, and objects of life
are limited and conditioned by this material present. But the word
which is employed here, translated rightly enough 'world,' is not
the same as that which is often used, especially in John's writings,
for the same idea. Although it conveys a similar idea, still it is
different. The characteristic quality of the visible and material
world which is set forth by the expression here employed is its
transiency. 'The children of this epoch' rather than 'of this world'
is the meaning of the phrase. And it suggests, not so much the
inadequacy of the material to satisfy the spiritual, as the absurdity
of a man fixing his hopes and limiting his aims and life-purpose
within the bounds of what is destined to fade and perish. Fleeting
wealth, fleeting honours, mortal loves, wisdom, and studies that pass
away with the passing away of the material; these, however elevating
some of them may be, however sweet some of them may be, however
needful all of them are in their places, are not the things to which
a man can safely lash his being, or entrust his happiness, or wisely
devote his life. And therefore the men who, ignoring the fact that
they live and the world passes, make themselves its slaves, and
itself their object, are convicted by the very fact of the
disproportion between the duration of themselves and of that which
is their aim, of being children of the darkness.

Then we come to the other antithesis. The children of light are so
in the measure in which their lives are not dependent exclusively
upon, nor directed solely towards, the present order and condition
of things. If there be a _this,_ then there is a _that_. If there be an
age which is qualified as being present, then that implies that there
is an age or epoch which is yet to come. And that coming 'age' should
regulate the whole of our relations to that age which at present is. For
life is continuous, and the coming epoch is the outcome of the present.
As truly as 'the child is father of the man,' so truly is Eternity the
offspring of Time, and that which we are to-day determines that which
we shall be through the ages. He that recognises the relations of the
present and the future, who sees the small, limited things of the
moment running out into the dim eternity beyond, and the track
unbroken across the gulfs of death and the broad expanse of countless
years, and who therefore orders the little things here so as to secure
the great things yonder, he, and only he, who has made time the
'lackey to eternity,' and in his pursuit of the things seen and
temporal, regards them always in the light of things unseen and eternal,
is a child of light.

II. The second consideration suggested here is the limited and
relative wisdom of the fools.

The children of this world, who are the children of darkness, and
who at bottom are thoroughly unwise, considered relatively, 'are
wiser than the children of light.' The steward is the example. 'A
rogue is always'--as one of our thinkers puts it--'a roundabout
fool.' He would have been a much wiser man if he had been an
honester one; and, instead of tampering with his lord's goods, had
faithfully administered them.

But, shutting out the consideration of the moral quality of his
action, look how much there was in it that was wise, prudent, and
worthy of praise. There were courage, fertility of resource, a clear
insight into what was the right thing to do. There was a wise
adaptation of means to an end. There was promptitude in carrying out
the wise means that suggested themselves to him. The design was bad.
Granted. We are not talking about goodness, but about cleverness.
So, very significantly, in the parable the person cheated cannot
help saying that the cheat was a clever one. The 'lord,' although he
had suffered by it, 'commended the unjust steward, because he had
done wisely.'

Did you never know in Manchester some piece of sharp practice, about
which people said, 'Ah, well, he is a clever fellow,' and all but
condoned the immorality for the sake of the smartness? The lord and
the steward belong to the same level of character; and vulpine
sagacity, astuteness, and qualities which ensure success in material
things seem to both of them to be of the highest value. 'The children
of this world, _in their generation'_--but only in it--are wiser
than the children of light.'

Now I draw a very simple, practical lesson, and it is just this,
that if Christian men, in their Christian lives, would practise the
virtues that the world practises, in pursuit of its shabby aims and
ends, their whole Christian character would be revolutionised. Why,
a boy will spend more pains in learning to whistle than half of you
do in trying to cultivate your Christian character. The secret of
success religiously is precisely the same as the secret of success
in ordinary things. Look at the splendid qualities that go to the
making of a successful housebreaker. Audacity, resource, secrecy,
promptitude, persistence, skill of hand, and a hundred others, are
put into play before a man can break into your back kitchen and
steal your goods. Look at the qualities that go to the making of a
successful amuser of people. Men will spend endless time and pains,
and devote concentration, persistence, self-denial, diligence, to
learning how to play upon some instrument, how to swing upon a
trapeze, how to twist themselves into abnormal contortions. Jugglers
and fiddlers, and circus-riders and dancers, and people of that sort
spend far more time upon efforts to perfect themselves in their
profession, than ninety-nine out of every hundred professing
Christians do to make themselves true followers of Jesus Christ.
They know that nothing is to be got without working for it, and
there is nothing to be got in the Christian life without working for
it any more than in any other.

Shut out the end for a moment, and look at the means. From the ranks
of criminals, of amusers, and of the purely worldly men of business
that we come in contact with every day, we may get lessons that
ought to bring a blush to all our cheeks, when we think to ourselves
how a wealth of intellectual and moral qualities and virtues, such
as we do not bring to bear on our Christian lives, are by these men
employed in regard of their infinitely smaller pursuits.

Oh, brethren! we ought to be our own rebukes, for it is not only
other people who show forth in other fields of life the virtues that
would make so much better Christians of us, if we used them in ours,
but that we ourselves carry within ourselves the condemning
contrast. Look at your daily life! Do you give anything like the
effort to grow in the knowledge of your Lord and Saviour, Jesus
Christ, that you do to make or maintain your position in the world?
When you are working side by side with the children of this world
for the same objects, you keep step with them, and are known to be
diligent in business as they are. When you pass into the church,
what do you do there? Are we not ice in one half of our lives, and
fire in the other? We may well lay to heart these solemn words of
our Lord, and take shame when we think that not only do the unwise,
who choose the world as their portion, put us to shame in their
self-denial, their earnestness, their absorption, their clear
insight into facts, their swiftness in availing themselves of every
opportunity, their persistence and their perseverance, but that we
rebuke ourselves because of the difference between the earnestness
with which we follow the things that are of this world, and the
languor of our pursuit after the things that are unseen and eternal.

Of course the reasons for the contrast are easy enough to apprehend,
and I do not need to spend time upon them. The objects that so have
power to stimulate and to lash men into energy, continuously through
their lives, lie at hand, and a candle near will dim the sunshine
beyond. These objects appeal to sense, and such make a deeper
impression than things that are shown to the mind, as every picture-book
may prove to us. And we, in regard to the aims of our Christian life,
have to make a continual effort to bring and keep them before us, or
they are crowded out by the intrusive vulgarities and dazzling
brilliances of the present. And so it comes to pass that the men who
hunt after trifles that are to perish set examples to the men who say
that they are pursuing eternal realities. 'Go to the ant, thou sluggard,
consider her ways and be wise.' Go to the men of the world, thou
Christian, and do not let it be said that the devil's scholars are more
studious and earnest than Christ's disciples.

III. Lastly, note the conclusive folly of the partially wise.

'In their generation,' says Christ; and that is all that can be said,
The circle runs round its 360 degrees, and these people take a segment
of it, say forty-five degrees, and all the rest is as non-existent. If
I am to call a man a wise man out and out, there are two things that I
shall have to be satisfied about concerning him. The one is, what is
he aiming at? and the other, how does he aim at it? In regard to the
means, the men of the world bear the bell, and carry away the supremacy.
Let in the thought of the end, and things change. Two questions reduce
all the world's wisdom to stark, staring insanity. The first question
is, 'What are you doing it for?' And the second question is, 'And
suppose you get it, what then?' Nothing that cannot pass the barrier
of these two questions satisfactorily is other than madness, if taken
to be the aim of a man's life. You have to look at the end, and the
whole circumference of the circle of the human being, before you serve
out the epithets of 'wise' and  'foolish.'

I need not dwell on the manifest folly of men who give their lives
to aims and ends of which I have already said that they are
disproportioned to the capacity of the pursuer. Look at yourselves,
brothers; these hearts of yours that need an infinite love for their
satisfaction, these active spirits of yours that can never be at
rest in creatural perfection; these troubled consciences of yours
that stir and moan inarticulately over unperceived wounds until they
are healed by Christ. How can any man with a heart and a will, and a
progressive spirit and intellect, find what he needs in anything
beneath the stars? 'Whose image and superscription hath it? They say
unto Him, Caesar's'; we say 'God's.' 'Render unto God the things
that are God's.' The man who makes anything but God his end and aim
is relatively wise and absolutely foolish.

Let me remind you too, that the same sentence of folly passes, if we
consider the disproportion between the duration of the objects and
of him who makes them his aim. You live, and if you are a wise man,
your treasures will be of the kind that last as long as you. 'They
call their lands after their own name; they think that their houses
shall continue for ever. They go down into the dust. Their glory
shall not descend after them,' and, therefore, 'this, their way, is
their folly.'

Brethren, all that I would say may be gathered into two words. Let
there be a proportion between your aims and your capacity. That
signifies, let God be your end. And let there be a correspondence
between your end and your means. That signifies, 'Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength, and with all thy mind.' Or else, when everything
comes to be squared up and settled, the epitaph on your gravestone
will deservedly be; 'Thou fool !'




TWO KINDS OF RICHES


    'He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful
    also in much: and he that is unjust in the least is
    unjust also in much. 11. If therefore ye have not been
    faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to
    your trust the true riches? 12. And if ye have not been
    faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give
    you that which is your own?'--LUKE xvi. 10-12.

That is a very strange parable which precedes my text, in which our
Lord takes a piece of crafty dishonesty on the part of a steward who
had been embezzling his lord's money as in some sense an example for
us Christian people, There are other instances in which He does the
same thing, finding a soul of goodness in things evil, as, for
instance, in the parable of the Unjust Judge. Similar is the New
Testament treatment of war or slavery, both of which diabolical
things are taken as illustrations of what in the highest sphere are
noble and heavenly things.

But having delivered the parable, our Lord seems, in the verses that
I have read, to anticipate the objection that the unfaithfulness of
the steward can never be an example for God's stewards; and in the
words before us, amongst other things, He says substantially this,
that whilst the steward's using his lord's wealth in order to help
his lord's debtors was a piece of knavery and unfaithfulness, in us
it is not unfaithfulness, but the very acme of faithfulness. In the
text we have the thought that there are two kinds of valuable things
in the world, a lower and a higher; that men may be very rich in
regard to the one, and very poor in regard to the other. In respect
to these, 'There is that maketh himself rich, and yet hath nothing;
there is that maketh himself poor, and yet hath great riches.' More
than that, the noblest use of the lower kind of possessions is to
secure the possession of the highest. And so He teaches us the
meaning of life, and of all that we have.

Now, there are three things in these words to which I would turn
your attention--the two classes of treasure, the contrast of
qualities between these two, and the noblest use of the lower.

I. The Two Classes of Treasure.

Now, we shall make a great mistake if we narrow down the
interpretation of that word 'mammon' in the context (which is 'that
which is least,' etc., here) to be merely money. It covers the whole
ground of all possible external and material possessions, whatsoever
things a man can only have in outward seeming, whatsoever things
belong only to the region of sense and the present. All that is in
the world, in fact, is included in the one name. And you must widen
out your thoughts of what is referred to here in this prolonged
contrast which our Lord runs between the two sets of treasures, so
as to include, not only money, but all sorts of things that belong
to this sensuous and temporal scene. And, on the other hand, there
stands opposite to it, as included in, and meant by, that which is
'most,' 'that which is the true riches,' 'that which is your own';
everything that holds of the unseen and spiritual, whether it be
treasures of intellect and lofty thought, or whether it be pure and
noble aims, or whether it be ideals of any kind, the ideals of art,
the aspirations of science, the lofty aims of the scholar and the
student--all these are included. And the very same standard of
excellence which declares that the treasures of a cultivated
intellect, of a pure mind, of a lofty purpose, are higher than the
utmost of material good, and that 'wisdom is better than rubies,'
the very same standard, when applied in another direction, declares
that above the treasures of the intellect and the taste are to be
ranked all the mystical and great blessings which are summoned up in
that mighty word salvation. And we must take a step further, for
neither the treasures of the intellect, the mind, and the heart, nor
the treasures of the spiritual life which salvation implies, can be
realised and reached unless a man possesses God. So in the deepest
analysis, and in the truest understanding of these two contrasted
classes of wealth you have but the old antithesis: the world--and
God. He that has God is rich, however poor he may be in reference to
the other category; and he that has Him not is poor, however rich he
may be. 'The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places,' says the
Psalmist; and 'I have a goodly heritage,' because he could also say,
'God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever.' So there
is the antithesis, the things of time and sense, the whole mass of
them knit together on the one hand; the single God alone by Himself
on the other. Of these two classes of valuable things our Lord goes
on next to tell us the relative worth. For we have here

II. The Contrast between the Two.

That contrast is threefold, as you observe, 'that which is least.'
or, perhaps better, 'that which is very little.' and 'that which is
much.' That is a contrast in reference to degree. But degree is a
shallow word, which does not cover the whole ground, nor go down
to the depths. So our Lord comes next to a contrast in regard to
essential nature, 'the unrighteous mammon' and 'the true riches.'
But even these contrasts in degree and in kind do not exhaust all
the contrasts possible, for there is another, the contrast in
reference to the reality of our possession: 'that which is
another's'; 'that which is your own.' Let us, then, take these three
things, the contrast in degree, the contrast in kind, the contrast
in regard to real possession.

First, then, and briefly, mental and spiritual and inward blessings,
salvation, God, are more than all externals. Our Lord gathers all
the conceivable treasures of earth, jewels and gold and dignities,
and scenes of sensuous delights, and everything that holds to the
visible and the temporal, and piles them into one scale, and then He
puts into the other the one name, God; and the pompous nothings fly
up and are nought, and have no weight at all. Is that not true? Does
it need any demonstration, any more talk about it? No!

But then comes in sense and appeals to us, and says, 'You cannot get
