humanity, even where men are spurred to great efforts by the thought
of the reverberation of these in the ear of the world, and of the
honour and glory that may come therefrom.

But not only in these higher forms of seeking after reputation, but
in lower forms, this trembling before, and seeking to conciliate, the
tribunal of what we call 'general opinion,' which means the voices of
the half-dozen people that are beside us and know about us, besets us
all, and weakens us all in a thousand ways. How many men would lose
all the motive that they have for living reputable lives, if nobody
knew anything about it? How many of you, when you go to London, and
are strangers, frequent places that you would not be seen in in
Manchester? How many of us are hindered, in courses which we know
that we ought to pursue, because we are afraid of this or that man or
woman, and of what they may look or speak? There is a regard to man's
judgment, which is separated by the very thinnest partition from
hypocrisy. There is a very shadowy distinction between the man who,
consciously or unconsciously, does a thing with an eye to what people
may say about it, and the man who pretends to be what he is not for
the sake of the reputation that he may thereby win.

Now, the direct tendency of Christian faith and principle is to
dwindle into wholesome insignificance the multitudinous voice of
men's judgments. For, if I understand at all what Christianity means,
it means centrally and essentially this, that I am brought into
loving personal relation with Jesus Christ, and draw from Him the
power of my life, and from Him the law of my life, and from Him the
stimulus of my life, and from Him the reward of my life. If there is
a direct communication between me and Him, and if I am deriving from
Him the life that He gives, which is 'free from the law of sin and
death,' I shall have little need or desire to heed the judgment that
men, who see only the surface, may pass upon me, and upon my doings,
and I shall refer myself to Him instead of to them. Those who can go
straight to Christ, whose lives are steeped in Him, who feel that
they draw all from Him, and that their actions and character are
moulded by His touch and His Spirit, are responsible to no other
tribunal. And the less they think about what men have to say of them
the stronger, the nobler, the more Christ-like they will be.

There is no need for any contempt or roughness to blend with such a
putting aside of men's judgments. The velvet glove may be worn upon
the iron hand. All meekness and lowliness may go with this wholesome
independence, and must go with it unless that independence is false
and distorted. 'With me it is a very small thing to be judged of you,
or of man's judgment,' need not be said in such a tone as to mean 'I
do not care a rush what you think about me'; but it must be said in
such a tone as to mean 'I care supremely for one approbation, and if
I have that I can bear anything besides.'

Let me appeal to you to cultivate more distinctly, as a plain
Christian duty, this wholesome independence of men's judgment. I
suppose there never was a day when it was more needed that men should
be themselves, seeing with their own eyes what God may reveal
to them and they are capable of receiving, and walking with their own
feet on the path that fits them, whatsoever other people may say
about it. For the multiplication of daily literature, the way in
which we are all living in glass houses nowadays--everybody knowing
everything about everybody else, and delighting in the gossip which
takes the place of literature in so many quarters--and the tendency
of society to a more democratic form give the many-headed monster and
its many tongues far more power than is wholesome, in the shaping of
the lives and character and conduct of most men. The evil of
democracy is that it levels down all to one plane, and that it tends
to turn out millions of people, as like each other as if they had
been made in a machine. And so we need, I believe, even more than our
fathers did, to lay to heart this lesson, that the direct result of a
deep and strong Christian faith is the production of intensely
individual character. And if there are plenty of angles in it,
perhaps so much the better. We are apt to be rounded by being rubbed
against each other, like the stones on the beach, till there is not a
sharp corner or a point that can prick anywhere. So society becomes
utterly monotonous, and is insipid and profitless because of that.
You Christian people, be yourselves, after your own pattern. And
whilst you accept all help from surrounding suggestions and hints,
make it 'a very small thing that you be judged of men.' And you,
young men, in warehouses and shops, and you, students, and you, boys
and girls, that are budding into life, never mind what other people
say. 'Let thine eyes look right onwards,' and let all the clatter on
either side of you go on as it will. The voices are very loud, but if
we go up high enough on the hill-top, to the secret place of the Most
High, we shall look down and see, but not hear, the bustle and the
buzz; and in the great silence Christ will whisper to us, 'Well done!
good and faithful servant.' That praise is worth getting, and one way
to get it is to put aside the hindrance of anxious seeking to
conciliate the good opinion of men.

II. Note the higher court of conscience.

Our Apostle is not to be taken here as contradicting what he says in
other places. 'I judge not mine own self,'--yet in one of these same
letters to the Corinthians he says, 'If we judged ourselves we should
not be judged.' So that he does not mean here that he is entirely
without any estimate of his own character or actions. That he did in
some sense judge himself is evident from the next clause, because he
goes on to say, 'I know nothing against myself.' If he acquitted
himself, he must previously have been judging himself. But his
acquittal of himself is not to be understood as if it covered the
whole ground of his life and character, but it is to be confined to
the subject in hand--viz. his faithfulness as a steward of the
mysteries of God. But though there is nothing in that region of his
life which he can charge against himself as unfaithfulness, he goes
on to say, 'Yet am I not hereby justified?'

Our absolution by conscience is not infallible. I suppose that
conscience is more reliable when it condemns than when it acquits. It
is never safe for a man to neglect it when it says, 'You are wrong!'
It is just as unsafe for a man to accept it, without further
investigation, when it says, 'You are right!' For the only thing that
is infallible about what we call conscience is its sentence, 'It is
right to do right.' But when it proceeds to say 'This, that, and the
other thing is right; and therefore it is right for you to do it,'
there may be errors in the judgment, as everybody's own experience
tells them. The inward judge needs to be stimulated, to be
enlightened, to be corrected often. I suppose that the growth of
Christian character is very largely the discovery that things that we
thought innocent are not, for us, so innocent as we thought them.

You only need to go back to history, or to go down into your own
histories, to see how, as light has increased, dark corners have been
revealed that were invisible in the less brilliant illumination. How
long it has taken the Christian Church to find out what Christ's
Gospel teaches about slavery, about the relations of sex, about
drunkenness, about war, about a hundred other things that you and I
do not yet know, but which our successors will wonder that we failed
to see! Inquisitor and martyr have equally said, 'We are serving
God.' Surely, too, nothing is more clearly witnessed by individual
experience, than that we may do a wrong thing, and think that it is
right. 'They that kill you will think that they do God service.'

So, Christian people, accept the inward monition when it is stern and
prohibitive. Do not be too sure about it when it is placable and
permissive. 'Happy is he that condemneth not himself in the thing
which he alloweth.' There may be secret faults, lying all unseen
beneath the undergrowth in the forest, which yet do prick and sting.
The upper floors of the house where we receive company, and where we,
the tenants, generally live, may be luxurious, and sweet, and clean.
What about the cellars, where ugly things crawl and swarm, and breed,
and sting?

Ah, dear brethren! when my conscience says to me, 'You may do it,' it
is always well to go to Jesus Christ, and say to Him 'May I?' 'Search
me, O God, and ... see if there be any wicked way in me,' and show it
to me, and help me to cast it out. 'I know nothing against myself;
yet am I not hereby justified.'

III. Lastly, note the supreme court of final appeal.

'He that judgeth me is the Lord.' Now it is obvious that 'the Lord'
here is Christ, both because of the preceding context and because of
the next verse, which speaks of His coming. And it is equally
obvious, though it is often unnoticed, that the judgment of which the
Apostle is here speaking is a present and preliminary judgment. 'He
that _judgeth_ me'--not, 'will judge,' but _now_, at this very
moment. That is to say, whilst people round us are passing their
superficial estimates upon me, and whilst my conscience is excusing,
or else accusing me--and in neither case with absolute
infallibility--there is another judgment, running concurrently with
them, and going on in silence. That calm eye is fixed upon me, and
sifting me, and knowing me. _That_ judgment is not fallible, because
before Him 'the hidden things' that the darkness shelters, those
creeping things in the cellars that I was speaking about, are all
manifest; and to Him the 'counsels of the heart,' that is, the
motives from which the actions flow, are all transparent and legible.
So His judgment, the continual estimate of me which Jesus Christ, in
His supreme knowledge of me, has, at every moment of my life--_that_
is uttering the final word about me and my character.

His estimate will dwindle the sentences of the other two tribunals
into nothingness. What matter what his fellow-servants say about the
steward's accounts, and distribution of provisions, and management of
the household? He has to render his books, and to give account of his
stewardship, only to his lord.

The governor of a Crown Colony may attach some importance to colonial
opinion, but he reports home; and it is what the people in Downing
Street will say that he thinks about. We have to report home; and it
is the King whom we serve, to whom we have to give an account. The
gladiator, down in the arena, did not much mind whether the thumbs of
the populace were up or down, though the one was the signal for his
life and the other for his death. He looked to the place where,
between the purple curtains and the flashing axes of the lictors, the
emperor sate. Our Emperor once was down on the sand Himself, and
although we are 'compassed about with a cloud of witnesses,' we look
to the Christ, the supreme Arbiter, and take acquittal or
condemnation, life or death, from Him.

That judgment, persistent all through each of our lives, is
preliminary to the future tribunal and sentence. The Apostle employs
in this context two distinct words, both of which are translated in
our version 'judge.' The one which is used in these three clauses, on
which I have been commenting, means a preliminary examination, and
the one which is used in the next verse means a final decisive trial
and sentence. So, dear brethren, Christ is gathering materials for
His final sentence; and you and I are writing the depositions which
will be adduced in evidence. Oh! how little all that the world may
have said about a man will matter then! Think of a man standing
before that great white throne, and saying, 'I held a very high place
in the estimation of my neighbours. The newspapers and the reviews
blew my trumpet assiduously. My name was carved upon the plinth of a
marble statue, that my fellow-citizens set up in honour of my
many virtues,'--and the name was illegible centuries before the
statue was burned in the last fire!

Brother! seek for the praise from Him, which is praise indeed. If He
says, 'Well done, good and faithful servant,' it matters little what
censures men may pass on us. If He says, 'I never knew you,' all
their praises will not avail. 'Wherefore we labour that, whether
present or absent, we may be well-pleasing to Him.'




THE FESTAL LIFE

   'Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old
   leaven ... but with the unleavened bread of
   sincerity and truth.'--1 COR. v. 8.


There had been hideous immorality in the Corinthian Church. Paul had
struck at it with heat and force, sternly commanding the exclusion of
the sinner. He did so on the ground of the diabolical power of
infection possessed by evil, and illustrated that by the very obvious
metaphor of leaven, a morsel of which, as he says, 'will leaven the
whole lump,' or, as we say, 'batch.' But the word 'leaven' drew up
from the depths of his memory a host of sacred associations connected
with the Jewish Passover. He remembered the sedulous hunting in every
Jewish house for every scrap of leavened matter; the slaying of the
Paschal Lamb, and the following feast. Carried away by these
associations, he forgets the sin in the Corinthian Church for a
moment, and turns to set forth, in the words of the text, a very deep
and penetrating view of what the Christian life is, how it is
sustained, and what it demands. 'Wherefore,' says he, 'let us keep
the feast ... with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.'
That 'wherefore' takes us back to the words before it, And what are
these? 'Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us'; therefore--because
of that sacrifice, to us is granted the power, and on us is laid
imperatively the obligation, to make life a festival and to purge
ourselves. Now, in the notion of a feast, there are two things
included--joy and plentiful sustenance. So there are three points
here, which I have already indicated--what the Christian life is, a
festival; on what it is sustained, the Paschal Sacrifice; what it
demands, scrupulous purging out of the old leaven.

I. The Christian life ought to be a continual festival.

The Christian life a feast? It is more usually represented as a
fight, a wrestle, a race; and such metaphors correspond, as it would
appear, far more closely to the facts of our environment, and to the
experiences of our hearts, than does such a metaphor as this. But the
metaphor of the festival goes deeper than that of the fight or race,
and it does not ignore the strenuous and militant side of the
Christian life. No man ever lived a more strenuous life than Paul; no
man had heavier tasks, and did them more cheerily; no man had a
sterner fight and fought it more bravely. There is nothing soft,
Epicurean, or oblivious of the patent sad facts of humanity in the
declaration that after all, beneath all, above all, central to all,
the Christian life is a glad festival, when it is the life that it
ought to be.

But you say, 'Ah! it is all very well to call it so; but in the first
place, continual joy is impossible in the presence of the
difficulties, and often sadnesses, that meet us on our life's path;
and, in the second place, it is folly to tell us to pump up emotions,
or to ignore the occasions for much heaviness and sorrow of heart.'
True; but, still, it is possible to cultivate such a temper as makes
life habitually joyful. We can choose the aspect under which we by
preference and habitually regard our lives. All emotion follows upon
a preceding thought, or sensible experience, and we can pick the
objects of our thoughts, and determine what aspect of our lives to
look at most.

The sky is often piled with stormy, heaped-up masses of blackness,
but between them are lakes of calm blue. We can choose whether we
look at the clouds or at the blue. _These_ are in the lower
ranges; _that_ fills infinite spaces, upwards and out to the
horizon. These are transient, eating themselves away even whilst we
look, and black and thunderous as they may be, they are there but for
a moment--that is perennial. If we are wise, we shall fix our gaze
much rather on the blue than on the ugly cloud-rack that hides it,
and thus shall minister to ourselves occasions for the noble kind of
joy which is not noisy and boisterous, 'like the crackling of thorns
under a pot,' and does not foam itself away by its very ebullience,
but is calm like the grounds of it; still, like the heaven to which
it looks; eternal, like the God on whom it is fastened. If we would
only steadfastly remember that the one source of worthy and enduring
joy is God Himself, and listen to the command, 'Rejoice in the Lord,'
we should find it possible to 'rejoice always.' For that thought of
Him, His sufficiency, His nearness, His encompassing presence, His
prospering eye, His aiding hand, His gentle consolation, His enabling
help will take the sting out of even the bitterest of our sorrows,
and will brace us to sustain the heaviest, otherwise crushing
burdens, and greatly to 'rejoice, though now for a season we are in
heaviness through manifold temptations.' The Gulf Stream rushes into
the northern hemisphere, melts the icebergs and warms the Polar seas,
and so the joy of the Lord, if we set it before us as we can and
should do, will minister to us a gladness which will make our lives a
perpetual feast.

But there is another thing that we can do; that is, we can clearly
recognise the occasions for sorrow in our experience, and yet
interpret them by the truths of the Christian faith. That is to say,
we can think of them, not so much as they tend to make us sad or
glad, but as they tend to make us more assured of our possession of,
more ardent in our love towards, and more submissive in our attitude
to, the all-ordering Love which is God. Brethren, if we thought of
life, and all its incidents, even when these are darkest and most
threatening, as being what it and they indeed are, His training of us
into capacity for fuller blessedness, because fuller possession of
Himself, we should be less startled at the commandment, 'Rejoice in
the Lord always,' and should feel that it was possible, though the
figtree did not blossom, and there was no fruit in the vine, though
the flocks were cut off from the pastures, and the herds from the
stall, yet to rejoice in the God of our salvation. Rightly understood
and pondered on, all the darkest passages of life are but like the
cloud whose blackness determines the brightness of the rainbow on its
front. Rightly understood and reflected on, these will teach us that
the paradoxical commandment, 'Count it all joy that ye fall into
divers temptations,' is, after all, the voice of true wisdom speaking
at the dictation of a clear-eyed faith.

This text, since it is a commandment, implies that obedience to it,
and therefore the realisation of this continual festal aspect of
life, is very largely in our own power. Dispositions differ, some of
us are constitutionally inclined to look at the blacker, and some at
the brighter, side of our experiences. But our Christianity is worth
little unless it can modify, and to some extent change, our natural
tendencies. The joy of the Lord being our strength, the cultivation
of joy in the Lord is largely our duty. Christian people do not
sufficiently recognise that it is as incumbent on them to seek after
this continual fountain of calm and heavenly joy flowing through
their lives, as it is to cultivate some of the more recognised
virtues and graces of Christian conduct and character.

Secondly, we have here--

II. The Christian life is a continual feeding on a sacrifice.

'Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Wherefore let us keep the
feast.' It is very remarkable that this is the only place in Paul's
writings where he articulately pronounces that the Paschal Lamb is a
type of Jesus Christ. There is only one other instance in the New
Testament where that is stated with equal clearness and emphasis, and
that is in John's account of the Crucifixion, where he recognises the
fact that Christ died with limbs unbroken, as being a fulfilment, in
the New Testament sense of that word, of what was enjoined in regard
to the antitype, 'a bone of him shall not be broken.'

But whilst the definite statement which precedes my text that Christ
is 'our Passover,' and 'sacrificed for us' as such, is unique in
Paul's writings, the thought to which it gives clear and crystallised
expression runs through the whole of the New Testament. It underlies
the Lord's Supper. Did you ever think of how great was the
self-assertion of Jesus Christ when He laid His hand on that
sacredest of Jewish rites, which had been established, as the words
of the institution of it say, to be 'a perpetual memorial through all
generations,' brushed it on one side, and in effect, said: 'You do
not need to remember the Passover any more. I am the true Paschal
Lamb, whose blood sprinkled on the doorposts averts the sword of the
destroying Angel, whose flesh, partaken of, gives immortal life.
Remember Me, and this do in remembrance of Me.' The Lord's Supper
witnesses that Jesus thought Himself to be what Paul tells the
Corinthians that He is, even our Passover, sacrificed for us. But the
point to be observed is this, that just as in that ancient ritual,
the lamb slain became the food of the Israelites, so with us the
Christ who has died is to be the sustenance of our souls, and of our
Christian life. 'Therefore let us keep the feast.'

Feed upon Him; that is the essential central requirement for all
Christian life, and what does feeding on Him mean? 'How can this man
give us his flesh to eat?' said the Jews, and the answer is plain
now, though so obscure then. The flesh which He gave for the life of
the world in His death, must by us be taken for the very nourishment
of our souls, by the simple act of faith in Him. That is the feeding
which brings not only sustenance but life. Christ's death for us is
the basis, but it is only the basis, of Christ's living in us, and
His death for me is of no use at all to me unless He that died for me
lives in me. We feed on Him by faith, which not only trusts to the
Sacrifice as atoning for sin, but feeds on it as communicating and
sustaining eternal life--'Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us,
wherefore let us keep the Feast.'

Again, we keep the feast when our minds feed upon Christ by
contemplation of what He is, what He has done, what He is doing, what
He will do; when we take Him as 'the Master-light of all our seeing,'
and in Him, His words and works, His Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, Session as Sovereign at the right hand of God, find the
perfect revelation of what God is, the perfect discovery of what man
is, the perfect disclosure of what sin is, the perfect prophecy of
what man may become, the Light of light, the answer to every question
that our spirits can put about the loftiest verities of God and man,
the universe and the future. We feed on Christ when, with lowly
submission, we habitually subject thoughts, purposes, desires, to His
authority, and when we let His will flow into, and make plastic and
supple, our wills. We nourish our wills by submitting them to Jesus,
and we feed on Him when we not only say 'Lord! Lord!' but when we do
the things that He says. We feed on Christ, when we let His great,
sacred, all-wise, all-giving, all satisfying love flow into our
restless hearts and make them still, enter into our vagrant
affections and fix them on Himself. Thus when mind and conscience and
will and heart all turn to Jesus, and in Him find their sustenance,
we shall be filled with the feast of fat things which He has prepared
for all people. With that bread we shall be satisfied, and with it
only, for the husks of the swine are no food for the Father's son,
and we 'spend our money for that which is not bread, and our labour
for that which satisfieth not,' if we look anywhere else than to the
Paschal Lamb slain for us for the food of our souls.

III. The Christian life is a continual purging out of the old leaven.

I need not remind you how vivid and profoundly significant that
emblem of leaven, as applied to all manner of evil, is. But let me
remind you how, just as in the Jewish Ritual, the cleansing from all
that was leavened was the essential pre-requisite to the
participation in the feast, feeding on Jesus Christ, as I have tried
to describe it, is absolutely impossible unless our leaven is
cleansed away. Children spoil their appetites for wholesome food by
eating sweetmeats. Men destroy their capacity for feeding on Christ
by hungry desires, and gluttonous satisfying of those desires with
the delusive sweets of this passing world. But, my brother, your
experience, if you are a Christian man at all, will tell you that in
the direct measure in which you have been drawn away into paltering
with evil, your appetite for Christ and your capacity for gazing upon
Him, contemplating Him, feeding on Him, has died out. There comes a
kind of constriction in a man's throat when he is hungering after
lesser good, especially when there is a tinge of evil in the supposed
good that he is hungering after, which incapacitates Him from eating
the bread of God, which is Jesus Christ.

But let us remember that absolute cleansing from all sin is not
essential, in order to have real participation in Jesus Christ. The
Jew had to take every scrap of leaven out of his house before he
began the Passover. If that were the condition for us, alas! for us
all; but the effort after purity, though it has not entirely attained
its aim, is enough. Sin abhorred does not prevent a man from
participating in the Bread that came down from heaven.

Then observe, too, that for this power to cleanse ourselves, we must
have had some participation in Christ, by which there is given to us
that new life that conquers evil. In the words immediately preceding
my text, the Apostle bases his injunction to purge out the old leaven
on the fact that 'ye are unleavened.' Ideally, in so far as the power
possessed by them was concerned, these Corinthians were unleavened,
even whilst they were bid to purge out the leaven. That is to say, be
what you are; realise your ideal, utilise the power you possess, and
since by your faith there has been given to you a new life that can
conquer all corruption and sin, see that you use the life that is
given. Purge out the old leaven because ye are unleavened.

One last word--this stringent exhortation, which makes Christian
effort after absolute purity a Christian duty, and the condition of
participation in the Paschal Lamb, is based upon that thought to
which I have already referred, of the diabolical power of infection
which Evil possesses. Either you must cast it out, or it will choke
the better thing in you. It spreads and grows, and propagates itself,
and works underground through and through the whole mass. A
water-weed got into some of our canals years ago, and it has all but
choked some of them. The slime on a pond spreads its green mantle
over the whole surface with rapidity. If we do not eject Evil it will
eject the good from us. Use the implanted power to cast out this
creeping, advancing evil. Sometimes a wine-grower has gone into his
cellars, and found in a cask no wine, but a monstrous fungus into
which all the wine had, in the darkness, passed unnoticed. I fear
some Christian people, though they do not know it, have something
like that going on in them.

It is possible for us all to keep this perpetual festival. To live
in, on, for, Jesus Christ will give us victory over enemies, burdens,
sorrows, sins. We may, if we will, dwell in a calm zone where no
tempests rage, hear a perpetual strain of sweet music persisting
through thunder peals of sorrow and suffering, and find a table
spread for us in the presence of our enemies, at which we shall renew
our strength for conflict, and whence we shall rise to fight the good
fight a little longer, till we sit with Him at His table in His
Kingdom, and 'eat, and live for ever.'




FORMS _VERSUS_ CHARACTER

   'Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing,
   but the keeping of the commandments of God.'--1 COR. vii. 19.

   'For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth anything,
   nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh by love.'--GAL. v. 6.

   'For neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision,
   but a new creature.'--GAL. vi. 16 (R.V.).


The great controversy which embittered so much of Paul's life, and
marred so much of his activity, turned upon the question whether a
heathen man could come into the Church simply by the door of faith,
or whether he must also go through the gate of circumcision. We all
know how Paul answered the question. Time, which settles all
controversies, has settled that one so thoroughly that it is
impossible to revive any kind of interest in it; and it may seem to
be a pure waste of time to talk about it. But the principles that
fought then are eternal, though the forms in which they manifest
themselves vary with every varying age.

The Ritualist--using that word in its broadest sense--on the one
hand, and the Puritan on the other, represent permanent tendencies of
human nature; and we find to-day the old foes with new faces. These
three passages, which I have read, are Paul's deliverance on the
question of the comparative value of external rites and spiritual
character. They are remarkable both for the identity in the former
part of each and for the variety in the latter. In all the three
cases he affirms, almost in the same language, that 'circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing,' that the Ritualist's rite
and the Puritan's protest are equally insignificant in comparison
with higher things. And then he varies the statement of what the
higher things are, in a very remarkable and instructive fashion. The
'keeping of the commandments of God,' says one of the texts, is the
all-important matter. Then, as it were, he pierces deeper, and in
another of the texts (I take the liberty of varying their order)
pronounces that 'a new creature' is the all-important thing. And then
he pierces still deeper to the bottom of all, in the third text, and
says the all-important thing is 'faith which worketh by love.'

I think I shall best bring out the force of these words by dealing
first with that emphatic threefold proclamation of the nullity of all
externalism; and then with the singular variations in the triple
statement of what is essential, viz. spiritual conduct and character.

I. First, the emphatic proclamation of the nullity of outward rites.

'Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing,' say two
texts. 'Circumcision availeth nothing, and uncircumcision availeth
nothing,' says the other. It neither is anything nor does anything.
Did Paul say that because circumcision was a Jewish rite? No. As I
believe, he said it because it was _a rite_; and because he had
learned that the one thing needful was spiritual character, and that
no external ceremonial of any sort could produce that. I think we are
perfectly warranted in taking this principle of my text, and in
extending it beyond the limits of the Jewish rite about which Paul
was speaking. For if you remember, he speaks about baptism, in the
first chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, in a precisely
similar tone and for precisely the same reason, when he says, in
effect, 'I baptized Crispus and Gaius and the household of Stephanas,
and I think these are all. I am not quite sure. I do not keep any
kind of record of such things; God did not send me to baptize, He
sent me to preach the Gospel.'

The thing that produced the spiritual result was not the rite, but
the truth, and therefore he felt that his function was to preach the
truth and leave the rite to be administered by others. Therefore we
can extend the principle here to all externalisms of worship, in all
forms, in all churches, and say that in comparison with the
essentials of an inward Christianity they are nothing and they do
nothing.

They have their value. As long as we are here on earth, living in the
flesh, we must have outward forms and symbolical rites. It is in
Heaven that the seer 'saw no temple.' Our sense-bound nature
requires, and thankfully avails itself of, the help of external rites
and ceremonials to lift us up towards the Object of our devotion. A
man prays all the better if he bow his head, shut his eyes, and bend
his knees. Forms do help us to the realisation of the realities, and
the truths which they express and embody. Music may waft our souls to
the heavens, and pictures may stir deep thoughts. That is the simple
principle on which the value of all external aids to devotion
depends. They may be helps towards the appreciation of divine truth,
and to the suffusing of the heart with devout emotions which may lead
to building up a holy character.

There is a worth, therefore--an auxiliary and subordinate worth--in
these things, and in that respect they are _not_ nothing, nor do
they 'avail nothing.' But then all external rites tend to usurp more
than belongs to them, and in our weakness we are apt to cleave to
them, and instead of using them as means to lift us higher, to stay
in them, and as a great many of us do, to mistake the mere
gratification of taste and the excitement of the sensibilities for
worship. A bit of stained glass may be glowing with angel-forms and
pictured saints, but it always keeps some of the light out, and it
always hinders us from seeing through it. And all external worship
and form have so strong a tendency to usurp more than belongs to
them, and to drag us down to their own level, even whilst we think
that we are praying, that I believe the wisest man will try to pare
down the externals of his worship to the lowest possible point. If
there be as much body as will keep a soul in, as much form as will
embody the spirit, that is all that we want. What is more is
dangerous.

All form in worship is like fire, it is a good servant but it is a
bad master, and it needs to be kept very rigidly in subordination, or
else the spirituality of Christian worship vanishes before men know;
and they are left with their dead forms which are only
evils--crutches that make people limp by the very act of using them.

Now, my dear friends, when that has happened, when men begin to say,
as the people in Paul's time were saying about circumcision, and as
people are saying in this day about Christian rites, that they are
necessary, then it is needful to take up Paul's ground and to say,
'No! they are nothing!' They are useful in a certain place, but if
you make them obligatory, if you make them essential, if you say that
grace is miraculously conveyed through them, then it is needful that
we should raise a strong note of protestation, and declare their
absolute nullity for the highest purpose, that of making that
spiritual character which alone is essential.

And I believe that this strange recrudescence--to use a modern
word--of ceremonialism and aesthetic worship which we see all round
about us, not only in the ranks of the Episcopal Church, but amongst
Nonconformists, who are sighing for a less bare service, and here and
there are turning their chapels into concert-rooms, and instead of
preaching the Gospel are having 'Services of Song' and the like--that
all this makes it as needful to-day as ever it was to say to men:
'Forms are not worship. Rites may crush the spirit. Men may yield to
the sensuous impressions which they produce, and be lapped in an
atmosphere of aesthetic emotion, without any real devotion.'

Such externals are only worth anything if they make us grasp more
firmly with our understandings and feel more profoundly with our
hearts, the great truths of the Gospel. If they do that, they help;
if they are not doing that, they hinder, and are to be fought
against. And so we have again to proclaim to-day, as Paul did,
'Circumcision is nothing,' 'but the keeping of the commandments of
God.'

Then notice with what remarkable fairness and boldness and breadth
the Apostle here adds that other clause: 'and uncircumcision is
nothing.' It is a very hard thing for a man whose life has been spent
in fighting against an error, not to exaggerate the value of his
protest. It is a very hard thing for a man who has been delivered
from the dependence upon forms, not to fancy that his formlessness is
what the other people think that their forms are. The Puritan who
does not believe that a man can be a good man because he is a
Ritualist or a Roman Catholic, is committing the very same error as
the Ritualist or the Roman Catholic who does not believe that the
Puritan can be a Christian unless he has been 'christened.' The two
people are exactly the same, only the one has hold of the stick at
one end, and the other at the other. There may be as much idolatry in
superstitious reliance upon the bare worship as in the advocacy of
the ornate; and many a Nonconformist who fancies that he has 'never
bowed the knee to Baal' is as true an idol-worshipper in his
superstitious abhorrence of the ritualism that he sees in other
communities, as are the men who trust in it the most.

It is a large attainment in Christian character to be able to say
with Paul, 'Circumcision is nothing, and my own favourite point of
uncircumcision is nothing either. Neither the one side nor the other
touches the essentials.'

II. Now let us look at the threefold variety of the designation of
these essentials here.

In our first text from the Epistle to the Corinthians we read,
'Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of the commandments of God.' If we finished the sentence it
would be, 'but the keeping of the commandments of God is everything.'

And by that 'keeping the commandments,' of course, the Apostle does
not mean merely external obedience. He means something far deeper
than that, which I put into this plain word, that the one essential
of a Christian life is the conformity of the will with God's--not
the external obedience merely, but the entire surrender and the
submission of my will to the will of my Father in Heaven. That is the
all-important thing; that is what God wants; that is the end of all
rites and ceremonies; that is the end of all revelation and of all
utterances of the divine heart. The Bible, Christ's mission, His
passion and death, the gift of His Divine Spirit, and every part of
the divine dealings in providence, all converge upon this one aim and
goal. For this purpose the Father worketh hitherto, and Christ works,
that man's will may yield and bow itself wholly and happily and
lovingly to the great infinite will of the Father in heaven.

Brethren! that is the perfection of a man's nature, when his will
fits on to God's like one of Euclid's triangles superimposed upon
another, and line for line coincides. When his will allows a free
passage to the will of God, without resistance or deflection, as
light travels through transparent glass; when his will responds to
the touch of God's finger upon the keys, like the telegraphic needle
to the operator's hand, then man has attained all that God and
religion can do for him, all that his nature is capable of; and far
beneath his feet may be the ladders of ceremonies and forms and
outward acts, by which he climbed to that serene and blessed height,
'Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of God's commandments is everything.'

That submission of will is the sum and the test of your Christianity.
Your Christianity does not consist only in a mere something which you
call faith in Jesus Christ. It does not consist in emotions, however
deep and blessed and genuine they may be. It does not consist in the
acceptance of a creed. All these are means to an end. They are meant
to drive the wheel of life, to build up character, to make your
deepest wish to be, 'Father! not my will, but Thine, be done.' In the
measure in which that is your heart's desire, and not one
hair's-breadth further, have you a right to call yourself a
Christian.

But, then, I can fancy a man saying: 'It is all very well to talk
about bowing the will in this fashion; how can I do that?' Well, let
us take our second text--the third in the order of their
occurrence--'For neither circumcision is anything, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.' That is to say, if we are ever
to keep the will of God we must be made over again. Ay! we must! Our
own consciences tell us that; the history of all the efforts that
ever we have made--and I suppose all of us have made some now and
then, more or less earnest and more or less persistent--tells us that
there needs to be a stronger hand than ours to come into the fight if
it is ever to be won by us. There is nothing more heartless and more
impotent than to preach, 'Bow your wills to God, and then you will be
happy; bow your wills to God, and then you will be good.' If that is
all the preacher has to say, his powerless words will but provoke the
answer, 'We cannot. Tell the leopard to change his spots, or the
Ethiopian his skin, as soon as tell a man to reduce this revolted
kingdom within him to obedience, and to bow his will to the will of
God. We cannot do it.' But, brethren, in that word, 'a new creature,'
lies a promise from God; for a creature implies a creator. 'It is He
that hath made us, and not we ourselves.' The very heart of what
Christ has to offer us is the gift of His own life to dwell in our
hearts, and by its mighty energy to make us free from the law of sin
and death which binds our wills. We may have our spirits moulded into
His likeness, and new tastes, and new desires, and new capacities
infused into us, so as that we shall not be left with our own poor
powers to try and force ourselves into obedience to God's will, but
that submission and holiness and love that keeps the commandments of
God, will spring up in our renewed spirits as their natural product
and growth. Oh! you men and women who have been honestly trying, half
your lifetime, to make yourselves what you know God wants you to be,
and who are obliged to confess that you have failed, hearken to the
message: 'If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things
are passed away.' The one thing needful is keeping the commandments
of God, and the only way by which we can keep the commandments of God
is that we should be formed again into the likeness of Him of whom
alone it is true that 'He did always the things that pleased' God.

And so we come to the last of these great texts: 'In Christ Jesus,
neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith
which worketh by love.' That is to say, if we are to be made over
again, we must have faith in Christ Jesus. We have got to the root
now, so far as we are concerned. We must keep the commandments of
God; if we are to keep the commandments we must be made over again,
and if our hearts ask how can we receive that new creating power into
our lives, the answer is, by 'faith which worketh by love.'

Paul did not believe that external rites could make men partakers of
a new nature, but he believed that if a man would trust in Jesus
Christ, the life of that Christ would flow into his opened heart, and
a new spirit and nature would be born in him. And, therefore, his
triple requirements come all down to this one, so far as we are
concerned, as the beginning and the condition of the other two.
'Neither circumcision does anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith
which worketh by love,' does everything. He that trusts Christ opens
his heart to Christ, who comes with His new-creating Spirit, and
makes us willing in the day of His power to keep His commandments.

But faith leads us to obedience in yet another fashion, than this
opening of the door of the heart for the entrance of the new-creating
Spirit. It leads to it in the manner which is expressed by the words
of our text, 'worketh by love.' Faith shows itself living, because it
leads us to love, and through love it produces its effects upon
conduct.

Two things are implied in this designation of faith. If you trust
Christ you will love Him. That is plain enough. And you will not love
Him unless you trust Him. Though it lies wide of my present purpose,
let us take this lesson in passing. You cannot work yourself up into
a spasm or paroxysm of religious emotion and love by resolution or by
effort. All that you can do is to go and look at the Master and get
near Him, and that will warm you up. You can love if you trust. Your
trust will make you love; unless you trust you will never love Him.

The second thing implied is, that if you love you will obey. That is
plain enough. The keeping of the commandments will be easy where
there is love in the heart. The will will bow where there is love in
the heart. Love is the only fire that is hot enough to melt the iron
obstinacy of a creature's will. The will cannot be driven. Strike it
with violence and it stiffens; touch it gently and it yields. If you
try to put an iron collar upon the will, like the demoniac in the
Gospels, the touch of the apparent restraint drives it into fury, and
it breaks the bands asunder. Fasten it with the silken leash of love,
and a 'little child' can lead it. So faith works by love, because
whom we trust we shall love, and whom we love we shall obey.

Therefore we have got to the root now, and nothing is needful but an
operative faith, out of which will come all the blessed possession of
a transforming Spirit, and all sublimities and noblenesses of an
obedient and submissive will.

My brother! Paul and James shake hands here. There is a 'faith' so
called, which does not work. It is dead! Let me beseech you, none of
you to rely upon what you choose to call your faith in Jesus Christ,
but examine it. Does it do anything? Does it help you to be like Him?
Does it open your hearts for His Spirit to come in? Does it fill them
with love to that Master, a love which proves itself by obedience?
Plain questions, questions that any man can answer; questions that go
to the root of the whole matter. If your faith does that, it is
genuine; if it does not, it is not.

And do not trust either to forms, or to your freedom from forms. They
will not save your souls, they will not make you more Christ-like.
They will not help you to pardon, purity, holiness, blessedness. In
these respects neither if we have them are we the better, nor if we
have them not are we the worse. If you are trusting to Christ, and by
that faith are having your hearts moulded and made over again into
all holy obedience, then you have all that you need. Unless you have,
though you partook of all Christian rites, though you believed all
Christian truth, though you fought against superstitious reliance on
forms, you have not the one thing needful, for 'in Christ Jesus
neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith
which worketh by love.'




SLAVES AND FREE

