Nor is this impossible, since from the very heart of the Beatific
Vision, the Angels keep watch over us. No, there can be no rest
for me until the end of the world. But when the Angel shall have
said: 'Time is no more!' then I shall rest, then I shall be able
to rejoice, because the number of the elect will be complete."

"And what is this _little way_ that you would teach to souls?"

"IT IS THE WAY OF SPIRITUAL CHILDHOOD, THE WAY OF TRUST AND
ABSOLUTE SELF-SURRENDER.

I want to point out to them the means that I have always found so
perfectly successful, to tell them that there is but one thing to
do here below: we must offer Jesus _the flowers of little
sacrifices_ and win Him by a caress. That is how I have won Him,
and that is why I shall be made so welcome."

"Should I guide you wrongly by my _little way_ of love," she said
to a novice, "do not fear that I shall allow you to continue
therein; I should soon come back to the earth, and tell you to
take another road. If I do not return, then believe in the truth
of these my words: We can never have too much confidence in the
Good God, He is so mighty, so merciful. As we hope in Him so shall
we receive."

On the eve of the feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel, a novice said
to her: "I think that if you were to die to-morrow, after Holy
Communion, I should be quite consoled--it would be such a
beautiful death!" Therese answered quickly: "Die after Holy
Communion! Upon a great feast! Nay, not so. _In my 'little way'
everything is most ordinary; all that I do, little souls must be
able to do likewise."_

And to one of her missionary brothers she wrote: "What draws me to
my Heavenly Home is the summons of my Lord, together with the hope
that at length I shall love Him as my heart desires, and shall be
able to make Him loved by a multitude of souls who will bless Him
throughout eternity."

And in another letter to China: "I trust fully that I shall not
remain idle in Heaven; my desire is to continue my work for the
Church and for souls. I ask this of God, and I am convinced He
will hear my prayer. You see that if I quit the battle-field so
soon, it is not from a selfish desire of repose. For a long time
now, suffering has been my Heaven here upon earth, and I can
hardly conceive how I shall become acclimatised to a land where
joy is unmixed with sorrow. Jesus will certainly have to work a
complete change in my soul--else I could never support the
ecstasies of Paradise."

It was quite true, suffering had become her Heaven upon earth--she
welcomed it as we do happiness. "When I suffer much," she would
say, "when something painful or disagreeable happens to me,
instead of a melancholy look, I answer by a smile. At first I did
not always succeed, but now it has become a habit which I am glad
to have acquired."

A certain Sister entertained doubts concerning the patience of
Therese. One day, during a visit, she remarked that the invalid's
face wore an expression of unearthly joy, and she sought to know
the reason. "It is because the pain is so acute just now," Therese
replied; "I have always forced myself to love suffering and to
give it a glad welcome." "Why are you so bright this morning?"
asked Mother Agnes of Jesus. "Because of two little crosses.
Nothing gives me 'little joys' like 'little crosses.'" And another
time: "You have had many trials to-day?" "Yes, but I love them!
. . . I love all the Good God sends me!" "Your sufferings are
terrible!" "No--they are not terrible: can a little Victim of Love
find anything terrible that is sent by her Spouse? Each moment He
sends me what I am able to bear, and nothing more, and if He
increase the pain, my strength is increased as well. But I could
never ask for greater sufferings--I am too little a soul. They
would then be of my own choice. I should have to bear them all
without Him, and I have never been able to do anything when left
to myself."

Thus spoke that wise and prudent Virgin on her deathbed, and her
lamp, filled to the brim with the oil of virtue, burned brightly
to the end. If, as the Holy Spirit reminds us in the Book of
Proverbs: _"A man's doctrine is proved by his patience,"_[9] those
who have heard her may well believe in her doctrine, for she has
proved it by a patience no test could overcome.

At each visit the doctor expressed his admiration. "If only you
knew what she has to endure! I have never seen any one suffer so
intensely with such a look of supernatural joy. . . . I shall not
be able to cure her; she was not made for this earth." In view of
her extreme weakness, he ordered some strengthening remedies.
Therese was at first distressed because of their cost, but she
afterwards admitted: "I am no longer troubled at having to take
those expensive remedies, for I have read that when they were
given to St. Gertrude, she was gladdened by the thought that it
would redound to the good of our benefactors, since Our Lord
Himself has said: 'Whatever you do to the least of My little ones,
you do unto Me.'"[10] "I am convinced that medicines are powerless
to cure me," she added, "but I have made a covenant with God that
the poor missionaries who have neither time nor means to take care
of themselves may profit thereby."

She was much moved by the constant gifts of flowers made to her by
her friends outside the Convent, and again by the visits of a
sweet little redbreast that loved to play about her bed. She saw
in these things the Hand of God. "Mother, I feel deeply the many
touching proofs of God's Love for me. I am laden with them . . .
nevertheless, I continue in the deepest gloom! . . . I suffer much
. . . very much! and yet my state is one of profound peace. All my
longings have been realised . . . I am full of confidence."

Shortly afterwards she told me this touching little incident: "One
evening, during the 'Great Silence,' the Infirmarian brought me a
hot-water bottle for my feet, and put tincture of iodine on my
chest. I was in a burning fever, and parched with thirst, and,
whilst submitting to these remedies, I could not help saying to
Our Lord: 'My Jesus, Thou seest I am already burning, and they
have brought me more heat and fire. Oh! if they had brought me
even half a glass of water, what a comfort it would have been!
. . . My Jesus! Thy little child is so thirsty. But she is glad to
have this opportunity of resembling Thee more closely, and thus
helping Thee to save souls.' The Infirmarian soon left me, and I
did not expect to see her again until the following morning. What
was my surprise when she returned a few minutes later with a
refreshing drink! 'It has just struck me that you may be thirsty,'
she said, 'so I shall bring you something every evening.' I looked
at her astounded, and when I was once more alone, I melted into
tears. Oh! how good Jesus is! how tender and loving! How easy it
is to reach His Heart!"

.   .   .   .   .   .   .

On September 6, the little Spouse of Jesus received a touching
proof of the loving thought of His Sacred Heart. She had
frequently expressed a wish to possess a relic of her special
patron, the Venerable Theophane Venard, but as her desire was not
realised, she said no more. She was quite overcome, therefore,
when Mother Prioress brought her the longed-for treasure--received
that very day. She kissed it repeatedly, and would not consent to
part with it.

It may be asked why she was so devoted to this young Martyr. She
herself explained the reason in an affectionate interview with her
own sisters: "Theophane Venard is a _little_ saint; his life was
not marked by anything extraordinary. He had an ardent devotion to
Our Immaculate Mother and a tender love of his own family."
Dwelling on these words she added: "And I, too, love my family
with a tender love; I fail to understand those Saints who do not
share my feelings. As a parting gift I have copied for you some
passages from his last letters home. His soul and mine have many
points of resemblance, and his words do but re-echo my thoughts."

We give here a copy of that letter, which one might have believed
was composed by Therese herself:

"I can find nothing on earth that can make me truly happy; the
desires of my heart are too vast, and nothing of what the world
calls happiness can satisfy it. Time for me will soon be no more,
my thoughts are fixed on Eternity. My heart is full of peace, like
a tranquil lake or a cloudless sky. I do not regret this life on
earth. I thirst for the waters of Life Eternal.

"Yet a little while and my soul will have quitted this earth, will
have finished her exile, will have ended her combat. I go to
Heaven. I am about to enter the Abode of the Blessed--to see what
the eye hath never seen, to hear what the ear hath never heard, to
enjoy those things the heart of man hath not conceived . . . I
have reached the hour so coveted by us all. It is indeed true that
Our Lord chooses the little ones to confound the great ones of
this earth. I do not rely upon my own strength but upon Him Who,
on the Cross, vanquished the powers of hell.

"I am a spring flower which the Divine Master culls for His
pleasure. We are all flowers, planted on this earth, and God will
gather us in His own good time--some sooner, some later . . . I,
little flower of one day, am the first to be gathered! But we
shall meet again in Paradise, where lasting joy will be our
portion.

"Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus, using the words of the angelic
martyr--Theophane Venard."

Toward the end of September, when something was repeated to her
that had been said at recreation, concerning the responsibility of
those who have care of souls, she seemed to revive a little and
gave utterance to these beautiful words: "To him that is little,
mercy is granted.[11] It is possible to remain _little_ even in
the most responsible position, and is it not written that, at the
last day, 'the Lord will arise to save the meek and lowly ones of
the earth'?[12] He does not say 'to judge,' but 'to save!'"

As time went on, the tide of suffering rose higher and higher, and
she became so weak, that she was unable to make the slightest
movement without assistance. Even to hear anyone whisper increased
her discomfort; and the fever and oppression were so extreme that
it was with the greatest difficulty she was able to articulate a
word. And yet a sweet smile was always on her lips. Her only fear
was lest she should give her Sisters any extra trouble, and until
two days before her death she would never allow any one to remain
with her during the night. However, in spite of her entreaties,
the Infirmarian would visit her from time to time. On one occasion
she found Therese with hands joined and eyes raised to Heaven.
"What are you doing?" she asked; "you ought to try and go to
sleep." "I cannot, Sister, I am suffering too much, so I am
praying. . . ." "And what do you say to Jesus?" "I say nothing--I
only love Him!"

"Oh! how good God is!" . . . she sometimes exclaimed. "Truly He
must be very good to give me strength to bear all I have to
suffer." One day she said to the Mother Prioress: "Mother, I would
like to make known to you the state of my soul; but I cannot, I
feel too much overcome just now." In the evening Therese sent her
these lines, written in pencil with a trembling hand:

"O my God! how good Thou art to the little Victim of Thy Merciful
Love! Now, even when Thou joinest these bodily pains to those of
my soul, I cannot bring myself to say: 'The anguish of death hath
encompassed me.'[13] I rather cry out in my gratitude: 'I have
gone down into the valley of the shadow of death, but I fear no
evil, because Thou, O Lord, art with me.'"[14]

Her little Mother said to her: "Some think that you are afraid of
death." "That may easily come to pass," she answered; "I do not
rely on my own feelings, for I know how frail I am. It will be
time enough to bear that cross if it comes, meantime I wish to
rejoice in my present happiness. When the Chaplain asked me if I
was resigned to die, I answered: 'Father, I need rather to be
resigned to live--I feel nothing but joy at the thought of death.'
Do not be troubled, dear Mother, if I suffer much and show no sign
of happiness at the end. Did not Our Lord Himself die 'a Victim of
Love,' and see how great was His Agony!"

.   .   .   .   .   .   .

At last dawned the eternal day. It was Thursday, September 30,
1897. In the morning, the sweet Victim, her eyes fixed on Our
Lady's statue, spoke thus of her last night on earth: "Oh! with
what fervour I have prayed to her! . . . And yet it has been pure
agony, without a ray of consolation. . . . Earth's air is failing
me: when shall I breathe the air of Heaven?"

For weeks she had been unable to raise herself in bed, but, at
half-past two in the afternoon, she sat up and exclaimed: "Dear
Mother, the chalice is full to overflowing! I could never have
believed that it was possible to suffer so intensely. . . . I can
only explain it by my extreme desire to save souls. . . ." And a
little while after: "Yes, all that I have written about my thirst
for suffering is really true! I do not regret having surrendered
myself to Love."

She repeated these last words several times. A little later she
added: "Mother, prepare me to die well." The good Mother Prioress
encouraged her with these words: "My child, you are quite ready to
appear before God, for you have always understood the virtue of
humility." Then, in striking words, Therese bore witness to
herself:

"Yes, I feel it; my soul has ever sought the truth. . . . I have
understood humility of heart!"

.   .   .   .   .   .   .

At half-past four, her agony began--the agony of this "Victim of
Divine Love." When the Community gathered round her, she thanked
them with the sweetest smile, and then, completely given over to
love and suffering, the Crucifix clasped in her failing hands, she
entered on the final combat. The sweat of death lay heavy on her
brow . . . she trembled . . . but, as a pilot, when close to
harbour, is not dismayed by the fury of the storm, so this soul,
strong in faith, saw close at hand the beacon-lights of Heaven,
and valiantly put forth every effort to reach the shore.

As the convent bells rang the evening Angelus, she fixed an
inexpressible look upon the statue of the Immaculate Virgin, the
Star of the Sea. Was it not the moment to repeat her beautiful
prayer:

"O thou who camest to smile on me in the morn of my life, come
once again and smile, Mother, for now it is eventide!"[15]

A few minutes after seven, turning to the Prioress, the poor
little Martyr asked: "Mother, is it not the agony? . . . am I not
going to die?" "Yes, my child, it is the agony, but Jesus perhaps
wills that it be prolonged for some hours." In a sweet and
plaintive voice she replied: "Ah, very well then . . . very well
. . . I do not wish to suffer less!"

Then, looking at her crucifix:

"Oh! . . . I love Him! . . . My God, I . . . love . . . Thee!"

These were her last words. She had scarcely uttered them when, to
our great surprise, she sank down quite suddenly, her head
inclined a little to the right, in the attitude of the Virgin
Martyrs offering themselves to the sword; or rather, as a Victim
of Love, awaiting from the Divine Archer the fiery shaft, by which
she longs to die.

Suddenly she raised herself, as though called by a mysterious
voice; and opening her eyes, which shone with unutterable
happiness and peace, fixed her gaze a little above the statue of
Our Lady. Thus she remained for about the space of a _Credo,_ when
her blessed soul, now become the prey of the "Divine Eagle," was
borne away to the heights of Heaven.

.   .   .   .   .   .   .

A few days before her death, this little Saint had said: "The
death of Love which I so much desire is that of Jesus upon the
Cross." Her prayer was fully granted. Darkness enveloped her, and
her soul was steeped in anguish. And yet, may we not apply to her
also that sublime prophecy of St. John of the Cross, referring to
souls consumed by the fire of Divine Love: "They die Victims of
the onslaughts of Love, in raptured ecstasies--like the swan,
whose song grows sweeter as death draws nigh. Wherefore the
Psalmist declared: 'Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of His Saints.'[16] For then it is that the rivers of love burst
forth from the soul and are whelmed in the Ocean of Divine Love."

No sooner had her spotless soul taken its flight than the joy of
that last rapture imprinted itself on her brow, and a radiant
smile illumined her face. We placed a palm-branch in her hand; and
the lilies and roses that adorned her in death were figures of her
white robe of baptism made red by her Martyrdom of Love.

On the Saturday and Sunday a large crowd passed before the grating
of the nuns' chapel, to gaze on the mortal remains of the "Little
Flower of Jesus." Hundreds of medals and rosaries were brought to
touch the "Little Queen" as she lay in the triumphant beauty of
her last sleep.

.   .   .   .   .   .   .

On October 4, the day of the funeral, there gathered in the Chapel
of the Carmel a goodly company of Priests. The honour was surely
due to one who had prayed so earnestly for those called to that
sacred office. After a last solemn blessing, this grain of
priceless wheat was cast into the furrow by the hands of Holy
Mother Church.

Who shall tell how many ripened ears have sprung forth since, how
many the sheaves that are yet to come? "Amen, amen, I say to you,
unless the grain of wheat, falling into the ground, die, itself
remaineth alone. But if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit."[17]
Once more the word of the Divine Reaper has been magnificently
fulfilled.

THE PRIORESS OF THE CARMEL.
_____________________________

[1] Dom Gueranger.

[2] Mother Mary of Gonzaga died Dec. 17, 1904, at the age of 71.
Mother Agnes of Jesus (Pauline) was at that time Prioress. The
former--herself of the line of St. Antony of Padua--recognized in
Soeur Therese "an heroic soul, filled with holiness, and capable
of becoming one day an excellent Prioress." With this end in view,
she trained her with a strictness for which the young Saint was
most grateful. In the arms of Mother Mary of Gonzaga the "Little
Flower of Jesus" was welcomed to the Carmel, and in those arms she
died--"happy," she declared, "not to have in that hour as
Superioress her 'little Mother,' in order the better to exercise
her spirit of faith in authority." [Ed.]

[3] As will be remembered, this was Marie, her eldest sister. [Ed.]

[4] The Blessed Theophane Venard was born at St. Loup, in the
diocese of Poitiers, on the Feast of the Presentation of Our Lady,
Nov. 21, 1829. He was martyred at Kecho, Tong-King, on the Feast
of the Presentation of Our Lord, Feb. 2, 1861, at the age of 32. A
long and delightful correspondence with his family, begun in his
college days and completed from his "cage" at Kecho, reveals a
kinship of poesy as well as of sanctity and of the love of home,
between the two "spring flowers." The beauty of his soul was so
visible in his boyish face that he was spared all torture during
his two months in the "cage." In 1909, the year in which Therese
became "Servant of God" by the commencement of the Episcopal
Process, her patron received the honours of Beatification. Another
child of France--Joan, its "Martyr-Maid"--whose praises have been
sung in affectionate verse by the Saints of St. Loup and Lisieux,
was beatified that same year. [Ed.]

[5] An allusion to the obituary notice sent to each of the French
Carmels when a Carmelite nun dies in that country. In the case of
those who die in the odour of sanctity these notices sometimes run
to considerable length. Four notices issued from the Carmel of
Lisieux are of great interest to the clients of Soeur Therese, and
are in course of publication at the Orphans' Press, Rochdale;
those of the Carmel's saintly Foundress, Mother Genevieve of St.
Teresa, whose death is referred to in Chapter VIII; Mother Mary of
Gonzaga, the Prioress of Therese; Sister Mary of the Eucharist
(Marie Guerin), the cousin of Therese (Chapter III); and most
interesting of all, the long sketch, partly autobiographical, of
Mother Mary of St. Angelus (Marie Ange), the "trophy of Therese,"
brought by her intercession to the Carmel in 1902--where the
writer made her acquaintance in the following spring; she became
Prioress in 1908, dying eighteen months later in the odour of
sanctity, aged only 28. [Ed.]

[6] Cf. Job 13:15.

[7] John 3:34.

[8] When asked before her death how they should pray to her in
Heaven, Soeur Therese, with her wonted simplicity, made answer:
"You will call me 'Little Therese'--_petite Therese."_ And at
Gallipoli, on the occasion of her celebrated apparition in the
