of God and his willingness to supply every spiritual need, forgetting the
possibility of living in daily communion and fellowship with him, knowing
nothing of his joys in the salvation and repentance of lost souls, they
are seeking in their own strength, wearily and joylessly, to do the things
that they believe to be right and to obey the commands of God, but their
lives are like those of servants, not like the free, joyous, loving
experience of true sons.

Possibly the most artistic touch in the parable is its abrupt close. We do
not know whether the elder son yielded to the entreaty of his father or
not. It was an appeal to the Pharisees; would they accept the grace of God
and further his plans for the salvation of the lost, or would they
continue to criticize and envy the repentant sinner? Shall we live as
servants or as sons?



6. The Unrighteous Steward. Ch. 16:1-13


    1 And he said also unto the disciples, There was a certain rich
    man, who had a steward; and the same was accused unto him that he
    was wasting his goods. 2 And he called him, and said unto him,
    What is this that I hear of thee? render the account of thy
    stewardship; for thou canst be no longer steward. 3 And the
    steward said within himself, What shall I do, seeing that my lord
    taketh away the stewardship from me? I have not strength to dig;
    to beg I am ashamed. 4 I am resolved what to do, that, when I am
    put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.
    5 And calling to him each one of his lord's debtors, he said to
    the first, How much owest thou unto my lord? 6 And he said, A
    hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take thy bond, and
    sit down quickly and write fifty. 7 Then said he to another, And
    how much owest thou? And he said, A hundred measures of wheat. He
    saith unto him, Take thy bond, and write fourscore.


    8 And his lord commended the unrighteous steward because he had
    done wisely: for the sons of this world are for their own
    generation wiser than the sons of the light. 9 And I say unto you,
    Make to yourselves friends by means of the mammon of
    unrighteousness; that, when it shall fail, they may receive you
    into the eternal tabernacles. 10 He that is faithful in a very
    little is faithful also in much: and he that is unrighteous in a
    very little is unrighteous also in much. 11 If therefore ye have
    not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to
    your trust the true _riches_? 12 And if ye have not been faithful
    in that which is another's, who will give you that which is your
    own? 13 No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate
    the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one, and
    despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.


The parable of the Unrighteous Steward is often regarded as the most
perplexing of all the parables of our Lord. It seems to picture a man who
robbed his master and received his master's praise and was pointed to by
Jesus as an example for his followers; further, it seems to indicate that
a place in heaven can be purchased with money. A more careful reading
shows that the praise was bestowed, not for dishonesty, but for prudence
and foresight, that our Lord would have his followers imitate these good
qualities in a bad man, and further that it is possible to use wealth so
generously as to secure endless satisfaction and joy.

The story is that of a steward or a trustee who was in charge of the
property of a rich landowner. Report had reached his master of the
extravagance and dishonesty of this servant. An account was demanded and
he was certain to lose his position. However, he seized on the opportunity
which was still his so to use the wealth intrusted to him as to secure
friends who would provide a home for him when his stewardship had been
lost.

The story is intended to illustrate the stewardship of wealth. No money is
really owned by a follower of Christ; it is simply intrusted to him to be
wisely used in accordance with the will of the Master. For its use a
strict account must some day be made. It will, therefore, be the part of
wisdom and of prudence so to use that which is now intrusted that in the
eternity to come there will be no regret but only joy for the way in which
wealth was employed. In the parable the steward was guilty of fraud, as he
reduced the debts of those who owed money to his master. He was really
using for his future benefit money which was not his own. Of course the
Christian is to act with scrupulous honesty; nevertheless, as he benefits
others by his generous gifts, he really is using money which belongs to
the Lord, but of course he is using it in accordance with the will of his
Master.

In applying the parable, Jesus indicated that the right use of money,
which seeks the welfare of others, applies not only to the rich but also
to the poor, "He that is faithful in a very little is faithful also in
much."

Jesus further indicated that the stewardship which all Christians now
enjoy is a training for larger service in the life to come. "If therefore
ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to
your trust the true riches?"

The motive which inspires fidelity as stewards is that of love. The
difficulty with the dishonest servant was that he was disloyal to his
master and was really seeking to serve himself. One who really loves his
Lord will be faithful in the use of that which is intrusted to him. The
danger of stewards is that of divided allegiance. "No servant can serve
two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else
he will hold to one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and
mammon."



7. The Rich Man and Lazarus. Ch. 16:14-31


    14 And the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these
    things; and they scoffed at him. 15 And he said unto them, Ye are
    they that justify yourselves in the sight of men; but God knoweth
    your hearts: for that which is exalted among men is an abomination
    in the sight of God. 16 The law and the prophets _were_ until
    John: from that time the gospel of the kingdom of God is preached,
    and every man entereth violently into it. 17 But it is easier for
    heaven and earth to pass away, than for one tittle of the law to
    fall.


    18 Every one that putteth away his wife, and marrieth another,
    committeth adultery: and he that marrieth one that is put away
    from a husband committeth adultery.


    19 Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple
    and fine linen, faring sumptuously every day: 20 and a certain
    beggar named Lazarus was laid at his gate, full of sores, 21 and
    desiring to be fed with the _crumbs_ that fell from the rich man's
    table; yea, even the dogs came and licked his sores. 22 And it
    came to pass, that the beggar died, and that he was carried away
    by the angels into Abraham's bosom: and the rich man also died,
    and was buried. 23 And in Hades he lifted up his eyes, being in
    torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. 24
    And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
    Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool
    my tongue; for I am in anguish in this flame. 25 But Abraham said,
    Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
    things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things: but now here he is
    comforted, and thou art in anguish. 26 And besides all this,
    between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, that they that
    would pass from hence to you may not be able, and that none may
    cross over from thence to us. 27 And he said, I pray thee
    therefore, father, that thou wouldst send him to my father's
    house; 28 for I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them,
    lest they also come into this place of torment. 29 But Abraham
    saith, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them. 30
    And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one go to them from the
    dead, they will repent. 31 And he said unto him, If they hear not
    Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, if one
    rise from the dead.


The parable of the Unrighteous Steward was intended to teach the
possibility of the right use of wealth. The parable of the Rich Man and
Lazarus was designed by our Lord to warn his hearers against its abuse.
Between the two parables Luke records a number of sayings, the connection
of which cannot be determined beyond question but they seem to have been
quoted by him as an introduction to the second of these parables, vs.
14-18. They contain a rebuke of the Pharisees for their besetting sin of
avarice and a statement of the unfailing authority of the Law, the letter
of which they observed, but by the spirit of which they were condemned.

These Pharisees ridiculed our Lord for teaching the absolute necessity of
generosity and benevolence and the unselfish use of wealth. Our Lord
replied that while these enemies of his might receive the approval of men,
God read their hearts and many who received human praise were but
abominable in the sight of God. Jesus stated that while the gospel message
did differ from the Law and while many were eagerly accepting its blessed
privileges, it did not set aside the Law, but only showed how its demands
could be met. When he stated that "one tittle of the law" could not fall,
he referred to the minute projections which distinguish Hebrew letters,
and meant that the slightest requirement of the Law was sacred and
abiding. He illustrated these truths by a reference to the Seventh
Commandment, and insisted that adultery did not lose its sinful character
because of any interpretation of the Law such as was put upon it by those
who were teaching lax theories of divorce. It was still sinful, even when
justified by civil enactment. Thus Jesus was reminding the Pharisees that
the Law might abide and be sacred even when legalists who observed its
letter were condemned.

In the parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, Jesus by no means taught that
it is sinful to be rich or that the poor are all saved. He did mean to
suggest the solemn peril of the selfish use of wealth. The sin of the rich
man did not consist either in the way in which he had acquired his wealth
or in the fact that he possessed it, nor yet in any breach of moral law,
but in the plain statement that while he was living in selfish luxury one
who was in sore need lay unrelieved at his door. The rich man is commonly
called Dives, the Latin name for "a man of wealth." Lazarus is the only
person in any parable of our Lord to whom a special name is given. It is
just possible that the name was intended to indicate the character of the
man as one who trusted in the help of God. The story shows not only the
contrast between the two men in the present life, but the still greater
contrast in the life that is to come. The picture is not to be interpreted
with absurd literalness; but it does contain a serious warning, and behind
its figures of speech are solemn realities. It does indicate the remorse
and the anguish which forever may be experienced by those who upon earth
make only a selfish and heartless use of wealth and position and
opportunity. The consequences are shown to be as endless as they are
distressing. A time of reversal is to come, a time of judgment and
retribution.

It is evident that Jesus was especially warning the Pharisees; the rich
man was a representative of this class who were notorious for their
scrupulous observance of law and for their lives of selfish luxury and
indulgence. The rich man addressed Abraham as his father, and was
addressed by Abraham as his son. This is an intimation that the most
orthodox Jew might be lost and come at last to a place of torment.

As the rich man requested that a special warning be sent to his brethren,
it is possible that he was expressing his sympathy; more probably he was
making an excuse and intimating that had he been given more light he would
not have so grievously sinned. The reply is, therefore, very significant,
"If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
if one rise from the dead." It was an answer to the Pharisees for their
continual request that Jesus should give some striking sign by which they
would recognize his divine mission. Our Lord indicated that a striking
prodigy or miracle will never convince those whose hearts are not right
with God. He declared further that the Law and the Prophets plainly set
forth the divine requirement of love. One who fails to observe this
supreme law in the use of wealth and of all similar opportunities and
privileges is under condemnation and is in peril of eternal pain.



8. Warnings to the Disciples. Ch. 17:1-10


    1 And he said unto his disciples, It is impossible but that
    occasions of stumbling should come; but woe unto him, through whom
    they come! 2 It were well for him if a millstone were hanged about
    his neck, and he were thrown into the sea, rather than that he
    should cause one of these little ones to stumble. 3 Take heed to
    yourselves: if thy brother sin, rebuke him; and if he repent,
    forgive him. 4 And if he sin against thee seven times in the day,
    and seven times turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt
    forgive him.


    5 And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith. 6 And
    the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye
    would say unto this sycamine tree, Be thou rooted up, and be thou
    planted in the sea; and it would obey you. 7 But who is there of
    you, having a servant plowing or keeping sheep, that will say unto
    him, when he is come in from the field, Come straightway and sit
    down to meat; 8 and will not rather say unto him, Make ready
    wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have
    eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink? 9 Doth
    he thank the servant because he did the things that were
    commanded? 10 Even so ye also, when ye shall have done all the
    things that are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants;
    we have done that which it was our duty to do.


After the severe rebuke given by our Lord to the Pharisees in view of
their selfish abuse of wealth, Luke records four apparently disconnected
warnings given to the disciples. The first, vs. 1, 2, was against the
peril of causing others to sin. In this world of selfishness and of evil
desire, our Lord declared, it is inevitable that such offenses will be
committed, but he pronounced a solemn woe upon anyone guilty of this
grievous fault. He declared that it would be better for such a person to
be drowned in the sea rather than to allow himself to become guilty of
such a sin. The death of the body is far preferable to the death of the
soul. Therefore, Jesus warned his followers lest they might lead anyone
astray or causes anyone to stumble, particularly such as might be in years
or experience less mature than themselves. No age of the Church has been
without its tragedies in which power and influence have been selfishly
used to mislead innocent souls, and no life is beyond the possibility of
placing stumblingblocks in the paths of others or of exerting even
unconsciously influences which may cause others to sin.

In the second warning, here recorded by Luke, vs. 3, 4, Jesus guarded his
disciples against lack of charity. He intimated that his followers should
be ready always to forgive. He did not advise weakness or indifference to
sin; he suggested that a brother who offends may deserve and should
receive a rebuke. It is proper that he should be made to feel and to
appreciate his fault. Nevertheless, he is to be treated with kindness and
if he sincerely repents, he is to be forgiven freely. Even if he repeats
his sin with frequency, no revenge is to be harbored against him. Jesus
suggested that his offense might be committed "seven times in the day," by
which he meant an unlimited repetition of the fault; even then if his
repentance is sincere, forgiveness must not be denied.

The twelve apostles, probably in view of the particular responsibilities
which rested upon them, turned to their Master with the petition, "Lord,
increase our faith." The reply contains a solemn warning, that there is
need of such increase, a far greater need than the petitioners realized.
Nevertheless, there is also in the reply a gracious promise. They were
lovingly rebuked for their lack of faith, but they were reassured by a
revelation of the unlimited power of faith. Our Lord asserted that if they
possessed real faith, even so small as to be compared with one of the most
minute objects in nature, namely, "a grain of mustard seed," they would be
able by a word to accomplish incredible results, speaking figuratively, to
cause a mulberry tree to be rooted up and planted in the sea. The
followers of Christ to-day need to be reminded of these same truths,
namely, of the narrow limits to which faith is usually confined and the
unbounded possibilities which might be theirs if their trust in Christ
were more simple, more unquestioning, and more real. Vs. 5, 6.

The fourth warning here recorded rebukes the pride, the self-confidence,
the desire for praise and for reward, which too often characterize the
followers of Christ. Jesus taught that no human works, however perfect,
give a claim upon God, but are merely the fulfillment of duty. This truth
is set forth in the parable of the Unprofitable Servant. Vs. 7-10. The
word "unprofitable" does not mean worthless, but merely implies one who
has not gone beyond his obligation or duty. The picture is that of a slave
who has labored faithfully in the field and who when the day is done
merely continues in the evening to accomplish his appointed tasks. His
