meeting their insular brethren beyond the Channel and Irish Sea. All
such ancient contacts push the problem further and further back in time;
and our easiest and safest course is to state--as we may of the similar
problem of the origin of the Celtic Otherworld belief--that available
facts of comparative religion, philosophy, and myth, indicate clearly a
prehistoric epoch when there was a common ancestral stock for the
Mediterranean and pan-Celtic cultures. This may have had its beginnings
in the Danube country, or in North Europe, as many authorities in
ethnology now hold, or, as others are beginning to hold, in the lost
Atlantis--the most probable home of the dark pre-Celtic peoples of
Ireland, Isle of Man, Scotland, Britain, Southern and Western Europe,
and North Africa, who with the Aryans are the joint ancestors of the
modern Celts. Both branches of this common Celtic ancestral stock held
the re-birth doctrine. And at least from their Aryan ancestors it seems
to have been inherited by the Celts of history. To attempt a
hypothetical proof that this race or that race, Egyptian, Phoenician,
Greek, or Celtic, as the case may be, is alone the originator of this or
any other particular belief is as useless and as absurd as to attempt
proof that the Gael has no racial affinity with the Brython. One of the
greatest services now being performed by scientific inquiry into human
problems is the demonstration of the unreasonableness of assuming
artificial social barriers separating race from race, religion from
religion, and institution from institution, and the declaration that the
unity and the brotherhood of man is a fact inherent in man's own nature,
and not a sentimental ideal. But there is specialization and
differentiation everywhere in nature; and while Celtic traditions and
beliefs are not fundamentally unlike those found in every age, race, and
cultural stage, the treatment of this common stock of prehistoric lore
and mystical religion is in some respects unique, and hence Celtic.
Beyond this statement we cannot go.




SECTION III

THE CULT OF GODS, SPIRITS, FAIRIES, AND THE DEAD




CHAPTER VIII

THE TESTIMONY OF ARCHAEOLOGY[428]

     'As he spoke, he paused before a great mound grown over with trees,
     and around it silver clear in the moonlight were immense stones
     piled, the remains of an original circle, and there was a dark,
     low, narrow entrance leading therein. "This was my palace. In days
     past many a one plucked here the purple flower of magic and the
     fruit of the tree of life...." And even as he spoke, a light began
     to glow and to pervade the cave, and to obliterate the stone walls
     and the antique hieroglyphics engraven thereon, and to melt the
     earthen floor into itself like a fiery sun suddenly uprisen within
     the world, and there was everywhere a wandering ecstasy of sound:
     light and sound were one; light had a voice, and the music hung
     glittering in the air.... "I am Aengus; men call me the Young. I am
     the sunlight in the heart, the moonlight in the mind; I am the
     light at the end of every dream, the voice for ever calling to come
     away; I am desire beyond joy or tears. Come with me, come with me:
     I will make you immortal; for my palace opens into the Gardens of
     the Sun, and there are the fire-fountains which quench the heart's
     desire in rapture."'--A. E.

     Inadequacy of Pygmy Theory--According to the theories concerning
     divine images and fetishes, gods, daemons, and ancestral spirits
     haunt megaliths--Megaliths are religious and funereal, as shown
     chiefly by _Cenn Cruaich_, Stonehenge, Guernsey menhirs, monuments
     in Brittany, by the circular fairy dance as an ancient initiatory
     sun-dance, by Breton earthworks, archaeological excavations
     generally, and by present-day worship at Indian dolmens--New Grange
     and Celtic Mysteries: evidence of manuscripts; evidence of
     tradition--The Aengus Cult--New Grange compared with Great Pyramid:
     both have astronomical arrangement and same internal plan--Why they
     open to the sunrise--Initiations in both--Great Pyramid as model
     for Celtic tumuli--Gavrinis and New Grange as spirit-temples.


In this chapter we propose to deal with the popular belief among Celtic
peoples that tumuli, dolmens, menhirs, and in fact most megalithic
monuments, prehistoric or historic, are either the abodes or else the
favourite haunts of various orders of fairies--of pixies in Cornwall, of
_corrigans_ in Brittany, of little spirits like pygmies, of spirits like
mortals in stature, of goblins, of demons, and of ghosts. Interesting
attempts have been made to explain this folk-belief by means of the
Pygmy Theory of Fairies; and this folk-belief appears to be almost the
chief one upon which the theory depends.[429] As was pointed out in the
Introduction (p. xxiii), possibly one of the many threads interwoven
into the complex fabric of the Fairy-Faith round an original psychical
pattern may have been bequeathed by a folk-memory of some unknown,
perhaps pygmy, races, who may have inhabited underground places like
those in certain tumuli. But even though the Pygmy Theory were
altogether accepted by us the problem we are to consider would still be
an unsolved one; for how explain by the Pygmy Theory why the folk-memory
should always run in psychical channels, and not alone in Celtic lands,
but throughout Europe, and even in Australia, America, Africa, and
India.

Archaeological researches have now made it clear that many of the great
tumuli covering dolmens or subterranean chambers, like that of Mont St.
Michel (at Carnac) for example, were religious and funereal in their
purposes from the first; and therefore the Pygmy Theory is far from a
satisfactory or adequate explanation. To us the inquiry is similar to an
investigation into the reasons why ghosts should haunt a house, whereas
the supporters of the Pygmy Theory forget the ghosts and tell all about
the people who may or who may never have lived in the haunted house, and
who built it. The megaliths, in the plain language of the folk-belief,
are haunted by fairies, pixies, _corrigans_, ghosts, and various sorts
of invisible beings. Like the Psychical Research Society, we believe
there may be, or actually are, invisible beings like ghosts, and so
propose to conduct our investigations from that point of view.[430]


MENHIRS, DOLMENS, CROMLECHS, AND TUMULI

To begin with, we shall concern ourselves with menhirs, dolmens,
cromlechs, and certain kinds of tumuli--such as are found at Carnac,
round which _corrigans_ hold their nightly revels, and where ghost-like
forms are sometimes seen in the moonlight, or even when there is no
moon. M. Paul Sebillot in _Le Folk-lore de France_[431] has very
adequately described the numerous folk-traditions and customs connected
with all such monuments, and it remains for us to deal especially with
the psychical aspects of these traditions and customs.

The learned Canon Mahe in his _Essai sur les antiquites du departement
du Morbihan_ (p. 258), a work of rare merit, published at Vannes in
1825, holds that not only were the majestic Alignements of Carnac used
as temples for religious rites, but that the stones themselves of which
the Alignements are formed were venerated as the abodes of gods.[432]
And quoting Porphyry, Iamblichus, Proclus, Hermes, and others, he shows
that the ancients believed that gods and daemons, attracted by sacrifice
and worship to stone images and other inanimate objects, overshadowed
them or even took up their abode in them. This position of Canon Mahe is
confirmed by a comparative study of Celtic and non-Celtic traditions
respecting the theory of what has been erroneously called
'idol-worship'. All evidence goes to show that idols so called, are
simply images used as media for the manifestation of ghosts, spirits,
and gods: the ancients, like contemporary primitive races, do not seem
ever to have actually worshipped such images, but simply to have
supplicated by prayer and sacrifice the indwelling deity.[433] The
ancient Egyptians, for example, conceived the _Ka_ or personality as a
thing separable from the person or body, and hence 'the statue of a
human being represented and embodied a human _Ka_'. Likewise a statue of
a god was the dwelling-place of a divine _Ka_, attracted to it by
certain mystical formulae at the time of dedication.[434] Though there
might be many statues of the same god no two were alike; each was
animated by an independent 'double' which the rites of consecration had
elicited from the god. These statues, being thus animated by a 'double',
manifested their will--as Greek and Roman statues are reported to have
done--either by speaking, or by rhythmic movements. The divine virtue
residing in the images of the gods was thought to be a sort of fluid,
analogous to what we call the magnetic fluid, the aura, &c. It could be
transmitted by the imposition of hands and by magic passes, on the nape
of the neck or along the dorsal spine of a patient;[435] and no doubt
extraordinary curative properties were attributed to it.

Dr. Tylor has brought together examples from all parts of the globe of
so-called fetishism, which is veneration paid to natural living objects
such as trees, fish, animals, as well as to inanimate objects of almost
every conceivable description, including stones, because of the spirit
believed to be inherent or resident in the particular object; and he
shows that idols originally were fetishes, which in time came to be
shaped according to the form of the spirit or god supposed to possess
them.[436] Mr. R. R. Marett, the originator of the pre-animistic theory,
believes that originally fetishes were regarded as gods themselves, and
that gradually they came to be regarded as the dwellings of gods.[437]
Certain well-defined Celtic traditions entirely fit in with this
theory:--e. g. Canon Mahe writes, 'In accordance with this strange
theory they (the Celts) could believe that rocks, set in motion by
spirits which animated them, sometimes went to drink at rivers, as is
said of the Peulvan at Noyal-Pontivy' (Morbihan);[438] and I have found
a parallel belief at Rollright, Oxfordshire, England, where it is said
of the King Stone, an ancient menhir, and, according to some
folk-traditions, a human being transformed, that it goes down the hill
on Christmas Eve to drink at the river. In the famous menhir or
pillar-stone on Tara to this day, we have another curious example like
the moving statues in Egypt and the Celtic stones which move; for in the
_Book of Lismore_ the wonderful properties of the _Lia Fail_, the 'Stone
of Destiny', are enumerated, and it is said that ever when Ireland's
monarch stepped upon it the stone would cry out under him, but that if
any other person stepped upon it, there was only silence.[439]

In the _Tripartite Life of St. Patrick_ it is said that Ireland's chief
idol was at Mag Slecht, and by name 'Cenn Cruaich, covered with gold and
silver, and twelve other idols[440] [were] about it, covered with
brass'. When Patrick tried to place his crosier on the top of Cenn
Cruaich, the idol 'bowed westward to turn on its right side, for its
face was from the South, to wit, Tara.... And the earth swallowed the
twelve other images as far as their heads, and they are thus in sign of
the miracle, and he cursed the demon, and banished him to hell'.[441]
Sir John Rhys points out that _Cenn Cruaich_ means 'Head or Chief of
the Mound', and that the story of its inclined position suggests to us
an ancient and gradually falling menhir planted on the summit of a
tumulus or hill surrounded by twelve lesser pillar stones, all
thirteen--itself a sacred number--regarded as the abodes of gods or else
as gods themselves; and these gods are referred to as the demon
exorcized from the place by Patrick. The central menhir or Cenn Cruaich
probably represents the Solar God, and the twelve menhirs surrounding
this probably represent the twelve months of the year.[442] In the
_Colloquy_ it is said that Patrick went his way 'to sow faith and piety,
to banish devils and wizards out of Ireland; to raise up saints and
righteous, to erect crosses, station-stones, and altars; also to
overthrow idols and goblin images, and the whole art of sorcery'.[443]
Welsh tradition says that St. David split the capstone of the Maen Ketti
Cromlech (dolmen)[444] in Gower, in order to prove to the people that
there was nothing divine in it.[445]

According to Geoffrey of Monmouth, Merlin constructed Stonehenge by
magically transporting from Ireland the 'Choir of the Giants',
apparently an ancient Irish circle of stones.[446] The rational
explanation of this myth seems to be that the stones of Stonehenge, not
belonging to the native rocks of South England, as geologists well know,
were probably transported from some distant part of Britain and set up
on Salisbury Plain, because of some magical properties supposed to have
been possessed by them; and most likely 'the stones were regarded as
divine or as seats of divine power'.[447] And further (thereby admitting
the sacred purpose of the group), Sir John Rhys sees no objection to
identifying Stonehenge with the famous temple of Apollo in the island of
the Hyperboreans, referred to in the journal of Pytheas' travels.[448]
According to Sir John Rhys's interpretation of this journal, 'the
kings of the city containing the temple and the overseers of the latter
were the Boreads, who took up the government in succession, according to
their tribes. The citizens gave themselves up to music, harping and
chanting in honour of the Sun-god, who was every nineteenth year wont
himself to appear about the time of the vernal equinox, and to go on
harping and dancing in the sky until the rising of the Pleiades.'[448]

Two menhirs, roughly hewn to simulate the human form, are yet to be
found in Guernsey, Channel Islands, and formerly there was a similar
menhir in the Breton village of Baud, Morbihan. One of the Guernsey
figures was dug up in 1878 under the chancel of the Catel Church, and
then placed in the churchyard, so that in this instance it seems highly
probable that the Christian Church was built on the site of a sacred
pagan shrine where a cult of stones once existed. The second stone
figure (a female), now standing as a gate-post in the churchyard of St.
Martin's parish, seems also to mark a spot where a pre-Christian
sanctuary was christianized. The country-people of the district, up to
the middle of the last century, considered it lucky to make floral and
even food offerings to this stone; but in 1860 the churchwarden to
destroy its sanctity had it broken in two, though now it has been
restored.[449] A like stone image was the famous 'Venus de Quinipilly',
near Baud, Morbihan. At its base was a stone trough, wherein until late
into the seventeenth century the sick were cured by contact with the
image, and young men and maidens were wont to bathe to secure love and
long life.[449]

Canon Mahe recorded in 1825 that the folk-belief located ghosts and
spirits of the dead round megalithic monuments, more especially those
known to have been used for tombs, because the Celts thought them
haunted by ancestral spirits;[450] and what was true in 1825 is true
now, for there is still in Brittany the association of ancestral
spirits, _corrigans_, and other spirit-like tribes with tumuli, dolmens,
menhirs, and cromlechs, and, as we have shown in chapter ii, a very
living faith in the _Legende de la Mort_. In describing some curious
dolmens and cromlechs (stone circles) on the summit of a mountain called
the _Clech_ or _Mane er kloch_, 'Mountain of the bell,' at Mendon,
Arrondissement de Lorient, Morbihan, the same author gives it as his
opinion, based on folk-traditions, that the cromlechs, like others in
Brittany, were places in which the ancient Bretons practised necromancy
and invoked the spirits of their ancestors, to whom they attributed
great power. He then records a very valuable and interesting tradition
concerning these monuments, which seems to indicate clearly a close
relationship between the _Poulpiquets_ (another name for _corrigans_),
thought of as spirits by the peasants, and the magical rites conducted
in the circles to invoke spirits or daemons:--'The people call the
stones which are found there the rocks of the _Hosegueannets_ or
_Guerrionets_ (who are the same as the _Poulpiquets_); and they declare
that at fixed seasons they are in the habit of coming there to celebrate
their mysteries, which would prove that the race of these dwarfs is not
yet extinct, as I believed.'[451]

When we hear how _corrigans_ dance the national Breton _ronde_ or
_ridee_, at or in such cromlechs (themselves, like the dance, circular
in form), which with other ancient stone monuments and earthworks are
still believed to be the favourite haunts of these and kindred
spirit-tribes, we seem to see, in the light of what Canon Mahe records,
a psychical folk-memory about a goblin race who are now thought of as
frequenting the very places where anciently such spirits are said to
have been invoked by pagan priests for the purposes of divination.
Further, it appears that at these sacred centres, as the quoted
tradition indicates, in prehistoric times Brythonic initiations took
place, like those still flourishing among a few surviving American
Indian tribes (who also dance the circular initiation dance), and among
other primitive peoples, as we shall more adequately show in the chapter
on St. Patrick's Purgatory. The Breton dance is, therefore, most likely
the memorial of an ancient initiation dance, religious in character,
and, probably, in honour of the sun, being circular in the same way that
cromlechs dedicated to a sun-cult are circular. Stonehenge, the most
highly developed type of the cromlech, was undoubtedly a sun-temple; and
the dance anciently held in it, as described by Pytheas, in honour of
the god Apollo, was no doubt circular like the Breton national dance,
and, presumably, initiatory.[452] Through a natural anthropomorphic
process, this circular initiation dance has come to be attributed to
_corrigans_ in Brittany, to pixies in Cornwall and in England, and to
fairies in these and other Celtic countries. The idea of fairy tribes in
such a special relation may result from a folk-memory of the actual
initiators who, as masked men, represented spirits; and, if this be a
plausible view, then fairies may be compared to the initiators of
contemporary initiation ceremonies among primitive peoples and,
following Dr. Gilbert Murray's theory, to the Greek satyrs also.[453]

A circular dance like the Breton one still survives among the peasantry
in the Channel Islands, at least in Guernsey, Alderney, and Sark, being
celebrated at weddings, but the revolution is now around a person
instead of a stone, and to this person obeisance is paid. This tends to
confirm our opinion that the dance is the survival of an ancient
sun-dance, the central figure being typical of the sun deity himself, or
Apollo; and if we design this dance thus [Symbol: sun], we have the
astronomical emblem still used in all our calendars to represent the
sun, one which in itself preserves a vast mass of forgotten lore.
Formerly in Guernsey, the sites of principal dolmens (or cromlechs) and
pillar-stones were visited in sacred procession, and round certain of
them the whole body of pilgrims 'solemnly revolved three times from east
to west'--as the sun moves.[454]

Again, according to Canon Mahe,[455] the bases and lower parts of the
sides of four singular barrows at Coet-bihan blend in such a way as to
form an enclosed court, and one of the barrows has been pierced as
though for a passage-way into this court. And he holds that it is more
than probable that these ancient earthworks when first they were raised,
and others like them in various Celtic lands, witnessed many mystic and
religious rites and sacred tribal assemblies. The supposition that the
Coet-bihan earthworks were originally dedicated to pagan religious
usages is very much strengthened by the fact that in very early times a
Christian chapel was erected near them.[456] Mont St. Michel at Carnac
is another example of a pagan tumulus dedicated to a Christian saint;
and, as Sir John Rhys says, the Archangel Michael appears in more
places than one in Celtic lands as the supplanter of the dark
powers.[457] Not only were tumuli thus transferred by re-dedication from
pagan gods to Christian saints, but dolmens and menhirs as well. Thus,
for example, at Plouharnel-Carnac (Morbihan) there is a menhir
surmounted by a Christian cross, just as at Dol (Ille-et-Vilaine) a
wooden crucifix surmounts the great menhir, and at Carnac there is a
dolmen likewise christianized by a stone cross-mounted on the
table-stone. Again, M. J. Dechelette in his _Manuel d'Archeologie
Prehistorique, Celtique et Gallo-Romaine_ (p. 380) describes a dolmen at
Plouaret (Cotes-du-Nord) converted into a chapel dedicated to the Seven
Saints, and another dolmen at Saint-Germain-de-Confolens (Charente)
likewise transformed into a place of worship. Miss Edith F. Carey thus
explains the dolmens in the Channel Islands:--'All our old traditions
prove our dolmens to have been the general rendezvous of our insular
sorcerers. In sixteenth and seventeenth century manuscripts I have found
these dolmens described as "altars of the gods of the sea".... One of
our ancient dolmens retains its ancient name of De Hus, and a
fifteenth-century "Perchage" of Fief de Leree tells us that a now
destroyed dolmen on our western coast was dedicated to the same god, for
Heus or Hesus was the War-God of ancient Gaul.'[458] The same writer
describes excavations made at De Hus by Mr. Lukis, and that he found in
a side chamber there two kneeling skeletons, one facing the north, the
other the south. He considered them to have been of young persons
probably interred alive as a funeral or propitiatory sacrifice to some
tribal chief, or else to a presiding deity of the dolmen. Beside a tomb
of the early bronze age at the bottom of a large tumulus near
Mammarloef, in Skane, Dr. Oscar Montelius, the famous archaeologist of
Sweden, discovered a circular stone altar on which reposed charcoal and
the remains of a burnt animal offering, which undoubtedly was made to
the dead.[459] Schliemann made a parallel discovery in an ancient tomb
at Mycenae, Greece.[460] Curiously, in India to-day the Dravidian
tribes, a pygmy-like aboriginal race, worship at the ancient dolmens in
their forests and mountains, whether as at tombs and hence to ancestral
spirits or to gods is not always clear; but the latter form of worship
is probably more common, since Mr. Walhouse once observed one of their
medicine-men performing a propitiatory service to the agricultural or
earth deities. The medicine-man passed the night in solitude sitting 'on
the capstone of a dolmen with heels and hams drawn together and chin on
knee'--evidently thus to await the advent of the Sun-god.[461]

All the above illustrations, mostly Celtic ones, tend to prove that
menhirs, certain tumuli and earthworks, cromlechs, and dolmens were
originally connected with religious usages, chiefly with a cult of gods
and fairy-like beings, and, though less commonly, with the dead. We pass
now to a special consideration of chambered tumuli, to show that the
same apparently holds true of them.


NEW GRANGE AND CELTIC MYSTERIES

Though, as Professor J. Loth and other eminent archaeologists hold, all
tumuli containing chambers, and all _allees couvertes_ of dolmens,
should be considered as designedly funereal in their purposes,
nevertheless certain of the greater ones, like New Grange and Gavrinis
may also properly be considered as places for rendering worship or even
sacrifice to the dead, and, perhaps, as places for religious pilgrimages
and sacred rites. This, too, seems to be the opinion of M. J. Dechelette
in his work on Celtic and Gallo-Roman archaeology, as he traces from the
earliest prehistoric times in Europe the evolution of the cult of the
dead according to the evidence furnished by the ancient megalithic
monuments.[462]

To begin with, let us take as a type for our study the most famous of
all so-called Celtic tumuli, that of New Grange, on the River Boyne in
Ireland.[463] In Irish literature New Grange is constantly associated
with the Tuatha De Danann as one of their palaces, as our fourth chapter
points out. Throughout our second section generally, the testimony
indicates that the essential nature of these fairy-folk is subjective or
spiritual. These two facts at the outset are very important and
fundamental, because we expect to show even more clearly than we have
just done in the case of menhirs, dolmens, cromlechs, and smaller
tumuli, that the folk-belief under consideration is at bottom a
psychical one, which has grown up out of a folk-memory of the time when,
as has just been said, Celtic or pre-Celtic tumuli were used for
interments, and probably certain ones among them as places for the
celebration of pagan mysteries.

Mr. George Coffey, the eminent archaeologist in charge of the
archaeological collections of the Royal Irish Academy, quotes from
ancient Irish records in the _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_ and other manuscripts
to show that the early traditions refer to the Boyne country as the
burial-place of the kings of Tara, and that sometimes they seem to
associate _Brugh-na-Boyne_ with the tumuli on the Boyne,[464] but, no
exact identification being possible, it cannot be said with certainty
whether any one of the three great Boyne tumuli is meant. Even though it
could be shown conclusively that some mighty hero or king had actually
been entombed in New Grange, as is likely, in the earth behind the
chamber, under the chamber's floor, or even within the chamber, still,
as we have already pointed out, most of the great Irish heroes and kings
were in popular belief literally gods incarnate, and, therefore (as
commonly among all ancient peoples, civilized and non-civilized, who
held the same doctrine), the tomb of such a divine personage came to be
regarded as the actual dwelling of the once incarnate god, even though
his bones were long turned to dust. The _Book of Ballymote_ strengthens
this suggestion: in one of its ancient Irish poems, by MacNia, son of
Oenna, preceded by this mystical dedication, 'Ye Poets of Bregia, of
truth, not false,' the wonders of the Palace of the Boyne, the Hall of
the great god Daghda, supreme king and oracle of the Tuatha de Danann,
are thus celebrated:--

  Behold the _Sidh_ before your eyes,
  It is manifest to you that it is a king's mansion,
  Which was built by the firm Daghda;
  It was a wonder, a court, an admirable hill.[465]

It seems clear enough, from the old Irish manuscripts referred to by Mr.
Coffey,[466] that the Boyne country near Tara was the sacred and
religious centre of ancient Ireland, and was used by the Irish in very
much the same way as Memphis and other places on the sacred Nile were
used by the ancient Egyptians, both as a royal cemetery and as a place
for the celebration of pagan mysteries. It is known that most of the
Mysteries of Antiquity were psychic in their nature, having to do with
the neophyte's entrance into Hades or the invisible world while out of
the physical body, or else with direct communication with gods, spirits,
and shades of the dead, while in the physical body; and such mysteries
were performed in darkened chambers from which all light was excluded.
These chambers were often carved out of solid rock, as can be seen in
the Rock Temples of India; and when mountain caves or natural caverns
were not available, artificial ones were used (see chapter x).

The places, like Tara and Memphis, where the great men and kings of the
nations of antiquity were entombed, being the most sacred, were very
often, on that account, also the places dedicated to the most
magnificent temples and to the Mysteries, or among less advanced nations
to the worship of the dead. On every side of sacred Stonehenge,
Salisbury Plain is dotted with the burial mounds of unknown heroes and
chieftains of ancient Britain; while in modern times, even though the
Mysteries are long forgotten, Westminster Abbey, at the centre of the
planet's capital, has, in turn, become the hallowed Hall of the Mighty
Dead for the vast British Empire. In view of all these facts, after a
careful examination of the famous New Grange tumulus itself, and a study
of the references to it in old Irish literature, we are firmly of the
opinion that one cannot be far wrong in describing it as a spirit-temple
in which were celebrated ancient Celtic or pre-Celtic Mysteries at the
time when neophytes, including those of royal blood, were initiated; and
as such it is directly related to a cult of the Tuatha De Danann or
Fairy-Folk, of spirits, and of the dead. Nor are we alone in this
opinion. Mr. Coffey himself, we believe, is inclined to favour it; and
Mr. W. C. Borlase, author of _The Dolmens of Ireland_, who is quite
committed to it, says that it is not necessary, as some do, to consider
New Grange as an ancient abode of mortal men, for 'the spirits of the
dead, the fairies, the _Sidhe_, might have had their _brugh_, or
palace, as well'.[467] And he points out that in the old Irish
manuscripts we have proof that it was supposed to be thus used. This
proof is found in the _Agallamh na Senorach_ or 'Colloquy with the
Ancients' by St. Patrick, from the _Book of Lismore_, a
fifteenth-century manuscript copied from older manuscripts and now
translated by Standish H. O'Grady:--The three sons of the King of
Ireland, by name Ruidhe, Fiacha, and Eochaid, leaving their nurse's and
guardian's house, went to _fert na ndruadh_, i. e. 'grave of the
wizards', north-west of Tara, to ask of their father a country, a
domain; but he refused their request, and then they formed a project to
gain lands and riches by fasting on the _tuatha de Danann_ at the
_brugh_ upon the Boyne: '"Lands therefore I will not bestow on you, but
win lands for yourself." Thereupon they with the ready rising of one man
rose and took their way to the green of the _brugh_ upon the Boyne
where, none other being in their company, they sat them down. Ruidhe
said: "What is your plan to-night?" His brothers rejoined: "Our project
is to fast on the _tuatha de Danann_, aiming thus to win from them good
fortune in the shape of a country, of a domain, of lands, and to have
vast riches." Nor had they been long there when they marked a
cheery-looking young man of a pacific demeanour that came towards them.
He salutes the king of Ireland's sons; they answer him after the same
manner. "Young man, whence art thou? whence comest thou?" "Out of yonder
_brugh_ chequered with the many lights hard by you here." "What name
wearest thou?" "I am the Daghda's son Bodhb Derg; and to the _tuatha de
Danann_ it was revealed that ye would come to fast here to-night, for
lands and for great fortune."' Then with Bodhb Derg, the three sons of
Ireland's king entered into the _brugh_, and the _tuatha de Danann_ went
into council, and Midhir Yellow-mane son of the Daghda who presided
said: 'Those yonder accommodate now with three wives, since from wives
it is that either fortune or misfortune is derived.' And from their
marriages with the three daughters of Midhir they derived all their
wishes--territories and wealth in the greatest abundance. 'For three
days with their nights they abode in the _sidh_.' 'Angus told them to
carry away out of _fidh omna_, i. e. "Oakwood," three apple-trees: one in
full bloom, another shedding the blossom, and another covered with ripe
fruit. Then they repaired to the _dun_, where they abode for three times
fifty years, and until those kings disappeared; for in virtue of
marriage alliance they returned again to the _tuatha de Danann_, and
from that time forth have remained there.'[468]

Mr. Borlase, commenting on this passage, suggests its importance in
proving to us that during the Middle Ages there existed a tradition,
thus committed to writing from older manuscripts or from oral sources,
regarding 'the nature of the rites performed in pagan times at those
places, which were held sacred to the heathen mysteries'.[469] The
passage evidently describes a cult of royal or famous ancestral spirits
identified with the god-race of Tuatha De Danann, who, as we know, being
reborn as mortals, ruled Ireland. These ancestral spirits were to be
approached by a pilgrimage made to their abode, the spirit-haunted
tumulus, and a residence in it of three days and three nights during
which period there was to be an unbroken fast. Sacrifices were doubtless
offered to the gods, or spirit-ancestors; and while they were 'fasted
upon', they were expected to appear and grant the pilgrim's prayer and
to speak with him. All this indicates that the existence of invisible
beings was taken for granted, probably through the knowledge gained by
initiation.

The _Echtra Nerai_ or the 'Adventures of Nera' (see this study, p. 287),
contains a description like the one above, of how a mortal named Nera
went into the _Sidhe_-palace at Cruachan; and it is said that he went
not only into the cave (_uamh_) but into the _sid_ of the cave. The term
_uamh_ or cave, according to Mr. Borlase, indicates the whole of the
interior vaulted chamber, while the _sid_ of that vaulted chamber or
_uamh_ is intended to refer to 'the _sanctum sanctorum_, or
_penetralia_ of the spirit-temple, upon entering into which the mortal
came face to face with the royal occupants, and there doubtless he lay
fasting, or offering his sacrifices, at the periods prescribed'.[470]
The word _brugh_ refers simply to the appearance of a tumulus, or
souterrain beneath a fort or rath, and means, therefore, mansion or
dwelling-place.[471] And Mr. Borlase adds:--'I feel but little doubt
that in the inner chamber at New Grange, with its three recesses and its
basin, we have this _sid of the cave_, and the place where the pilgrims
fasted--a situation and a practice precisely similar to those which,
under Christian auspices, were continued at such places as the Leaba
Mologa in Cork, the original Patrick's Purgatory in Lough Derg, and
elsewhere. The practice of lying in stone troughs was a feature of the
Christian pilgrimages in Ireland. Sometimes such troughs had served the
previous purpose of stone coffins. It is just possible that the shallow
basins in the cells at Lough Crew, New Grange, and Dowth may, like the
stone beds or troughs of the saints,[472] have been occupied by the
pilgrims engaged in their devotions. If so, however, they must have sat
in them in Eastern fashion.'[471]

Again, in the popular tale called _The Pursuit of Diarmuid and
Grainne_,[473] Aengus, the son of the Dagda, one of the Tuatha De
Danann, is called Aengus-an-Bhrogha, and connected with the
_Brugh-na-Boinne_. In the tale Finn says, 'Let us leave this tulach, for
fear that Aengus-an-Bhrogha and the Tuatha-De-Danann might catch us; and
though we have no part in the slaying of Diarmuid, he would none the
more readily believe us.' Aengus is evidently an invisible being with
great power over mortals. This is clear in what follows: he transports
Diarmuid's body to the _Brugh-na-Boinne_, saying, 'Since I cannot
restore him to life, I will send a soul into him, so that he may talk to
me each day.' Thus, as the presiding deity of the _brugh_, Aengus the
Tuatha De Danann could reanimate dead bodies 'and cause them to speak
to devotees, we may suppose oracularly.'[474] In the _Bruighion
Chaorthainn_ or 'Fort of the Rowan Tree', a Fenian tale, a poet put Finn
under taboo to understand these verses:--

  I saw a house in the country
  Out of which no hostages are given to a king,
  Fire burns it not, harrying spoils it not.

And Finn made reply:--'I understand that verse, for that is the Brugh of
the Boyne that you have seen (perhaps, as we suggest, during an
initiation), namely, the house of Aengus Og of the Brugh, and it cannot
be burned or harried as long as Aengus (a god) shall live.' As Mr.
Borlase observes, to say that 'no hostages are given to a king' out of
the _Brugh_ is probably another way of saying that the dead pay no
taxes, or that being a holy place, the _Brugh_ was exempt.[475] This
last evidence is from oral tradition, and rather late in being placed on
record; but it is not on that account less trustworthy, and may be much
more so than the older manuscripts. Until quite modern times the
folk-lore of the Boyne country still echoed similar traditions about
unknown mystic rites, following what O'Donovan has recorded; for he has
said that Aenghus-an-Bhrogha was considered the presiding fairy of the
Boyne till quite within recent times, and that his name was still
familiar to the old inhabitants of Meath who were then fast forgetting
their traditions with the Irish language.[476] And this tradition brings
us to consider what was apparently an Aengus Cult among the ancient
Celtic peoples.


THE AENGUS CULT

Euhemeristic tradition came to represent the Great God Dagda and his
sons as buried in a tumulus, probably New Grange, and then called it, as
I found it called to-day, a fairy mound, a name given also to Gavrinis,
its Breton parallel. The older and clearer tradition relates how Aengus
gained possession of the _Brugh_ of the Boyne, and says nothing about
it as a cemetery, but rather describes it as 'an admirable place, more
accurately speaking, as an admirable land, a term which betrays the
usual identification of the fairy mound with the nether world to which
it formed the entrance'.[477] The myth placing Dagda at the head of the
departed makes him 'a Goidelic Cronus ruling over an Elysium with which
a sepulchral mound was associated'.[477] The displacement of Dagda by
his son makes 'Mac Oc (Aengus), who should have been the youthful Zeus
of the Goidelic world, rejoicing in the translucent expanse of the
heavens as his crystal bower', a king of the dead.[477]

In Dun Aengus, the strange cyclopean circular structure, and hence most
likely sun-temple, on Aranmore, we have another example of the
localization of the Aengus myth. This fact leads us to believe, after
due archaeological examination, that amid the stronghold of Dun Aengus,
with its tiers of amphitheatre-like seats and the native rock at its
centre, apparently squared to form a platform or stage, were anciently
celebrated pagan mysteries comparable to those of the Greeks and less
cultured peoples, and initiations into an Aengus Cult such as seems to
have once flourished at New Grange. At Dun Aengus, however, the mystic
assemblies and rites, conducted in such a sun-temple, so secure and so
strongly fortified against intrusion, no doubt represented a somewhat
different mystical school, and probably one very much older than at New
Grange. In the same manner, each of the other circular but less
important cyclopean structures on Aranmore and elsewhere in west Ireland
may have been structures for closely related sun-cults. To our mind, and
we have carefully and at leisure examined most of these cyclopean
structures on Aranmore, it seems altogether fanciful to consider them as
having been _originally_ and _primarily_ intended as places of
refuge--_duns_ or forts. Yet, because the ancient Celts never separated
civil and religious functions, such probable sun-temples could have been
as frequently used for non-religious tribal assemblies as for
initiation ceremonies; and nothing makes it impossible for them to have
been in times of need also places for refuge against enemies. We are led
to this view with respect to Dun Aengus in particular, because the
Aengus of Aranmore is known as Aengus, son of Umor, and is associated
with the mystic people called the Fir Bolg; and, yet, as Sir John
Rhys thinks, this Aengus, son of Umor, and Aengus, son of Dagda, are
two aspects of a single god, a Celtic Zeus.[478] O'Curry's statements
about Dun Aengus seem to confirm all this; and there seems to have been
a tale, now lost, about the 'Destruction of _Dun Oengusa_' (in modern
Irish _Dun Aonghuis_), the Fortress of Aengus.[478]

This sun-cult, represented in Ireland by the Aengus Cult, can be traced
further: Sir John Rhys regards Stonehenge--a sun-temple also circular
like the Irish _duns_ and Breton cromlechs--as a temple to the Celtic
Zeus, in Irish mythology typified by Aengus, and in Welsh by
Merlin:--'What sort of a temple could have been more appropriate for the
primary god of light and of the luminous heavens than a spacious,
open-air enclosure of a circular form like Stonehenge?'[479] In Welsh
myth, Math ab Mathonwy, called also 'Math the Ancient', was the greatest
magician of ancient Wales, and his relation as teacher to Gwydion ab
Don, the great Welsh Culture Hero, leads Sir John Rhys to consider
him the Brythonic Zeus, though Merlin shares with him in this
distinction;[480] and since the Gaelic counterpart of Math is Aengus, a
close study of Math might finally show a cult in his honour in Wales as
we have found in Ireland an Aengus Cult.[481] We may, therefore, with
more or less exactness, equate the Aengus Cult as we see it in Irish
myth connected chiefly with Dun Aengus and New Grange, with the unknown
cult practised at Stonehenge, and this in turn with other Brythonic or
pre-Brythonic sun-cults and initiations practised at Carnac, the great
Celtic Jerusalem in Brittany, and at Gavrinis. All this will be more
clearly seen after we have set forth what seems a definite and most
striking parallel to New Grange, both as a monument erected by man and,
as we maintain, as a place for religious mysteries--the greatest
structure ever raised by human effort, the Great Pyramid.


NEW GRANGE AND THE GREAT PYRAMID COMPARED

Caliph Al Mamoun in A. D. 820, by a forced passage, was the first in
modern times to enter the Great Pyramid, and he found nowhere a mummy or
any indications that the structure had ever been used as a tomb for the
dead. The King's Chamber, so named by us moderns, proved to be a keen
disappointment for its first violator, for in it there was neither gold
nor silver nor anything at all worth carrying away. The magnificent
chamber contained nothing save an empty stone chest without a lid.
Archaeologists in Egypt and archaeologists in Ireland face the same
unsolved problem, namely, the purpose of the empty stone chest without
inscriptions and quite unlike a mummy tomb, and of the stone basin in
New Grange.[482] Certain Egyptologists have supposed that some royal
personage must have been buried in the curious granite coffer, though
there can be only their supposition to support them, for they have
absolutely no proof that such is true, while there is strong
circumstantial evidence to show that such is not true. Sir Gardner
Wilkinson in his well-known publications has already suggested that the
stone chest as well as the Great Pyramid itself were never intended to
hold a corpse; and it is generally admitted by Egyptologists that no
sarcophagus intended for a mummy has ever been found so high up in the
body of a pyramid as this empty stone chest, except in the Second
Pyramid. Incontestable evidence in support of the highly probable theory
that the Great Pyramid was not intended for an actual tomb can be drawn
from two important facts:--(1) 'the coffer has certain remarkable cubic
proportions which show a care and design beyond what could be expected
in any burial-coffer'--according to the high authority of Dr. Flinders
Petrie; (2) the chamber containing the coffer and the upper passage-ways
have ventilating channels not known in any other Pyramid, so that
apparently there must have been need of frequent entrance into the
chamber by living men, as would be the case if used, as we hold, for
initiation ceremonies.[483]

It is well known that very many of the megalithic monuments of the New
Grange type scattered over Europe, especially from the Carnac centre of
Brittany to the Tara-Boyne centre of Ireland, have one thing in common,
an astronomical arrangement like the Great Pyramid, and an entrance
facing one of the points of the solstices, usually either the winter
solstice, which is common, or the summer solstice.[484] The puzzle has
always been to discover the exact arrangement of the Great Pyramid by
locating its main entrance. A Californian, Mr. Louis P. McCarty, in his
recent (1907) work entitled _The Great Pyramid Jeezeh_, suggests with
the most logical and reasonable arguments that the builders of the
Pyramid have placed its main entrance in an undiscovered passage-way
beneath the Great Sphinx, now half-buried in the shifting desert sands.
If it can be shown that the Sphinx is the real portal, and many things
tend to indicate that it is, the Great Pyramid is built on the same
plan as New Grange, that is to say, it opens to the south-east, and like
New Grange contains a narrow passage-way leading to a central chamber.
South-easterly from the centre of the Pyramid lies the Sphinx, 5,380
feet away, a distance equal to 'just five times the distance of the
"diagonal socket length" of the Great Pyramid from the centre of the
Subterranean Chamber, under the Pyramid, to the supposed entrance under
the Sphinx'[485]--a distance quite in keeping with the mighty
proportions of the wonderful structure. And what is important, several
eminent archaeologists have worked out the same conclusion, and have
been seeking to connect the two monuments by making excavations in the
Queen's Chamber, where it is supposed there exists a tunnel to the
Sphinx. In all this we should bear in mind that the present entrance to
the Pyramid is the forced one made by the treasure-seeking Caliph.

This very probable astronomical parallelism between the great Egyptian
monument and the Irish one would establish their common religious, or,
in a mystic sense, their funereal significance. In the preceding chapter
we have set forth what symbolical relation the sun, its rising and
setting, and its death at the winter equinox, were anciently supposed to
hold to the doctrines of human death and re-birth. Jubainville,
regarding the sun among the Celts in its symbolical relation to death,
wrote, 'In Celtic belief, the dead go to live beyond the Ocean, to the
south-west, there where the sun sets during the greater part of the
year.'[486] This, too, as M. Maspero shows, was an Egyptian belief;[487]
while, as equally among the Celts, the east, especially the south-east,
where, after the winter solstice, the sun seems to be re-born or to rise
out of the underworld of Hades into which it goes when it dies, is
symbolical of the reverse--Life, Resurrection, and Re-birth. In this
last Celtic-Egyptian belief, we maintain, may be found the reason why
the chief megalithic monuments (dolmens, tumuli, and alignements), in
Celtic countries and elsewhere, have their directions east and west, and
why those like New Grange and Gavrinis open to the sunrise.

Greek temples also opened to the sunrise, and on the divine image within
fell the first rays of the beautiful god Apollo.[488] In the great
Peruvian sun-temple at Cuzco, a splendid disk of pure gold faced the
east, and, reflecting the first rays of the rising sun, illuminated the
whole sanctuary.[489] The cave-temple of the Florida Red Men opened
eastward, and within its entrance on festival days stood the priest at
dawn watching for the first ray of the sun, as a sign to begin the chant
and offering.[490] The East Indian performs the ablution at dawn in the
sacred Ganges, and stands facing the east meditating, as Brahma appears
in all the wondrous glory of a tropical sunrise.[491] And in the same
Aryan land there is an opposite worship: the dreaded Thugs, worshippers
of devils and of Kali the death-goddess, in their most diabolical rites
face the west and the sunset, symbols of death.[492] How Christianity
