confidence as to his power to protect them. It was to vindicate himself,
and to confound that arrogant pretender, that Jehovah vouchsafed these
demonstrations in the view of the Hebrews, who needed the lesson which
they taught, and in a way to be rehearsed and known among the Canaanites
and other nations of the earth. It was a marked and memorable scene in
the progress of that great antagonism which hitherto has constituted the
basis, and, however obscured to the blinded view of the actors, or
concealed by their craft and policy, has furnished the elements of
history, and is yet in the view of the whole universe, with all the
accompaniments of publicity and conclusiveness, to have its issue.

It would require a chapter to refer to all the descriptions and
allusions commemorative of this scene, in the triumphant song of Moses,
recalled and sung, Rev. xv. 3, by the redeemed, in celebration of their
resembling deliverance, to the praise of the Lamb as their Redeemer,
whom they address as the Lord God Almighty--Jehovah, the Elohim; and in
the Psalms, cxxxv., cxxxvi., and other Scriptures, where to Jehovah are
referred the wonders done in Egypt and in the wilderness, which by Moses
are ascribed to him as Melach Jehovah.

But, waiving these references, it may be noticed as an additional
evidence that it was the Delegated One, the Personal Word, who, after
appearing visibly to Moses, and investing him with his ministerial
office, executed those wondrous demonstrations in Egypt, that, prior to
the signal exercise of his power and justice by which he destroyed all
the first-born of the opposing party, he instituted for the benefit and
as auxiliary to the faith of his people, the ordinance of the passover;
of which, the slaughter of the paschal lamb, the sprinkling of the blood
as the means of exemption from death, and other details, had a
counterpart in the circumstances, reference, import, and Scripture
narrative of his sacrifice of himself, Christ our Passover sacrificed
for us; the Lamb of God, slain virtually and in effect, as by covenant
and oath, from the foundation of the world.




CHAPTER XIX.

    Further Illustration of the Antagonism--Idolatry a Counterfeit
    Rival System in opposition to the Messiah and the True
    Worship--Its Origin and Nature--Satan the God of it--The Tower
    of Babel devoted to his Worship--That Worship extended thence
    over the Earth at the Dispersion.


The illustration of this mighty and ceaseless conflict requires
particular reference to the system of idolatry by which, in opposition
and rivalship to the worship and service of Jehovah, Satan organized his
followers under Nimrod; and on their dispersion to different regions of
the globe, enslaved and held in bondage all the tribes and nations which
they planted, and to which he at length seduced the kings, princes,
priests, and all but a remnant of the chosen people. It was one
comprehensive antagonist rival system, copied and counterfeited in all
its leading features from the doctrines and ritual revealed to the race
at first, and renewedly taught and practised by Noah, on his egress from
the ark. In what forms the great Adversary had instigated the corruption
and wickedness, and led on the masses of the race before the Deluge to
their total destruction by that instrument of Jehovah's power, is but
faintly intimated. The earth was filled with violence; and it is not
unlikely that Cain's example in presenting, contrary to the Divine
command and the ritual prescription, an offering not of blood, not
typical of the expiatory sacrifice of Messiah, the promised Son, but an
offering intended for the occasion, by its nature, and in contrast to
that of Abel, to express his denial and rejection of the typical
sacrifice and its antitype; and his sullen and arrogant denial of his
being in the wrong, and needing an atonement and forgiveness; and the
example of his persecuting malevolence, in killing his brother, may
furnish a clue to the theory and practice of his party afterwards.

But while Noah, conformably to the earlier practice, erected an altar to
Jehovah, offered typical offerings, and otherwise complied with the
ritual, professed the doctrines, and exercised the faith of the revealed
system of religion, and was a preacher of righteousness; his early
descendants, like those of Adam, were soon separated into opposite
parties of true and false worshippers.

The false or idolatrous party, originally characterized as the seed of
the serpent, the followers and servants of Satan, having, under
Nimrod--a name signifying rebel--united in their antagonist scheme,
commenced the erection of the tower of Babel--otherwise Bel, Belus, or
Baal--in Babylon.

From a comparison of the terms employed with reference to this
structure, and the object and nature of the idolatry to which it was
devoted; its history and that of the structures and idolatry of other
countries which were copied from the model here furnished; the
descriptions in the Scriptures of that idolatry, both as practised by
the heathen and by the Israelites, and the references to it by
Herodotus, Thucydides, and other secular historians, the following
summary statement in the present and two succeeding chapters is believed
to be well founded.

This tower or temple was originally destined, as it was afterwards
devoted, to the worship of the great Adversary, who palmed himself upon
his followers as god of this world, god of providence, bestower of
benefits and blessings; the good principle or intelligence of the
Babylonians, Persians, and other heathen nations, by whom he was
regarded as a creature intermediate between the supreme, self-existent,
invisible Being, and the human race, and in that character as creator
and ruler of the world; having his residence in the sun as his
tabernacle and shekina, and manifesting himself locally and at pleasure
to his votaries in fire, as his element, and as the medium of their
worship, sacrifices, incense, &c., and in light, and in the effects of
the solar heat upon vegetation, and otherwise as causing the chief
blessings and comforts of life. These visible objects and benefits
appealed directly to the senses and the unrestrained passions of his
followers, who, being at enmity with the righteous party, and
irreconcilably opposed to the doctrines, duties, and restraints of their
religion; and yet, as well from social considerations as from their
natures as dependent creatures, requiring a substitute, a rival
antagonist system, and a head and leader consistent with it, may well be
supposed to have entered into this system with a zeal, a pertinacity and
desperateness, not exceeded by their successors in Babylon or elsewhere,
nor even by that of the apostate Jews, who, in direct opposition to the
doctrines and worship of Jehovah, established in his temple this idol
system, with its emblems and rites, and the public and formal worship of
its god in the sun, most boldly and impiously turning their faces to the
East, and their backs to the visible Shekina in the holy place.

The system of corruption, delusion, and bondage, by which the great
Adversary commenced his second experiment of lordship over his party,
and of renewed and perpetual hostility towards the righteous, and
treason, rebellion, impiety, and insult towards Jehovah their Elohe,
required not only to be such as would gratify their depraved hearts and
grovelling passions, so as to insure success to his craft and subtlety,
but to be contrived, adopted, and put in practice so as to unite,
combine, and govern them, as soon as possible after the repeopling of
the earth commenced.

That it was in fact contrived, adopted, and practised prior to the
dispersion, is proved by the resumption and practice of it by the
dispersed tribes and nations both in the Eastern and Western
hemispheres: and that the nature, object, doctrines, rites, bearings,
and ends of it, were originally well understood, and matter of common
intelligence and notoriety, is proved by the close resemblance of the
system, as established in other quarters of the world, to the model
metropolitan establishment in Babylon.

This original tower or temple--which there is no reasonable ground to
doubt continued near two thousand years, till Xerxes pillaged and
destroyed it, together with the structures around it which had been
added by Nebuchadnezzar--was six hundred feet square at the base, and
six hundred feet in height, its cubic contents far exceeding those of
the largest of the pyramids. It was devoted to the worship of the god of
their idolatry, the intelligence to whom they ascribed the works of
creation and providence, under the names Bel, Baal, Beelzebub, and other
designations of Satan; and also to astronomical observations, which
appear to have led to the appropriation, subsequently, of the moon to
Astarte, consort of Baal and Queen of heaven, the prototype--not in
respect to her moral character, which was wholly opposite, but to her
mediating office--of the deified Mary of the Papists; and of the
planets and stars, to subordinate auxiliary mediating demons of
different species.

The projectors and architects of this great paragon and wonder of the
world were not a horde of ignorant, wandering nomades. They had
knowledge and arts adequate to an undertaking, whether considered merely
as a physical undertaking, or in connection with the stupendous and
enduring system of imposture, impiety, and misery it was devoted to,
which has not been equalled since: and which may well be conceived of as
sufficient to occasion the local and special interposition of the
Messenger Jehovah to confound their language and scatter them abroad
upon the face of all the earth. Their astronomy, and probably their
geometry and other abstruse branches of knowledge, were, at least in
respect to their leading principles, not inferior to those of the
present day. Prideaux, speaking of this tower, which he holds to be the
same with that destroyed Xerxes, observes, that "when Alexander took
Babylon, Callisthenes the philosopher, who accompanied him thither,
found they had astronomical observations for nineteen hundred and three
years backward from that time, which carrieth the account as high as the
one hundred and fifteenth year after the flood, which was within fifteen
years after the Tower of Babel was built. For the confusion of tongues,
which followed immediately after the building of that tower, happened in
the year wherein Peleg was born, which was an hundred and one years
after the flood, and fourteen years after that, those observations
began. This account Callisthenes sent from Babylon into Greece, to his
master Aristotle," &c. (Book II., part 1.)




CHAPTER XX.

    The system of Idolatry founded on a perversion of the Doctrine
    of Mediation--References to the Worshippers of Baal, Israelite
    and Pagan.


This system of idolatry was founded on the doctrine of mediation, which
was the basis of the revealed system of true religion. But in the
application of that doctrine, idolatry exhibited an entire perversion,
ascribing the mediatorial office and relations, not to Messiah, the
Messenger Jehovah, the one only Mediator between God and man, but to his
adversary, antagonist, and competitor, who emphatically in this respect,
and as creator and administrator of providence, arrogated the office,
prerogatives, relations and works of Jehovah, the delegated Personal
Word.

This consideration alone affords a clue to any intelligent understanding
of the system in its details, or of the succeeding history of the
antagonism; of the enormity and turpitude of idolatry as a crime; and of
the amazing retributions and judgments which it called down upon the
Canaanites and other nations devoted to the worship of Baal, and upon
the Israelites on their apostatizing to that worship.

The doctrine of mediation and of one Divine Mediator, as it involved the
relations of men to the Creator, moral and providential Ruler and
Redeemer, was the basis and prime element in the patriarchal and
Levitical economies, which prescribed a religion not merely for
dependent, but for fallen, guilty creatures, no acts of whom, whether
of obedience in performing ordinary duties, or of religious homage,
sacrifices, prayers or offerings, could be accepted unless rendered in
the exercise of faith in the appointed Mediator, and a consciousness of
entire dependence on his merits, and the efficacy of his mediation, as
the only ground of acceptance, and of the bestowment of blessings on
them. Hence the typical sacrifices, and all the rites, ordinances, and
prescriptions of that system.

But from the nature of the case, and the consciousness of dependence,
helplessness and misery in those who turned away from the true worship,
a sense of the necessity of mediation and a mediator must naturally have
been felt by them, as well as by those of the other party. Without a
sense of that necessity they would neither have projected nor adopted
any religion whatever. It is the sole basis of all false religions.
Those who have it not, must be classed with atheists or deists. The Jews
who nominally reject the doctrine, and really reject the true Mediator,
palpably contradict and pervert the religion which they profess, and
virtually assign to their rites and forms the office of mediation.

Nothing can be more unlikely or more absurd than the supposition that
nations, tribes, or individuals should contrive or adopt or persevere in
the practice of a false religion, without a notion more or less correct,
and a conviction more or less strong and effective, of the existence of
a Supreme Being, to whose will the striking events of providence, the
vicissitudes in their own experience, their acts, their prayers, their
fears and hopes, had a real, though it might be a mysterious and
incomprehensible, reference. But with such conviction, their false
religion, naturally in theory, and necessarily in order to such effect
upon their hopes and fears as to induce their perseverance in it,
refers ultimately to that mysterious, unseen, and, without intermediate
agencies and instruments of mediation, inaccessible Being. Such fears
and such conviction, coupled with the uncertainties of the future, and
with impending or foreboded evils, are, like instincts, deep seated, in
the very nature of man. And hence, with reference to the false system
under consideration, the facility, on the one hand, with which
imposture, delusion, and desperate infatuation might take effect; and
the absurdity, on the other hand, of supposing that Baal, whose
tabernacle in the sun, and whose manifestations in fire, light, air or
water were ever visibly or sensibly present and familiar; or that any of
the animals consecrated to him, or of the representative material images
of animate or inanimate, rational or irrational forms, called idols,
were ever mistaken by any of his worshippers for that Being whom they
regarded as supreme, ever invisible, and far removed from immediate
intercourse and familiarity with mortals. Such a mistake would argue
that the Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Asiatics, Polynesians, Mexicans, and
all other pagans, as well as the devotees of Popery, were more senseless
than the animals, or even the material forms and figures, before which
they bowed themselves down, and presented their gifts and offerings.

But not to waste words on so plain a matter, let it be illustrated by
reference to Scripture. The Israelites were so terrified by the thunders
and lightnings at the giving of the Law, when Jehovah spoke to them
directly, that "they removed and stood afar off; and they said unto
Moses: Speak thou with us, and we will hear, but let not Elohim speak
with us, lest we die. And Moses said unto the people, Fear not, for
(the) Elohim has come to prove you, and that his fear may be before
your faces, that ye sin not." Ex. xx. Moses, referring to this, Deut.
v., says: "Jehovah," that is, the Messenger Jehovah, "talked with you
face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire, (I stood between
Jehovah and you at that time, to show you the word of Jehovah: for ye
were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount;)
saying, I am Jehovah thy Elohe, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, from the house of bondage. Thou shalt have none other Elohim
before me. Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, nor any likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath,
or that is in the waters under the earth; thou shalt not bow down
thyself unto them, nor serve them: For I, Jehovah thy Elohe, am a
jealous El," &c. Shortly after this, Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and
seventy of the elders of Israel were called up into the mount, and "they
saw the Elohe of Israel." Then Aaron and the others returned to the
people, except Moses, who was called up into the cloud on the mount, and
remained there forty days and forty nights. In the meantime, "the sight
of the glory of Jehovah was like devouring fire on the top of the mount,
in the eyes of the children of Israel." The appalling terrors of this
sight, from which they were, at the announcement of the Law, so anxious
to be relieved, being thus prolonged from week to week, and despairing
of the return of their chosen interlocutor between Jehovah and them, the
minds of the people reverted to the image representative of Baal, and
with other images and idolized objects familiarly called Elohim, with
which their sojourn in Egypt had made them acquainted: and they said to
Aaron, "Up, make us Elohim which shall go before us; for as for this
Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not
what is become of him." Aaron accordingly made a molten calf, "and they
said, _This is thy Elohe_, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt:" plainly meaning, This image represents, is a visible
representative of thy Elohe, and stands between him and us, as Moses,
the man that brought us out of Egypt, stood between Jehovah and us at
the giving of the Law. They wanted and deemed that they had in this
molten image a visible representative of the Elohe of Israel. But no one
can suppose that Aaron, after having witnessed the wonders in Egypt, and
assisted Moses as an instrument of them, and, with the elders, "seen the
Elohe of Israel" in the mount, could mistake and ascribe to the brute
image the power and prerogatives of that Being; neither did the people
imagine any thing to that effect. The crime of which they were guilty,
and for which they were punished, was that of breaking a positive
command; doing what was expressly forbidden; making a graven image;
worshipping it as a representative emblem of Jehovah, and medium of
their homage of him; placing it _before him_, between them and him, in
imitation of the Egyptians, who made and worshipped similar images as
the immediate, local, visible, familiar objects or media through which
they offered their sacrifices and prayers to Baal. There is no
intimation that they intended on this occasion to ascribe their
deliverance from Egypt to Baal. On the contrary, they had witnessed the
most amazing demonstrations in the plagues and at the Red Sea, that
their deliverance was effected by the high hand and outstretched arm of
Jehovah, in opposition to that adversary. They were required by
sacrifices and prayers to worship the Elohe of Israel directly in spirit
and in truth, conformably to the letter of their ritual, the divine
doctrine of mediation, and his relations as the only Mediator between
