to the Church.  I pass over the trials of the Church in the eighteenth
century, to the meeting of the Continental Congress in 1774.  It was
proposed to open Congress with prayer.  Objections were made on account
of the religious differences of the delegates.  Old Samuel Adams arose,
with his white hair streaming on his shoulders,--the same earnest Puritan
who, in 1768, had written to England:   "We hope in God that no such
establishment as the Protestant episcopate shall ever take place in
America,"--and said: "Gentlemen, shall it be said that it is possible
that there can be any religious differences which will prevent men from
crying to that God who alone can save them?  I move that the Rev. Dr.
Duche, minister of Christ Church in this city, be asked to open this
Congress with prayer."  John Adams, writing to his wife, said: "Never
can I forget that scene.  There were twenty Quakers standing by my side,
and we were all bathed in tears."  When the Psalms for the day were
read, it seemed as if Heaven was pleading for the oppressed: "O Lord,
fight thou against them that fight against me."  "Lord, who is like Thee
to defend the poor and the needy?"  "Avenge thou my cause, my Lord, my
God."  On the 4th of July 1776, Congress published to the world that
these colonies were, and of right ought to be, free.  We believe that a
majority of those who signed this declaration were sons of the Church.
The American colonists were not rebels; they were loyal, God-fearing
men.  The first appeal that Congress made to the colonies was "for the
whole people to keep one and the same day as a day of fasting and prayer
for the restoration of the invaded rights of America, and reconciliation
with the parent State."  They stood for their inalienable rights,
guaranteed to them by the Magna Charta, which nobles, headed by Bishop
Stephen Langton, had wrung from King John.  The English clergy had at
ordination taken an oath of allegiance to the British Crown.  Many who
sympathized with their oppressed country felt bound to pray for King
George until another government was permanently established.  Others,
like Dr. Provost, retired to private life.  For two hundred years an
Episcopal Church had no resident Bishop.  No child of the Church
received confirmation.  No one could take orders without crossing the
Atlantic, where one man in five lost his life by disease or shipwreck.
At one time the Rev. William White was the only clergyman of the Church
in Pennsylvania.  Even after we  had received the episcopate, the
outlook was so hopeless that one of her bishops said, "I am willing to
do all I can for the rest of my days, but there will be no such Church
when I am gone."  When William Meade told Chief Justice Marshall that he
was to take orders in the Episcopal Church, the Chief Justice said, "I
thought that this Church had perished in the Revolution."  Of the less
than two hundred clergy, many had returned to England or retired to
private life.  In some of the colonies the endowments of the Church had
been confiscated.  There was no discipline for clergy or laity, and it
did seem as if the vine of the Lord's planting was to perish out of the
land.


On the Feast of the Annunciation, 1783, ten of the clergy of Connecticut
met in the glebe house at Woodbury to elect a bishop.  They met
privately, for the Church was under the ban of civil authority, and they
feared the revival of bitter opposition to an American episcopate which
might alarm the English bishops and defeat their efforts.  They did not
come to make a creed, or frame a liturgy, or found a Church.  They met
to secure that which was lacking for the complete organization of the
Church, and thus perpetuate for their country that ministry whose
continuity was witnessed through all the ages in a living body, which is
the body of Christ.  I know of no greater heroism than that which sent
Samuel Seabury to ask of the bishops of the Church of England the
episcopate for the scattered flock of Christ.  You remember the fourteen
months' weary waiting, and when his prayer was refused in England, God
led him to the persecuted Church of Scotland.  Now go with me to
Aberdeen; it is an upper room, a congregation of clergy and laity are
present.  The bishops and Robert Kilgour, Bishop of Aberdeen, Arthur
Petrie, Bishop of Moray, and John Skinner, Coadjutor Bishop of Aberdeen,
who preached the sermon.  The prayers were ended; Samuel Seabury, a
kingly man, kneels for the imposition of apostolic hands, and, according
to the godly usage of the Catholic Church, is consecrated bishop, and
made the first apostle for the New World.  None can tell what, under
God, we owe to those venerable men.  They signed a concordat binding
themselves and successors to use the Prayer of Invocation in the
Scottish Communion Office, which sets forth that truth which is
inwrought in all the teachings of our blessed Lord and His apostles,
that the communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is limited to the
worthy receiver of this blessed sacrament.  The consecration of Seabury
touched the heart of the English Church.

In 1783 the Church of England did not have one bishop beyond its shores.
There are to-day fifteen bishops in Africa, six in China and Japan, and
twenty-three in Australia and the Pacific Islands, ten in India, seven
in the West Indies, and eighty-five in British North America and the
United States.  Every colony of the British Empire and every State and
Territory of the United States has its own bishop, except the Territory
of Alaska.

On February 4th, 1787, the Rev. Dr. Samuel Provost, D.D., were
consecrated bishops in Lambeth Chapel, by John Moore, Archbishop of
Canterbury, William Markham, Archbishop of York, Charles Moss, Bishop of
Bath and Wells, and John Hinchcliffe, Bishop of Peterborough.  The
sermon was preached by the chaplain of the primate.  Our minister to
England, Hon. John Adams, urged the application of Drs. Provost and
White, and in after years wrote: "There is no part of my life I look
back with more satisfaction than the part I took--daring and hazardous as
it was to myself and mine--in the introduction of episcopacy to America."
Samuel Provost was a devoted patriot and one of the ripest scholars of
America.  In the convention which elected him Bishop of New York were
John Jay, Washington's chief justice, Marinus Willet, one of
Washington's favorite generals, James Duane, John Alsop, R.R.
Livingston, and William Duer, members of the Continental Congress, and
David Brooks, commissary-general of the Revolution, and personal friend
of Washington.  If less prominent in his episcopal administration,
Bishop Provost's name as a patriot was a tower of strength to the infant
Church.

Of Bishop White we can say, as John Adams said of Roger Sherman, "He was
pure as an angel and firm as Mount Atlas."  He was beloved and
reverenced by all Christian people.  When Congress declared the colonies
independent States in 1776, he at once took the oath of allegiance to
the new government.  When a friend warned him that he had put his neck
in a halter, he replied: "I know the danger; the cause is just; I have
put my faith in God."  In 1777 he was elected chaplain of Congress, and
held the office (except when Congress met in New York) until the capital
was removed to Washington.  Francis Hopkinson, a distinguished signer of
the Declaration of Independence, and other loyal sons of the country,
were among those who elected him Bishop of Pennsylvania.

One hundred years ago today the representatives of the Church in the
different States met to adopt a constitution.  There had been tentative
efforts to effect an organization and adopt a Book of Common Prayer, all
of which were overruled by the good providence of God.  Many not of our
fold desired a liturgy.  Benjamin Franklin published at his own expense
a revised copy of the English liturgy.  The House of Bishops was
composed of Bishop Seabury and Bishop White. Bishop Provost was absent.
In the House of Clerical and Lay Deputies were the Rev. Abraham Jarvis,
the Rev. Robert Smith, and the Rev. Samuel Parker, who became bishops.
They met to show the world that the charter of the Church is perpetual,
and that the Church has the power to adapt herself to all the conditions
of human society.  They met to consolidate the scattered fragments of
the Church in the thirteen colonies into a national Church, and secure
for themselves and children Catholic faith and worship in the Book of
Common Prayer.  They builded wiser than they knew.  They secured for the
Church self-government, free from all secular control.  They preserved
the traditions of the past, and yet every feature of executive,
legislative, and judicial administration was in harmony with the
Constitution of the Republic.  They gave the laity a voice in the
council of the Church; they provided that bishops and clergy should be
tried by their peers, and that the clergy and laity of each diocese
should elect their own bishop subject to the approval of the whole
Church.  There was the most delightful fraternal intercourse between the
two bishops.  In the words of our Presiding Bishop, "The blessed results
of that convention were due, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, to
the steadfast gentleness of Bishop White and the gentle steadfast--of
Bishop Seabury."  A century has passed.  The Church which was then
everywhere spoken against is everywhere known and respected; the mantle
of Seabury, White, Hobart, Ravenscroft, Eliot, De Lancey, and Kemper has
fallen on others, and her sons are in the forefront of that mighty
movement which will people this land with millions of souls.  While we
say with grateful hearts, "What hath God wrought!" we also say, "Not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy Nave give the praise."
Surely, an awful responsibility rests upon a Church whose history is so
full of the mercy of God.  We are living in the great missionary age of
the Church.  There is no nation on the earth to whom we may not carry
the Gospel.  More than eight hundred millions of souls for whom Christ
died have not heard that there is a Saviour.   One of the hinderances to
the speedy evangelization of the world is the division among
Christians,--alas! both within and without the Church.  Our Saviour said:
"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another."  Christians have been separated in hostile camps, and
often divisions have ripened into hatred.  The saddest of all is that
the things which separate us are not necessary for salvation.  The
truths in which we agree are part of the Catholic faith.  In the words
of Dr. Dollinger, "we can say each to the other as baptized, we are on
either side, brothers and sisters in Christ.  In the great garden of the
Lord, let us shake hands over these confessional hedges, and let us
break them down, so as to be able to embrace one another altogether.
These hedges are doctrinal divisions about which either we or you are in
error.  If you are in the wrong, we do not hold you morally culpable;
for your education, surroundings, knowledge, and training made the
adherence to these doctrines excusable and even right.  Let us examine,
compare, and investigate the matter together, and we shall discover the
precious pearl of peace and unity; and then let us join hands together
in cultivating and cleansing the garden of the Lord, which is overgrown
with weeds."  There are blessed signs that the Holy Spirit is deepening
the spiritual life of widely separated brothers.  Historical Churches
are feeling the pulsation of a new life from the Incarnate God.  All
Christian folk see that the Holy Spirit has passed over these human
barriers and set His seal to the labors of separated brethren in Christ.
The ever-blessed Comforter is quickening in Christian hearts the divine
spirit of charity.  Christians are learning more and more the theology
which centres in the person of Jesus Christ.  It is this which worldwide
is creating a holy enthusiasm to stay the flood of intemperance,
impurity, and sin at home, and gather lost heathen folk into the fold of
Christ.  In our age every branch of the Church can call over the roll of
its confessors and martyr, and so link its history to the purest ages of
the Church.  We would not rob them of one sheaf they have gathered into
the garner of the Lord.  We share in every victory and we rejoice in
every triumph.  There is not one of that great company who have washed
their robes white in the blood of the Lamb, who is not our kinsman in
Christ.  Brothers in Christ of every name, shall we not pray for the
healing of the wounds of the body of Christ, that the world may believe
in him?

We are perplexed by the unbelief and sin of our time.  The Christian
faith is assailed not only with scoffs of old as Celsus and Julian, but
also with the keenest intellectual criticism of Divine revelation, the
opposition of alleged scientific facts, and a Corinthian worldliness
whose motto is "Eat and drink, for to-morrow we die."  In many places
Christian homes are dying out.  Crime and impurity are coming in as a
flood, and anarchy raises its hated form in a land where all men are
equal before the law.  The lines between the Church and the world are
dim.  Never did greater problems confront a council of the Church.  An
Apostolic Church has a graver work than discussion about its name or the
amending of its canons and rubrics.  I fear that some of this unbelief
is a revolt from a caricature of God.  These mechanical ideas about the
universe are the outcome of a mechanical theology which has lost sight
of the Fatherhood of God.  There is much honest unbelief.  In these
yearnings of humanity, in its clubs, brotherhoods, and orders, in their
