doctrines for the Person whom the doctrines represent, I, for one,
rejoice in it. But I believe that the antithesis suggested by the
phrase, and by some of its advocates avowed, between the Christ of
the Gospels and the Christ of the Epistles, is false. The Christ of
the Gospels is the Christ of the Epistles, as I humbly venture to
believe. And I cannot but see that there is a possibility of a
movement which, carried out legitimately, should command the fullest
sympathy of every Christian heart, degenerating into the rejection
of all the supernatural elements in the nature and work of our Lord,
and leaving us with a meagre human Christ, shrunken and impotent.
The Christ of the Gospels, by all means; but let it be the whole
Christ of all the Gospels, the Christ over whose cradle angels sang,
by whose empty grave angels watched, whose ascending form angels
beheld and proclaimed that He should come again to be our Judge. Go
back to that Christ, and all will be well.

Now it seems to me that one direction in which there is a
possibility of such movement as I have referred to being one-sided
and harmful is in reference to the conception which we form of the
death of Jesus Christ. And therefore I ask you to listen for a few
moments to me at this time whilst I try to bring out what is plain
in the words before us; and is, as I humbly believe, interwoven in
the whole texture of all the Gospels--viz., the conception which
Jesus Christ Himself formed of the meaning of His death.

I. The first thing that I notice is that the Christ of the Gospels
thought and taught that His death was to be His own act.

I do not think that it is an undue or pedantic pressing of the
significance of the words before us, if I ask you to notice two of
the significant expressions in this text. 'The Son of Man
_came_,' and came 'to _give_ His life.' The one word refers to the act
of entrance into, the other to the act of departure from, this earthly
life. They correspond in so far as that both bring into prominence
Christ's own consent, volition, and action in the very two things
about which men are least consulted, their being born and their dying.

'The Son of Man came.' Now if that expression occurred but once it
might be minimised as being only a synonym for birth, having no
special force. But if you will notice that it is our Lord's habitual
word about Himself, only varied occasionally by another one equally
significant when he says that He 'was sent'; and if you will further
notice that all through the Gospels He never but once speaks of
Himself as being 'born,' I think you will admit that I am not making
too much of a word when I say that when Christ, out of the depths of
His consciousness, said 'the Son of Man _came_,' He was teaching
us that He lived before He was born, and that behind the natural fact
of birth there lay the supernatural fact of His choosing to be
incarnated for man's redemption.  The one instance in which He does
speak of Himself as 'being born' is most instructive in this
connection. For it was before the Roman governor; and He accompanied
the clause in which He said, 'To this end was I born'--which was
adapted to Pilate's level of intelligence--with another one which
seemed to be inserted to satisfy His own sense of fitness, rather
than for any light that it would give to its first hearer, 'And for
this cause came I into the world.' The two things were not synonymous;
but before the birth there was the coming, and Jesus was born because
the Eternal Word willed to come. So says the Christ of the Gospels;
and the Christ of the Epistles is represented as 'taking upon Him
the form of a servant, and being found in fashion as a man.' Do you
accept that as true of 'the historic Christ'?

With precise correspondence, if we turn to the other end of His
life, we find the equally significant expression in my text which
asserts for it, too, that the other necessity to which men
necessarily and without their own volition bow was to Christ a
matter of choice. 'The Son of Man came to _give_.' 'No man
taketh it from Me,' as He said on another occasion. 'I lay it down
of Myself.' 'The Good Shepherd giveth His life for the sheep.' 'My
flesh ... I give for the world's life.' Now, brethren, we are not to
regard these words as mere vague expressions for a willing surrender
to the necessity of death, but as expressing what I believe is
taught us all through Scripture, and is fundamental to any real
grasp of the real Christ, that He died because He chose, and chose
because He loved. What meant that 'loud voice' with which He said
'It is finished,' but that there was no physical exhaustion, such as
was usually the immediate occasion of death by crucifixion? What
meant that surprising rapidity with which the last moment came in
His case, to the astonishment of the stolid bystanders? They meant
the same thing as I believe that the Evangelists meant when they,
with one consent, employed expressions to describe Christ's death,
which may indeed be only euphemisms, but are apparently declarations
of its voluntary character. 'He gave up the ghost.' 'He yielded His
Spirit.' He breathed forth His life, and so He died.

As one of the old fathers said, 'Who is this that thus falls asleep
when He wills? To die is weakness, but thus to die is power.' 'The
weakness of God is stronger than man.' The desperate king of Israel
bade his slave kill him, and when the menial shrunk from such
sacrilege he fell upon his own sword. Christ bade His servant Death,
'Do this,' and he did it; and dying, our Lord and Master declared
Himself the Lord and Master of Death. This is a part of the history
of the historic Christ. Do you believe it?

II. Then, secondly, the Christ of the Gospels thought and taught
that His death was one chief aim of His coming.

I have omitted words from my text which intervene between its first
and its last ones; not because I regard them as unimportant, but
because they would lead us into too wide a field to cover in one
sermon. But I would pray you to observe how the re-insertion of them
throws immense light upon the significance of the words which I have
chosen. 'The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister.' That covers the whole ground of His gracious and gentle
dealings here on earth, His tenderness, self-abnegation, sympathy,
healing, and helpfulness. Then, side by side with that, and as the
crowning manifestation of His work of service, without which His
life--gracious, radiant, sweet as it is--would still want something
of its power, He sets His death.

Surely that is an altogether unexampled phenomenon; altogether a
unique and unparalleled thing, that a _man_ should regard that
which for all workers, thinkers, speakers, poets, philanthropists,
is the sad term of their activity, as being a part of His work; and
not only a part, but so conspicuous a part that it was a purpose
which He had in view from the very beginning, and before the
beginning, of His earthly life. So Calvary was to Jesus Christ no
interruption, tragic and premature, of His life's activities. His
death was no mere alternative set before Him, which He chose rather
than be unfaithful or dumb. He did not die because He was hounded by
hostile priests, but He came on purpose that He might so end His
career.

I need not remind you of, and space would not permit me to dwell
upon, other instances in the Gospels in which our Lord speaks the
same language. At the very beginning of His public ministry He told
the inquiring rabbi, who came to Him with the notion that He would
be somewhat flattered by His recognition by one of the authoritative
and wise pundits of the nation, that 'the Son of Man must be lifted
up.' The necessity was before Him, but it was no unwelcome
necessity, for it sprung from His own love. It was the very aim of
His coming, to live a Servant and to die a Ransom.

Dear brethren, let me press upon you this plain truth, that no
conception of Christ's death which looks upon it merely as the
close, by pathetic sufferings, of a life to the activities of which
it adds nothing but pathos, approaches the signification of it which
inheres in the thought that this was the aim and purpose with which
Jesus Christ was incarnate, that He should live indeed the pure and
sweet life which He lived, but equally that He should die the
painful and bitter death which He died. He was not merely a martyr,
though the first of them, but something far more, as we shall see
presently. If to you the death of Jesus Christ is the same in kind,
however superior in degree, as those of patriots and reformers and
witnesses for the truth and martyrs for righteousness, then I humbly
venture to represent that, instead of going back to, you have gone
away from, the Christ of the Gospels, who said, 'The Son of Man came
... to give His life'; and that such a Christ is not a historic but
an imaginary one.

III. So, thirdly, notice that the Christ of the Gospels thought and
taught that His death was a ransom.

A ransom is a price paid in exchange for captives that they may be
liberated; or for culprits that they may be set free. And that was
Christ's thought of what He had to die for. There lay the 'must.'

I do not dwell upon the conception of our condition involved in that
word. We are all bound and held by the chain of our sins. We all
stand guilty before God, and, as I believe, there is a necessity in
that loving divine nature whereby it is impossible that without a
ransom there can be, in the interests of mankind and in the
interests of righteousness, forgiveness of sins. I do not mean that
in the words before us there is a developed theory of atonement, but
I do mean that no man, dealing with them fairly, can strike out of
them the notion of vicarious suffering in exchange for, or instead
of, 'the many.' This is no occasion for theological discussion, nor
am I careful now to set forth a fully developed doctrine; but I am
declaring, as God helps me, what is to me, and I pray may be to you,
the central thought about that Cross of Calvary, that on it there is
made the sacrifice for the world's sins.

And, dear brethren, I beseech you to consider, how can we save the
character of Jesus Christ, accepting these Gospels, which on the
hypothesis about which I am now speaking are valid sources of
knowledge, without recognising that He deliberately led His
disciples to believe that He died for--that is, instead of--them
that put their trust in Him? For remember that not only such words
as these of my text are to be taken into account. Remember that it
was the Christ of the Gospels who established that last rite of the
Lord's Supper, in which the broken bread, and the separation between
the bread and the wine, both indicated a violent death, and who said
about both the one and the other of the double symbols, 'For you.' I
do not understand how any body of professing believers, rejecting
Christ's death as the sacrifice for sin, can find a place in their
beliefs or in their practice for that institution of the Lord's
Supper, or can rightly interpret the sacred words then spoken. This
is why the Cross was Christ's aim. This is why He said, with His
dying breath, 'It is finished.' This truth is the explanation of His
words, 'The Good Shepherd giveth His life for the sheep.'

And this truth of a ransom-price lies at the basis of all vigorous
Christianity. A Christianity without a dying Christ is a dying
Christianity. And history shows us that the expansiveness and
elevating power of the Gospel depend on the prominence given to the
sacrifice on the Cross. An old fable says that the only thing that
melts adamant is the blood of a lamb. The Gospel reveals the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, His death for us as a ransom, as the
one power which subdues hostility and binds hearts to Him. The
Christ of the Gospels is the Christ who taught that He died for us.

IV. Lastly, the Christ of the Gospels thought and taught that His
death had world-wide power.

He says here, 'A ransom for _many_.' Now that word is not used
in this instance in contradistinction to 'all,' nor in
contradistinction to 'few.' It is distinctly employed as emphasising
the contrast between the single death and the wide extent of its
benefits; and in terms which, rigidly taken, simply express
indefiniteness, it expresses universality. That that is so seems to
me to be plain enough, if we notice other places of Scripture to
which, at this stage of my sermon, I can but allude. For instance,
in Romans v. the two expressions, 'the many' and the 'all,'
alternate in reference to the extent of the power of Christ's
sacrifice for men. And the Apostle in another place, where probably
there may be an allusion to the words of the text, so varies them as
that he declares that Jesus Christ in His death was the ransom
'instead of all.' But I do not need to dwell upon these. 'Many' is a
vague word, and in it we see dim crowds stretching away beyond our
vision, for whom that death was to be the means of salvation. I take
it that the words of our text have an allusion to those in the great
prophecy in the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, in which we read, 'By
His knowledge shall My righteous Servant' (mark the allusion in our
text, 'Who came to _minister_') 'justify many, for He shall
bear their iniquities.'

So, brethren, I believe that I am not guilty of unduly widening out our
Lord's thought when I say that the indefinite 'many' is practically
'all.' And, brother, if 'all,' then _you_; if all, then _me_; if
all, then _each_. Think of a man, nineteen centuries ago, away
in a little insignificant corner of the world, standing up and saying,
'My death is the price paid in exchange for the world!' That is
meekness and lowliness of heart, is it? That is humility, so beautiful
in a teacher, is it? How any man can accept the veracity of these
narratives, believe that Jesus Christ said anything the least like
this, not believe that He was the Divine Son of the Father, the
Sacrifice for the world's sin, and yet profess--and honestly profess,
I doubt not, in many cases--to retain reverence and admiration, all
but adoration, for Him, I confess that I, for my poor part, cannot
understand.

But I ask you, what you are going to do with these thoughts and
teachings of the Christ of the Gospels. Are you going to take them
for true? Are, you going to trust your salvation to Him? Are you
going to accept the ransom and say, 'O Lord, truly I am Thy servant;
Thou hast loosed my bonds'? Brethren, the Christ of the Gospels, by
all means; but the Christ that said, 'The Son of Man came to ...
give His life a ransom for many.' My Christ, and your Christ, and
the world's Christ is 'the Christ that died; yea, rather, that is
risen again; who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh
intercession for us.'




THE COMING OF THE KING TO HIS PALACE


    'And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come
    to Bethphage, unto the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus
    two disciples, 2. Saying unto them, Go into the village
    over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass
    tied, and a colt with her: loose them, and bring them
    unto Me. 3. And if any man say ought unto you, ye shall
    say, The Lord hath need of them; and straightway he
    will send them. 4. All this was done, that it might be
    fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,
    5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King
    cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a
    colt the foal of an ass. 6. And the disciples went, and
    did as Jesus commanded them, 7. And brought the ass,
    and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they
    set Him thereon. 8. And a very great multitude spread
    their garments in the way; others cut down branches
    from the trees, and strawed them in the way. 9. And the
    multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried,
    saying, Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed is He that
    cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.
    10. And when He was come into Jerusalem, all the city
    was moved, saying, Who is this? 11. And the multitude
    said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.
    12. And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out
    all them that sold and bought in the temple, and
    overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the
    seats of them that sold doves, 13. And said unto them,
    It is written, My house shall be called the house of
    prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves. 14. And
    the blind and the lame came to Him in the temple; and
    He healed them. 15. And when the chief priests and
    scribes saw the wonderful things that He did, and the
    children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to
    the Son of David, they were sore displeased, 16. And
    said unto Him, Hearest Thou what these say? And Jesus
    saith unto them, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the
    mouth of babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise?'
    --MATT. xxi. 1-16.

Jesus spent His last Sabbath in the quiet home at Bethany with
Lazarus and his sisters. Some sense of His approaching death tinged
the modest festivities of that evening with sadness, and spoke in
Mary's 'anointing of His body for the burying.' The pause was brief,
and, with the dawn of Sunday, He set Himself again to tread the road
to the cross. Who can doubt that He felt the relief of that
momentary relaxation of the strain on His spirit, and the
corresponding pressure of its renewed tightening? This passage shows
Him putting out from the quiet haven and facing the storm again. It
is in two main sections, dealing respectively with the royal
procession, and the acts of the King in the temple.

I. The procession of the King. The first noteworthy point is that
our Lord initiates the whole incident, and deliberately sets Himself
to evoke the popular enthusiasm, by a distinct voluntary fulfilment
of a Messianic prophecy. The allusion to the prophecy, in His
sending for the colt and mounting it, may have escaped the disciples
and the crowds of pilgrims; but they rightly caught His intention to
make a solemn triumphal entry into the city, and responded with a
burst of enthusiasm, which He expected and wished. The poor garments
flung hastily on the animals, the travel-stained cloaks cast on the
rocky path, the branches of olive and palm waved in the hands, and
the tumult of acclaim, which shrilly echoed the words of the psalm,
and proclaimed Him to be the Son of David, are all tokens that the
crowds hailed Him as their King, and were all permitted and welcomed
by Him. All this is in absolute opposition to His usual action,
which had been one long effort to damp down inflammable and
unspiritual Messianic hopes, and to avoid the very enthusiasm which
now surges round Him unchecked. Certainly that calm figure, sitting
on the slow-pacing ass, with the noisy multitude pressing round Him,
is strangely unlike Him, who hid Himself among the hills when they
sought to make Him a King. His action is the more remarkable, if it
be remembered that the roads were alive with pilgrims, most of whom
passing through Bethany would be Galileans; that they had seen
Lazarus walking about the village, and knew who had raised him; that
the Passover festival was _the_ time in all the year when
popular tumults were to be expected; and that the crowds going to
Jerusalem were met by a crowd coming from it, bent on seeing the
doer and the subject of the great miracle. Into this heap of
combustibles our Lord puts a light. He must have meant that it
should blaze as it did.

What is the reason for this contrast? The need for the former
reticence no longer existed. There was no fear now of His teaching
and ministry being interrupted by popular outburst. He knew that it
was finished, and that His hour had come. Therefore, the same motive
of filial obedience which had led Him to avoid what would prevent
His discharging His Father's commission, now impelled Him to draw
the attention of the nation and its rulers to the full extent of His
claims, and to put the plain issue of their acceptance or rejection
in the most unmistakable manner. A certain divine decorum, if we may
so call it, required that once He should enter the city as its King.
Some among the shouting crowds might have their enthusiasm purified
and spiritualised, if once it were directed to Him. It was for us,
no less than for them, that this one interruption of His ordinary
method was adopted by Him, that we too might ponder the fact that He
laid His hand on that magnificent prophecy, and said, 'It is mine. I
am the King.'

The royal procession is also a revelation of the character of the
King and the nature of His kingdom. A strange King this, indeed, who
has not even an ass of His own, and for followers, peasants with
palm branches instead of swords! What would a Roman soldier or one
of Herod's men have thought of that rustic procession of a pauper
prince on an ass, and a hundred or two of weaponless, penniless men?
Christ's one moment of royal pomp is as eloquent of His humiliation
as the long stretch of His lowly life is. And yet, as is always the
case, side by side with the lowliness there gleams the veiled
splendour. He had to borrow the colt, and the message in which He
asks for it is a strange paradox. 'The Lord hath need of him'--so
great was the poverty of so great a King. But it spoke, too, of a
more than human knowledge, and of an authority which had only to
require in order to receive. Some farming villager, no doubt, who
was a disciple but secretly, gladly yielded his beasts. The prophecy
which Matthew quotes, with the omission of some words, from
Zechariah, and the addition of the first clause from Isaiah, is
symbolic, and would have been amply fulfilled in the mission and
character of Christ, though this event had never taken place. But
just as it is symbolic, so this external fulfilment, which is
intended to point to the real fulfilment, is also symbolic. The
chariot and the horse are the emblems of conquerors. It is fitting
that the Prince of Peace should make His state entry on a colt,
unridden before, and saddled only with a garment. Zechariah meant
that Zion's King should not reign by the right of the strongest, and
that all His triumphs should be won by lowly meekness. Christ meant
the same by His remarkable act. And has not the picture of Him,
throned thus, stamped for ever on the imagination of the world a
profounder sense of the inmost nature of His kingdom than many words
would have done? Have we learned the lesson of the gentleness which
belongs to His kingdom, and of the unchristian character of war and
violence? Do we understand what the Psalmist meant when he sang, 'In
thy majesty ride on prosperously, because of ... meekness'? Let us
not forget the other picture, 'Behold, a white horse, and He that
sat thereon, called Faithful and True; and in righteousness He doth
judge and make war.'

The entry may remind us also of the worthlessness of mere enthusiastic
feeling in reference to Jesus Christ. The day was the Sunday. How many
of that crowd were shouting as loudly, 'Crucify Him!' and 'Not this
man, but Barabbas!' on the Friday? The palm-branches had not faded,
where they had been tossed, before the fickle crowd had swung round
to the opposite mood. Perhaps the very exuberance of feeling at the
beginning, had something to do with the bitterness of the execrations
at the end, of the week. He had not answered their expectations, but,
instead of heading a revolt, had simply taught in the temple, and
meekly let Himself be laid hold of. Nothing succeeds like success,
and no idol is so quickly forsaken as the idol of a popular rising.
All were eager to disclaim connection with Him, and to efface the
remembrance of their Sunday's hosannas by their groans round His
gibbet. But there is a wider lesson here. No enthusiasm can be too
intense which is based upon a true sense of our need of Christ, and
of His work for us; but it is easy to excite apparently religious
emotion by partial presentations of Him, and such excitement foams
itself away by its very violence, like some Eastern river that in
winter time dashes down the wady with irresistible force, and in
summer is bone dry. Unless we know Christ to be the Saviour of our
souls and the Lamb of God, we shall soon tire of singing hosannas in
His train, and want a king with more pretensions; but if we have
learned who and what He is to us, then let us open our mouths wide,
and not be afraid of letting the world hear our shout of praise.

II. The coming of the King in the temple. The discussion of the
accuracy of Matthew's arrangement of events here is unnecessary. He
has evidently grouped, as usual, incidents which have a common
bearing, and wishes to put these three, of the cleansing, the
healing, and the pleasure in the children's praise, as the
characteristic acts of the King in the temple. We can scarcely avoid
seeing in the first of the three a reference to Malachi's prophecy,
'The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to His temple ... And
He shall purify the sons of Levi.' His first act, when in manhood He
visited the temple, had been to cleanse. His first act when He
enters it as its Lord is the same. The abuse had grown again apace.
Much could be said in its vindication, as convenient and harmless,
and it was too profitable to be lightly abandoned. But the altar of
Mammon so near the altar of God was sacrilege in His eyes, and
though He had passed the traders unmolested many times since that
first driving out, now that He solemnly comes to claim His rights,
He cannot but repeat it. It is perhaps significant that His words
now have both a more sovereign and a more severe tone than before.
Then He had spoken of 'My Father's house,' now it is 'My house,'
which are a part of His quotation indeed, but not therefore
necessarily void of reference to Himself. He is exercising the
authority of a son over His own house, and bears Himself as Lord of
the temple. Before, He charged them with making it a 'house of
merchandise'; now, with turning it into a robber's cave. Evil
rebuked and done again is worse than before. Trafficking in things
pertaining to the altar is even more likely than other trading to
cross the not always very well defined line which separates trade
from trickery and commerce from theft. That lesson needs to be laid
to heart in many quarters now. There is always a fringe of moneyed
interests round Christ's Church, seeking gain out of religious
institutions; and their stands have a wonderful tendency to creep
inwards from the court of the Gentiles to holier places. The
parasite grows very quickly, and Christ had to deal with it more
than once to keep down its growth. The sellers of doves and changers
of money into the sacred shekel were venial offenders compared with
many in the Church, and the race is not extinct. If Christ were to
come to His house to-day, in bodily form, who doubts that He would
begin, as He did before, by driving the traders out of His temple?
How many 'most respectable' usages and people would have to go, if
He did!

The second characteristic, or we might say symbolical, act is the
healing of the blind and lame. Royal state and cleansing severity
are wonderfully blended with tender pity and the gentle hand of
sovereign virtue to heal. The very manifestation of the former drew
the needy to Him; and the blind, though they could not see, and the
lame, though they could not walk, managed to grope and hobble their
way to Him, not afraid of His severity, nor daunted by His royalty.
No doubt they haunted the temple precincts as beggars, with perhaps
as little sense of its sacredness as the money-changers; but their
misery kindled a flicker of confidence and desire, to which He who
tends the dimmest wick till it breaks into clear flame could not but
respond. Though in His house He casts out the traders, He will heal
the cripples and the blind, who know their need, and faintly trust
His heart and power. Such a trait could not be wanting in this
typical representation of the acts of the King.

Finally, He encourages and casts the shield of His approval round
the children's praises. How natural it is that the children, pleased
with the stir and not yet drilled into conventionalism, should have
kept up their glad shouts, even inside the temple enclosure! How
their fresh treble voices ring yet through all these centuries! The
priests had, no doubt, been nursing their wrath at all that had been
going on, but they had not dared to interfere with the cleansing,
nor, for very shame, with the healings; but now they see their
opportunity. This is a clear breach of all propriety, and that is
the crime of crimes in the eyes of such people. They had kept quite
cool and serenely contemptuous, amid the stir of the glad
procession, and they did not much care though He healed some
beggars; but to have this unseemly noise, though it was praise, was
more than they could stand. Ecclesiastical martinets, and men whose
religion is mostly ceremony, are, of course, more 'moved with
indignation' at any breach of ceremonial regulations than at holes
made in graver laws. Nothing makes men more insensitive to the ring
of real worship than being accustomed to the dull decorum of formal
worship. Christ answers their 'hearest thou?' with a 'did ye never
read?' and shuts their mouths with words so apposite in their
plainest meaning that even they are silenced. To Him these young
ringing hosannas are 'perfect praise,' and worth any quantity of
rabbis' preachments. In their deeper sense, His words declare that
the ears of God and of His Son, the Lord of the temple, are more
gladly filled with the praises of the 'little ones,' who know their
weakness, and hymn His goodness with simple tongue, than with
heartless eloquence of words or pomp of worship. The psalm from
which the words are taken declares man's superiority over the
highest works of God's hands, and the perfecting of the divine
praise from his lips. We are but as the little children of creation,
but because we know sin and redemption, we lead the chorus of
heaven. As St. Bernard says, 'Something is wanting to the praise of
heaven, if those be wanting who can say, "We went through fire and
through water; and Thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place."' In
like manner, those praise Him most acceptably among men who know
their feebleness, and with stammering lips humbly try to breathe
their love, their need, and their trust.




A NEW KIND OF KING


    'All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which
    was spoken by the prophet, saying, Tell ye the daughter
    of Zion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and
    sitting upon an ass.'--MATT. xxi. 4, 5.

Our Lord's entrance into Jerusalem is one of the comparatively few
events which are recorded in all the four Gospels. Its singular
unlikeness to the rest of His life, and its powerful influence in
bringing about the Crucifixion, may account for its prominence in
the narratives. It took place probably on the Sunday of Passion
Week. Before the palm branches were withered the enthusiasm had died
away, and the shouting crowd had found out that this was not the
sort of king that they wanted. They might have found that out, even
by the very circumstances of the entrance, for they were profoundly
significant; though their meaning, like so much of the rest of
Christ's life, was less clear to the partakers and spectators than
it is to us. 'These things understood not the disciples at the
first,' says John in closing his narrative of the entrance, 'but
when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that they had done
these things unto Him.'

My object in this sermon is not at all to attempt a pictorial
treatment of this narrative, for these Gospels tell it us a great
deal better than any of us can tell it after them; but to seek to
bring out, if it may be, two or three aspects of its significance.

I. First, then, I ask you to consider its significance as an
altogether exceptional fact in Christ's life.

Throughout the whole of the preceding period, He had had two aims
distinctly in view. One was to shun publicity; and the other was to
damp down the heated, vulgar anticipations of the multitude, who
expected a temporal king. And now here He deliberately, and of set
purpose, takes a step which is like flinging a spark into a powder
barrel. The nation was assembled in crowds, full of the unwholesome
excitement which attended their meeting for the annual feast. All
were in a quiver of expectation; and knowing that, Jesus Christ
originates this scene by His act of sending the two disciples into
the village over against them, to 'bring the ass, and the colt the
foal of an ass.' The reasons for a course so entirely opposed to all
the preceding must have been strong. Let us try to see what they
were.

First, He did it in order to precipitate the conflict which was to end
in His death. Now, had He any right to do that? Knowing as He did the
ferment of expectation into which He was thrusting this new element
of disturbance, and foreseeing, as He must have done, that it would
sharpen the hostility of the rulers of the people to a murderous
degree, how can He be acquitted of one of two things--either singular
shortsightedness or rash foolhardiness in taking such a step? Was He
justified, or was He not?

If we are to look at His conduct from ordinary points of view, the
answer must certainly be that He was not. And we can only understand
this, and all the rest of His actions during the fateful three or
four days that followed it, if we recognise in them the fixed
resolve of One who knew that His mission was not only to live and to
teach by word and life, but to die, and by death to deliver the
world. I take it that it is very hard to save the character of Jesus
Christ for our reverence if we refuse to regard His death as for our
redemption. But if He came, and knew that He came, not only 'to
minister' but 'to give His life a ransom for many,' then we can
understand how He hastened to the Cross, and deliberately set a
light to the train which was to end in that great explosion. On any
other hypothesis it seems to me immensely hard to account for His
act here.

Then, still further, looking at this distinctly exceptional fact in
our Lord's life, we see in it a very emphatic claim to very singular
prerogative and position. He not only thereby presented Himself
before the nation in their collective capacity as being the King of
Israel, but He also did a very strange thing. He dressed Himself, so
to speak, in order to fulfil a prophecy. He posed before the world
as being the Person who was meant by sacred old words. And His
Entrance upon the slow-pacing colt was His voluntary and solemn
assertion that He was the Person of whom the whole stream and
current of divinely sent premonitions and forecasts had been
witnessing from the beginning. He claimed thereby to be the King of
Israel and the Fulfiller of the divine promises that were of old.

Now again, I have to ask the question, Was He right, or was He
wrong? If He was right, then He is a great deal more than a wise
Teacher, and a perfect Example of excellence. If He was wrong, He is
a great deal less. There is no escape from that alternative, as it
seems to me, but by the desperate expedient of denying that He ever
did this thing which this narrative tells us that He did. At all
events I beseech you all, dear friends, to take fairly into your
account of the character of Jesus Christ, this fact, that He, the
meek, the gentle, said that He was meek, and everybody has believed
Him; and that once, in the very crisis of His life, and in
circumstances which make the act most conspicuous, He who always
shunned publicity, nor 'caused His voice to be heard in the
streets,' and steadfastly put away from Himself the vulgar homage
that would have degraded Him into a mere temporal monarch, did
assert that He was the King of Israel and the Fulfiller of prophecy.
Ask yourselves, What does that fact mean?

And then, still further, looking at the act as exceptional in our
Lord's life, note that it was done in order to make one final,
solemn appeal and offer to the men who beheld Him. It was the last
bolt in His quiver. All else had failed, perhaps this might succeed.
We know not the depths of the mysteries of that divine foreknowledge
which, even though it foresees failure, ceases not to plead and to
woo obstinate hearts. But this we may thankfully learn, that, just
as with despairing hope, but with unremitting energy, Jesus Christ,
often rejected, offered Himself once more if perchance He might win
men to repentance, so the loving patience and long-suffering of our
God cease not to plead ever with us. 'Last of all He sent unto them
His Son, saying, They will reverence My Son when they see Him'; and
yet the expectation was disappointed, and the Son was slain. We
touch deep mysteries, but the persistence of the pleading and
rejected love and pity of our God shine through this  strange fact.

II. And now, secondly, let me ask you to note its significance as a
symbol.

The prophecy which two out of the four evangelists--viz., Matthew and
John--regard as having been, in some sense, fulfilled by the Entrance
into Jerusalem, would have been fulfilled quite as truly if there had
been no Entrance. For the mere detail of the prophecy is but a
picturesque way of setting forth its central and essential point--viz.,
the meekness of the King. So our Lord's fulfilment is only an external,
altogether subsidiary, accomplishment of the prophecy; and in fact,
like some other of the external correspondences between His life and
the outward details of Old Testament prophecy, is intended for little
more than a picture or a signpost which may direct our thoughts to the
inward correspondence, which is the true fulfilment.

So then, the deed, like the prophecy after which it is moulded, is
wholly and entirely of importance in its symbolical aspect.

The symbolism is clear enough. This is a new kind of King. He comes,
not mounted on a warhorse, or thundering across the battlefield in a
scythe-armed chariot, like the Pharaohs and the Assyrian monarchs,
who have left us their vainglorious monuments, but mounted on the
emblem of meekness, patience, gentleness, and peace. And He is a
pauper King, for He has to borrow the beast on which He rides, and
His throne is draped with the poor, perhaps ragged, robes of a
handful of fishermen. And His attendants are not warriors bearing
spears, but peasants with palm branches. And the salutation of His
royalty is not the blare of trumpets, but the 'Hosanna!' from a
thousand throats. That is not the sort of King that the world calls
a King. The Roman soldiers might well have thought they were
perpetrating an exquisite jest when they thrust the reed into His
unresisting hand, and crushed down the crown of thorns on His
bleeding brows.

But the symbol discloses the very secret of His Kingdom, the
innermost mysteries of His own character and of the forces to which
He intrusts the further progress of His word. Gentleness is royal
and omnipotent; force and violence are feeble. The Lord is in the
still, small voice, not in the earthquake, nor the fire, nor the
mighty wind. The dove's light pinion will fly further than the wings
of Rome's eagles, with their strong talons and blood-dyed beaks. And
the kingdom that is established in meekness, and rules by gentleness
and for gentleness, and has for its only weapons the power of love
and the omnipotence of patience, that is the kingdom which shall be
eternal and universal.

Now all that is a great deal more than pretty sentiment; it has the
closest practical bearing upon our lives. How slow God's Church has
been to believe that the strength of Christ's kingdom is meekness!
Professing Christian men have sought to win the world to their side,
and by wealth or force or persecution, or this, that, or the other
of the weapons out of the world's armoury, to promote the kingdom of
Christ. But it has all been in vain. There is only one power that
conquers hate, and that is meek love. There is only one way by which
Christ's kingdom can stand firm, and that is its unworldly contrast
to all the manner of human dominion. Wheresoever God's Church has
allied itself with secular sovereignties, and trusted in the arm of
flesh, there has the fine gold become dimmed. Endurance wears out
persecution, patient submission paralyses hostile violence, for you
cannot keep on striking down unresisting crowds with the sword. The
Church of Christ is an anvil that has been beaten upon by many
hammers, and it has worn them all out. Meekness is victorious, and
the kingdom of Christ can only be advanced by the faithful
proclamation of His gentle love, from lips that are moved by hearts
which themselves are conformed to His patient image.

Then, still further, let me remind you that this symbol carries in
it, as it seems to me, the lesson of the radical incompatibility of
war with Christ's kingdom and dominion. It has taken the world all
these centuries to begin to learn that lesson. But slowly men are
coming to it, and the day will dawn when all the pomp of warfare,
and the hell of evil passions from which it comes, and which it
stimulates, will be felt to be as utterly incompatible with the
spirit of Christianity as slavery is felt to-day. The prophecy which
underlies our symbol is very significant in this respect.
Immediately upon that vision of the meek King throned on the colt
the foal of an ass, follows this: 'And I will cut off the chariot
from Ephraim, and the horses from Jerusalem; and the battle bow
shall be cut off, and He shall speak peace unto the heathen.'

Let me beseech you, Christian men and women, to lay to heart the
duty of Christ's followers in reference to the influence and
leavening of public opinion upon this matter, and to see to it that,
in so far as we can help, we set ourselves steadfastly against that
devilish spirit which still oppresses with an incubus almost
intolerable, the nations of so-called Christendom. Lift up your
voices be not afraid, but cry, 'We are the followers of the Prince
of Peace, and we war against the war that is blasphemy against His
dominion.'

And so, still further, note the practical force of this symbol as
influencing our own conduct. We are the followers of the meek
Christ. It becomes _us_ to walk in all meekness and gentleness.
'Spirited conduct' is the world's euphemism for unchristian conduct,
in ninety-nine cases out of the hundred. The perspective of virtue
has altered since Jesus Christ taught us how to love. The old
heathen virtues of magnanimity, fortitude, and the like have 'with
shame to take a lower room.' There is something better than these.
The saint has all the virtues of the old heathen hero, and some more
besides, which are higher than these, and those which he has in
common, he has in different proportion. The flaunting tulips and
peonies of the garden of the world seem to outshine the white
snowdrops and the glowing, modest little violets below their leaves,
but the former are vulgar, and they drop very soon, and the latter,
if paler and more delicate, are refined in their celestial beauty.
The slow-pacing steed on which Jesus Christ rides will out-travel
the fiery warhorse, and will pursue its patient, steadfast path till
He 'bring forth righteousness unto judgment,' and 'all the upright
in heart shall follow Him.'

III. Lastly, notice the significance of this fact as a prophecy. It
was, as I have pointed out, the last solemn appeal to the nation,
and in a very real sense it was Christ's coming to judgment. It is
impossible to look at it without seeing, besides all its other
meanings, gleaming dimly through it, the anticipations of that other
coming, when the Lord Himself 'shall descend with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and the trump of God.'

Let me bring into connection with the scene of my text three others,
gathered from various parts of Scripture. In the forty-fifth Psalm
we find, side by side with the great words, 'Ride on prosperously
because of truth and _meekness_ and righteousness,' the others,
'Thine arrows are sharp in the hearts of the king's enemies; the
people shall fall under Thee.' Now, though it is possible that that
later warlike figure may be merely the carrying out of the thought
which is more gently put before us in the former words, still it
looks as if there were two sides to the conquering manifestation of
the king--one being in 'meekness and truth and righteousness,' and
the other in some sense destructive and punitive.

But, however that may be, my second scene is drawn from the last
book of Scripture, where we read that, when the first seal was
opened, there rode forth a Figure, crowned, mounted upon a white
steed, bearing bow and arrow, 'conquering and to conquer.' And,
though that again may be but an image of the victorious progress of
the gentle Gospel of Jesus Christ throughout the whole earth, still
it comes as one in a series of judgments, and may rather be taken to
express the punitive effects which follow its proclamation even here
and now.

But there can be no doubt with regard to the third of the scenes
which I connect with the incident of which we are discoursing: 'And
I saw heaven opened, and beheld a white horse; and He that sat upon
Him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness doth He judge
and make war.... And out of His mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with
it He should smite the nations; and He shall rule them with a rod of
iron; and He treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of
Almighty God.' That is the Christ who came into Jerusalem on the colt
the foal of an ass. That is the Christ who is meek and long-suffering.
There is a reserve of punitive and destructive power in the meek King.
And oh I what can be so terrible as the anger of meekness, the wrath
of infinite gentleness? In the triumphal entry, we find that, when
the procession turned the rocky shoulder of Olivet, and the long line
of the white city walls, with the gilding of the Temple glittering in
the sunshine, burst upon their view, the multitude lifted up their
voices in gladness. But Christ sat there, and as He looked across the
valley, and beheld, with His divine prescience, the city, now so
joyous and full of stir, sitting solitary and desolate, He lifted up
His voice in loud wailing. The Christ wept because He must punish,
but He punished though He wept.

Our Judge is the gentle Jesus, therefore we can hope. The gentle
Jesus is our Judge, therefore let us not presume. I beseech you,
brethren, lay, as these poor people did their garments, your lusts
