to recover it from the well. But all the efforts the princes made to
recover it proved futile. They then began to eye one another bashfully,
and not knowing how to recover it, their anxiety became great. Just at
this time they beheld a Brahmana near enough unto them, of darkish hue,
decrepit and lean, sanctified by the performance of the Agnihotra and who
had finished his daily rites of worship. And beholding that illustrious
Brahmana, the princes who had despaired of success surrounded him
immediately. Drona (for that Brahmana was no other), seeing the princes
unsuccessful, and conscious of his own skill, smiled a little, and
addressing them said, "Shame on your Kshatriya might, and shame also on
your skill in arms! You have been born in the race of Bharata! How is it
that ye cannot recover the ball (from the bottom of this well)? If ye
promise me a dinner today, I will, with these blades of grass, bring up
not only the ball ye have lost but this ring also that I now throw down!"
Thus saying, Drona that oppressor of foes, taking off his ring, threw it
down into the dry well. Then Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, addressing
Drona, said, "O Brahmana (thou askest for a trifle)! Do thou, with Kripa's
permission, obtain of us that which would last thee for life!" Thus
addressed, Drona with smiles replied unto the Bharata princes, saying,
"This handful of long grass I would invest, by my mantras, with the virtue
of weapons. Behold these blades possess virtues that other weapons, have
not! I will, with one of these blades, pierce the ball, and then pierce
that blade with another, and that another with a third, and thus shall I,
by a chain, bring up the ball."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Drona did exactly what he had said. And the
princes were all amazed and their eyes expanded with delight. And
regarding what they had witnessed to be very extraordinary, they said, "O
learned Brahmana, do thou bring up the ring also without loss of time."

"'Then the illustrious Drona, taking a bow with an arrow, pierced the ring
with that arrow and brought it up at once. And taking the ring thus
brought up from the well still pierced with his arrow, he coolly gave it
to the astonished princes. Then the latter, seeing the ring thus recovered,
said, "We bow to thee, O Brahmana! None else owneth such skill. We long to
know who thou art and whose son. What also can we do for thee?"

"'Thus addressed, Drona replied unto the princes, saying, "Do ye repair
unto Bhishma and describe to him my likeness and skill. The mighty one
will recognize me." The princes then saying, "So be it," repaired unto
Bhishma and telling him of the purport of that Brahmana's speech, related
everything about his (extraordinary) feat. Hearing everything from the
princes, Bhishma at once understood that the Brahmana was none else than
Drona, and thinking that he would make the best preceptor for the princes,
went in person unto him and welcoming him respectfully, brought him over
to the palace. Then Bhishma, that foremost of all wielders of arms,
adroitly asked him the cause of his arrival at Hastinapura. Asked by him,
Drona represented everything as it had happened, saying, "O sir, in times
past I went to the great Rishi Agnivesa for obtaining from him his weapons,
desirous also of learning the science of arms. Devoted to the service of
my preceptor, I lived with him for many years in the humble guise of a
Brahmacharin, with matted locks on my head. At that time, actuated by the
same motives, the prince of Panchala, the mighty Yajnasena, also lived in
the same asylum. He became my friend, always seeking my welfare. I liked
him much. Indeed, we lived together for many, many years. O thou of Kuru's
race, from our earliest years we had studied together and, indeed, he was
my friend from boyhood, always speaking and doing what was agreeable to me.
For gratifying me, O Bhishma, he used to tell me, 'O Drona, I am the
favourite child of my illustrious father. When the king installeth me as
monarch of the Panchalas, the kingdom shall be thine. O friend, this,
indeed, is my solemn promise. My dominion, wealth and happiness, shall all
be dependent on thee.' At last the time came for his departure. Having
finished his studies, he bent his steps towards his country. I offered him
my regards at the time, and, indeed, I remembered his words ever
afterwards.

"'"Some time after, in obedience to the injunctions of my father and
tempted also by the desire of offspring, I married Kripi of short hair, who
gifted with great intelligence, had observed many rigid vows, and was ever
engaged in the Agnihotra and other sacrifices and rigid austerities.
Gautami, in time, gave birth to a son named Aswatthaman of great prowess
and equal in splendour unto the Sun himself. Indeed, I was pleased on
having obtained Aswatthaman as much as my father had been on obtaining me.

"'"And it so happened that one day the child Aswatthaman observing some
rich men's sons drink milk, began to cry. At this I was so beside myself
that I lost all knowledge of the point of the compass. Instead of asking
him who had only a few kine (so that if he gave me one, he would no longer
be able to perform his sacrifices and thus sustain a loss of virtue), I was
desirous of obtaining a cow from one who had many, and for that I wandered
from country to country. But my wanderings proved unsuccessful, for I
failed to obtain a milch cow. After I had come back unsuccessful, some of
my son's playmates gave him water mixed with powdered rice. Drinking this,
the poor boy, was deceived into the belief that he had taken milk, and
began to dance in joy, saying, 'O, I have taken milk. I have taken milk!'
Beholding him dance with joy amid these playmates smiling at his
simplicity, I was exceedingly touched. Hearing also the derisive speeches
of busy-bodies who said, 'Fie upon the indigent Drona, who strives not to
earn wealth, whose son drinking water mixed with powdered rice mistaketh
it for milk and danceth with joy, saying, "I have taken milk,--I have
taken milk!"'--I was quite beside myself. Reproaching myself much, I at
last resolved that even if I should have to live cast off and censured by
Brahmanas, I would not yet, from desire of wealth, be anybody's servant,
which is ever hateful. Thus resolved, O Bhishma, I went, for former
friendship, unto the king of the Somakas, taking with me my dear child and
wife. Hearing that he had been installed in the sovereignty (of the
Somakas), I regarded myself as blessed beyond compare. Joyfully I went
unto that dear friend of mine seated on the throne, remembering my former
friendship with him and also his own words to me. And, O illustrious one,
approaching Drupada, I said, 'O tiger among men, know me for thy friend!'--
Saying this, I approached him confidently as a friend should. But Drupada,
laughing in derision cast me off as if I were a vulgar fellow. Addressing
me he said, 'Thy intelligence scarcely seemeth to be of a high order
inasmuch as approaching me suddenly, thou sayest thou art my friend! Time
that impaireth everything, impaireth friendship also. My former friendship
with thee was for a particular purpose. One of impure birth can never be a
friend of one who is of pure birth. One who is not a car-warrior can never
be a friend of one who is such. Friendship can only subsist between
persons that are of equal rank, but not between those that are unequally
situated. Friendship never subsisteth for ever in my heart. Time impaireth
friendships, as also anger destroyeth them. Do thou not stick, therefore,
to that worn-off friendship between us. Think not of it any longer. The
friendship I had with thee, O best of Brahmanas, was for a special purpose.
There cannot be friendship between a poor man and a rich man, between an
unlettered kind and a man of letters, between a coward and a hero. Why
dost thou, therefore, desire the revival of our former friendship? O thou
of simple understanding, great kings can never have friendship with such
indigent and luckless wight as thou. One who is not a king can never have
a king for his friend. I do not remember ever having promised thee my
kingdom. But, O Brahmana, I can now give thee food and shelter for one
night.'--Thus addressed by him, I left his presence quickly with my wife,
vowing to do that which I will certainly do soon enough. Thus insulted by
Drupada, O Bhishma, I have been filled with wrath, I have come to the
Kurus, desirous of obtaining intelligent and docile pupils. I come to
Hastinapura to gratify thy wishes. O, tell me what I am to do."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by the son of Bharadwaja, Bhishma
said unto him, "String thy bow, O Brahmana, and make the Kuru princes
accomplished in arms. Worshipped by the Kurus, enjoy with a glad heart to
thy fill every comfort in their abode. Thou art the absolute lord, O
Brahmana, of what ever wealth the Kurus have and of their sovereignty and
kingdom! The Kurus are thine (from this day). Think that as already
accomplished which may be in thy heart. Thou art, O Brahmana, obtained by
us as the fruit of our great good luck. Indeed, the favour thou hast
conferred upon me by thy arrival is great."'"


SECTION CXXXIV

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus worshipped by Bhishma, Drona, that first of men,
endued with great energy, took up his quarters in the abode of the Kurus
and continued to live there, receiving their adorations. After he had
rested a while, Bhishma, taking with him his grandsons, the Kaurava
princes, gave them unto him as pupils, making at the same time many
valuable presents. And the mighty one (Bhishma) also joyfully gave unto
the son of Bharadwaja a house that was tidy and neat and well-filled with
paddy and every kind of wealth. And that first of archers, Drona,
thereupon joyfully accepted the Kauravas, viz., the sons of Pandu and
Dhritarashtra, as his pupils. And having accepted them all as his pupils,
one day Drona called them apart and making them touch his feet, said to
them with a swelling heart, "I have in my heart a particular purpose.
Promise me truly, ye sinless ones, that when ye have become skilled in
arms, ye will accomplish it."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words, the Kuru princes remained
silent. But Arjuna, O king, vowed to accomplish it whatever it was. Drona
then cheerfully clasped Arjuna to his bosom and took the scent of his head
repeatedly, shedding tears of joy all the while. Then Drona endued with
great prowess taught the sons of Pandu (the use of) many weapons both
celestial and human. And, O bull of the Bharata race, many other princes
also flocked to that best of Brahmanas for instruction in arms. The
Vrishnis and the Andhakas, and princes from various lands, and the
(adopted) son of Radha of the Suta caste, (Karna), all became pupils of
Drona. But of them all, the Suta child Karna, from jealousy, frequently
defied Arjuna, and supported by Duryodhana, used to disregard the Pandavas.
Arjuna, however, from devotion to the science of arms, always stayed by
the side of his preceptor, and in skill, strength of arms, and
perseverance, excelled all (his class-fellows). Indeed, although the
instruction the preceptor gave, was the same in the case of all, yet in
lightness and skill Arjuna became the foremost of all his fellow-pupils.
And Drona was convinced that none of his pupils would (at any time) be
able to be equal to that son of Indra.

"'Thus Drona continued giving lessons to the princes in the science of
weapons. And while he gave unto every one of his pupils a narrow-mouthed
vessel (for fetching water) in order that much time may be spent in
filling them, he gave unto his own son Aswatthaman a broad-mouthed vessel,
so that, filling it quickly, he might return soon enough. And in the
intervals so gained, Drona used to instruct his own son in several
superior methods (of using weapons). Jishnu (Arjuna) came to know of this,
and thereupon filling his narrow-mouthed vessel with water by means of the
Varuna weapon he used to come unto his preceptor at the same time with his
preceptor's son. And accordingly the intelligent son of Pritha, that
foremost of all men possessing a knowledge of weapons, had no inferiority
to his preceptor's son in respect of excellence. Arjuna's devotion to the
service of his preceptor as also to arms was very great and he soon became
the favourite of his preceptor. And Drona, beholding his pupil's devotion
to arms, summoned the cook, and told him in secret, "Never give Arjuna his
food in the dark, nor tell him that I have told thee this." A few days
after, however, when Arjuna was taking his food, a wind arose, and
thereupon the lamp that had been burning went out. But Arjuna, endued with
energy, continued eating in the dark, his hand, from habit, going to his
mouth. His attention being thus called to the force of habit, the strong-
armed son of Pandu set his heart upon practising with his bow in the night.
And, O Bharata, Drona, hearing the twang of his bowstring in the night,
came to him, and clasping him, said, "Truly do I tell thee that I shall do
that unto thee by which there shall not be an archer equal to thee in this
world."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thereafter Drona began to teach Arjuna the art
of fighting on horse-back, on the back of elephants, on car, and on the
ground. And the mighty Drona also instructed Arjuna in fighting with the
mace, the sword, the lance, the spear, and the dart. And he also
instructed him in using many weapons and fighting with many men at the
same time. And hearing reports of his skill, kings and princes, desirous
of learning the science of arms, flocked to Drona by thousands. Amongst
those that came there, O monarch, was a prince named Ekalavya, who was the
son of Hiranyadhanus, king of the Nishadas (the lowest of the mixed
orders). Drona, however, cognisant of all rules of morality, accepted not
the prince as his pupil in archery, seeing that he was a Nishada who might
(in time) excel all his high-born pupils. But, O oppressor of all enemies,
the Nishada prince, touching Drona's feet with bent head, wended his way
into the forest, and there he made a clay-image of Drona, and began to
worship it respectfully, as if it was his real preceptor, and practised
weapons before it with the most rigid regularity. In consequence of his
exceptional reverence for his preceptor and his devotion to his purpose,
all the three processes of fixing arrows on the bowstring, aiming, and
letting off became very easy for him.

"'And one day, O grinder of foes, the Kuru and the Pandava princes, with
Drona's leave, set out in their cars on a hunting excursion. A servant, O
king, followed the party at leisure, with the usual implements and a dog.
Having come to the woods, they wandered about, intent on the purpose they
had in view. Meanwhile, the dog also, in wandering alone in the woods,
came upon the Nishada prince (Ekalavya). And beholding the Nishada of dark
hue, of body besmeared with filth, dressed in black and bearing matted
locks on head, the dog began to bark aloud.

"'Thereupon the Nishada prince, desirous of exhibiting his lightness of
hand, sent seven arrows into its mouth (before it could shut it). The dog,
thus pierced with seven arrows, came back to the Pandavas. Those heroes,
who beheld that sight, were filled with wonder, and, ashamed of their own
skill, began to praise the lightness of hand and precision of aim by
auricular precision (exhibited by the unknown archer). And they thereupon
began to seek in those woods for the unknown dweller therein that had
shown such skill. And, O king, the Pandavas soon found out the object of
their search ceaselessly discharging arrows from the bow. And beholding
that man of grim visage, who was totally a stranger to them, they asked,
"Who art thou and whose son?" Thus questioned, the man replied, "Ye heroes,
I am the son of Hiranyadhanus, king of the Nishadas. Know me also for a
pupil of Drona, labouring for the mastery of the art of arms."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The Pandavas then, having made themselves
acquainted with everything connected with him, returned (to the city), and
going unto Drona, told him of that wonderful feat of archery which they
had witnessed in the woods. Arjuna, in particular, thinking all the while,
O king, "Ekalavya," saw Drona in private and relying upon his preceptor's
affection for him, said, "Thou hadst lovingly told me, clasping me, to thy
bosom, that no pupil of thine should be equal to me. Why then is there a
pupil of thine, the mighty son of the Nishada king, superior to me?"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'On hearing these words, Drona reflected for a
moment, and resolving upon the course of action he should follow, took
Arjuna with him and went unto the Nishada prince. And he beheld Ekalavya
with body besmeared with filth, matted locks (on head), clad in rags,
bearing a bow in hand and ceaselessly shooting arrows therefrom. And when
Ekalavya saw Drona approaching towards him, he went a few steps forward,
and touched his feet and prostrated himself on the ground. And the son of
the Nishada king worshipping Drona, duly represented himself as his pupil,
and clasping his hands in reverence stood before him (awaiting his
commands). Then Drona, O king, addressed Ekalavya, saying, "If, O hero,
thou art really my pupil, give me then my fees." On hearing these words,
Ekalavya was very much gratified, and said in reply, "O illustrious
preceptor, what shall I give? Command me; for there is nothing, O foremost
of all persons conversant with the Vedas, that I may not give unto my
preceptor." Drona answered, "O Ekalavya, if thou art really intent on
making me a gift, I should like then to have the thumb of thy right hand."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these cruel words of Drona, who had
asked of him his thumb as tuition-fee, Ekalavya, ever devoted to truth and
desirous also of keeping his promise, with a cheerful face and an
unafflicted heart cut off without ado his thumb, and gave it unto Drona.
After this, when the Nishada prince began once more to shoot with the help
of his remaining fingers, he found, O king, that he had lost his former
lightness of hand. And at this Arjuna became happy, the fever (of
jealousy) having left him.

"'Two of Drona's pupils became very much accomplished in the use of mace.
These were Duryodhana and Bhima, who were, however, always jealous of each
other. Aswatthaman excelled everyone (in the mysteries of the science of
arms). The twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) excelled everybody in handling the
sword. Yudhishthira surpassed everybody as a car-warrior; but Arjuna,
however, outdistanced everyone in every respect--in intelligence,
resourcefulness, strength and perseverance. Accomplished in all weapons,
Arjuna became the foremost of even the foremost of car-warriors; and his
fame spread all over the earth to the verge of the sea. And although the
instruction was the same, the mighty Arjuna excelled all (the princes in
lightness of hand). Indeed, in weapons as in devotion to his preceptor, he
became the foremost of them all. And amongst all the princes, Arjuna alone
became an Atiratha (a car-warrior capable of fighting at one time with
sixty thousand foes). And the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra, beholding
Bhimasena endued with great strength and Arjuna accomplished in all arms,
became very jealous of them.

"'O bull among men, one day Drona desirous of testing the comparative
excellence of all his pupils in the use of arms, collected them all
together after their education had been completed. And before assembling
them together, he had caused an artificial bird, as the would be aim, to
be placed on the top of a neighbouring tree. And when they were all
together, Drona said unto them, "Take up your bows quickly and stand here
aiming at that bird on the tree, with arrows fixed on your bowstrings;
shoot and cut off the bird's head, as soon as I give the order. I shall
give each of you a turn, one by one, my children."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Drona, that foremost of all Angira's sons
first addressed Yudhishthira saying, "O irrepressible one, aim with thy
arrow and shoot as soon as I give the order." Yudhishthira took up the bow
first, as desired, O king, by his preceptor, and stood aiming at the bird.
But, O bull of Bharata's race, Drona in an instant, addressing the Kuru
prince standing with bow in hand, said, "Behold, O prince, that bird on
top of the tree." Yudhishthira replied unto his preceptor, saying, "I do."
But the next instant Drona again asked him, "What dost thou see now, O
prince? Seest thou the tree, myself or thy brothers?" Yudhishthira
answered, "I see the tree, myself, my brothers, and the bird." Drona
repeated his question, but was answered as often in the same words. Drona
then, vexed with Yudhishthira, reproachingly said, "Stand thou apart. It
is not for thee to strike the aim." Then Drona repeated the experiment
with Duryodhana and the other sons of Dhritarashtra, one after another, as
also with his other pupils, Bhima and the rest, including the princes that
had come unto him from other lands. But the answer in every case was the
same as Yudhishthira's viz., "We behold the tree, thyself, our fellow-
pupils, and the bird." And reproached by their preceptor, they were all
ordered, one after another, to stand apart.'"


SECTION CXXXV

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'When everyone had failed, Drona smilingly called
Arjuna and said unto him, "By thee the aim must be shot; therefore, turn
thy eyes to it. Thou must let fly the arrow as soon as I give the order.
Therefore, O son, stand here with bow and arrow for an instant." Thus
addressed, Arjuna stood aiming at the bird as desired by his preceptor,
with his bow bent. An instant after Drona asked him as in the case of
others, "Seest thou, O Arjuna, the bird there, the tree, and myself?"
Arjuna replied, "I see the bird only, but not the tree, or thyself." Then
the irrepressible Drona, well-pleased with Arjuna, the instant after,
again said unto that mighty car-warrior amongst the Pandavas, "If thou
seest the vulture, then describe it to me." Arjuna said, "I see only the
head of the vulture, not its body." At these words of Arjuna, the hair (on
Drona's body) stood on end from delight. He then said to Partha, "Shoot."
And the latter instantly let fly (his arrow) and with his sharp shaft
speedily struck off the head of the vulture on the tree and brought it
down to the ground. No sooner was the deed done than Drona clasped
Phalguna to his bosom and thought Drupada with his friends had already
been vanquished in fight.

"'Some time after, O bull of Bharata's race, Drona, accompanied by all of
his pupils, went to the bank of the Ganga to bathe in that sacred stream.
And when Drona had plunged into the stream, a strong alligator, sent as it
were, by Death himself seized him by the thigh. And though himself quite
capable, Drona in a seeming hurry asked his pupil to rescue him. And he
said, "O, kill this monster and rescue me." Contemporaneously with this
speech, Vibhatsu (Arjuna) struck the monster within the water with five
sharp arrows irresistible in their course, while the other pupils stood
confounded, each at his place. Beholding Arjuna's readiness, Drona
considered him to be the foremost of all his pupils, and became highly
pleased. The monster, in the meantime cut into pieces by the arrows of
Arjuna, released the thigh of illustrious Drona and gave up the ghost. The
son of Bharadwaja then addressed the illustrious and mighty car-warrior
Arjuna and said, "Accept, O thou of mighty arms, this very superior and
irresistible weapon called Brahmasira with the methods of hurling and
recalling it. Thou must not, however, ever use it against any human foe,
for if hurled at any foe endued with inferior energy, it might burn the
whole universe. It is said, O child, that this weapon hath not a peer in
the three worlds. Keep it, therefore, with great care, and listen to what
I say. If ever, O hero, any foe, not human, contendeth against thee thou
mayst then employ it against him for compassing his death in battle."
Pledging himself to do what he was bid, Vibhatsu then, with joined hands,
received that great weapon.

"'The preceptor then, addressing him again, said, "None else in this world
will ever become a superior bowman to thee. Vanquished thou shall never be
by any foe, and thy achievements will be great."'"


SECTION CXXXVI

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'O thou of Bharata's race, beholding the sons of
Dhritarashtra and Pandu accomplished in arms, Drona, O monarch, addressed
king Dhritarashtra, in the presence of Kripa, Somadatta, Valhika, the wise
son of Ganga (Bhishma), Vyasa, and Vidura, and said, "O best of Kuru kings,
thy children have completed their education. With thy permission, O king,
let them now show their proficiency." Hearing him, the king said with a
gladdened heart, "O best of Brahmanas, thou hast, indeed, accomplished a
great deed. Command me thyself as to the place and the time where and when
and the manner also in which the trial may be held. Grief arising from my
own blindness maketh me envy those who, blessed with sight, will behold my
children's prowess in arm. O Kshatri (Vidura), do all that Drona sayeth. O
thou devoted to virtue, I think there is nothing that can be more
agreeable to me." Then Vidura, giving the necessary assurance to the king,
went out to do what he was bid. And Drona endued with great wisdom, then
measured out a piece of land that was void of trees and thickets and
furnished with wells and springs. And upon the spot of land so measured
out, Drona, that first of eloquent men, selecting a lunar day when the
star ascendant was auspicious, offered up sacrifice unto the gods in the
presence of the citizens assembled by proclamation to witness the same.
And then, O bull among men, the artificers of the king built thereon a
large and elegant stage according to the rules laid down in the scriptures,
and it was furnished with all kinds of weapons. They also built another
elegant hall for the lady-spectators. And the citizens constructed many
platforms while the wealthier of them pitched many spacious and high tents
all around.

"'When the day fixed for the Tournament came, the king accompanied by his
ministers, with Bhishma and Kripa, the foremost of preceptors, walking
ahead, came unto that theatre of almost celestial beauty constructed of
pure gold, and decked with strings of pearls and stones of lapis lazuli.
And, O first of victorious men, Gandhari blessed with great good fortune
and Kunti, and the other ladies of the royal house-hold, in gorgeous
attire and accompanied by their waiting women, joyfully ascended the
platforms, like celestial ladies ascending the Sumeru mountain. And the
four orders including the Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, desirous of beholding
the princes' skill in arms, left the city and came running to the spot.
And so impatient was every one to behold the spectacle, that the vast
crowd assembled there in almost an instant. And with the sounds of
trumpets and drums and the noise of many voices, that vast concourse
appeared like an agitated ocean.

"'At last, Drona accompanied by his son, dressed in white (attire), with a
white sacred thread, white locks, white beard, white garlands, and white
sandal-paste rubbed over his body, entered the lists. It seemed as if the
Moon himself accompanied by the planet Mars appeared in an unclouded sky.
On entering Bharadwaja performed timely worship and caused Brahmanas
versed in mantras to celebrate the auspicious rites. And after auspicious
and sweet-sounding musical instruments had been struck up as a
propitiatory ceremony, some persons entered, equipped with various arms.
And then having girded up their loins, those mighty warriors, those
foremost ones of Bharata's race (the princes) entered, furnished with
finger-protectors (gauntlet), and bows, and quivers. And with Yudhishthira
at their head, the valiant princes entered in order of age and began to
show wonderful skill with their weapons. Some of the spectators lowered
their heads, apprehending fall of arrows while others fearlessly gazed on
with wonder. And riding swiftly on horses and managing them "dexterously"
the princes began to hit marks with shafts engraved with their respective
names. And seeing the prowess of the princes armed with bows and arrows,
the spectators thought that they were beholding the city of the Gandharvas,
became filled with amazement. And, O Bharata, all on a sudden, some
hundreds and thousands, with eyes wide open in wonder, exclaimed, "Well
done! Well done!" And having repeatedly displayed their skill and
dexterity in the use of bows and arrows and in the management of cars, the
mighty warriors took up their swords and bucklers, and began to range the
lists, playing their weapons. The spectators saw (with wonder) their
agility, the symmetry of their bodies, their grace, their calmness, the
firmness of their grasp and their deftness in the use of sword and buckler.
Then Vrikodara and Suyodhana, internally delighted (at the prospect of
fight), entered the arena, mace in hand, like two single-peaked mountains.
And those mighty-armed warriors braced their loins, and summoning all
their energy, roared like two infuriate elephants contending for a cow-
elephant; and like two infuriated elephants those mighty heroes
faultlessly (in consonance with the dictates of the science of arm)
careered right and left, circling the lists. And Vidura described to
Dhritarashtra and the mother of the Pandavas (Kunti) and Gandhari, all the
feats of the princes.'"


SECTION CXXXVII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Upon the Kuru king and Bhima, the foremost of
all endued with strength, having entered the arena, the spectators were
divided into two parties in consequence of the partiality swaying their
affections. Some cried, "Behold the heroic king of the Kurus!"--some--
"Behold Bhima!"--And on account of these cries, there was, all on a sudden,
a loud uproar. And seeing the place become like a troubled ocean, the
intelligent Bharadwaja said unto his dear son, Aswatthaman, "Restrain both
these mighty warriors so proficient in arms. Let not the ire of the
assembly be provoked by this combat of Bhima and Duryodhana."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then the son of the preceptor of the princes
restrained those combatants with their maces uplifted and resembling two
swollen oceans agitated by the winds that blow at the universal
dissolution. And Drona himself entering the yard of the arena commanded
the musicians to stop, and with a voice deep as that of the clouds
addressed these words, "Behold ye now that Partha who is dearer to me than
my own son, the master of all arms, the son of Indra himself, and like
unto the younger brother of Indra, (Vishnu)!" And having performed the
propitiatory rites, the youthful Phalguna, equipped with the finger
protector (gauntlet) and his quiver full of shafts and bow in hand,
donning his golden mail, appeared in the lists even like an evening cloud
reflecting the rays of the setting sun and illumined by the hues of the
rainbow and flashes of lightning.

"'On seeing Arjuna, the whole assembly were delighted and conchs began to
be blown all around with other musical instruments. And there arose a
great uproar in consequence of the spectators' exclaiming,--"This is the
graceful son of Kunti!"--"This is the middle (third) Pandava!"--"This is
the son of the mighty Indra!"--"This is the protector of the Kurus"--"This
is the foremost of those versed in arms!"--"This is the foremost of all
cherishers of virtue!"--"This is the foremost of the persons of correct
behaviour, the great repository of the knowledge of manners!" At those
exclamations, the tears of Kunti, mixing with the milk of her breast,
wetted her bosom. And his ears being filled with that uproar, that first
of men, Dhritarashtra, asked Vidura in delight, "O Kshatri, what is this
great uproar for, like unto that of the troubled ocean, arising all on a
sudden and rending the very heavens?" Vidura replied, "O mighty monarch,
the son of Pandu and Pritha, Phalguna, clad in mail hath entered the lists.
And hence this uproar!" Dhritarashtra said, "O thou of soul so great, by
the three fires sprung from Pritha who is even like the sacred fuel, I
have, indeed, been blessed, favoured and protected!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'When the spectators, excited with delight, had
somewhat regained their equanimity, Vibhatsu began to display his
lightness in the use of weapons. By the Agneya weapon, he created fire,
and by the Varuna weapon he created water, by the Vayavya weapon, he
created air, and by the Parjanya weapon he created clouds. And by the
Bhauma weapon, he created land, and by the Parvatya weapon, he brought
mountains into being. By the Antardhana weapon all these were made to
disappear. Now the beloved one of his preceptor (Arjuna) appeared tall and
now short; now he was seen on the yoke of his car, and now on the car
itself; and the next moment he was on the ground. And the hero favoured by
his practised dexterity, hit with his various butts--some tender, some
fine and some of thick composition. And like one shaft, he let fly at a
time into the mouth of a moving iron-boar five shafts together from his
bow-string. And that hero of mighty energy discharged one and twenty
arrows into the hollow of a cow's horn hung up on a rope swaying to and
fro. In this manner, O sinless one, Arjuna showed his profound skill in
the use of sword, bow, and mace, walking over the lists in circles.

"'And, O Bharata, when the exhibition had well-nigh ended, the excitement
of the spectators had cooled, and the sounds of instruments had died out
there was heard proceeding from the gate, the slapping of arms, betokening
might and strength, and even like unto the roar of the thunder. And, O
king, as soon as this sound was heard, the assembled multitude instantly
thought, "Are the mountains splitting or is the earth itself rending
asunder, or is the welkin resounding with the roar of gathering clouds?"
And then all the spectators turned their eyes towards the gate. And Drona
stood, surrounded by the five brothers, the sons of Pritha, and looked
like the moon in conjunction with the five-starred constellation Hasta.
And Duryodhana, that slayer of foes, stood up in haste and was surrounded
by his century of haughty brothers with Aswatthaman amongst them. And that
prince, mace in hand, thus surrounded by his hundred brothers with
uplifted weapons appeared like Purandara in days of yore, encircled by the
celestial host on the occasion of the battle with the Danavas.'"


SECTION CXXXVIII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana continued, 'When the spectators, with eyes expanded with
wonder, made way for that subjugator of hostile cities, Karna, that hero
with his natural mail and face brightened with ear-rings, took up his bow
and girded on his sword, and then entered the spacious lists, like a
walking cliff. That far-famed destroyer of hostile hosts, the large-eyed
Karna, was born of Pritha in her maidenhood. He was a portion of the hot-
beamed Sun and his energy and prowess were like unto those of the lion, or
the bull, or the leader of a herd of elephants. In splendour he resembled
the Sun, in loveliness the Moon, and in energy the fire. Begotten by the
Sun himself, he was tall in stature like a golden palm tree, and, endued
with the vigour of youth, he was capable of slaying a lion. Handsome in
features, he was possessed of countless accomplishments. The mighty-armed
warrior, eyeing all around the arena, bowed indifferently to Drona and
Kripa. And the entire assembly, motionless and with steadfast gaze,
thought, "Who is he?" And they became agitated in their curiosity to know
the warrior. And that foremost of eloquent men, the offspring of the Sun,
in a voice deep as that of the clouds, addressed his unknown brother, the
son of the subduer of the Asura, Paka (Indra), saying, "O Partha, I shall
perform feats before this gazing multitude, excelling all thou hast
performed! Beholding them, thou shall be amazed." And, O thou best of
those blest with speech, he had hardly done when the spectators stood up
all at once, uplifted by some instrument, as it were. And, O tiger among
men, Duryodhana was filled with delight, while Vibhatsu was instantly all
abashment and anger. Then with the permission of Drona, the mighty Karna,
delighting in battle, there did all that Partha had done before. And, O
Bharata, Duryodhana with his brothers thereupon embraced Karna in joy and
then addressed him saying, "Welcome O mighty-armed warrior! I have
obtained thee by good fortune, O polite one! Live thou as thou pleasest,
and command me, and the kingdom of the Kurus." Karna replied, "When thou
hast said it, I regard it as already accomplished. I only long for thy
friendship. And, O lord, my wish is even for a single combat with Arjuna."
Duryodhana said, "Do thou with me enjoy the good things of life! Be thou
the benefactor of thy friend, and, O represser of enemies, place thou thy
feet on the heads of all foes."

"'Arjuna, after this, deeming himself disgraced, said unto Karna
stationed amidst the brothers like unto a cliff, "That path which the
unwelcome intruder and the uninvited talker cometh to, shall be thine,
O Karna, for thou shall be slain by me." Karna replied, "This arena is
meant for all, not for thee alone, O Phalguna! They are kings who are
superior in energy; and verily the Kshatriya regardeth might and might
alone. What need of altercation which is the exercise of the weak? O
Bharata, speak then in arrows until with arrows I strike off thy head
today before the preceptor himself!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hastily embraced by his brothers, Partha that
subduer of hostile cities, with the permission of Drona, advanced for the
combat. On the other side, Karna, having been embraced by Duryodhana with
his brothers, taking up his bow and arrows, stood ready for the fight.
Then the firmament became enveloped in clouds emitting flashes of
lightning, and the coloured bow of Indra appeared shedding its effulgent
rays. And the clouds seemed to laugh on account of the rows of white
cranes that were then on the wing. And seeing Indra thus viewing the arena
from affection (for his son), the sun too dispersed the clouds from over
his own offspring. And Phalguna remained deep hid under cover of the
clouds, while Karna remained visible, being surrounded by the rays of the
Sun. And the son of Dhritarashtra stood by Karna, and Bharadwaja and Kripa
and Bhishma remained with Partha. And the assembly was divided, as also
the female spectators. And knowing the state of things, Kunti the daughter
of Bhoja, swooned away. And by the help of female attendants, Vidura,
versed in the lore of all duties, revived the insensible Kunti by
sprinkling sandal-paste and water on her person. On being restored to
consciousness, Kunti, seeing her two sons clad in mail, was seized with
fear, but she could do nothing (to protect them). And beholding both the
warriors with bows strung in their hands the son of Saradwat, viz., Kripa,
knowing all duties and cognisant of the rules regulating duels, addressed
Karna, saying "This Pandava, who is the youngest son of Kunti, belongeth
to the Kaurava race: he will engage in combat with thee. But, O mighty-
armed one, thou too must tell us thy lineage and the names of thy father
and mother and the royal line of which thou art the ornament. Learning all
this, Partha will fight with thee or not (as he will think fit). Sons of
kings never fight with men of inglorious lineage."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'When he was thus addressed by Kripa, Karna's
countenance became like unto a lotus pale and torn with the pelting
showers in the rainy season. Duryodhana said, "O preceptor, verily the
scriptures have it that three classes of persons can lay claim to royalty,
viz., persons of the blood royal, heroes, and lastly, those that lead
armies. If Phalguna is unwilling to fight with one who is not a king, I
will install Karna as king of Anga."'

"Vaisampayana said, 'At that very moment, seated on a golden seat, with
parched paddy and with flowers and water-pots and much gold, the mighty
warrior Karna was installed king by Brahmanas versed in mantras. And the
royal umbrella was held over his head, while Yak-tails waved around that
redoubtable hero of graceful mien. And the cheers, having ceased, king
(Karna) said unto the Kaurava Duryodhana, "O tiger among monarchs, what
shall I give unto thee that may compare with thy gift of a kingdom? O king,
I will do all thou biddest!" And Suyodhana said unto him, "I eagerly wish
for thy friendship." Thus spoken to, Karna replied, "Be it so." And they
embraced each other in joy, and experienced great happiness.'"


SECTION CXXXIX

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'After this, with his sheet loosely hanging down,
Adhiratha entered the lists, perspiring and trembling, and supporting
himself on a staff.

"'Seeing him, Karna left his bow and impelled by filial regard bowed down
his head still wet with the water of inauguration. And then the charioteer,
hurriedly covering his feet with the end of his sheet, addressed Karna
crowned with success as his son. And the charioteer embraced Karna and
from excess of affection bedewed his head with tears, that head still wet
with the water sprinkled over it on account of the coronation as king of
Anga. Seeing the charioteer, the Pandava Bhimasena took Karna for a
charioteer's son, and said by way of ridicule, "O son of a charioteer,
thou dost not deserve death in fight at the hands of Partha. As befits thy
race take thou anon the whip. And, O worst of mortals, surely thou art not
worthy to sway the kingdom of Anga, even as a dog doth not deserve the
butter placed before the sacrificial fire." Karna, thus addressed, with
slightly quivering lips fetched a deep sigh, looked at the God of the day
in the skies. And even as a mad elephant riseth from an assemblage of
lotuses, the mighty Duryodhana rose in wrath from among his brothers, and
addressed that performer of dreadful deeds, Bhimasena, present there, "O
Vrikodara, it behoveth thee not to speak such words. Might is the cardinal
virtue of a Kshatriya, and even a Kshatriya of inferior birth deserveth to
be fought with. The lineage of heroes, like the sources of a lordly river,
is ever unknown. The fire that covereth the whole world riseth from the
waters. The thunder that slayeth the Danavas was made of a bone of (a
mortal named) Dadhichi. The illustrious deity Guha, who combines in his
composition the portions of all the other deities is of a lineage unknown.
Some call him the offspring of Agni; some, of Krittika, some, of Rudra,
and some of Ganga. It hath been heard by us that persons born in the
Kshatriya order have become Brahmanas. Viswamitra and others (born
Kshatriyas) have obtained the eternal Brahma. The foremost of all wielders
of weapons, the preceptor Drona hath been born in a waterpot and Kripa of
the race of Gotama hath sprung from a clump of heath. Your own births, ye
Pandava princes, are known to me. Can a she-deer bring forth a tiger (like
Karna), of the splendour of the Sun, and endued with every auspicious mark,
and born also with a natural mail and ear-rings? This prince among men
deserveth the sovereignty of the world, not of Anga only, in consequence
of the might of his arm and my swearing to obey him in everything. If
there be anybody here to whom all that I have done unto Karna hath become
intolerable, let him ascend his chariot and bend his bow with the help of
his feet."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then there arose a confused murmur amongst the
spectators approving of Duryodhana's speech. The sun, however, went down,
but prince Duryodhana taking Karna's hand led him out of the arena lighted
with countless lamps. And, O king, the Pandavas also, accompanied by Drona
and Kripa and Bhishma, returned to their abodes. And the people, too, came
away, some naming Arjuna, some Karna, and some Duryodhana (as the victor
of the day). And Kunti, recognising her son in Karna by the various
auspicious marks on his person and beholding him installed in the
sovereignty of Anga, was from motherly affection, very pleased. And
Duryodhana, O monarch, having obtained Karna (in this way), banished his
fears arising out of Arjuna's proficiency in arms. And the heroic Karna,
accomplished in arms, began to gratify Duryodhana by sweet speeches, while
Yudhishthira was impressed with the belief that there was no warrior on
earth like unto Karna.'"


SECTION CXL

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Beholding the Pandavas and the son of
Dhritarashtra accomplished in arms, Drona thought the time had come when
he could demand the preceptorial fee. And, O king, assembling his pupils
one day together, the preceptor Drona asked of them the fee, saying,
"Seize Drupada, the king of Panchala in battle and bring him unto me. That
shall be the most acceptable fee." Those warriors then answering, "So be
it", speedily mounted up on their chariots, and for bestowing upon their
preceptor the fee he had demanded, marched out, accompanied by him. Those
bulls among men, smiting the Panchalas on their way, laid siege to the
capital of the great Drupada. And Duryodhana and Karna and the mighty
Yuyutsu, and Duhsasana and Vikarna and Jalasandha and Sulochana,--these
and many other foremost of Kshatriya princes of great prowess, vied with
one another in becoming the foremost in the attack. And the princes,
riding in first class chariots and following the cavalry, entered the
hostile capital, and proceeded along the streets.

"'Meanwhile, the king of Panchala, beholding that mighty force and hearing
its loud clamour, came out of his palace, accompanied by his brothers.
Though king Yajnasena was well-armed, the Kuru army assailed him with a
shower of arrows, uttering their war-cry. Yajnasena, however, not easy to
be subdued in battle, approaching the Kurus upon his white chariot, began
to rain his fierce arrows around.

"'Before the battle commenced, Arjuna, beholding the pride of prowess
displayed by the princes, addressed his preceptor, that best of Brahmanas,
Drona, and said, "We shall exert ourselves after these have displayed
their prowess. The king of Panchala can never be taken on the field of the
