But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall
he be in rest.

Wis 4:8
For honourable age is not that which standeth in length of
time, nor that is measured by number of years.

Wis 4:9
But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life
is old age.

Wis 4:10
He pleased God, and was beloved of him: so that living among
sinners he was translated.

Wis 4:11
Yea speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should
alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul.

Wis 4:12
For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that
are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine
the simple mind.

Wis 4:13
He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long
time:

Wis 4:14
For his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted he to take
him away from among the wicked.

Wis 4:15
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they
up this in their minds, That his grace and mercy is with his
saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen.

Wis 4:16
Thus the righteous that is dead shall condemn the ungodly
which are living; and youth that is soon perfected the many
years and old age of the unrighteous.

Wis 4:17
For they shall see the end of the wise, and shall not
understand what God in his counsel hath decreed of him, and to
what end the Lord hath set him in safety.

Wis 4:18
They shall see him, and despise him; but God shall laugh them
to scorn: and they shall hereafter be a vile carcase, and a
reproach among the dead for evermore.

Wis 4:19
For he shall rend them, and cast them down headlong, that
they shall be speechless; and he shall shake them from the
foundation; and they shall be utterly laid waste, and be in
sorrow; and their memorial shall perish.

Wis 4:20
And when they cast up the accounts of their sins, they shall
come with fear: and their own iniquities shall convince them to
their face.

Wis 5:1
Then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before
the face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of
his labours.

Wis 5:2
When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear,
and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, so far
beyond all that they looked for.

Wis 5:3
And they repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit shall
say within themselves, This was he, whom we had sometimes in
derision, and a proverb of reproach:

Wis 5:4
We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be
without honour:

Wis 5:5
How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is
among the saints!

Wis 5:6
Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light
of righteousness hath not shined unto us, and the sun of
righteousness rose not upon us.

Wis 5:7
We wearied ourselves in the way of wickedness and
destruction: yea, we have gone through deserts, where there lay
no way: but as for the way of the Lord, we have not known it.

Wis 5:8
What hath pride profited us? or what good hath riches with
our vaunting brought us?

Wis 5:9
All those things are passed away like a shadow, and as a post
that hasted by;

Wis 5:10
And as a ship that passeth over the waves of the water, which
when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found, neither
the pathway of the keel in the waves;

Wis 5:11
Or as when a bird hath flown through the air, there is no
token of her way to be found, but the light air being beaten
with the stroke of her wings and parted with the violent noise
and motion of them, is passed through, and therein afterwards no
sign where she went is to be found;

Wis 5:12
Or like as when an arrow is shot at a mark, it parteth the
air, which immediately cometh together again, so that a man
cannot know where it went through:

Wis 5:13
Even so we in like manner, as soon as we were born, began to
draw to our end, and had no sign of virtue to shew; but were
consumed in our own wickedness.

Wis 5:14
For the hope of the Godly is like dust that is blown away
with the wind; like a thin froth that is driven away with the
storm; like as the smoke which is dispersed here and there with
a tempest, and passeth away as the remembrance of a guest that
tarrieth but a day.

Wis 5:15
But the righteous live for evermore; their reward also is
with the Lord, and the care of them is with the most High.

Wis 5:16
Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a
beautiful crown from the Lord's hand: for with his right hand
shall he cover them, and with his arm shall he protect them.

Wis 5:17
He shall take to him his jealousy for complete armour, and
make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies.

Wis 5:18
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true
judgment instead of an helmet.

Wis 5:19
He shall take holiness for an invincible shield.

Wis 5:20
His severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword, and the world
shall fight with him against the unwise.

Wis 5:21
Then shall the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from
the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they fly to the
mark.

Wis 5:22
And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone
bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the
floods shall cruelly drown them.

Wis 5:23
Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a
storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the
whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the
mighty.

Wis 6:1
Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be
judges of the ends of the earth.

Wis 6:2
Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude
of nations.

Wis 6:3
For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the
Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.

Wis 6:4
Because, being ministers of his kingdom, ye have not judged
aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the counsel of God;

Wis 6:5
Horribly and speedily shall he come upon you: for a sharp
judgment shall be to them that be in high places.

Wis 6:6
For mercy will soon pardon the meanest: but mighty men shall
be mightily tormented.

Wis 6:7
For he which is Lord over all shall fear no man's person,
neither shall he stand in awe of any man's greatness: for he
hath made the small and great, and careth for all alike.

Wis 6:8
But a sore trial shall come upon the mighty.

Wis 6:9
Unto you therefore, O kings, do I speak, that ye may learn
wisdom, and not fall away.

Wis 6:10
For they that keep holiness holily shall be judged holy: and
they that have learned such things shall find what to answer.

Wis 6:11
Wherefore set your affection upon my words; desire them, and
ye shall be instructed.

Wis 6:12
Wisdom is glorious, and never fadeth away: yea, she is easily
seen of them that love her, and found of such as seek her.

Wis 6:13
She preventeth them that desire her, in making herself first
known unto them.

Wis 6:14
Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail: for he
shall find her sitting at his doors.

Wis 6:15
To think therefore upon her is perfection of wisdom: and
whoso watcheth for her shall quickly be without care.

Wis 6:16
For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her,
sheweth herself favourably unto them in the ways, and meeteth
them in every thought.

Wis 6:17
For the very true beginning of her is the desire of
discipline; and the care of discipline is love;

Wis 6:18
And love is the keeping of her laws; and the giving heed unto
her laws is the assurance of incorruption;

Wis 6:19
And incorruption maketh us near unto God:

Wis 6:20
Therefore the desire of wisdom bringeth to a kingdom.

Wis 6:21
If your delight be then in thrones and sceptres, O ye kings
of the people, honour wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore.

Wis 6:22
As for wisdom, what she is, and how she came up, I will tell
you, and will not hide mysteries from you: but will seek her out
from the beginning of her nativity, and bring the knowledge of
her into light, and will not pass over the truth.

Wis 6:23
Neither will I go with consuming envy; for such a man shall
have no fellowship with wisdom.

Wis 6:24
But the multitude of the wise is the welfare of the world:
and a wise king is the upholding of the people.

Wis 6:25
Receive therefore instruction through my words, and it shall
do you good.

Wis 7:1
I myself also am a mortal man, like to all, and the offspring
of him that was first made of the earth,

Wis 7:2
And in my mother's womb was fashioned to be flesh in the time
of ten months, being compacted in blood, of the seed of man, and
the pleasure that came with sleep.

Wis 7:3
And when I was born, I drew in the common air, and fell upon
the earth, which is of like nature, and the first voice which I
uttered was crying, as all others do.

Wis 7:4
I was nursed in swaddling clothes, and that with cares.

Wis 7:5
For there is no king that had any other beginning of birth.

Wis 7:6
For all men have one entrance into life, and the like going
out.

Wis 7:7
Wherefore I prayed, and understanding was given me: I called
upon God, and the spirit of wisdom came to me.

Wis 7:8
I preferred her before sceptres and thrones, and esteemed
riches nothing in comparison of her.

Wis 7:9
Neither compared I unto her any precious stone, because all
gold in respect of her is as a little sand, and silver shall be
counted as clay before her.

Wis 7:10
I loved her above health and beauty, and chose to have her
instead of light: for the light that cometh from her never goeth
out.

Wis 7:11
All good things together came to me with her, and innumerable
riches in her hands.

Wis 7:12
And I rejoiced in them all, because wisdom goeth before them:
and I knew not that she was the mother of them.

Wis 7:13
I learned diligently, and do communicate her liberally: I do
not hide her riches.

Wis 7:14
For she is a treasure unto men that never faileth: which they
that use become the friends of God, being commended for the
gifts that come from learning.

Wis 7:15
God hath granted me to speak as I would, and to conceive as
is meet for the things that are given me: because it is he that
leadeth unto wisdom, and directeth the wise.

Wis 7:16
For in his hand are both we and our words; all wisdom also,
and knowledge of workmanship.

Wis 7:17
For he hath given me certain knowledge of the things that
are, namely, to know how the world was made, and the operation
of the elements:

Wis 7:18
The beginning, ending, and midst of the times: the
alterations of the turning of the sun, and the change of
seasons:

Wis 7:19
The circuits of years, and the positions of stars:

Wis 7:20
The natures of living creatures, and the furies of wild
beasts: the violence of winds, and the reasonings of men: the
diversities of plants and the virtues of roots:

Wis 7:21
And all such things as are either secret or manifest, them I
know.

Wis 7:22
For wisdom, which is the worker of all things, taught me: for
in her is an understanding spirit holy, one only, manifold,
subtil, lively, clear, undefiled, plain, not subject to hurt,
loving the thing that is good quick, which cannot be letted,
ready to do good,

Wis 7:23
Kind to man, steadfast, sure, free from care, having all
power, overseeing all things, and going through all
understanding, pure, and most subtil, spirits.

Wis 7:24
For wisdom is more moving than any motion: she passeth and
goeth through all things by reason of her pureness.

Wis 7:25
For she is the breath of the power of God, and a pure
influence flowing from the glory of the Almighty: therefore can
no defiled thing fall into her.

Wis 7:26
For she is the brightness of the everlasting light, the
unspotted mirror of the power of God, and the image of his
goodness.

Wis 7:27
And being but one, she can do all things: and remaining in
herself, she maketh all things new: and in all ages entering
into holy souls, she maketh them friends of God, and prophets.

Wis 7:28
For God loveth none but him that dwelleth with wisdom.

Wis 7:29
For she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the
order of stars: being compared with the light, she is found
before it.

Wis 7:30
For after this cometh night: but vice shall not prevail
against wisdom.

Wis 8:1
Wisdom reacheth from one end to another mightily: and sweetly
doth she order all things.

Wis 8:2
I loved her, and sought her out from my youth, I desired to
make her my spouse, and I was a lover of her beauty.

Wis 8:3
In that she is conversant with God, she magnifieth her
nobility: yea, the Lord of all things himself loved her.

Wis 8:4
For she is privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God,
and a lover of his works.

Wis 8:5
If riches be a possession to be desired in this life; what is
richer than wisdom, that worketh all things?

Wis 8:6
And if prudence work; who of all that are is a more cunning
workman than she?

Wis 8:7
And if a man love righteousness her labours are virtues: for
she teacheth temperance and prudence, justice and fortitude:
which are such things, as en can have nothing more profitable in
their life.

Wis 8:8
If a man desire much experience, she knoweth things of old,
and conjectureth aright what is to come: she knoweth the
subtilties of speeches, and can expound dark sentences: she
foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events of seasons and
times.

Wis 8:9
Therefore I purposed to take her to me to live with me,
knowing that she would be a counsellor of good things, and a
comfort in cares and grief.

Wis 8:10
For her sake I shall have estimation among the multitude, and
honour with the elders, though I be young.

Wis 8:11
I shall be found of a quick conceit in judgment, and shall be
admired in the sight of great men.

Wis 8:12
When I hold my tongue, they shall bide my leisure, and when I
speak, they shall give good ear unto me: if I talk much, they
shall lay their hands upon their mouth.

Wis 8:13
Moreover by the means of her I shall obtain immortality, and
leave behind me an everlasting memorial to them that come after
me.

Wis 8:14
I shall set the people in order, and the nations shall be
subject unto me.

Wis 8:15
Horrible tyrants shall be afraid, when they do but hear of
me; I shall be found good among the multitude, and valiant in
war.

Wis 8:16
After I am come into mine house, I will repose myself with
her: for her conversation hath no bitterness; and to live with
her hath no sorrow, but mirth and joy.

Wis 8:17
Now when I considered these things in myself, and pondered
them in my heart, how that to be allied unto wisdom is
immortality;

Wis 8:18
And great pleasure it is to have her friendship; and in the
works of her hands are infinite riches; and in the exercise of
conference with her, prudence; and in talking with her, a good
report; I went about seeking how to take her to me.

Wis 8:19
For I was a witty child, and had a good spirit.

Wis 8:20
Yea rather, being good, I came into a body undefiled.

Wis 8:21
Nevertheless, when I perceived that I could not otherwise
obtain her, except God gave her me; and that was a point of
wisdom also to know whose gift she was; I prayed unto the Lord,
and besought him, and with my whole heart I said,

Wis 9:1
O God of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, who hast made all
things with thy word,

Wis 9:2
And ordained man through thy wisdom, that he should have
dominion over the creatures which thou hast made,

Wis 9:3
And order the world according to equity and righteousness,
and execute judgment with an upright heart:

Wis 9:4
Give me wisdom, that sitteth by thy throne; and reject me not
from among thy children:

Wis 9:5
For I thy servant and son of thine handmaid am a feeble
person, and of a short time, and too young for the understanding
of judgment and laws.

Wis 9:6
For though a man be never so perfect among the children of
men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing
regarded.

Wis 9:7
Thou hast chosen me to be a king of thy people, and a judge
of thy sons and daughters:

Wis 9:8
Thou hast commanded me to build a temple upon thy holy mount,
and an altar in the city wherein thou dwellest, a resemblance of
the holy tabernacle, which thou hast prepared from the
beginning.

Wis 9:9
And wisdom was with thee: which knoweth thy works, and was
present when thou madest the world, and knew what was acceptable
in thy sight, and right in thy commandments.

Wis 9:10
O send her out of thy holy heavens, and from the throne of
thy glory, that being present she may labour with me, that I may
know what is pleasing unto thee.

Wis 9:11
For she knoweth and understandeth all things, and she shall
lead me soberly in my doings, and preserve me in her power.

Wis 9:12
So shall my works be acceptable, and then shall I judge thy
people righteously, and be worthy to sit in my father's seat.

Wis 9:13
For what man is he that can know the counsel of God? or who
can think what the will of the Lord is?

Wis 9:14
For the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our devices
are but uncertain.

Wis 9:15
For the corruptible body presseth down the soul, and the
earthy tabernacle weigheth down the mind that museth upon many
things.

Wis 9:16
And hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon earth,
and with labour do we find the things that are before us: but
the things that are in heaven who hath searched out?

Wis 9:17
And thy counsel who hath known, except thou give wisdom, and
send thy Holy Spirit from above?

Wis 9:18
For so the ways of them which lived on the earth were
reformed, and men were taught the things that are pleasing unto
thee, and were saved through wisdom.

Wis 10:1
She preserved the first formed father of the world, that was
created alone, and brought him out of his fall,

Wis 10:2
And gave him power to rule all things.

Wis 10:3
But when the unrighteous went away from her in his anger, he
perished also in the fury wherewith he murdered his brother.

Wis 10:4
For whose cause the earth being drowned with the flood,
wisdom again preserved it, and directed the course of the
righteous in a piece of wood of small value.

Wis 10:5
Moreover, the nations in their wicked conspiracy being
confounded, she found out the righteous, and preserved him
blameless unto God, and kept him strong against his tender
compassion toward his son.

Wis 10:6
When the ungodly perished, she delivered the righteous man,
who fled from the fire which fell down upon the five cities.

Wis 10:7
Of whose wickedness even to this day the waste land that
smoketh is a testimony, and plants bearing fruit that never come
to ripeness: and a standing pillar of salt is a monument of an
unbelieving soul.

Wis 10:8
For regarding not wisdom, they gat not only this hurt, that
they knew not the things which were good; but also left behind
them to the world a memorial of their foolishness: so that in
the things wherein they offended they could not so much as be
hid.

Wis 10:9
Rut wisdom delivered from pain those that attended upon her.

Wis 10:10
When the righteous fled from his brother's wrath she guided
him in right paths, shewed him the kingdom of God, and gave him
knowledge of holy things, made him rich in his travels, and
multiplied the fruit of his labours.

Wis 10:11
In the covetousness of such as oppressed him she stood by
him, and made him rich.

Wis 10:12
She defended him from his enemies, and kept him safe from
those that lay in wait, and in a sore conflict she gave him the
victory; that he might know that goodness is stronger than all.

Wis 10:13
When the righteous was sold, she forsook him not, but
delivered him from sin: she went down with him into the pit,

Wis 10:14
And left him not in bonds, till she brought him the sceptre
of the kingdom, and power against those that oppressed him: as
for them that had accused him, she shewed them to be liars, and
gave him perpetual glory.

Wis 10:15
She delivered the righteous people and blameless seed from
the nation that oppressed them.

Wis 10:16
She entered into the soul of the servant of the Lord, and
withstood dreadful kings in wonders and signs;

Wis 10:17
Rendered to the righteous a reward of their labours, guided
them in a marvellous way, and was unto them for a cover by day,
and a light of stars in the night season;

Wis 10:18
Brought them through the Red sea, and led them through much
water:

Wis 10:19
But she drowned their enemies, and cast them up out of the
bottom of the deep.

Wis 10:20
Therefore the righteous spoiled the ungodly, and praised thy
holy name, O Lord, and magnified with one accord thine hand,
that fought for them.

Wis 10:21
For wisdom opened the mouth of the dumb, and made the tongues
of them that cannot speak eloquent.

Wis 11:1
She prospered their works in the hand of the holy prophet.

Wis 11:2
They went through the wilderness that was not inhabited, and
pitched tents in places where there lay no way.

Wis 11:3
They stood against their enemies, and were avenged of their
adversaries.

Wis 11:4
When they were thirsty, they called upon thee, and water was
given them out of the flinty rock, and their thirst was quenched
out of the hard stone.

Wis 11:5
For by what things their enemies were punished, by the same
they in their need were benefited.

Wis 11:6
For instead of of a perpetual running river troubled with
foul blood,

Wis 11:7
For a manifest reproof of that commandment, whereby the
infants were slain, thou gavest unto them abundance of water by
a means which they hoped not for:

Wis 11:8
Declaring by that thirst then how thou hadst punished their
adversaries.

Wis 11:9
For when they were tried albeit but in mercy chastised, they
knew how the ungodly were judged in wrath and tormented,
thirsting in another manner than the just.

Wis 11:10
For these thou didst admonish and try, as a father: but the
other, as a severe king, thou didst condemn and punish.

Wis 11:11
Whether they were absent or present, they were vexed alike.

Wis 11:12
For a double grief came upon them, and a groaning for the
remembrance of things past.

Wis 11:13
For when they heard by their own punishments the other to be
benefited, they had some feeling of the Lord.

Wis 11:14
For whom they respected with scorn, when he was long before
thrown out at the casting forth of the infants, him in the end,
when they saw what came to pass, they admired.

Wis 11:15
But for the foolish devices of their wickedness, wherewith
being deceived they worshipped serpents void of reason, and vile
beasts, thou didst send a multitude of unreasonable beasts upon
them for vengeance;

Wis 11:16
That they might know, that wherewithal a man sinneth, by the
same also shall he be punished.

Wis 11:17
For thy Almighty hand, that made the world of matter without
form, wanted not means to send among them a multitude of bears
or fierce lions,

Wis 11:18
Or unknown wild beasts, full of rage, newly created,
breathing out either a fiery vapour, or filthy scents of
scattered smoke, or shooting horrible sparkles out of their
eyes:

Wis 11:19
Whereof not only the harm might dispatch them at once, but
also the terrible sight utterly destroy them.

Wis 11:20
Yea, and without these might they have fallen down with one
blast, being persecuted of vengeance, and scattered abroad
through the breath of thy power: but thou hast ordered all
things in measure and number and weight.

Wis 11:21
For thou canst shew thy great strength at all times when thou
wilt; and who may withstand the power of thine arm?

Wis 11:22
For the whole world before thee is as a little grain of the
balance, yea, as a drop of the morning dew that falleth down
upon the earth.

Wis 11:23
But thou hast mercy upon all; for thou canst do all things,
and winkest at the sins of men, because they should amend.

Wis 11:24
For thou lovest all the things that are, and abhorrest
nothing which thou hast made: for never wouldest thou have made
any thing, if thou hadst hated it.

Wis 11:25
And how could any thing have endured, if it had not been thy
will? or been preserved, if not called by thee?

Wis 11:26
But thou sparest all: for they are thine, O Lord, thou lover
of souls.

Wis 12:1
For thine incorruptible Spirit is in all things.

Wis 12:2
Therefore chastenest thou them by little and little that
offend, and warnest them by putting them in remembrance wherein
they have offended, that leaving their wickedness they may
believe on thee, O Lord.

Wis 12:3
For it was thy will to destroy by the hands of our fathers
both those old inhabitants of thy holy land,

Wis 12:4
Whom thou hatedst for doing most odious works of witchcrafts,
and wicked sacrifices;

Wis 12:5
And also those merciless murderers of children, and devourers
of man's flesh, and the feasts of blood,

Wis 12:6
With their priests out of the midst of their idolatrous crew,
and the parents, that killed with their own hands souls
destitute of help:

Wis 12:7
That the land, which thou esteemedst above all other, might
receive a worthy colony of God's children.

Wis 12:8
Nevertheless even those thou sparedst as men, and didst send
wasps, forerunners of thine host, to destroy them by little and
little.

Wis 12:9
Not that thou wast unable to bring the ungodly under the hand
of the righteous in battle, or to destroy them at once with
cruel beasts, or with one rough word:

Wis 12:10
But executing thy judgments upon them by little and little,
thou gavest them place of repentance, not being ignorant that
they were a naughty generation, and that their malice was bred
in them, and that their cogitation would never be changed.

Wis 12:11
For it was a cursed seed from the beginning; neither didst
thou for fear of any man give them pardon for those things
wherein they sinned.

Wis 12:12
For who shall say, What hast thou done? or who shall
withstand thy judgment? or who shall accuse thee for the nations
that perish, whom thou made? or who shall come to stand against
thee, to be revenged for the unrighteous men?

Wis 12:13
For neither is there any God but thou that careth for all, to
whom thou mightest shew that thy judgment is not unright.

Wis 12:14
Neither shall king or tyrant be able to set his face against
thee for any whom thou hast punished.

Wis 12:15
Forsomuch then as thou art righteous thyself, thou orderest
all things righteously: thinking it not agreeable with thy power
to condemn him that hath not deserved to be punished.

Wis 12:16
For thy power is the beginning of righteousness, and because
thou art the Lord of all, it maketh thee to be gracious unto
all.

Wis 12:17
For when men will not believe that thou art of a full power,
thou shewest thy strength, and among them that know it thou
makest their boldness manifest.

Wis 12:18
But thou, mastering thy power, judgest with equity, and
orderest us with great favour: for thou mayest use power when
thou wilt.

Wis 12:19
But by such works hast thou taught thy people that the just
man should be merciful, and hast made thy children to be of a
good hope that thou givest repentance for sins.

Wis 12:20
For if thou didst punish the enemies of thy children, and the
condemned to death, with such deliberation, giving them time and
place, whereby they might be delivered from their malice:

Wis 12:21
With how great circumspection didst thou judge thine own
sons, unto whose fathers thou hast sworn, and made covenants of
good promises?

Wis 12:22
Therefore, whereas thou dost chasten us, thou scourgest our
