it is entitled to special notice.

In the letter where this passage occurs the writer is extolling the
dignity of presbyters, and is endeavouring to shew that they are very
little inferior to bishops. He admits, indeed, that, in his own days,
they had ceased to ordain; but he intimates that they once possessed the
right, and that they retained it in all its integrity until the former
part of the preceding century. Some have thought that Jerome has here
expressed himself indefinitely, and that he did not know the exact date
at which the arrangement he describes ceased at Alexandria. But his
testimony, when fairly analysed, can scarcely be said to want precision;
for he obviously speaks of Heraclas and Dionysius as bishops _by
anticipation_, alleging that a custom which anciently existed among the
elders of the Egyptian metropolis was maintained until the time when
these ecclesiastics, who afterwards successively occupied the episcopal
chair, sat together in the presbytery. The period, thus pointed out, can
be easily ascertained. Demetrius, bishop of Alexandria, after a long
official life of forty-three years, died about A.D. 232, [581:1] and it
is well known that Heraclas and Dionysius were both members of his
presbytery towards the close of his episcopal administration. It was,
therefore, shortly before his demise that the new system was introduced.
In certain parts of the Church the arrangement mentioned by Jerome
probably continued somewhat longer. Cyprian apparently hints at such
cases of exception when he says that in "_almost_ all the provinces,"
[581:2] the neighbouring bishops assembled, on the occasion of an
episcopal vacancy, at the new election and ordination. It may have been
that, in a few of the more considerable towns, the elders still
continued to nominate their president.

When the erudite Roman presbyter informs us that "_even_ at Alexandria"
[581:3] the elders formerly made their own bishop, his language
obviously implies that such a mode of creating the chief pastor was not
confined to the Church of the metropolis of Egypt. It existed wherever
Christianity had gained a footing, and he mentions this particular see,
partly, because of its importance--being, in point of rank, the second
in the Empire--and partly, perhaps, because the remarkable circumstances
in its history, leading to the alteration which he specifies, were known
to all his well-informed contemporaries. Jerome does not say that the
Alexandrian presbyters inducted their bishop by imposition of hands,
[582:1] or set him apart to his office by any formal ordination. His
words apparently indicate that they did not recognize the necessity of
any special rite of investiture; that they made the bishop by election;
and that, when once acknowledged as the object of their choice, he was
at liberty to enter forthwith on the performance of his episcopal
duties. When the Roman soldiers made an emperor they appointed him by
acclamation, and the cheers which issued from their ranks as he stood up
before the legions and as he was clothed with the purple by one of
themselves, constituted the ceremony of his inauguration. The ancient
archdeacon was still one of the deacons; [582:2] as he was the chief
almoner of the Church, he required to possess tact, discernment, and
activity; and, in the fourth century, he was nominated to his office by
his fellow-deacons. Jerome assures us that, until the time of Heraclas
and Dionysius, the elders made a bishop just in the same way as in his
own day the soldiers made an emperor, or as the deacons chose one whom
they knew to be industrious, and made him an archdeacon.

In one of the letters purporting to have been written by Pius, bishop of
Rome, to Justus of Vienne, shortly after the middle of the second
century, there is a passage which supplies a singularly striking
confirmation of the testimony of Jerome. Even were we to admit that the
genuineness of this epistle cannot be satisfactorily established, it
must still be acknowledged to be a very ancient document, and were it of
somewhat later date than its title indicates, it should at least be
received as representing the traditions which prevailed respecting the
ecclesiastical arrangements of an early antiquity. In this communication
Pius speaks of his episcopal correspondent of Vienne as "_constituted by
the brethren_ and clothed with the dress of the bishops." [583:1] By
"the brethren," as is plain from another part of the letter, [583:2] he
understands the presbytery. And as the soldiers made a sovereign by
saluting him emperor, and arraying him in the purple; so the elders made
a president by clothing him with a certain piece of dress, and calling
him bishop. Thus, the statement of Jerome is exactly corroborated by the
evidence of this witness.

We may infer from the letter of Pius that in Gaul and Italy, as well as
in Egypt, the elders were in the habit of making their own bishop.
[583:3] There is not a particle of evidence to shew that any other
arrangement originally existed. The declaration of so competent an
authority as Jerome backed by the attestation of this ancient epistle
may be regarded as perfectly conclusive. [583:4] But other proofs
of the same fact are not wanting. For a long period the bishop continued
to be known by the title of "the elder who presides"-a designation which
obviously implies that he was still only one of the presbyters. When the
Paschal controversy created such excitement, and when Victor of Rome
threatened to renounce the communion of those who held views different
from his own, Irenaeus of Lyons wrote a letter of remonstrance to the
haughty churchman in which he broadly reminded him of his ecclesiastical
position. "_Those, presbyters_ before Soter _who governed_ the Church
over which you now preside, I mean," said he, "Anicetus, and Pius,
Hyginus with Telesphorus and Xystus, neither did themselves observe, nor
did they permit those after them to observe it.... But those _very
presbyters_ before you who did not observe it, sent the Eucharist to
those of Churches which did." [584:1] Irenaeus here endeavours to teach
the bishop of Rome a lesson of humility by reminding him repeatedly that
he and his predecessors were but presbyters.

The pastor of Lyons speaks even still more distinctly respecting the
status of the bishops who flourished in his generation. Thus, he
says--"We should obey those presbyters in the Church who have the
succession from the apostles, and who, _with the succession of the
episcopate_, have received the certain gift of truth according to the
good pleasure of the Father: but we should hold as suspected or as
heretics and of bad sentiments the rest who depart from the principal
succession, and meet together wherever they please.... From all such we
must keep aloof, but we must adhere to those who both preserve, as we
have already mentioned, the doctrine of the apostles, and exhibit, _with
the order of the presbytery_, sound teaching and an inoffensive
conversation." [585:1] "The order of the presbytery" obviously signifies
the official character conveyed by "the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery," and yet such was the ordination of those who, in the time
of Irenaeus, possessed "the succession from the apostles" and "the
succession of the episcopate."

Some imagine that no one can be properly qualified to administer divine
ordinances who has not received episcopal ordination, but a more
accurate acquaintance with the history of the early Church is all that
is required to dissipate the delusion. The preceding statements clearly
shew that, for upwards of one hundred and fifty years after the death of
our Lord, all the Christian ministers throughout the world were ordained
by presbyters. The bishops themselves were of "the order of the
presbytery," and, as they had never received episcopal consecration,
they could only ordain as presbyters. The bishop was, in fact, nothing
more than the chief presbyter. [585:2] A father of the third century
accordingly observes--"All power and grace are established in the Church
where _elders preside_, who possess the power, as well of baptizing, as
of confirming and ordaining." [585:3]

An old ecclesiastical law, recently presented for the first time to the
English reader, [586:1] throws much light on a portion of the history of
the Church long buried in great obscurity. This law may well remind us
of those remains of extinct classes of animals which the naturalist
studies with so much interest, as it obviously belongs to an era even
anterior to that of the so-called apostolical canons. [586:2] Though it
is part of a series of regulations once current in the Church of
Ethiopia, there is every reason to believe that it was framed in Italy,
and that its authority was acknowledged by the Church of Rome in the
time of Hippolytus. [586:3] It marks a transition period in the history
of ecclesiastical polity, and whilst it indirectly confirms the
testimony of Jerome relative to the custom of the Church of Alexandria,
it shews that the state of things to which the learned presbyter refers
was now superseded by another arrangement. This curious specimen of
ancient legislation treats of the appointment and ordination of
ministers. "The bishop," says this enactment, "is to be elected by all
the people.... And they shall choose ONE OF THE BISHOPS AND ONE OF THE
PRESBYTERS, ... AND THESE SHALL LAY THEIR HANDS UPON HIS HEAD AND PRAY."
[586:4] Here, to avoid the confusion arising from a whole crowd of
individuals imposing hands in ordination, two were selected to act on
behalf of the assembled office-bearers; and, that the parties entitled
to officiate might be fairly represented, the deputies were to be a
bishop and a presbyter. [587:1] The canon illustrates the jealousy with
which the presbyters in the early part of the third century still
guarded some of their rights and privileges. In the matter of investing
others with Church authority, they yet maintained their original
position, and though many bishops might be present when another was
inducted into office, they would permit only one of the number to unite
with one of themselves in the ceremony of ordination. Some at the
present day do not hesitate to assert that presbyters have no right
whatever to ordain, but this canon supplies evidence that in the third
century they were employed to ordain bishops.

It thus appears that the bishop of the ancient Church was very different
from the dignitary now known by the same designation. The primitive
bishop had often but two or three elders, and sometimes a single deacon,
[587:2] under his jurisdiction: the modern prelate has frequently the
oversight of several hundreds of ministers. The ancient bishop,
surrounded by his presbyters, preached ordinarily every Sabbath to his
whole flock: the modern bishop may spend an entire lifetime without
addressing a single sermon, on the Lord's day, to many who are under his
episcopal supervision. The early bishop had the care of a parish: the
modern bishop superintends a diocese. The elders of the primitive bishop
were not unfrequently decent tradesmen who earned their bread by the
sweat of their brow: [587:3] the presbyters of a modern prelate have
generally each the charge of a congregation, and are supposed to be
entirely devoted to sacred duties. Even the ancient city bishop had but
a faint resemblance to his modern namesake. He was the most laborious
city minister, and the chief preacher. He commonly baptized all who were
received into the Church, and dispensed the Eucharist to all the
communicants. He was, in fact, properly the minister of an overgrown
parish who required several assistants to supply his lack of service.

The foregoing testimonies likewise shew that the doctrine of apostolical
succession, as now commonly promulgated, is utterly destitute of any
sound historical basis. According to some, no one is duly qualified to
preach and to dispense the sacraments whose authority has not been
transmitted from the Twelve by an unbroken series of episcopal
ordinations. But it has been demonstrated that episcopal ordinations,
properly so called, originated only in the third century, and that even
the bishops of Rome, who flourished prior to that date, were "of the
order of the presbytery." All the primitive bishops received nothing
more than presbyterian ordination. It is plain, therefore, that the
doctrine of the transmission of spiritual power from the apostles
through an unbroken series of episcopal ordinations flows from sheer
ignorance of the actual constitution of the early Church.

But the arrangements now described were gradually subverted by episcopal
encroachments, and a separate chapter must be devoted to the
illustration of the progress of Prelacy.





CHAPTER X.

THE PROGRESS OF PRELACY.


We cannot tell when the president of the presbytery began to hold office
for life; but it is evident that the change, at whatever period it
occurred, must have added considerably to his power. The chairman of any
court is the individual through whom it is addressed, and, without whose
signature, its proceedings cannot be properly authenticated. He acts in
its name, and he stands forth as its representative. He may,
theoretically, possess no more power than any of the other members of
the judicatory, and he may be bound, by the most stringent laws, simply
to carry out the decisions of their united wisdom; but his very position
gives him influence; and, if he holds office for life, that influence
may soon become formidable. If he is not constantly kept in check by the
vigilance and determination of those with whom he is associated, he may
insensibly trench upon their rights and privileges. In the second
century the moderator of the city eldership was invariably a man
advanced in years, who, instead of being watched with jealousy, was
regarded with affectionate veneration; and it is not strange if he was
often permitted to stretch his authority beyond the exact range of its
legitimate exercise.

Evidence has already been adduced to shew that, on the rise of Prelacy,
the presidential chair was no longer inherited by the members of the
city presbytery in the order of seniority. The individuals considered
most competent for the situation were now nominated by their brethren;
and as the Church, especially in great towns, was sadly distracted by
the machinations of the Gnostics, it was deemed expedient to arm the
moderator with additional authority. As a matter of necessity, the
official who was furnished with these new powers required a new name;
for the title of _president_ by which he was already known, and which
continued long afterwards in current use, [590:1] did not now fully
indicate his importance. It was, therefore, gradually supplanted by the
designation of _bishop_, or overseer. Whilst this functionary was
nominated by the presbyters, he might be also set aside by them, so that
he felt it necessary to consult their wishes and to use his
discretionary power with modesty and moderation; but, when he began to
be elected by general suffrage, his authority was forthwith established
on a broader and firmer foundation. He was now emphatically the man of
the people; and from this date he possessed an influence with which the
presbytery itself was incompetent to grapple.

As early as the middle of the second century the bishop, at least in
some places, was entrusted with the chief management of the funds of the
Church; [590:2] and probably, about fifty years afterwards, a large
share of its revenues was appropriated to his personal maintenance.
[590:3] His superior wealth soon added immensely to his influence. He
was thus enabled to maintain a higher position in society than any of
his brethren; and he was at length regarded as the great fountain of
patronage and preferment. Long before Christianity enjoyed the sanction
of the state, the chief pastors of the great cities began to attract
attention by their ostentatious display of secular magnificence. Origen,
who flourished in the former half of the third century, strongly
condemns their vanity and ambition; and though perhaps his ascetic
temperament prompted him to indulge somewhat in the language of
exaggeration, the testimony of so respectable a witness cannot be
rejected as untrue. "We," says he, "proceed so far in the affectation of
pomp and state, as to outdo even bad rulers among the pagans; and, like
the emperors, surround ourselves with a guard that we may be feared and
made difficult of access, particularly to the poor. And in many of our
so-called Churches, _especially in the large towns_, may be found
presiding officers of the Church of God who would refuse to own even the
best among the disciples of Jesus while on earth as their equals."
[591:1] In these remarks the writer had doubtless a particular reference
to his own Church of Alexandria; but it is well known that elsewhere
some bishops in the third century assumed a very lofty bearing. It is
related of the celebrated Paul of Samosata, the bishop of Antioch, that
he acted as a secular judge, that he appeared in public surrounded by a
crowd of servants, and that he took special pleasure in pomp and parade;
and yet, had he not lapsed into heresy, there is no evidence that his
overweening pride would have brought down upon him the vengeance of
ecclesiastical discipline. In the third century the chief pastor of the
Western metropolis must have been known to the great officers of
government, and perhaps to the Emperor himself. Decius must have
regarded the Roman bishop as a somewhat formidable personage when he
declared that he would sooner tolerate a rival candidate for the throne,
and when he proclaimed his determination to annihilate the very office.
[591:2]

It was not strange that dignitaries who affected so much state soon
contrived to surround themselves with a whole host of new officials.
Within little more than a century after the rise of Prelacy the number
of grades of ecclesiastics was nearly trebled. In addition to the
bishop, the presbyters, and the deacons, there were also, in A.D. 251,
in the Church of Rome lectors, sub-deacons, acolyths, exorcists, and
janitors. [592:1] The lectors, who read the Scriptures to the
congregation [592:2] and who had charge of the sacred manuscripts,
attract our attention as distinct office-bearers about the close of the
second century. The sub-deacons are said to have had the care of the
sacramental cups; the acolyths attended to the lamps of the sacred
edifice; the exorcists [592:3] professed by their prayers to expel evil
spirits out of the bodies of those about to be baptized; and the
janitors performed the more humble duties of porters or door-keepers. At
a subsequent period each of these functionaries was initiated into
office by a special form of ordination or investiture. It was laid down
as a principle that no one could regularly become a bishop who had not
previously passed through all these inferior orders; [592:4] but when
the multitude wished all at once to elevate a layman to the rank of a
bishop or a presbyter, ecclesiastical routine was compelled to yield to
the pressure of popular enthusiasm. [592:5]

The great city in which Prelacy originated appears to have been the
place where these new offices made their first appearance. Rome, true to
her mission as "the mother of the Catholic Church," conceived and
brought forth nearly all the peculiarities of the Catholic system. The
lady seated on the seven hills was already regarded with great
admiration, and surrounding Churches silently copied the arrangements of
their Imperial parent. In the East, at least one of the orders now
instituted by the great Western prelate, that is, the order of acolyths,
was not adopted for centuries afterwards. [593:1]

The city bishops were well aware of the vast accession of influence they
acquired in consequence of their election by the people, and did not
fail to insist upon the circumstance when desirous to illustrate their
ecclesiastical title. Any one who peruses the letters of Cyprian may
remark the frequency, as well as the transparent satisfaction, with
which he refers to the mode of his appointment. Who, he seems to say,
could doubt his right to act as bishop of Carthage, seeing that he had
been chosen by "the suffrage of the whole fraternity"--by "the vote of
the people?" [593:2] The members of the Church enthusiastically
acknowledged such appeals to their sympathy and support, and in cases of
emergency promptly rallied round the individuals whom they had
themselves elevated to power. But as all the other church officers were
meanwhile likewise chosen by common suffrage, the bishops soon betrayed
an anxiety to appropriate the distinction, and began, under various
pretexts, to interfere with the free exercise of the popular franchise.
In one of his epistles Cyprian excuses himself to the Christians of
Carthage because he had ventured to ordain a reader without their
approval. He pleads that the peculiar circumstances of the case and the
extraordinary merits of the candidate must be accepted as his apology.
"In clerical ordinations," says he, "my custom is to _consult you
beforehand_, dearest brethren, _and in common deliberation_ to weigh the
character and merits of each. But testimonies of men need not be awaited
when anticipated by the sentence of God." [593:3] The sanction of the
people should have been obtained before the ordination; but, as
persecution now raged, it is suggested that it would have been
inconvenient to lay the matter before them; and Cyprian argues that the
informality was pardonable, inasmuch as the Almighty himself had given
His suffrage in favour of the new lector; for Aurelius, though only a
youth, had nobly submitted to the torture rather than renounce the
gospel.

The ordination of Aurelius under such circumstances was not, however, a
solitary case; and there is certainly something suspicious in the
frequency with which the bishop of Carthage apologizes to the clergy and
people for neglecting to consult them on the appointment of church
officers. In another of his letters he announces to the presbyters and
deacons that, "on an _urgent occasion_" he had "made Saturus a reader,
and Optatus the confessor a sub-deacon." [594:1] Again, he tells the
same parties, and "the whole people," that "Celerinus, renowned alike
for his courage and his character, has been joined to the clergy, _not
by human suffrage, but by the divine favour;_" [594:2] and at another
time he informs them that he had been "admonished and instructed by a
_divine vouchsafement_ to enrol Numidicus in the number of the
Carthaginian presbyters." [594:3] These cases were, no doubt, afterwards
quoted as precedents for the non-observance of the law; and from time to
time new pretences were discovered for evading its provisions. In this
way the rights of the people were gradually abridged; and in the course
of two or three centuries, the bishops almost entirely ignored their
interference in the election of presbyters and deacons, as well as of
the inferior clergy.

New canons relative to ordination were promulgated probably about the
time when the city presbyters ceased to have the exclusive right of
electing their own bishop. The altered circumstances of the Church led
to the establishment of these regulations. The election of the chief
pastor of a great town was often a scene of much excitement, and as
several of the elders might be regarded as candidates for the office, it
was obviously unseemly that any of them should preside on the occasion.
It was accordingly arranged that some of the neighbouring bishops should
be present to superintend the proceedings. The successful candidate now
began to be formally invested with his new dignity by the imposition of
hands; and at first, perhaps, one of the bishops, assisted by one of the
presbyters of the place, performed this ceremony. [595:1] But the elders
soon ceased to take part in the ordination. At the election, the people
and the clergy sometimes took opposite sides; and, in the contest, the
ecclesiastical party was not unfrequently completely overborne. It
occasionally happened, as in the case of Cyprian, [595:2] that one of
the elders was chosen in opposition to the wishes of the majority of the
presbytery; or, as in the case of Fabian of Rome, [595:3] that a layman
was all at once elevated to the episcopal chair; and, at such times, the
disappointed presbyters did not care to join in the inauguration. The
bishops availed themselves of the pretexts thus furnished to dispense
with their services altogether. At length the power of admitting to the
ministry by the laying on of hands began to be challenged as the
peculiar prerogative of the episcopal order.

In many places, perhaps before the middle of the third century, elders
were no longer permitted to take part in the consecration of bishops;
but Prelacy had not yet completely established itself upon the ruins of
the more ancient polity. Sometimes the presbytery itself still
discharged the functions of the bishop. After the martyrdom of Fabian in
A.D. 250, the Church of Rome remained upwards of a year under its care,
[596:1] as the see was meanwhile vacant; and about the same period we
find Cyprian, when in exile, requesting his presbyters and deacons to
execute both _his duties_ and their own. [596:2] It was still admitted
that elders were competent to ordain elders and deacons, as well as to
confirm and to baptize; and the bishop continued to recognise them as
his "_colleagues_" and his "_fellow-presbyters_." [596:3] It is clear,
however, that the relations between them and their episcopal chief were
now very vaguely defined, and that the ambiguous position of the parties
led to mutual complaints of ambition and usurpation. The Epistles of
Cyprian supply evidence that the bishop of Carthage, during a great part
of his episcopate, was engaged with his presbyters in a struggle for
power; [596:4] and though he asserted that he was contending for nothing
more than his legitimate authority, he was sometimes obliged to abate
his pretensions. In one case he complains that, "without his permission
or knowledge," his presbyter Novatus "of his own factiousness and
ambition" had "made Felicissimus his follower a deacon;" [596:5] but
still he does not venture to impeach the validity of the act, or refuse
to recognise the standing of the new ecclesiastic. Felicissimus seems to
have been ordained in a small meeting-house in the neighbourhood of
Carthage; and as Novatus, who probably presided on the occasion, appears
to have proceeded in conjunction with the majority of the presbytery,
they no doubt considered that, under these circumstances, the sanction
of the bishop was by no means indispensable. The manifestation of such a
spirit of independence was, however, exceedingly galling to their
imperious prelate.

From the manner in which Cyprian expresses himself we may infer that he
would not have been dissatisfied had Novatus and the elders who acted
with him obtained his _permission_ to ordain the deacon Felicissimus.
But about this period the bishops were beginning to look with extreme
jealousy on all presbyterian ordinations, and were commencing a series
of encroachments on the rights of their episcopal brethren in rural
districts. These country bishops, [597:1] who wore simply ministers of
single congregations, and who were generally poor and uninfluential,
soon succumbed to the great city dignitaries. By a council held at
Ancyra in A.D. 314, or very shortly after the close of the Diocletian
persecution, they were forbidden to perform duties which they had
hitherto been accustomed to discharge, for one of its canons declares
that "country bishops must not ordain presbyters or deacons; neither
must city presbyters in another parish without the written permission of
the bishop." [597:2]

This canon illustrates the strangely anomalous condition of the Church
at the period of its adoption. It takes no notice of _country elders_,
as the proceedings of such an humble class of functionaries probably
awakened no jealousy; and it degrades country bishops, who
unquestionably belonged to the episcopal order, by placing them in a
position inferior to that of city presbyters. About sixty years before,
or in the middle of the third century, three of these country bishops
were deemed competent to ordain a bishop of Rome; [598:1] but now they
are deprived of the right of ordaining even elders and deacons. It is
easy to understand why city presbyters were still permitted, under
certain conditions, to exercise this privilege. As they constituted the
council of the city chief pastor, their influence was considerable; and
as they had, until a recent date, been accustomed even to take part in
his own consecration, it was deemed inexpedient to tempt so formidable a
class of churchmen to make common cause with the country bishops by
stripping both at once of their ancient prerogatives. The country
bishops, as the weaker party, were first subjected to a process of
spoliation. But the recognition of Christianity by Constantine gave an
immense impulse to the progress of the hierarchy, and the city
presbyters were soon afterwards deprived of the privilege now wrested
from the country bishops.

The current of events had placed the Church, about the middle of the
third century, in a position which it could not long maintain. As the
growth of Christianity in towns was steady and rapid, the bishop there
rose quickly into wealth and power; but, among the comparatively poor
and thinly-scattered population of the country, his condition remained
nearly stationary. When Cyprian, in A.D. 256, addressed the eighty-seven
bishops assembled in the Council of Carthage, and told them that they
were all on an equality, he might have felt that the doctrine of
episcopal parity, as then understood, must be given up as indefensible
if assailed by the skill of a vigorous logician. Who could believe that
the bishop of Carthage held exactly the same official rank as every one
of his episcopal auditors? He was the chief pastor of a flourishing
metropolis; he had several congregations under his care, and several of
his presbyters were preachers; [599:1] but many of the bishops before
him were ministers of single congregations and without even one elder
competent to deliver a sermon, [599:2] In point of ministerial gifts and
actual influence some of the presbyters of Carthage were, no doubt, far
superior to many of the bishops of the council. And who could affirm
that Paul of Samosata, the chief pastor of the capital of the Eastern
Empire, was quite on a level with every one of the village bishops
around him whom he bribed to celebrate his praises? No wonder that it
was soon found necessary to remodel the episcopal system. The city
bishops had a show of equity in their favour when they asserted their
superiority, and their brethren in rural districts were too feeble and
dependent effectively to resist their own degradation.

The ecclesiastical title _metropolitan_ came into use about the time of
the Council of Nice in A.D. 325. [599:3] and there is reason to believe
that the territorial jurisdiction it implied was then first distinctly
defined and generally established; but the changes of the preceding
three quarters of a century, had been preparing the way for the new
arrangement. Many of the country bishops had meanwhile been reduced to a
condition of subserviency, whilst a considerable number of the chief
pastors in the great cities had been recognized as the constant
presidents of the synods which met in their respective capitals. It is
easy to see how these prelates acquired such a position. Talent, if
exerted, must always assert its ascendency; and it is probable that the
metropolitan bishops were generally more able and accomplished than the
majority of their brethren. They could fairly plead that zeal for the
good of the Church prompted them to take a lead in ecclesiastical
affairs, and their place of residence supplied them with facilities for
communicating with other pastors of which they often deemed it prudent
to avail themselves. When the synod met in the metropolis, the bishop of
the city was wont to entertain many of the members as his guests; and,
as he was elevated above most, if not all, of those with whom he acted,
in point of wealth, social standing, address, and knowledge of the
world, he was usually called on to occupy the chair of the moderator. In
process of time that which was originally conceded as a matter of
courtesy passed into an admitted right. So long as the metropolitan
bishop was inducted into office by mere presbyters, the circumstances of
his investiture pointed out to him the duty of humility; but when the
most distinguished chief pastors of the province deemed it an honour to
take part in his consecration, he immediately increased his pretensions.
Thus it is that the change in the mode of episcopal inauguration forms a
new era in the history of ecclesiastical assumption.

About the middle of the third century various circumstances conspired to
augment the authority of the great bishops. In the Decian and Valerian
persecutions the chief pastors were specially marked out for attack, and
the heroic constancy with which some of the most eminent encountered a
cruel death vastly enhanced the reputation of their order. In a few
years several bishops of Rome were martyred; Cyprian of Carthage endured
the same fate: Alexander of Jerusalem, and Babylas of Antioch, also laid
down their lives for their religion. [600:1] At the same time the schism
of Novatian at Rome, and the schism of Felicissimus at Carthage
threatened the Church with new divisions, and the same arguments which
were used, upwards of a hundred years before, for increasing the power
of the president of the eldership, could now be urged with equal
pertinency for adding to the authority of the president of the synod. In
point of fact perhaps the earliest occasion on which the bishop of Rome
executed discipline in his archiepiscopal capacity was immediately
connected with the schism of Novatian; for we have no record of any
exercise of such power until Cornelius, at the head of a council held in
the Imperial city, deposed the pastors who had officiated at the
consecration of his rival. [601:1] From this date the Roman metropolitan
probably presided at all the ordinations of the bishops in his vicinity.

To prevent the recurrence of schisms such as had now happened at Rome
and Carthage, it was, in all likelihood, arranged about this period, at
least in some quarters of the Church, that the presence or sanction of
the stated president of the provincial synod should be necessary to the
validity of all episcopal consecrations. There were still, however, many
districts in which the provincial synod had no fixed chairman. Hence an
ancient canon directs that at the ordination of a member of the
hierarchy, "_one of the principal bishops_ shall pray to God over the
approved candidate." [601:2] By a "principal bishop" we are to
understand the chief pastor of a principal or apostolic church; [601:3]
but in some provinces several such churches were to be found, and this
regulation attests that there no single ecclesiastic had yet acquired an
unchallenged precedence. As the close of the third century approached,
the ecclesiastical structure exhibited increasing uniformity; and one
dignitary in each region began to be known as the stated president of
the episcopal body. In one of the so-called apostolical canons, framed
probably before the Council of Nice, this arrangement is embodied. "The
bishops of every nation," says the ordinance, "ought to know who is the
_first among them_, and him they ought to esteem as their head, and not
do any great thing _without his consent_. ... But neither let him do
anything without the consent of all." [602:1]

This canon is apparently couched in terms of studied ambiguity, for the
expression "the first among the bishops of every nation" admits of
various interpretations. In many cases it probably meant the senior
bishop of the district; in others, it perhaps denoted the chief pastor
of the chief city of the province; and in others again, it may have
indicated the prelate of a great metropolis who had contrived to
establish his authority over a still more extensive territory. The rise
of the city bishops had completely destroyed that balance of power which
originally existed in the Church; and much commotion preceded the
settlement of a new ecclesiastical equilibrium. During the last forty
years of the third century the Christians enjoyed almost uninterrupted
peace; the chief pastors were meanwhile perpetually engaged in contests
for superiority; and about this time the bishops of Rome, of Alexandria,
and of Antioch, rapidly extended their influence. So rampant was the
usurping spirit of churchmen that even the violence of the Diocletian
persecution was not sufficient to check them in their career of
ambition. A contemporary writer, who was himself a member of the
episcopal order, bears testimony to this melancholy fact. "Some," said
he, "who were reputed our pastors, contemning the law of piety, were,
under the excitement of mutual animosities, fomenting nothing else but
disputes and threatenings and rivalry and reciprocal hostility and
hatred, as they contentiously prosecuted their ambitious designs for
sovereignty." [601:2]

What a change had passed over the Christian commonwealth in the course
of little more than two hundred years! When the Apostle John died, the
city church was governed by the common council of the elders, and their
president simply announced and executed the decisions of his brethren:
now, the president was transformed into a prelate who, by gradual
encroachments, had stripped the presbytery of a large share of its
authority. At the close of the first century the Church of Rome was,
perhaps, less influential than the Church of Ephesus, and the very name
of its moderator at that period is a matter of disputed and doubtful
tradition; but the Diocletian persecution had scarcely terminated when
the bishop of the great metropolis was found sitting in a council in the
palace of the Lateran, and claiming jurisdiction over eight or ten
provinces of Italy! These revolutions were not effected without much
opposition. The strife between the presbyters and the bishops was
succeeded by a general warfare among the possessors of episcopal power,
for the constant moderator of the synod was as anxious to increase his
authority as the constant moderator of the presbytery. About the close
of the third century the Church appears to have been sadly scandalised
by the quarrels of the bishops, and Eusebius accordingly intimates that,
in the reign of terror which so quickly followed, they suffered a
righteous retribution for their misconduct.

Discussions respecting questions of Church polity are often exceedingly
distasteful to persons of contracted views but of genuine piety, for
they cannot understand how the progress of vital godliness can be
influenced by forms of ecclesiastical government. [603:1] About this
period such sentiments were probably not uncommon, and much of the
apathy with which innovations were contemplated may thus be easily
explained. Besides, if the early bishop was a man of ability and
address, his influence in his own church was nearly overwhelming; for as
he was the ordinary, if not the only, preacher, he thus possessed the
most effective means of recommending any favourite scheme, and of giving
a decided tone to public opinion. When a parochial charge became vacant
by the demise of the chief pastor, the election of a successor was often
vigorously contested; and when an influential presbyter was defeated, he
sometimes exhibited his mortification by contending for the rights of
his order, and by disputing the pretensions of his successful rival. But
as such opposition was obviously dictated by the spirit of faction, it
was commonly brief, ill-sustained, and abortive. The young, talented,
and aspiring presbyters must have been strongly tempted to encourage the
growth of episcopal prerogative, for each might one day hope to occupy
the place of dignity, and thus to reap the fruits of present
encroachments. The bishops seem to have resisted more strenuously the
establishment of metropolitan ascendency. An ecclesiastical regulation
of great antiquity, [604:1] condemned their translation from one parish
to another, so that when the episcopate was gained, all farther
prospects of promotion were extinguished, for the place of _first among
the bishops_ was either inherited by seniority or claimed by the prelate
of the chief city. Hence it was that the pastors withstood so firmly all
infringements on their theoretical parity; and hence those "ambitious
disputes," [604:2] and those "collisions of bishops with bishops,"
[604:3] even amidst the fires of martyrdom, over which the historian of
the Church professes his anxiety to cast the veil of oblivion.





CHAPTER XI.

SYNODS--THEIR HISTORY AND CONSTITUTION.


The apostles, and the other original heralds of the gospel, sought
primarily _the conversion of unbelievers_. The commission given to Paul
points out distinctly the grand design of their ministry. When the great
persecutor of the saints was himself converted on his way to Damascus,
our Lord addressed to him the memorable words--"I have appeared unto
thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of
these things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I
will appear unto thee; delivering thee from the people, and from the
Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, _to open their eyes, and to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God_, that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which
are sanctified by faith that is in me." [605:1]

When a few disciples were collected in a particular locality, it not
unfrequently happened that they remained for a time without any proper
ecclesiastical organization. [605:2] But the Christian cause, under such
circumstances, could not be expected to flourish; and therefore, as soon
as practicable, the apostles and evangelists did not neglect to make
arrangements for the increase and edification of these infant
communities. To provide, as well for the maintenance of discipline, as
for the preaching of the Word, they accordingly proceeded to ordain
elders in every city where the truth had gained converts. These elders
afterwards ordained deacons in their respective congregations; and thus,
in due time, the Church was regularly constituted.

In the first century Christian societies were formed only here and there
throughout the Roman Empire; and, at its close, the gospel had scarcely
penetrated into some of the provinces. It is not to be expected that we
can trace any general confederation of the churches established during
this period, and it would be vain to attempt to demonstrate their
incorporation; as their distance, their depressed condition, and the
jealousy with which they were regarded by the civil government, [606:1]
rendered any extensive combination utterly impossible. At a time when
the disciples met together for worship in secret and before break of
day, it is not to be supposed that their pastors deemed it expedient to
undertake frequent journeys on the business of the Church, or assembled
in multitudinous councils. But though, in the beginning of the second
century, there was no formal bond of union connecting the several
Christian communities throughout the world, they meanwhile contrived in
various ways to cultivate an unbroken fraternal intercourse. Recognising
each other as members of the same holy brotherhood, they maintained an
epistolary correspondence, in which they treated of all matters
pertaining to the common interest. When the pastor of one church visited
another, his status was immediately acknowledged; and even when an
ordinary disciple emigrated to a distant province, the ecclesiastical
certificate which he carried along with him secured his admission to
membership in the strange congregation. Thus, all the churches treated
each other as portions of one great family; all adhered to much the same
system of polity and discipline; and, though there was not unity of
jurisdiction, there was the "keeping of the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace."

In modern times many ecclesiastical historians [607:1] have asserted
that synods commenced about the middle of the second century. But the
statement is unsupported by a single particle of evidence, and a number
of facts may be adduced to prove that it is altogether untenable. There
is no reason to doubt that synods, at least on a limited scale, met in
the days of the apostles, and that the Church courts of a later age were
simply the continuation and expansion of those primitive conventions. We
know very little respecting the history of the Christian commonwealth
during the former half of the second century, for the extant memorials
of the Church of that period are exceedingly few and meagre; and as the
proceedings of most of the synods which were then held did not perhaps
attract much notice, [607:2] it is not remarkable that they have shared
the fate of almost all the other ecclesiastical transactions of the same
date, and that they have been buried in oblivion. [607:3] It is nowhere
intimated by any ancient authority that synodical meetings commenced
fifty years after the death of the beloved disciple, and the earliest
writers who touch upon the subject speak of them as of apostolic
original. Irenaeus, the pastor of Lyons, had probably reached manhood
when, according to Mosheim and others, synods were at first formed; he
enjoyed the instructions of Polycarp, the disciple of the Apostle John;
he was beyond question one of the best informed Christian ministers of
his generation; and yet he obviously considered that these
ecclesiastical assemblies were in existence in the first century.
Speaking of the visit of Paul to Miletus when he sent to Ephesus and
called the elders of the Church, [608:1] he says that the apostle then
convoked "the bishops and presbyters of Ephesus and of the other
adjoining cities" [608:2]--plainly indicating that he summoned a
synodical meeting. Had an assembly of this kind been a novelty in the
days of Irenaeus, the pastor of Lyons would not have given such a
version of a passage in the inspired narrative. Cyprian flourished
shortly after the time when, according to the modern theory, councils
began to meet in Africa, but the bishop of Carthage himself
unquestionably entertained higher views of their antiquity. He declared
that conformably to "the practice received from _divine tradition_ and
_apostolic observance_," [608:3] "all the neighbouring bishops of the
same province met together" among the people over whom a pastor was to
be ordained; [608:4] and he did not here merely give utterance to his
own impressions, for a whole African synod concurred in his statement.
Subsequent writers of unimpeachable credit refer to the canons of
councils of which we otherwise know nothing, and though we cannot now
ascertain the exact time when these courts assembled, there is no reason
to doubt that at least some of them were convened before the middle of
the second century. Thus, when Jerome ascribes the origin of Prelacy to
an ecclesiastical decree, he alludes evidently to some synodical
convention of an earlier date than any of the meetings of which history
has preserved a record. [609:1]

Did we even want the direct testimony just adduced as to the government
of synods in the former part of the second century, we might on other
grounds infer that this species of polity then existed; for apostolic
example suggested its propriety, and the spirit of fraternity so
assiduously cherished by the early rulers of the Church must have
prompted them to meet together for the discussion and settlement of
ecclesiastical questions in which they felt a common interest. But
whilst Christianity was still struggling for existence, it was not in a
condition to form widely spread organizations. It is probable that the
business of the early Church courts was conducted with the utmost
secrecy, that they were attended by but few members, and that they were
generally composed of those pastors and elders who resided in the same
district and who could conveniently assemble on short notice. Their
meetings, in all likelihood, were summoned at irregular intervals, and
were held, to avoid suspicion, sometimes in one city and sometimes in
another; and, except when an exciting question awakened deep and general
anxiety, the representatives of the Churches of a whole province rarely,
perhaps, ventured on a united convention. Our ignorance of the councils
of the early part of the second century arises simply from the fact that
no writer appeared during that interval to register their acts; and we
have now no means of accurately filling up this blank in the history.
But we have good grounds for believing that Gnosticism now formed the
topic of discussion in several synods. [609:2] The errorists, we know,
were driven out of the Church in all places; and how can we account for
this general expulsion, except upon the principle of the united action
of ecclesiastical judicatories? Jerome gives us to understand that their
machinations led to a change in the ecclesiastical constitution, and
that this change was effected by a synodical decree adopted all over the
world [610:1]--thereby implying that presbyterial government was already
in universal operation. Montanism appeared whilst Gnosticism was yet in
its full strength, and this gloomy fanaticism created intense agitation.
Many of the pastors, as well as of the people, were bewildered by its
pretensions to inspiration, and by the sanctimony of its ascetic
discipline. It immediately occupied the attention of the ecclesiastical
courts, and its progress was, no doubt, arrested by their emphatic
condemnation of its absurdities. It is certain that their interference
was judicious and decided. "When the faithful held frequent meetings in
many places throughout Asia on account of this affair, and examined the
novel doctrines, and pronounced them profane, and rejected them as
heresy," the Montanist prophets "were in consequence driven out of the
Church and excluded from communion." [610:2]

The words just quoted are from the pen of an anonymous writer who
flourished towards the end of the second or beginning of the third
century; [610:3] and, though they supply the earliest distinct notice of
synodical meetings, they do not even hint that such assemblies were of
recent original. The Paschal controversy succeeded the Montanist
agitation, and convulsed the whole Church from East to West by its
frivolous discussions. The mode of keeping the Paschal festival had for
nearly fifty years been a vexed question, but about the close of the
second century it began to create bitter contention. Eusebius has given
us an account of the affair, and his narrative throws great light upon
the state of the ecclesiastical community at the time of its occurrence.
"For this cause," says he, "there were synods and councils of bishops,
and all, with according judgment, published in epistles an
ecclesiastical decree.... There is still extant a letter from those who
at that time were called together in Palestine, over whom presided
Theophilus, bishop of the parish of Caesarea, and Narcissus, bishop of
the parish of Jerusalem. There is also another letter from those who
were convoked at Rome [611:1] concerning the same question, which shews
that Victor was then bishop. There is too a letter from the bishops of
Pontus, over whom Palmas, as the senior pastor, presided. There is
likewise a letter from the parishes in Gaul of which Irenaeus was
president. And another besides from the Churches in Osroene and the
cities in that quarter." [611:2]

It is obvious from this statement that, before the termination of the
second century, synodical government was established throughout the
whole Church; for we here trace its operation in France, in Mesopotamia
or Osroene, in Italy, Pontus, and Palestine. This passage also
illustrates the progress of the changes which were taking place about
the period under review in the constitution of ecclesiastical
judicatories. As the president of the presbytery was at first the senior
elder, so the president of the synod was at first the senior pastor. At
this time the primitive arrangement had not been altogether superseded,
for at the meeting of the bishops of Pontus, Palmas, as being the oldest
member present, was called to occupy the chair of the moderator. But
elsewhere this ancient regulation had been set aside, and in some places
no new principle had yet been adopted. At the synod of Palestine the
jealousy of two rivals for the presidency led to a rather awkward
compromise. Caesarea was the seat of government, and on that ground its
bishop could challenge precedence of every other in the district, but
the Church of Jerusalem was the mother of the entire Christian
community, and its pastor, now a hundred years of age, [612:1]
considered that he was entitled to fill the place of dignity. For the
sake of peace the assembled fathers agreed to appoint two chairmen, and
accordingly Theophilus of Caesarea and Narcissus of Jerusalem presided
jointly in the synod of Palestine. In the synod of Rome there was no one
to dispute the pretensions of Bishop Victor. As the chief pastor of the
great metropolitan Church, he seems, as a matter of course, to have
taken possession of the presidential office.

