with the harp of Calvary.

Cambria was being prepared for its first great revival of religion.

There was no rich portfolio of Christian hymns such as exists to-day,
but surely there were not wanting pious words to the old chants of
Bangor and the airs of "Wild Wales." When time brought Howell Harris and
Daniel Rowland, and the great "Reformation" of the eighteenth century,
the renowned William Williams, "the Watts of Wales," appeared, and began
his tuneful work. The province soon became a land of hymns. The candles
lit and left burning here and there by Penry, Maurice, and the Owens,
blazed up to beacon-fires through all the twelve counties when Harris,
at the head of the mighty movement, carried with him the sacred songs of
Williams, kindling more lights everywhere between the Dee and the
British Channel.

William Williams of Pantycelyn was born in 1717, at Cefncoed Farm, near
Llandovery. Three years younger than Harris, (an Oxford graduate,) and
educated only at a village school and an academy at Llwynllwyd, he was
the song protagonist of the holy campaign as the other was its champion
preacher. From first to last Williams wrote nine hundred and sixteen
hymns, some of which are still heard throughout the church militant, and
others survive in local use and affection. He died Jan. 11, 1791, at
Pantycelyn, where he had made his home after his marriage. One of the
hymns in his _Gloria_, his second publication, may well have been his
last. It was dear to him above others, and has been dear to devout souls
in many lands.

    My God, my portion and my love;
    My all on earth, my all above,
        My all within the tomb;
    The treasures of this world below
    Are but a vain, delusive show,
        Thy bosom is my home.

It was fitting that Williams should name the first collection of his
hymns (all in his native Welsh) _The Hallelujah_. Its lyrics are full of
adoration for the Redeemer, and thanksgivings for His work.


"ONWARD RIDE IN TRIUMPH, JESUS,"

_Marchog, Jesu, yn llwyddiannus_,

Has been sung in Wales for a century and a half, and is still a
favorite.

    Onward ride in triumph, Jesus,
      Gird thy sword upon thy thigh;
    Neither earth nor Hell's own vastness
      Can Thy mighty power defy.
    In Thy Name such glory dwelleth
      Every foe withdraws in fear,
    All the wide creation trembleth
      Whensoever Thou art near.[37]

The unusual militant strain in this paean of conquest soon disappears,
and the gentler aspects of Christ's atoning sacrifice occupy the
writer's mind and pen.

[Footnote 37: The following shows the style of Rev. Elvet Lewis'
translation:
    Blessed Jesus, march victorious
      With Thy sword fixed at Thy side;
    Neither death nor hell can hinder
      The God-Warrior in His ride.]


"IN EDEN--O THE MEMORY!"

_Yn Eden cofiaf hyny byth!_

The text, "He was wounded for our transgressions," is amplified in this
hymn, and the Saviour is shown bruising Himself while bruising the
serpent.

The first stanza gives the key-note,--

    In Eden--O the memory!
    What countless gifts were lost to me!
      My crown, my glory fell;
    But Calvary's great victory
    Restored that vanished crown to me;
      On this my songs shall dwell;

--and the multitude of Williams' succeeding "songs" that chant the same
theme shows how well he kept his promise. The following hymn in Welsh
(_Cymmer, Jesu fi fel'r ydwyf_) antedates the advice of Dr. Malan to
Charlotte Elliott, "Come just as you are"--

    Take me as I am, O Saviour,
      Better I can never be;
    Thou alone canst bring me nearer,
      Self but draws me far from Thee.
        I can never
    But within Thy wounds be saved;

--and another (_Mi dafla maich oddi ar fy ngway_) reminds us of Bunyan's
Pilgrim in sight of the Cross:

    I'll cast my heavy burden down,
      Remembering Jesus' pains;
    Guilt high as towering mountain tops
      Here turns to joyful strains.

       *       *       *       *       *

    He stretched His pure white hands abroad,
      A crown of thorns He wore,
    That so the vilest sinner might
      Be cleansed forevermore;

Williams was called "The Sweet Singer of Wales" and "The Watts of Wales"
because he was the chief poet and hymn-writer of his time, but the lady
he married, Miss Mary Francis, was _literally_ a singer, with a voice so
full and melodious that the people to whom he preached during his
itineraries, which she sometimes shared with him, were often more moved
by her sweet hymnody than by his exhortations. On one occasion the good
man, accompanied by his wife, put up at Bridgend Tavern in Llangefin,
Anglesea, and a mischievous crowd, wishing to plague the "Methodists,"
planned to make night hideous in the house with a boisterous
merry-making. The fiddler, followed by a gang of roughs, pushed his way
to the parlor, and mockingly asked the two guests if they would "have a
tune."

"Yes," replied Williams, falling in with his banter, "anything you like,
my lad; 'Nancy Jig' or anything else."

And at a sign from her husband, as soon as the fellow began the jig,
Mrs. Williams struck in with one of the poet-minister's well-known Welsh
hymns in the same metre,--

   _Gwaed Dy groes sy'n c' odi fyny_

    Calvary's blood the weak exalteth
      More than conquerors to be,[38]

--and followed the player note for note, singing the sacred words in her
sweet, clear voice, till he stopped ashamed, and took himself off with
all his gang.

[Footnote 38: A less literal but more hymn-like translation is:
    Jesu's blood can raise the feeble
      As a conqueror to stand;
    Jesu's blood is all-prevailing
      O'er the mighty of the land:
        Let the breezes
      Blow from Calvary on me.

Says the author of _Sweet Singers of Wales_, "This refrain has been the
password of many powerful revivals."]

Another hymn--

   _O' Llefara! addfwyn Jesu_,

    Speak, O speak, thou gentle Jesus,

--recalls the well-known verse of Newton, "How sweet the name of Jesus
sounds." Like many of Williams' hymns, it was prompted by occasion. Some
converts suffered for lack of a "clear experience" and complained to
him. They were like the disciples in the ship, "It was dark, and Jesus
had not yet come unto them." The poet-preacher immediately made this
hymn-prayer for all souls similarly tried. Edward Griffiths translates
it thus:

    Speak, I pray Thee, gentle Jesus,
      O how passing sweet Thy words,
    Breathing o'er my troubled spirit,
      Peace which never earth affords,
    All the world's distracting voices,
      All th' enticing tones of ill,
    At Thy accents, mild, melodious
      Are subdued, and all is still.

    Tell me Thou art mine, O Saviour
      Grant me an assurance clear,
    Banish all my dark misgivings,
      Still my doubting, calm my fear.

Besides his Welsh hymns, published in the first and in the second and
larger editions of his _Hallelujah_, and in two or three other
collections, William Williams wrote and published two books of English
hymns,[39] the _Hosanna_ (1759) and the _Gloria_ (1772). He fills so
large a space in the hymnology and religious history of Wales that he
will necessarily reappear in other pages of this chapter.

[Footnote 39: Possibly they were written in Welsh, and translated into
English by his friend and neighbor, Peter Williams.]

From the days of the early religious awakenings under the 16th century
preachers, and after the ecclesiastical dynasty of Rome had been
replaced by that of the Church of England, there were periods when the
independent conscience of a few pious Welshmen rose against religious
formalism, and the credal constraints of "established" teaching--and
suffered for it. Burning heretics at the stake had ceased to be a church
practice before the 1740's, but Howell Harris, Daniel Rowlands, and the
rest of the "Methodist Fathers," with their followers, were not only
ostracised by society and haled before magistrates to be fined for
preaching, and sometimes imprisoned, but they were chased and beaten by
mobs, ducked in ponds and rivers, and pelted with mud and garbage when
they tried to speak or sing. But they kept on talking and singing.
Harris (who had joined the army in 1760) owned a commission, and once he
saved himself from the fury of a mob while preaching--with cloak over
his ordinary dress--by lifting his cape and showing the star on his
breast. No one dared molest an officer of His Britannic Majesty. But all
were not able to use St. Paul's expedient in critical moments.[40]

[Footnote 40: Acts 22:25.]

William Williams often found immunity in his hymns, for like Luther--and
like Charles Wesley among the Cornwall sea-robbers--he caught up the
popular glees and ballad-refrains of the street and market and his wife
sang their music to his words. It is true many of these old Welsh airs
were minors, like "Elvy" and "Babel" (a significant name in English) and
would not be classed as "glees" in any other country--always excepting
Scotland--but they had the _swing_, and their mode and style were catchy
to a Welsh multitude. In fact many of these uncopyrighted bits of
musical vernacular were appropriated by the hymnbook makers, and
christened with such titles as "Pembroke," "Arabia," "Brymgfryd,"
"Cwyfan," "Thydian," and the two mentioned above.

It was the time when Whitefield and the Wesleys were sweeping the
kingdom with their conquering eloquence, and Howell Harris (their
fellow-student at Oxford) had sided with the conservative wing of the
Gospel Reformation workers, and become a "Whitfield Methodist." The
Welsh Methodists, _ad exemplum_, marched with this Calvinistic
branch--as they do today. Each division had its Christian bard. Charles
Wesley could put regenerating power into sweet, poetic hymns, and
William Williams' lyrical preaching made the Bible a travelling pulpit.
The great "Beibl Peter Williams" with its commentaries in Welsh, since
so long reverenced and cherished in provincial families, was not
published till 1770, and for many the printed Word was far to seek.[41]
But the gospel minstrels carried the Word with them. Some of the long
hymns contained nearly a whole body of divinity.

[Footnote 41: As an incident contributory to the formation of the
British and Foreign Bible Society, the story has been often repeated of
the little girl who wept when she missed her Catechism appointment, and
told Thomas Charles of Bala that the bad weather was the cause of it,
for she had to walk seven miles to find a Bible every time she prepared
her lessons. See page 380.]

The Welsh learn their hymns by heart, as they do the Bible--a habit
inherited from those old days of scarcity, when memory served pious
people instead of print--so that a Welsh prayer-meeting is never
embarrassed by a lack of books. An anecdote illustrates this
characteristic readiness. In February, 1797, when Napoleon's name was a
terror to England, the French landed some troops near Fishguard,
Pembrokeshire. Mounted heralds spread the news through Wales, and in the
village of Rhydybont, Cardiganshire, the fright nearly broke up a
religious meeting; but one brave woman, Nancy Jones, stopped a panic by
singing this stanza of one of Thomas Williams' hymns,--

   _Diuw os wyt am ddylenu'r bya_

    If Thou wouldst end the world, O Lord,
    Accomplish first Thy promised Word,
    And gather home with one accord
      From every part Thine own,
    Send out Thy Word from pole to pole,
    And with Thy blood make thousands whole,
      And, _after that come down_.

Nancy Jones would have been a useful member of the "Singing Sisters"
band, so efficient a century or more afterwards.

The _tunes_ of the Reformation under the "Methodist Fathers" continued
far down the century to be the country airs of the nation, and
reverberations of the great spiritual movement were heard in their rude
music in the mountain-born revival led by Jack Edward Watkin in 1779 and
in the local awakenings of 1791 and 1817. Later in the 19th century new
hymns, and many of the old, found new tunes, made for their sake or
imported from England and America.

The sanctified gift of song helped to make 1829 a year of jubilee in
South Wales, nor was the same aid wanting during the plague in 1831,
when the famous Presbyterian preacher, John Elias,[42] won nearly a
whole county to Christ.

[Footnote 42: Those who read his biography will call him the "Seraphic
John Elias."

His name was John Jones when he was admitted a member of the presbytery.
What followed is a commentary on the embarrassing frequency of a common
name, nowhere realized so universally as it is in Wales.

"What is his father's name?" asked the moderator when John Jones was
announced.

"Elias Jones," was the answer.

"Then call the young man John Elias," said the speaker, "otherwise we
shall by and by have nobody but John Joneses."

And "John Elias" it remained.]

An accession of temperance hymns in Wales followed the spread of the
"Washingtonian" movement on the other side of the Atlantic in 1840, and
began a moral reformation in the county of Merioneth that resulted in a
spiritual one, and added to the churches several thousand converts,
scarcely any of whom fell away.

The revival of 1851-2 was a local one, but was believed by many to have
been inspired by a celestial antiphony. The remarkable sounds were
either a miracle or a psychic wonder born of the intense imagination of
a sensitive race. A few pious people in a small village of
Montgomeryshire had been making special prayer for an outpouring of the
spirit, but after a week of meetings with no sign of the result hoped
for, they were returning to their homes, discouraged, when they heard
strains of sweet music in the sky. They stopped in amazement, but the
beautiful singing went on--voices as of a choir invisible, indistinct
but melodious, in the air far above the roof of the chapel they had just
left. Next day, when the astonished worshippers told the story, numbers
in the district said they had heard the same sounds. Some had gone out
at eleven o'clock to listen, and thought that angels must be singing.
Whatever the music meant, the good brethren's and sisters' little
meetings became crowded very soon after, and the longed-for out-pouring
came mightily upon the neighborhood. Hundreds from all parts flocked to
the churches, all ages joining in the prayers and hymns and testimonies,
and a harvest of glad believers followed a series of meetings "led by
the Holy Ghost."

The sounds in the sky were never explained; but the belief that God sent
His angels to sing an answer to the anxious prayers of those pious
brethren and sisters did no one any harm.

Whether this event in Montgomeryshire was a preparation for what took
place six or seven years later is a suggestive question only, but when
the wave of spiritual power from the great American revival of 1857-8
reached England, its first messenger to Wales, Rev. H.R. Jones, a
Wesleyan, had only to drop the spark that "lit a prairie fire." The
reformation, chiefly under the leadership of Mr. Jones and Rev. David
Morgan, a Presbyterian, with their singing bands, was general and
lasting, hundreds of still robust and active Christians today dating
their new birth from the Pentecost of 1859 and its ingathering of eighty
thousand souls.

A favorite hymn of that revival was the penitential cry,--

   _O'th flaem, O Dduw! 'r wy'n dyfod_,

--in the seven-six metre so much loved in Wales.

    Unto Thy presence coming,
      O God, far off I stand:
   "A sinner" is my title,
      No other I demand.

    For mercy I am seeking
      For mercy still shall cry;
    Deny me not Thy mercy;
      O grant it or I die!

       *       *       *       *       *

    I heard of old that Jesus,
      Who still abides the same,
    To publicans gave welcome,
      And sinners deep in shame.

    Oh God! receive me with them,
      Me also welcome in,
    And pardon my transgression,
      Forgetting all my sin.

The author of the hymn was Thomas Williams of Glamorganshire, born 1761;
died 1844. He published a volume of hymns, _Waters of Bethesda_ in 1823.

The Welsh minor tune of "Clwyd" may appropriately have been the music to
express the contrite prayer of the words. The living composer, John
Jones, has several tunes in the Welsh revival manual of melodies, _Ail
Attodiad_.

The unparalleled religious movement of 1904-5 was a praying and singing
revival. The apostle and spiritual prompter of that unbroken campaign of
Christian victories--so far as any single human agency counted--was Evan
Roberts, of Laughor, a humble young worker in the mines, who had prayed
thirteen years for a mighty descent of the heavenly blessing on his
country and for a clear indication of his own mission. His convictions
naturally led him to the ministry, and he went to Newcastle Emlyn to
study. Evangelical work had been done by two societies, made up of
earnest Christians, and known as the "Forward Movement" and the
"Simultaneous Mission." Beginnings of a special season of interest as a
result of their efforts, appeared in the young people's prayer meetings
in February, 1904, at New Quay, Cardiganshire. The interest increased,
and when branch-work was organized a young praying and singing band
visited Newcastle Emlyn in the course of one of their tours, and held a
rally meeting. Evan Roberts went to the meeting and found his own
mission. He left his studies and consecrated himself, soul and body, to
revival work. In every spiritual and mental quality he was surpassingly
well-equipped. To the quick sensibility of his poetic nature he added
the inspiration of a seer and the zeal of a devotee. Like Moses, Elijah,
and Paul in Arabian solitudes, and John in the Dead Sea wilds, he had
prepared himself in silence and alone with God; and though, on occasion,
he could use effectively his gift of words, he stood distinct in a land
of matchless pulpit orators as "the silent leader." Without preaching he
dominated the mood of his meetings, and without dictating he could
change the trend of a service and shape the next song or prayer on the
intuition of a moment. In fact, judged by its results, it was God
Himself who directed the revival, only He endowed His minister with the
power of divination to watch its progress and take the stumbling-blocks
out of the way. By a kind of hallowed psychomancy, that humble man would
detect a discordant presence, and hush the voices of a congregation till
the stubborn soul felt God in the stillness, and penitently
surrendered.

Many tones of the great awakening of 1859 heard again in 1904-5,--the
harvest season without a precedent, when men, women and children
numbering ten per cent of the whole population of a province were
gathered into the membership of the church of Christ. But there were
tones a century older heard in the devotions of that harvest-home in
Wales. A New England Christian would have felt at home, with the tuneful
assemblies at Laughor, Trencynon, Bangor, Bethesda, Wrexham, Cardiff, or
Liverpool, singing Lowell Mason's "Meribah" or the clarion melody of
Edson's "Lenox" to Wesley's--

    Blow ye the trumpet, blow,
      The gladly solemn sound;

--or to his other well-known--

    Arise my soul, arise,
      Shake off thy guilty fears,
    The bleeding Sacrifice
      In thy behalf appear.

In short, the flood tide of 1904 and 1905 brought in very little new
music and very few new hymns. "Aberystwyth" and "Tanymarian," the minor
harmonies of Joseph Party and Stephens; E.M. Price's "St. Garmon;" R.M.
Pritchard's, "Hyfrydol," and a few others, were choral favorites, but
their composers were all dead, and the congregations loved the still
older singers who had found familiar welcome at their altars and
firesides. The most cherished and oftenest chosen hymns were those of
William Williams and Ann Griffiths, of Charles Wesley, of Isaac
Watts--indeed the very tongues of fire that appeared at Jerusalem took
on the Cymric speech, and sang the burning lyrics of the poet-saints.
And in their revival joy Calvinistic Wales sang the New Testament with
more of its Johannic than of its Pauline texts. The covenant of
peace--Christ and His Cross--is the theme of all their hymns.


"HERE BEHOLD THE TENT OF MEETING."

_Dyma Babell y cyfarfod._

This hymn, written by Ann Griffiths, is entitled "Love Eternal," and
praises the Divine plan to satisfy the Law and at the same time save the
sinner. The first stanza gives an idea of the thought:

    Here behold the tent of meeting,
      In the blood a peace with heaven,
    Refuge from the blood-avengers,
      For the sick a Healer given.
    Here the sinner nestles safely
      At the very Throne divine,
    And Heaven's righteous law, all holy.
      Still on him shall smile and shine.


"HOW SWEET THE COVENANT TO REMEMBER."

_Bydd melus gofio y cyfammod._

This, entitled "Mysteries of Grace," is also from the pen of Ann
Griffiths. It has the literalness noticeable in much of the Welsh
religious poetry, and there is a note of pietism in it. The two last
stanzas are these:

    He is the great Propitiation
      Who with the thieves that anguish bare;
    He nerved the arms of His tormentors
      To drive the nails that fixed Him there.
    While He discharged the sinner's ransom,
      And made the Law in honor be,
    Righteousness shone undimmed, resplendent,
      And me the Covenant set free.

    My soul, behold Him laid so lowly,
      Of peace the Fount, of Kings the Head,
    The vast creation in Him moving
      And He low-lying with the dead!
    The Life and portion of lost sinners,
      The marvel of heaven's seraphim,
    To sea and land the God Incarnate
      The choir of heaven cries, "Unto Him!"

Ann Griffiths' earliest hymn will be called her sweetest. Fortunately,
too, it is more poetically translated. It was before the vivid
consciousness and intensity of her religious experience had given her
spiritual writings a more involved and mystical expression.

    My soul, behold the fitness
      Of this great Son of God,
    Trust Him for life eternal
      And cast on Him thy load,
    A man--touched with the pity
      Of every human woe,
    A God--to claim the kingdom
      And vanquish every foe.

This stanza, the last of her little poem on the "Eternal Fitness of
Jesus," came to her when, returning from an exciting service, filled
with thoughts of her unworthiness and of the glorious beauty of her
Saviour, she had turned down a sheltered lane to pray alone. There on
her knees in communion with God her soul felt the spirit of the sacred
song. By the time she reached home she had formed it into words.

The first and second stanzas, written later, are these:

    Great Author of salvation
      And providence for man,
    Thou rulest earth and heaven
      With Thy far-reaching plan.
    Today or on the morrow,
      Whatever woe betide,
    Grant us Thy strong assistance,
      Within Thy hand to hide.

    What though the winds be angry,
      What though the waves be high
    While wisdom is the Ruler,
      The Lord of earth and sky?
    What though the flood of evil
      Rise stormily and dark?
    No soul can sink within it;
      God is Himself the ark.

Mrs. Ann Griffiths, of Dolwar Fechan, Montgomeryshire, was born in 1776,
and died in 1805. "She remains," says Dr. Parry, her fellow-countryman,
"a romantic figure in the religious history of Wales. Her hymns leave
upon the reader an undefinable impression both of sublimity and
mysticism. Her brief life-history is most worthy of study both from a
literary and a religious point of view."

[Illustration: Isaac Watts, D.D.]

A suggestive chapter of her short earthly career is compressed in a
sentence by the author of "Sweet Singers of Wales:"

"She had a Christian life of eight years and a married life of ten
months."

She died at the age of twenty-nine. In 1904, near the centennial of her
death, amid the echoes of her own hymns, and the rising waves of the
great Refreshing over her native land, the people of Dolwar Fechan
dedicated the new "Ann Griffiths Memorial Chapel" to her name and to the
glory of God.

Although the Welsh were not slow to adopt the revival tones of other
lands, it was the native, and what might be called the national, lyrics
of that emotional race that were sung with the richest unction and
_hwyl_ (as the Cymric word is) during the recent reformation, and that
evinced the strongest hold on the common heart. Needless to say that
with them was the world-famous song of William Williams,--

    Guide me, O Thou Great Jehovah;

   _Arglwydd ar wain truy'r anialoch_;

--and that of Dr. Heber Evans,--

    Keep me very near to Jesus,
      Though beneath His Cross it be,
    In this world of evil-doing
     'Tis the Cross that cleanseth me;

--and also that native hymn of expectation, high and sweet, whose writer
we have been unable to identify--

    The glory is coming! God said it on high,
    When light in the evening will break from the sky;
    The North and South and the East and the West,
    With joy of salvation and peace will be bless'd.

       *       *       *       *       *

    O summer of holiness, hasten along!
    The purpose of glory is constant and strong;
    The winter will vanish, the clouds pass away;
    O South wind of Heaven, breath softly today!

Of the almost countless hymns that voiced the spirit of the great
revival, the nine following are selected because they are
representative, and all favorites--and because there is no room for a
larger number. The first line of each is given in the original Welsh:


"DWY ADEN COLOMEN PE CAWN."

    O had I the wings of a dove
      How soon would I wander away
    To gaze from Mount Nebo I'd love
      On realms that are fairer than day.
    My vision, not clouded nor dim,
      Beyond the dark river should run;
    I'd sing, with my thoughts upon Him,
      The sinless, the crucified one.

This is another of Thomas Williams' hymns. One of the tunes suitable to
its feeling and its measure was "Edom," by Thomas Evans. It was much
sung in 1859, as well as in 1904.


"CAELBOD YN FORSEC DAN YR IAN."

    Early to bear the yoke excels
    By far the joy in sin that dwells;
    The paths of wisdom still are found
    In peace and solace to abound.

    The young who serve Him here below
    The wrath to come shall never know;
    Of such in heaven are pearls that shine
    Unnumbered in the crown divine.

Written for children and youth by Rev. Thomas Jones, of Denbigh, born
1756; died 1820,--a Calvinistic Methodist preacher, author of a
biography of Thomas Charles of Bala, and various theological works.


"DYMA GARIAD FEL Y MOROEDD, TOSTURIASTHAN FEL Y LLI."

    Love unfathomed as the ocean
      Mercies boundless as the wave!
    Lo the King of Life, the guiltless,
      Dies my guilty soul to save;
    Who can choose but think upon it,
      Who can choose but praise and sing?
    Here is love, while heaven endureth,
      Nought can to oblivion bring.
