According to German legends the uneven surface of the earth was due
to the giants, who marred its smoothness by treading upon it while
it was still soft and newly created, while streams were formed from
the copious tears shed by the giantesses upon seeing the valleys made
by their husbands' huge footprints. As such was the Teutonic belief,
the people imagined that the giants, who personified the mountains
to them, were huge uncouth creatures, who could only move about in
the darkness or fog, and were petrified as soon as the first rays of
sunlight pierced through the gloom or scattered the clouds.

This belief led them to name one of their principal mountain chains
the Riesengebirge (giant mountains). The Scandinavians also shared
this belief, and to this day the Icelanders designate their highest
mountain peaks by the name of Jokul, a modification of the word
"Joetun." In Switzerland, where the everlasting snows rest upon the
lofty mountain tops, the people still relate old stories of the time
when the giants roamed abroad; and when an avalanche came crashing
down the mountain side, they say the giants have restlessly shaken
off part of the icy burden from their brows and shoulders.



The First Gods

As the giants were also personifications of snow, ice, cold, stone, and
subterranean fire, they were said to be descended from the primitive
Fornjotnr, whom some authorities identify with Ymir. According to this
version of the myth, Fornjotnr had three sons: Hler, the sea; Kari, the
air; and Loki, fire. These three divinities, the first gods, formed the
oldest trinity, and their respective descendants were the sea giants
Mimir, Gymir, and Grendel, the storm giants Thiassi, Thrym, and Beli,
and the giants of fire and death, such as the Fenris wolf and Hel.

As all the royal dynasties claimed descent from some mythical being,
the Merovingians asserted that their first progenitor was a sea giant,
who rose out of the waves in the form of an ox, and surprised the
queen while she was walking alone on the seashore, compelling her to
become his wife. She gave birth to a son named Meroveus, the founder
of the first dynasty of Frankish kings.

Many stories have already been told about the most important
giants. They reappear in many of the later myths and fairy-tales,
and manifest, after the introduction of Christianity, a peculiar
dislike to the sound of church bells and the singing of monks and nuns.



The Giant in Love

The Scandinavians relate, in this connection, that in the days
of Olaf the Saint a giant called Senjemand, dwelt on the Island of
Senjen, and he was greatly incensed because a nun on the Island of
Grypto daily sang her morning hymn. This giant fell in love with a
beautiful maiden called Juterna-jesta, and it was long ere he could
find courage to propose to her. When at last he made his halting
request, the fair damsel scornfully rejected him, declaring that he
was far too old and ugly for her taste.


    "Miserable Senjemand--ugly and grey!
    Thou win the maid of Kvedfiord!
    No--a churl thou art and shalt ever remain."

            Ballad (Brace's tr.).


In his anger at being thus scornfully refused, the giant swore
vengeance, and soon after he shot a great flint arrow from his bow
at the maiden, who dwelt eighty miles away. Another lover, Torge,
also a giant, seeing her peril and wishing to protect her, flung
his hat at the speeding arrow. This hat was a thousand feet high
and proportionately broad and thick, nevertheless the arrow pierced
the headgear, falling short, however, of its aim. Senjemand, seeing
that he had failed, and fearing the wrath of Torge, mounted his steed
and prepared to ride off as quickly as possible; but the sun, rising
just then above the horizon, turned him into stone, together with the
arrow and Torge's hat, the huge pile being known as the Torghatten
mountain. The people still point to an obelisk which they say is the
stone arrow; to a hole in the mountain, 289 feet high and 88 feet wide,
which they say is the aperture made by the arrow in its flight through
the hat; and to the horseman on Senjen Island, apparently riding a
colossal steed and drawing the folds of his wide cavalry cloak closely
about him. As for the nun whose singing had so disturbed Senjemand, she
was petrified too, and never troubled any one with her psalmody again.



The Giant and the Church Bells

Another legend relates that one of the mountain giants, annoyed by
the ringing of church bells more than fifty miles away, once caught
up a huge rock, which he hurled at the sacred building. Fortunately
it fell short and broke in two. Ever since then, the peasants say
that the trolls come on Christmas Eve to raise the largest piece of
stone upon golden pillars, and to dance and feast beneath it. A lady,
wishing to know whether this tale were true, once sent her groom
to the place. The trolls came forward and hospitably offered him a
drink from a horn mounted in gold and ornamented with runes. Seizing
the horn, the groom flung its contents away and dashed off with it
at a mad gallop, closely pursued by the trolls, from whom he escaped
only by passing through a stubble field and over running water. Some
of their number visited the lady on the morrow to claim this horn,
and when she refused to part with it they laid a curse upon her,
declaring that her castle would be burned down every time the horn
should be removed. The prediction has thrice been fulfilled, and now
the family guard the relic with superstitious care. A similar drinking
vessel, obtained in much the same fashion by the Oldenburg family,
is exhibited in the collection of the King of Denmark.

The giants were not supposed to remain stationary, but were said to
move about in the darkness, sometimes transporting masses of earth
and sand, which they dropped here and there. The sandhills in northern
Germany and Denmark were supposed to have been thus formed.



The Giants' Ship

A North Frisian tradition relates that the giants possessed a colossal
ship, called Mannigfual, which constantly cruised about in the Atlantic
Ocean. Such was the size of this vessel that the captain was said
to patrol the deck on horseback, while the rigging was so extensive
and the masts so high that the sailors who went up as youths came
down as gray-haired men, having rested and refreshed themselves in
rooms fashioned and provisioned for that purpose in the huge blocks
and pulleys.

By some mischance it happened that the pilot once directed the immense
vessel into the North Sea, and wishing to return to the Atlantic
as soon as possible, yet not daring to turn in such a small space,
he steered into the English Channel. Imagine the dismay of all on
board when they saw the passage growing narrower and narrower the
farther they advanced. When they came to the narrowest spot, between
Calais and Dover, it seemed barely possible that the vessel, drifting
along with the current, could force its way through. The captain,
with laudable presence of mind, promptly bade his men soap the sides
of the ship, and to lay an extra-thick layer on the starboard, where
the rugged cliffs of Dover rose threateningly. These orders were no
sooner carried out than the vessel entered the narrow space, and,
thanks to the captain's precaution, it slipped safely through. The
rocks of Dover scraped off so much soap, however, that ever since
they have been particularly white, and the waves dashing against them
still have an unusually foamy appearance.

This exciting experience was not the only one through which the
Mannigfual passed, for we are told that it once, nobody knows how,
penetrated into the Baltic Sea, where, the water not being deep enough
to keep the vessel afloat, the captain ordered all the ballast to be
thrown overboard. The material thus cast on either side of the vessel
into the sea formed the two islands of Bornholm and Christiansoe.



Princess Ilse

In Thuringia and in the Black Forest the stories of the giants are
legion, and one of the favourites with the peasants is that about
Ilse, the lovely daughter of the giant of the Ilsenstein. She was so
charming that far and wide she was known as the Beautiful Princess
Ilse, and was wooed by many knights, of whom she preferred the Lord of
Westerburg. But her father did not at all approve of her consorting
with a mere mortal, and forbade her to see her lover. Princess Ilse
was wilful, however, and in spite of her sire's prohibition she
daily visited her lover. The giant, exasperated by her persistency
and disobedience, finally stretched out his huge hands and, seizing
the rocks, tore a great gap between the height where he dwelt and the
castle of Westerburg. Upon this, Princess Ilse, going to the cleft
which parted her from her lover, recklessly flung herself over the
precipice into the raging flood beneath, and was there changed into
a bewitching undine. She dwelt in the limpid waters for many a year,
appearing from time to time to exercise her fascinations upon mortals,
and even, it is said, captivating the affections of the Emperor
Henry, who paid frequent visits to her cascade. Her last appearance,
according to popular belief, was at Pentecost, a hundred years ago;
and the natives have not yet ceased to look for the beautiful princess,
who is said still to haunt the stream and to wave her white arms to
entice travellers into the cool spray of the waterfall.


    "I am the Princess Ilse,
      And I dwell at the Ilsenstein;
    Come with me to my castle,
      And bliss shall be mine and thine.

    "With the cool of my glass-clear waters
      Thy brow and thy locks I'll lave;
    And thou'lt think of thy sorrows no longer,
      For all that thou look'st so grave.

    "With my white arms twined around thee,
      And lapped on my breast so white,
    Thou shalt lie, and dream of elf-land--
      Its loves and wild delight."

            Heine (Martin's tr.).



The Giantess's Plaything

The giants inhabited all the earth before it was given to mankind, and
it was only with reluctance that they made way for the human race, and
retreated into the waste and barren parts of the country, where they
brought up their families in strict seclusion. Such was the ignorance
of their offspring, that a young giantess, straying from home, once
came to an inhabited valley, where for the first time in her life she
saw a farmer ploughing on the hillside. Deeming him a pretty plaything,
she caught him up with his team, and thrusting them into her apron,
she gleefully carried them home to exhibit to her father. But the
giant immediately bade her carry peasant and horses back to the place
where she had found them, and when she had done so he sadly explained
that the creatures whom she took for mere playthings, would eventually
drive the giant folk away, and become masters of the earth.






CHAPTER XXIV: THE DWARFS


Little Men

In the first chapter we saw how the black elves, dwarfs, or
Svart-alfar, were bred like maggots in the flesh of the slain giant
Ymir. The gods, perceiving these tiny, unformed creatures creeping in
and out, gave them form and features, and they became known as dark
elves, on account of their swarthy complexions. These small beings
were so homely, with their dark skin, green eyes, large heads, short
legs, and crow's feet, that they were enjoined to hide underground,
being commanded never to show themselves during the daytime lest they
should be turned into stone. Although less powerful than the gods,
they were far more intelligent than men, and as their knowledge was
boundless and extended even to the future, gods and men were equally
anxious to question them.

The dwarfs were also known as trolls, kobolds, brownies, goblins,
pucks, or Huldra folk, according to the country where they dwelt.


    "You are the grey, grey Troll,
      With the great green eyes,
    But I love you, grey, grey Troll--
      You are so wise!

    "Tell me this sweet morn,
      Tell me all you know--
    Tell me, was I born?
      Tell me, did I grow?"

            The Legend of the Little Fay (Buchanan).



The Tarnkappe

These little beings could transport themselves with marvellous celerity
from one place to another, and they loved to conceal themselves
behind rocks, when they would mischievously repeat the last words
of conversations overheard from such hiding-places. Owing to this
well-known trick, the echoes were called dwarfs' talk, and people
fancied that the reason why the makers of such sounds were never
seen was because each dwarf was the proud possessor of a tiny red
cap which made the wearer invisible. This cap was called Tarnkappe,
and without it the dwarfs dared not appear above the surface of the
earth after sunrise for fear of being petrified. When wearing it they
were safe from this peril.


    "Away! let not the sun view me--
      I dare no longer stay;
    An Elfin-child, thou wouldst me see,
      To stone turn at his ray."

            La Motte-Fouque.



The Legend of Kallundborg

Helva, daughter of the Lord of Nesvek, was loved by Esbern Snare,
whose suit, however, was rejected by the proud father with the scornful
words: "When thou shalt build at Kallundborg a stately church, then
will I give thee Helva to wife."

Now Esbern, although of low estate, was proud of heart, even as
the lord, and he determined, come what might, to find a way to win
his coveted bride. So off he strode to a troll in Ullshoi Hill,
and effected a bargain whereby the troll undertook to build a fine
church, on completion of which Esbern was to tell the builder's name
or forfeit his eyes and heart.

Night and day the troll wrought on, and as the building took shape,
sadder grew Esbern Snare. He listened at the crevices of the hill
by night; he watched during the day; he wore himself to a shadow
by anxious thought; he besought the elves to aid him. All to no
purpose. Not a sound did he hear, not a thing did he see, to suggest
the name of the builder.

Meantime, rumour was busy, and the fair Helva, hearing of the evil
compact, prayed for the soul of the unhappy man.

Time passed until one day the church lacked only one pillar,
and worn out by black despair, Esbern sank exhausted upon a bank,
whence he heard the troll hammering the last stone in the quarry
underground. "Fool that I am," he said bitterly, "I have builded
my tomb."

Just then he heard a light footstep, and looking up, he beheld his
beloved. "Would that I might die in thy stead," said she, through
her tears, and with that Esbern confessed how that for love of her
he had imperilled eyes and heart and soul.

Then fast as the troll hammered underground, Helva prayed beside her
lover, and the prayers of the maiden prevailed over the spell of the
troll, for suddenly Esbern caught the sound of a troll-wife singing
to her infant, bidding it be comforted, for that, on the morrow,
Father Fine would return bringing a mortal's eyes and heart.

Sure of his victim, the troll hurried to Kallundborg with the last
stone. "Too late, Fine!" quoth Esbern, and at the word, the troll
vanished with his stone, and it is said that the peasants heard at
night the sobbing of a woman underground, and the voice of the troll
loud with blame.


    "Of the Troll of the Church they sing the rune
    By the Northern Sea in the harvest moon;
    And the fishers of Zealand hear him still
    Scolding his wife in Ulshoi hill.

    "And seaward over its groves of birch
    Still looks the tower of Kallundborg church,
    Where, first at its altar, a wedded pair,
    Stood Helva of Nesvek and Esbern Snare!"

            J. G. Whittier



The Magic of the Dwarfs

The dwarfs, as well as the elves, were ruled by a king, who, in
various countries of northern Europe, was known as Andvari, Alberich,
Elbegast, Gondemar, Laurin, or Oberon. He dwelt in a magnificent
subterranean palace, studded with the gems which his subjects had
mined from the bosom of the earth, and, besides untold riches and the
Tarnkappe, he owned a magic ring, an invincible sword, and a belt of
strength. At his command the little men, who were very clever smiths,
would fashion marvellous jewels or weapons, which their ruler would
bestow upon favourite mortals.

We have already seen how the dwarfs fashioned Sif's golden hair,
the ship Skidbladnir, the point of Odin's spear Gungnir, the ring
Draupnir, the golden-bristled boar Gullin-bursti, the hammer Mioelnir,
and Freya's golden necklace Brisinga-men. They are also said to
have made the magic girdle which Spenser describes in his poem of
the "Faerie Queene,"--a girdle which was said to have the power of
revealing whether its wearer were virtuous or a hypocrite.


    "That girdle gave the virtue of chaste love
    And wifehood true to all that did it bear;
    But whosoever contrary doth prove
    Might not the same about her middle wear
    But it would loose, or else asunder tear."

            Faerie Queene (Spenser).


The dwarfs also manufactured the mythical sword Tyrfing, which could
cut through iron and stone, and which they gave to Angantyr. This
sword, like Frey's, fought of its own accord, and could not be
sheathed, after it was once drawn, until it had tasted blood. Angantyr
was so proud of this weapon that he had it buried with him; but his
daughter Hervor visited his tomb at midnight, recited magic spells, and
forced him to rise from his grave to give her the precious blade. She
wielded it bravely, and it eventually became the property of another
of the Northern heroes.

Another famous weapon, which according to tradition was forged by
the dwarfs in Eastern lands, was the sword Angurvadel which Frithiof
received as a portion of his inheritance from his fathers. Its hilt
was of hammered gold, and the blade was inscribed with runes which
were dull until it was brandished in war, when they flamed red as
the comb of the fighting-cock.


                            "Quick lost was that hero
    Meeting in battle's night that blade high-flaming with runics.
    Widely renown'd was this sword, of swords most choice in the
    Northland."

            Tegner's Frithiof (G. Stephens's tr.).



The Passing of the Dwarfs

The dwarfs were generally kind and helpful; sometimes they kneaded
bread, ground flour, brewed beer, performed countless household tasks,
and harvested and threshed the grain for the farmers. If ill-treated,
however, or turned to ridicule, these little creatures would forsake
the house and never come back again. When the old gods ceased to be
worshipped in the Northlands, the dwarfs withdrew entirely from the
country, and a ferryman related how he had been hired by a mysterious
personage to ply his boat back and forth across the river one night,
and at every trip his vessel was so heavily laden with invisible
passengers that it nearly sank. When his night's work was over, he
received a rich reward, and his employer informed him that he had
carried the dwarfs across the river, as they were leaving the country
for ever in consequence of the unbelief of the people.



Changelings

According to popular superstition, the dwarfs, in envy of man's
taller stature, often tried to improve their race by winning human
wives or by stealing unbaptized children, and substituting their
own offspring for the human mother to nurse. These dwarf babies were
known as changelings, and were recognisable by their puny and wizened
forms. To recover possession of her own babe, and to rid herself of
the changeling, a woman was obliged either to brew beer in egg-shells
or to grease the soles of the child's feet and hold them so near the
flames that, attracted by their offspring's distressed cries, the dwarf
parents would hasten to claim their own and return the stolen child.

The troll women were said to have the power of changing themselves
into Maras or nightmares, and of tormenting any one they pleased;
but if the victim succeeded in stopping up the hole through which a
Mara made her ingress into his room, she was entirely at his mercy,
and he could even force her to wed him if he chose to do so. A wife
thus obtained was sure to remain as long as the opening through which
she had entered the house was closed, but if the plug were removed,
either by accident or design, she immediately effected her escape
and never returned.



The Peaks of the Trolls

Naturally, traditions of the little folk abound everywhere throughout
the North, and many places are associated with their memory. The
well-known Peaks of the Trolls (Trold-Tindterne) in Norway are said
to be the scene of a conflict between two bands of trolls, who in
the eagerness of combat omitted to note the approach of sunrise,
with the result that they were changed into the small points of rock
which stand up noticeably upon the crests of the mountain.



A Conjecture

Some writers have ventured a conjecture that the dwarfs so often
mentioned in the ancient sagas and fairy-tales were real beings,
probably the Phoenician miners, who, working the coal, iron, copper,
gold, and tin mines of England, Norway, Sweden, etc., took advantage
of the simplicity and credulity of the early inhabitants to make
them believe that they belonged to a supernatural race and always
dwelt underground, in a region which was called Svart-alfa-heim,
or the home of the black elves.
