[FN#214]  Schopenhauer, 'The World as Will and Idea' (R. B. Haldane
and J. Kemp's translation, vol. iii., pp. 384-386); Hartman,
'Philosophy of the Unconsciousness' (W. C. Coupland's translation,
vol. iii., pp. 12-119).


No matter what these one-sided observers' opinion may be, we are
certain that we experience good as well as evil, and feel pain and
pleasure as well.  Neither can we alleviate the real sufferings of
the sick by telling them that sickness is no other than the absence
of health, nor can we make the poor a whit richer by telling them
that poverty is a mere absence of riches.  How could we save the
dying by persuading them that death is a bare privation of life?  Is
it possible to dispirit the happy by telling them that happiness is
unreal, or make the fortunate miserable by telling them that fortune
has no objective reality, or to make one welcome evil by telling one
that it is only the absence of good?

You must admit there are no definite external causes of pain nor
those of pleasure, for one and the same thing causes pain at one time
and pleasure at another.  A cause of delight to one person turns out
to be that of aversion to another.  A dying miser might revive at the
sight of gold, yet a Diogenes would pass without noticing it.  Cigars
and wine are blessed gifts of heaven to the intemperate,[FN#215] but
accursed poison to the temperate.  Some might enjoy a long life, but
others would heartily desire to curtail it.  Some might groan under a
slight indisposition, while others would whistle away a life of
serious disease.  An Epicure might be taken prisoner by poverty, yet
an Epictetus would fearlessly face and vanquish him.  How, then, do
you distinguish the real cause of pain from that of pleasure?  How do
you know the causes of one are more numerous than the causes of the
other?


[FN#215]  The author of Han Shu (Kan Sho) calls spirits the gift of
Heaven.


Expose thermometers of several kinds to one and the same temperature.
 One will indicate, say, 60°, another as high as 100°, another as low as
15°.  Expose the thermometers of human sensibilities, which are of
myriads of different kinds, to one and the same temperature of
environment.  None of them will indicate the same degrees.  In one
and the same climate, which we think moderate, the Eskimo would be
washed with perspiration, while the Hindu would shudder with cold.
Similarly, under one and the same circumstance some might be
extremely miserable and think it unbearable, yet others would be
contented and happy.  Therefore we may safely conclude that there are
no definite external causes of pain and pleasure, and that there must
be internal causes which modify the external.



3. The Law of Balance.

Nature governs the world with her law of balance.  She puts things
ever in pairs,[FN#216] and leaves nothing in isolation.  Positives
stand in opposition to negatives, actives to passives, males to
females, and so on.  Thus we get the ebb in opposition to the flood
tide; the centrifugal force to the centripetal; attraction to
repulsion; growth to decay; toxin to antitoxin; light to shade;
action to reaction; unity to variety; day to night; the animate to
the inanimate.  Look at our own bodies: the right eye is placed side
by side with the left; the left shoulder with the right; the right
lung with the left; the left hemisphere of the brain with that of the
right; and so forth.


[FN#216]  Zenists call them 'pairs of opposites.'


It holds good also in human affairs: advantage is always accompanied
by disadvantage; loss by gain; convenience by inconvenience; good by
evil; rise by fall; prosperity by adversity; virtue by vice; beauty
by deformity; pain by pleasure; youth by old age; life by death.  'A
handsome young lady of quality,' a parable in Mahaparinirvana-sutra
tells us, 'who carries with her an immense treasure is ever
accompanied by her sister, an ugly woman in rags, who destroys
everything within her reach.  If we win the former, we must also get
the latter.'  As pessimists show intense dislike towards the latter
and forget the former, so optimists admire the former so much that
they are indifferent to the latter.



4. Life Consists in Conflict.

Life consists in conflict.  So long as man remains a social animal he
cannot live in isolation.  All individual hopes and aspirations
depend on society.  Society is reflected in the individual, and the
individual in society.  In spite of this, his inborn free will and
love of liberty seek to break away from social ties.  He is also a
moral animal, and endowed with love and sympathy.  He loves his
fellow-beings, and would fain promote their welfare; but he must be
engaged in constant struggle against them for existence.  He
sympathizes even with animals inferior to him, and heartily wishes to
protect them; yet he is doomed to destroy their lives day and night.
He has many a noble aspiration, and often soars aloft by the wings of
imagination into the realm of the ideal; still his material desires
drag him down to the earth.  He lives on day by day to continue his
life, but he is unfailingly approaching death at every moment.

The more he secures new pleasure, spiritual or material, the more he
incurs pain not yet experienced.  One evil removed only gives place
to another; one advantage gained soon proves itself a disadvantage.
His very reason is the cause of his doubt and suspicion; his
intellect, with which he wants to know everything, declares itself to
be incapable of knowing anything in its real state; his finer
sensibility, which is the sole source of finer pleasure, has to
experience finer suffering.  The more he asserts himself, the more he
has to sacrifice himself.  These conflictions probably led Kant to
call life "a trial time, wherein most succumb, and in which even the
best does not rejoice in his life."  "Men betake themselves," says
Fichte, "to the chase after felicity. . . . But as soon as they
withdraw into themselves and ask themselves, 'Am I now happy?' the
reply comes distinctly from the depth of their soul, 'Oh no; thou art
still just as empty and destitute as before!' . . . They will in the
future life just as vainly seek blessedness as they have sought it in
the present life."

It is not without reason that the pessimistic minds came to conclude
that 'the unrest of unceasing willing and desiring by which every
creature is goaded is in itself unblessedness,' and that 'each
creature is in constant danger, constant agitation, and the whole,
with its restless, meaningless motion, is a tragedy of the most
piteous kind.'  'A creature like the carnivorous animal, who cannot
exist at all without continually destroying and tearing others, may
not feel its brutality, but man, who has to prey on other sentient
beings like the carnivorous, is intelligent enough, as hard fate
would have it, to know and feel his own brutal living.'  He must be
the most miserable of all creatures, for he is most conscious of his
own misery.  Furthermore, 'he experiences not only the misfortunes
which actually befall him, but in imagination he goes through every
possibility of evil.'  Therefore none, from great kings and emperors
down to nameless beggars, can be free from cares and anxieties, which
'ever flit around them like ghosts.'



5. The Mystery of Life.

Thus far we have pointed out the inevitable conflictions in life in
order to prepare ourselves for an insight into the depth of life.  We
are far from being pessimistic, for we believe that life consists in
confliction, but that confliction does not end in confliction, but in
a new form of harmony.  Hope comes to conflict with fear, and is
often threatened with losing its hold on mind; then it renews its
life and takes root still deeper than before.  Peace is often
disturbed with wars, but then it gains a still firmer ground than
ever.  Happiness is driven out of mind by melancholy, then it is
re-enforced by favourable conditions and returns with double
strength.  Spirit is dragged down by matter from its ideal heaven,
then, incited by shame, it tries a higher flight.  Good is opposed by
evil, then it gathers more strength and vanquishes its foe.  Truth is
clouded by falsehood, then it issues forth with its greater light.
Liberty is endangered by tyranny, then it overthrows it with a
splendid success.

Manifoldness stands out boldly against unity; difference against
agreement; particularity against generality; individuality against
society.  Manifoldness, nevertheless, instead of annihilating,
enriches unity; difference, instead of destroying agreement, gives it
variety; particularities, instead of putting an end to generality,
increase its content; individuals, instead of breaking the harmony of
society, strengthen the power of it.

Thus 'Universal Life does not swallow up manifoldness nor extinguish
differences, but it is the only means of bringing to its full
development the detailed content of reality; in particular, it does
not abolish the great oppositions of life and world, but takes them
up into itself and brings them into fruitful relations with each
other.'  Therefore 'our life is a mysterious blending of freedom and
necessity, power and limitation, caprice and law; yet these opposites
are constantly seeking and finding a mutual adjustment.'



6. Nature Favours Nothing in Particular.

There is another point of view of life, which gave the present writer
no small contentment, and which he believes would cure one of
pessimistic complaint.  Buddha, or Universal Life conceived by Zen,
is not like a capricious despot, who acts not seldom against his own
laws.  His manifestation as shown in the Enlightened Consciousness is
lawful, impartial, and rational.  Buddhists believe that even Shakya
Muni himself was not free from the law of retribution, which
includes, in our opinion, the law of balance and that of causation.

Now let us briefly examine how the law of balance holds its sway over
life and the world.  When the Cakravartin, according to an Indian
legend, the universal monarch, would come to govern the earth, a
wheel would also appear as one of his treasures, and go on rolling
all over the world, making everything level and smooth.  Buddha is
the spiritual Cakravartin, whose wheel is the wheel of the law of
balance, with which he governs all things equally and impartially.
First let us observe the simplest cases where the law of balance
holds good.  Four men can finish in three days the same amount of
work as is done by three men in four days.  The increase in the
number of men causes the decrease in that of days, the decrease in
the number of men causes the increase in that of days, the result
being always the same.  Similarly the increase in the sharpness of a
knife is always accompanied by a decrease in its durability, and the
increase of durability by a decrease of sharpness.  The more
beautiful flowers grow, the uglier their fruits become; the prettier
the fruits grow, the simpler become their flowers.  'A strong soldier
is ready to die; a strong tree is easy to be broken; hard leather is
easy to be torn.  But the soft tongue survives the hard teeth.'
Horned creatures are destitute of tusks, the sharp-tusked creatures
lack horns.  Winged animals are not endowed with paws, and handed
animals are provided with no wings.  Birds of beautiful plumage have
no sweet voice, and sweet-voiced songsters no feathers of bright
colours.  The finer in quality, the smaller in quantity, and bulkier
in size, the coarser in nature.

Nature favours nothing in particular.  So everything has its
advantage and disadvantage as well. What one gains on the one hand
one loses on the other.  The ox is competent in drawing a heavy cart,
but he is absolutely incompetent in catching mice.  A shovel is fit
for digging, but not for ear-picking.  Aeroplanes are good for
aviation, but not for navigation.  Silkworms feed on mulberry leaves
and make silk from it, but they can do nothing with other leaves.
Thus everything has its own use or a mission appointed by Nature; and
if we take advantage of it, nothing is useless, but if not, all are
useless.  'The neck of the crane may seem too long to some idle
on-lookers, but there is no surplus in it.  The limbs of the tortoise
may appear too short, but there is no shortcoming in them.'  The
centipede, having a hundred limbs, can find no useless feet; the
serpent, having no foot, feels no want.



7. The Law of Balance in Life.

It is also the case with human affairs.  Social positions high or
low, occupations spiritual or temporal, work rough or gentle,
education perfect or imperfect, circumstances needy or opulent, each
has its own advantage as well as disadvantage.  The higher the
position the graver the responsibilities, the lower the rank the
lighter the obligation.  The director of a large bank can never be so
careless as his errand-boy who may stop on the street to throw a
stone at a sparrow; nor can the manager of a large plantation have as
good a time on a rainy day as his day-labourers who spend it in
gambling.  The accumulation of wealth is always accompanied by its
evils; no Rothschild nor Rockefeller can be happier than a poor
pedlar.

A mother of many children may be troubled by her noisy little ones
and envy her sterile friend, who in turn may complain of her
loneliness; but if they balance what they gain with what they lose,
they will find the both sides are equal.  The law of balance strictly
forbids one's monopoly of happiness.  It applies its scorpion whip to
anyone who is given to pleasures.  Joy in extremity lives next door
to exceeding sorrow.  "Where there is much light," says Goethe,
"shadow is deep."  Age, withered and disconsolate, lurks under the
skirts of blooming youth.  The celebration of birthday is followed by
the commemoration of death.  Marriage might be supposed to be the
luckiest event in one's life, but the widow's tears and the orphan's
sufferings also might be its outcome.  But for the former the latter
can never be.  The death of parents is indeed the unluckiest event in
the son's life, but it may result in the latter's inheritance of an
estate, which is by no means unlucky.  The disease of a child may
cause its parents grief, but it is a matter of course that it lessens
the burden of their livelihood.  Life has its pleasures, but also its
pains.  Death has no pleasure of life, but also none of its pain.  So
that if we balance their smiles and tears, life and death are equal.
It is not wise for us, therefore, to commit suicide while the terms
of our life still remain, nor to fear death when there is no way of
avoiding it.

Again, the law of balance does not allow anyone to take the lion's
share of nature's gifts.  Beauty in face is accompanied by deformity
in character.  Intelligence is often uncombined with virtue.  "Fair
girls are destined to be unfortunate," says a Japanese proverb, "and
men of ability to be sickly."  "He makes no friend who never makes a
foe."  "Honesty is next to idiocy."  "Men of genius," says
Longfellow, "are often dull and inert in society; as the blazing
meteor when it descends to earth is only a stone."  Honour and shame
go hand in hand.  Knowledge and virtue live in poverty, while ill
health and disease are inmates of luxury.

Every misfortune begets some sort of fortune, while every good luck
gives birth to some sort of bad luck.  Every prosperity never fails
to sow seeds of adversity, while every fall never fails to bring
about some kind of rise.  We must not, then, despair in days of frost
and snow, reminding ourselves of sunshine and flowers that follow
them; nor must we be thoughtless in days of youth and health, keeping
in mind old age and ill health that are in the rear of them.  In
brief, all, from crowns and coronets down to rags and begging bowls,
have their own happiness and share heavenly grace alike.



8. The Application of the Law of Causation to Morals.

Although it may be needless to state here the law of causation at any
length, yet it is not equally needless to say a few words about its
application to morals as the law of retribution, which is a matter of
dispute even among Buddhist scholars.  The kernel of the idea is very
simple-like seed, like fruit; like cause, like effect; like action,
like influence--nothing more.  As fresh air strengthens and impure
air chokes us, so good conduct brings about good consequence, and bad
conduct does otherwise.[FN#217]


[FN#217]  Zen lays much stress on this law.  See Shu-sho-gi and
Ei-hei-ka-kun, by Do-gen.


Over against these generalizations we raise no objection, but there
are many cases, in practical life, of doubtful nature.  An act of
charity, for example, might do others some sort of damage, as is
often the case with the giving of alms to the poor, which may produce
the undesirable consequence of encouraging beggary.  An act of love
might produce an injurious effect, as the mother's love often spoils
her children.  Some[FN#218] may think these are cases of good cause
and bad effect.  We have, however, to analyze these causes and
effects in order to find in what relation they stand.  In the first
case the good action of almsgiving produces the good effect of
lessening the sufferings of the poor, who should be thankful for
their benefactor.  The giver is rewarded in his turn by the peace and
satisfaction of his conscience.  The poor, however, when used to
being given alms are inclined to grow lazy and live by means of
begging.  Therefore the real cause of the bad effect is the
thoughtlessness of both the giver and the given, but not charity
itself.  In the second case the mother's love and kindness produce a
good effect on her and her children, making them all happy, and
enabling them to enjoy the pleasure of the sweet home; yet
carelessness and folly on the part of the mother and ingratitude on
the part of the children may bring about the bad effect.


[FN#218]  Dr. H. Kato seems to have thought that good cause may bring
out bad effect when he attacked Buddhism on this point.


History is full of numerous cases in which good persons were so
unfortunate as to die a miserable death or to live in extreme
poverty, side by side with those cases in which bad people lived in
health and prosperity, enjoying a long life.  Having these cases in
view, some are of the opinion that there is no law of retribution as
believed by the Buddhists.  And even among the Buddhist scholars
themselves there are some who think of the law of retribution as an
ideal, and not as a law governing life.  This is probably due to
their misunderstanding of the historical facts.  There is no reason
because he is good and honourable that he should be wealthy or
healthy; nor is there any reason because he is bad that he should be
poor or sickly.  To be good is one thing, and to be healthy or rich
