
I. Note the preliminaries of the covenant. The chapter begins with the
command to Moses to come up to the mount, with Aaron and other
representatives of the people. But he was already there when the
command was given, and a difficulty has been found (or, shall we say,
made) out of this. The explanation seems reasonable and plain enough,
that the long section extending from Exodus xx. 22, and containing the
fundamental laws as spoken by God, is closed by our verses 1 and 2,
which imply, in the very order to Moses to come up with his companions,
that he must first go down to bring them. God dismisses him as a king
might end an audience with his minister, by bidding him return with
attendants. The singular use of the third person in reference to Moses
in the third verse is not explained by supposing another writer; for,
whoever wrote it, it would be equally anomalous.

So he comes down from the stern cloud-encircled peak to that great
plain where the encampment lay, and all eyes watch his descent. The
people gather round him, eager and curious. He recounts 'all the
judgments,' the series of laws, which had been lodged in his mind by
God, and is answered by the many-voiced shout of too swiftly promised
obedience. Glance over the preceding chapters, and you will see how
much was covered by 'all that the Lord hath spoken.' Remember that
every lip which united in that lightly made vow drew its last breath in
the wilderness, because of disobedience, and the burst of homage
becomes a sad witness to human weakness and changefulness. The glory of
God flashed above them on the barren granite, the awful voice had
scarcely died into desert silence, nerves still tingled with
excitement, and wills were bowed before Jehovah, manifestly so near.
For a moment, the people were ennobled, and obedience seemed easy. They
little knew what they were saying in that brief spasm of devotion. It
was high-water then, but the tide soon turned, and all the ooze and
ugliness, covered now, lay bare and rotting. 'Better is it that thou
shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay.' We may
take the lesson to ourselves, and see to it that emotion consolidates
into strenuous persistency, and does not die in the very excitement of
the vow.

The pledge of obedience was needed before the Covenant could be made,
and, as we shall find, was reiterated in the very centre of the
ceremonial ratification. For the present, it warranted Moses in
preparing for the morrow's ritual. His first step was to prepare a
written copy of the laws to which the people had sworn. Here we come
across an old, silenced battery from which a heavy fire used to be
directed against the historical accuracy of the Pentateuch. Alphabetic
writing was of a later date. There could not have been a written code.
The statement was a mere attempt of a later age to claim antiquity for
comparatively modern legislation. It was no more historical than
similar traditions in other countries, Sibylline books, etc. All that
is out of court now. Perhaps some other guns will be spiked in due
time, that make a great noise just at present. Then comes the erection
of a rude altar, surrounded by twelve standing stones, just as on the
east of Jordan we may yet see dolmens and menhirs. The altar represents
the divine presence; and the encircling stones, Israel gathered around
its God. The group is a memorial and a witness to the people,--and a
witness against them, if disobedient. Thus two permanent records were
prepared, the book and the monument. The one which seemed the more
lasting has perished; the more fragile has endured, and will last to
the world's end.

II. Note the rite of ratification of the covenant. The ceremonial is
complex and significant. We need not stay on the mere picture,
impressive and, to our eyes, strange as it is, but rather seek to bring
out the meaning of these smoking offerings, and that blood flung on the
altar and on the crowd. First came two sorts of sacrifices, offered not
by priests, but by selected young men, probably one for each tribe,
whose employment in sacrificial functions shows the priestly character
of the whole nation, according to the great words of Exodus xix. 6.
Burnt-offerings and peace-offerings differed mainly in the use made of
the sacrifice, which was wholly consumed by fire in the former, while
it was in part eaten by the offerer in the latter. The one symbolised
entire consecration; the other, communion with God on the basis of
sacrifice. The sin-offering does not appear here, as being of later
origin, and the product of the law, which deepened the consciousness of
transgression. But these sacrifices, at the threshold of the covenant,
receive an expiatory character by the use made of the blood, and
witness to the separation between God and man, which renders amity and
covenant friendship impossible, without a sacrifice.

They must have yielded much blood. It is divided into two parts,
corresponding to the two parties to the covenant, like the cloven
animals in Abraham's covenant. One half is 'sprinkled' on the altar,
or, as the word means, 'swung,'--which suggests a larger quantity and a
more vehement action than 'sprinkling' does. That drenching of the
altar with gore is either a piece of barbarism or a solemn symbol of
the central fact of Christianity no less than of Judaism, and a token
that the only footing on which man can be received into fellowship with
God is through the offering of a pure life, instead of the sinner,
which, accepted by God, covers or expiates sin. There can be no
question that the idea of expiation is at the very foundation of the
Old Testament ritual. It is fashionable to regard the expiatory element
of Christianity as 'Hebrew old clothes,' but the fact is the other way
about. It is not that Christianity has not been able to rid itself of a
rude and false conception, but that 'Judaism' had its sacrifices
appointed by God, in order to prepare the way for the true offering,
which takes away sin.

The expiation by blood having been thus made, the hindrances to the
nation's entering into covenant are removed. Therefore follows in
logical order the next step, their formal (alas! how purely formal it
proved to be) taking on themselves its obligations. The freshly written
'book' is produced, and read there, to the silent people, before the
bloody altar, beneath the peak of Sinai. Again the chorus of assent
from a thousand throats echoes among the rocks. They accept the
conditions. They had done so last night; but this is the actual
contract on their part, and its place in the whole order of the
ceremony is significant. It follows expiation, without which man cannot
enter into friendship with God, without the acceptance of which man
will not yield himself in obedience. The vows which God approves are
those of men whose sins are covered.

The final step was the sprinkling of the people with the blood. The
division of the blood into two portions signifies that it had an office
in regard to each party to the covenant. If it had been possible to
pour it all on the altar, and then all on the people, that would have
been done. The separation into two portions was inevitable; but in
reality it is the same blood which, sprinkled on the altar, expiates,
and on the worshipper, consecrates, cleanses, unites to God, and brings
into covenant with Him. Hence Moses accompanies the sprinkling of the
people with the explanation, 'This is the blood of the covenant, which
the Lord hath made with you, upon all these conditions' (Rev. Ver.
margin). It ratifies the compact on both sides. God 'hath made' it, in
accepting the sprinkled blood; they have made it, in being sprinkled
therewith. But while the rite sets forth the great gospel truth of
expiation, the Covenant moves within the region of law. It is made 'on
the basis of all these words,' and is voidable by disobedience. It is
the _Magna Charta_ of the nation, and its summing up is 'this do, and
thou shalt live.' Its promises are mainly of outward guardianship and
national blessings. And these are suspended by it, as they were in fact
contingent, on the national observance of the national vow. The general
idea of a covenant is that of a compact between two parties, each of
whom comes under obligations contingent on the other's discharge of
his. Theologians have raised the question whether God's covenant is of
this kind. Surely it is. His promises to Israel had an 'if,' and the
fulfilment of the conditions necessarily secured the accomplishment of
the promises. The ritual of the first covenant transcends the strictly
retributive compact which it ratified, and shadows a gospel beyond law,
even the new covenant which brings better gifts, and does not turn on
'do,' but simply on the sprinkling with the blood of Jesus. The words
of Moses were widened to carry a blessing beyond his thoughts, which
was disclosed when, in an upper chamber, a dying man said to the twelve
representatives of the true Israel, 'This is the new covenant in My
blood, drink ye all of it.' The blood which Moses sprinkled gave ritual
cleansing, but it remained outside the man. The blood of Jesus gives
true purification, and passes into our veins to become our life. The
covenant by Moses was 'do and live'; that in Christ is 'believe and
live.' Moses brought commandments, and on them his covenant was built;
Christ brings gifts, and His covenant is all promises, which are ours
on the simple condition of taking them.

III. Note the vision and feast on the basis of the covenant. The little
company that climbed the mountain, venturing within the fence,
represented the whole people. Aaron and his sons were the destined
priests. The elders were probably seventy, because that number is the
product of the two perfect numbers, and perhaps with allusion to the
seventy souls who went down into Egypt with Jacob. It is emphatically
said that they saw 'the God of Israel,' for that day's covenant had
made him so in a new closeness of relationship. In token of that new
access to and possession in Him, which was henceforth to be the
prerogative of the obedient people, some manifestation of His immediate
presence was poured on their astonished eyes. It is needless to inquire
its nature, or to ask how such a statement is consistent with the
spirituality of the divine nature, or with what this same book of
Exodus says, 'There shall no man see Me, and live.' The plain intention
is to assert that there was a visible manifestation of the divine
presence, but no attempt is made to describe it. Our eyes are stayed at
the pavement beneath His feet, which was blue as sapphire, and bright
as the cloudless sky gleaming above Sinai. It is enough to learn that
'the secret of the Lord is with them' to whom He shows 'His covenant';
that, by the power of sacrifice, a true vision of God may be ours,
which is 'in a mirror, darkly,' indeed, but yet is real and all
sufficing. Before the covenant was made, Israel had been warned to keep
afar lest He should break through on them, but now 'He laid not His
hand' upon them; for only blessing can stream from His presence now,
and His hand does not crush, but uphold.

Nor is this all which we learn of the intercourse with God which is
possible on the ground of His covenant. They 'did eat and drink.' That
may suggest that the common enjoyments of the natural life are in no
way inconsistent with the vision of God; but more probably it is meant
to teach a deeper lesson. We have remarked that the ritual of the
peace-offering included a feast on the sacrifice 'before the Lord,' by
which was signified communion with Him, as at His table, and this meal
has the same meaning. They who stand in covenant relations with God,
feed and feast on a sacrifice, and thereby hold fellowship with Him,
since He too has accepted the sacrifice which nourishes them. So that
strange banquet on Sinai taught a fact which is ever true, prophesied
the deepest joys of Christian experience, which are realised in the
soul that eats the flesh and drinks the blood of Christ, the Mediator
of the new covenant, and dimly shadowed the yet future festival, when,
cleansed and consecrated by His blood, they who have made a covenant
with Him by His sacrifice, shall be gathered unto Him in the heavenly
mount, where He makes a 'feast of fat things and wines on the lees well
refined,' and there shall sit, for ever beholding His glory, and
satisfied with the provisions of His house.




THE BREAD OF THE PRESENCE


    'Thou shalt set upon the table shew-bread before Me
    alway.'--EXODUS xxv. 30.

I suspect that to many readers the term 'shew-bread' conveys little
more meaning than if the Hebrew words had been lifted over into our
version. The original expression, literally rendered, is 'bread of the
face'; or, as the Revised Version has it in the margin, 'presence
bread,' and the meaning of that singular designation is paraphrased and
explained in my text: 'Thou shalt set upon the table, bread of the
presence before Me always.' It was bread, then, which was laid in the
presence of God. The directions with regard to it may be very briefly
stated. Every Sabbath the priests laid upon the table which stood on
one side of the Altar of Incense, in the Inner Court, two piles of
loaves, on each of which piles was placed a pan of incense. They lay
there for a week, being replaced by fresh ones on the coming Sabbath.

The Altar of Incense in the middle symbolised the thought that the
priestly life, which was the life of the nation, and is the life of the
Christian both individually and collectively, is to be centrally and
essentially a life of prayer. On one side of it stood the great golden
lamp which, in like manner, declared that the activities of the
priestly life, which was the life of Israel, and is the life of the
Christian individually and collectively, is to be, in its manward
aspect, a light for the world. On the other side of the Altar of
Incense stood this table with its loaves. What does it say about the
life of the priest, the Church, and the individual Christian? That is
the question that I wish to try to answer here; and in doing so let me
first ask you to look at the thing itself, and then to consider its
connection with the other two articles in connection with which it made
a threefold oneness.

I. Let me deal with this singular provision of the ancient ritual by
itself alone.

Bread is a product at once of God's gift and of man's work. In the
former aspect, He 'leaves not Himself without witness, in that,' in the
yearly miracle of the harvest, 'He gives us bread from Heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness'; in the
latter, considered as a product of man's activity, agriculture is, if
not the first, at all events in settled communities the prime, form of
human industry. The farmer and the baker begin the series of man's
industries. So that these loaves were fitly taken as representatives of
all kinds of human industry and their products, and as such were
consecrated to God. That is the broad significance of this institution,
which, as we shall have to see, links itself with the other two
conceptions of the priestly life in its Godward and in its manward
aspect. Now the first thing that is suggested, therefore, is the plain
obligation, which is also a blessed privilege, for all men who are
priests of God by faith in, and union with, the great High Priest, that
they lay all their activities as an offering before God. The loaves in
their very place on that table, right in front of the veil that parted
the Inner Court from the inmost of all, where the Shekinah shone, and
the Cherubim bowed in worship, tell us that in some sense they, too,
were an offering, and that the table was an altar. Their sacrificial
character is emphasised by the fact that upon the top of each of the
piles there was laid a pan of incense.

So, then, the whole was an offering of Israel's activities and its
results to God. And we, Christian men and women, have to make an
offering of all our active life, and all its products. That thought
opens up many considerations, one or two of which I ask leave to touch
briefly. First, then, if my active life is to be an offering to God,
that means that I am to surrender myself. And that surrender means
three things: first that in all my daily work I am to set Him before me
as my end; second, that in all my daily work I am to set Him before me
as my law; third, that in all my daily work I am to set Him before me
as my power. As for the first, whatever a man does for any motive
other, and with any end less, than God and His Glory, that act,
beautiful as it may be in other respects, loses its supreme beauty, and
falls short of perfect nobleness, just in the measure in which other
motives, or other ends, than this supreme one, are permitted to
dominate it. I do not contend for such an impossible suppression of
myself as that my own blessedness and the like shall be in no manner my
end, but I do maintain this, that in good old language, 'Man's chief
end is to glorify God,' and that anything which I do, unless it is
motived by this regard to Him as its 'chief end,' loses its noblest
consecration, and is degraded from its loftiest beauty. The Altar
sanctifies, and not only sanctifies but ennobles, the gift. That which
has in it the taint of self-regard so pronouncedly and dominantly as
that God is shut out, is like some vegetation down in low levels at the
bottom of a vale, which never has the sun to shine upon it. But let it
rise as some tree above the brushwood until its topmost branches are in
the light, and then it is glorified. To live to self is ignoble and
mean; to live for others is higher and nobler. But highest and noblest
of all is to offer the loaves to God, and to make Him the end of all
our activities.

Again, there is another consideration, bearing on another region in
which the assertive self is only too apt to spoil all work. And that
is, that if our activities are offerings to God, this means that His
supreme Will is to be our law, and that we obey His commands and accept
His appointments in quiet submission. The tranquillity of heart, the
accumulation of power, which come to men when they, from the depths,
say, 'Not my will but Thine be done'; 'Speak, Lord! for Thy servant
heareth,' cannot be too highly stated. There is no such charm to make
life quiet and strong as the submission of the will to God's
providences, and the swift obedience of the will to God's commandments.
And whilst to make self my end mars what else is beautiful, making self
my law mars it even more.

Further, we offer our activities to God when we fall back upon Him as
our one power, and say, 'Perfect Thy strength in my weakness.' He that
goes out into the world to do his daily work, of whatsoever sort it
is--you in your little sphere, or I in mine--in dependence upon
himself, is sure to be defeated. He that says 'we have no strength
against this great multitude that cometh against us, but our eyes are
unto Thee,' will, sooner or later, be able to go back with joy, and
say, 'the Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad.' The
man that goes into the fight like that foolish prime minister of France
under the Empire, 'with a light heart.' will very soon find his Sedan,
and have shamefully to surrender. Brethren, these three things, making
God the end of my work; making God's will the law of my work; making
God's strength the power of my work; these are the ways by which we,
too, can bring our little pile of barley bread, and lay it upon that
table.

Again, this consecration of life's activities is to be carried out by
treating their products, as well as themselves, as offerings to God.
The loaves were the results of human activity. They were also the
products of divine gifts elaborated by human effort. And both things
are true about all the bread that you and I have been able to make for
the satisfaction of our desires, or the sustenance of our strength--it
comes ultimately from the gift of God. In regard to this consecration
of the product of our activities, as well as of our activities
themselves, I have but two words to offer, and the one is, let us see
to it that we consecrate our enjoyment of God's gifts by bringing that
enjoyment, as well as the activities which He has blessed to produce
it, into His presence. That table bore the symbols of the grateful
recognition of God's mercies by the people. And when our hearts are
glad, and our 'bosom's lord sits lightly on his throne,' we have
special need to take care that our joy be not godless, nor our
enjoyment of His gifts be without reference to Himself. 'Ah,' you say,
'that is a threadbare commonplace.' Yes, it is, dear friends; it is a
commonplace just because it is needful at every turn, if we are to make
our lives what they ought to be.

May I say another thing? and that is, that the loaves that were laid
within the Sanctuary were not intended to be separated from the others
that were eaten in the tents, nor were they meant to be a kind of
purchasing of an indulgence, or of a right, by surrendering a little,
to the godless and selfish enjoyment of the rest of the batch, or of
the rest of the harvest. Let us apply that to our money, which is one
of the products of our activities; and not fancy, as a great many
people do, that what we give as a subscription to some benevolent or
religious institution buys for us the right to spend all the rest
selfishly. That is another commonplace, very threadbare and very
feeble, when we speak it, but with claws and teeth in it that will lay
hold of us, when we try to put it in practice. The enjoyments and the
products of our daily activities are to be offered to God.

Still further, this table with its burden has suggestions that as
Christians we are bound to bring all our work to Him for His judgment
upon it. The loaves were laid right in front of the veil, behind which
blazed the light of His presence. And that meant that they were laid
before 'those pure eyes and perfect judgment of all-judging' God.
Whether we bring our activities there or no, of course in a very real
and solemn sense they are there. But what I desire to insist upon now
is how important, for the nobleness and purity of our daily lives, it
is that we should be in the continual habit of realising to ourselves
the thought that whatever we do, we do before His Face. The Roman
Catholics talk about 'the practice of the presence of God.' One does
not like the phrase, but all true religion will practise what is meant
by it. And for us it should be as joyous to think, 'Thou God seest me,'
as it is for a child to play or work with a quiet heart, because it
knows that its mother is sitting somewhere not very far off and
watching that no harm comes to it. That thought of being in His
presence would be for us a tonic, and a test. How it would pull us up
in many a meanness, and keep our feet from wandering into many
forbidden ways, if there came like a blaze of light into our hearts the
thought: 'Thou God seest me!' There are many of our activities, I am
afraid, which we should not like to put down on that table. Can _you_
think of any in _your_ lives that you would be rather ashamed to lay
there, and say to Him, 'Judge Thou this'? Then do not do it. That is a
brief, but a very stringent, easily applied, and satisfactory test of a
great many doubtful things. If you cannot take them into the Inner
Court, and lay them down there, and say, 'Look, Lord! this is my
baking,' be sure that they are made, not of wholesome flour, but of
poisoned grain, and that there is death in them.

Further, this table, with its homely burden of twelve poor loaves, may
suggest to us how the simplest, smallest, most secular of our
activities is a fit offering to Him. The loaves were not out of place
amidst the sanctities of the spot, nor did they seem to be incongruous
with the golden altar and the golden lamp-stand, and yet they were but
twelve loaves. The poorest of our works is fit to be carried within the
shrine, and laid upon His altar. We may be sure that He delights even
in the meanest and humblest of them, if only we take them to Him and
say: 'All things come of Thee, and of Thine own have we given Thee.'
Ah! there are a great many strange things in Christ's treasury. Mothers
will hoard up trifles that belonged to their children, which everybody
else thinks worthless. Jesus Christ has in His storehouse a 'cup of
cold water,' the widows' mites, and many another thing that the world
counts of no value, and He recognises as precious. There is an old
story about some great emperor making a progress through his dominions,
where he had been receiving precious gifts from cities and nobles, and
as the gay cortege was passing a poor cottage, the peasant-owner came
out with a coarse earthenware cup filled with spring water in his hand,
and offered it to his overlord as the only gift that he could give. The
king accepted it, and ennobled him on the spot. Take your barley loaves
to Christ, and He will lay them up in His storehouse.

II. Now I need only say a word or two about the other aspect of this
table of shew-bread, taken with the other two articles in conjunction
with which it formed a unity.

The lamp and the table go together. They are both offshoots from the
altar in the middle. That is to say, your lives will not shine before
men unless your activities are offered to God. The smallest taint of
making self your end, your law, or your strength, mingling with your
lives, and manifest in their actions, will dim the light which shines
from them, and men will be very quick to find out and say, 'He calls
himself a Christian; but he lives for himself.' Neither the light,
which is the radiance of a Christian life manwards, can be sustained
without the offering of the life in its depths to God, nor can the
activities of the life be acceptably offered to Him, unless the man
that offers them 'lets his light shine before men.' The lamp and the
table must go together.

The lamp and the table must together be offshoots from the altar. If
there be not in the centre of the life aspiration after Him in the
depths of the heart, communion with Him in the silent places of the
soul, then there will be little brightness in the life to ray out
amongst men, and there will be little consecration of the activities to
be laid before God. The reason why the manifold bustle and busy-ness of
the Christian Church today sows so much and reaps so little, lies
mainly here, that they have forgotten to a large extent how the altar
in the centre must give the oil for the lamp to shine, and the grain to
be made into the loaves. And, on the other hand, the altar in the
middle needs both its flanking accompaniments. For the Christian life
is to be no life of cloistered devotion and heavenward aspiration only
or mainly, but is to manifest its still devotion and its heavenward
aspiration by the consecration of its activities to God, and the raying
of them out into a darkened world. The service of man is the service of
God, for lamp and table are offshoots of the altar. But the service of
God is the basis of the best service of man, for the altar stands
between the lamp and the table.

So, brethren, let us blend these three aspects into a unity, the Altar,
the Lamp, the Table, and so shall we minister aright, and men will call
us the 'priests of the Most High God,' till we pass within the veil
where, better than the best of us here can do, we shall be able to
unite still communion and active service, and shine as the sun in the
Kingdom of our Father. 'His servants shall serve Him' with priestly
ministrations, 'and shall see His face, and His name shall be in their
foreheads.'




THE GOLDEN LAMPSTAND


    'Thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold....'
    --EXODUS xxv. 31.

If we could have followed the Jewish priest as he passed in his daily
ministrations into the Inner Court, we should have seen that he first
piled the incense on the altar which stood in its centre, and then
turned to trim the lamps of the golden candlestick which flanked it on
one side. Of course it was not a candlestick, as our versions
misleadingly render the word. That was an article of furniture unknown
in those days. It was a lampstand; from a central upright stem branched
off on either side three arms decorated with what the Book calls
'beaten work,' and what we in modern jewellers' technicality call
_repousse_ work, each of which bore on its top, like a flower on its
stalk, a shallow cup filled with oil, in which a wick floated. There
were thus seven lamps in all, including that on the central stem. The
material was costly, the work adorning it was artistic, the oil with
which it was fed was carefully prepared, the number of its lamps
expressed perfection, it was daily trimmed by the priest, and there,
all through the night, it burned, the one spot of light in a dark
desert.

Now, this Inner Court of the Tabernacle or Temple was intended, with
its furniture, to be symbolical of the life of Israel, the priestly
nation. The Altar of Incense, which was the main article of
ecclesiastical equipment there, and stood in the central place,
represented the life of Israel in its Godward aspect, as being a life
of continual devotion. The Candlestick on the one hand, and the Table
of Shew-bread on the other, were likewise symbolical of other aspects
of that same life. I have to deal now with the meaning and lessons of
this golden lampstand, and it teaches us--

I. The office manwards of the Church and of the individual Christian.

Let me just for a moment recall the various instances in which this
symbol reappears in Scripture. We have, in the vision of the prophet
who sustained and animated the spirits of Israel in their Restoration,
the repetition of the emblem, in the great golden candlestick which
Zechariah saw, fed by two 'olive trees,' one on either side of it; and
in the last book of Scripture we have that most significant and lovely
variation of it, the reappearance, not of the _one_ golden candlestick
or lampstand, but of _seven_. The formal unity is at an end, but the
seven constitute a better, more vital unity, because Christ is in the
midst. We may learn the lesson that the Christian conception of the
oneness of the Church towers above the Jewish conception of the oneness
of Israel by all the difference that there is between a mere
mechanical, external unity, and a vital oneness--because all are
partakers of the one Christ. I may recall, also, how our Lord, in that
great programme of the Kingdom which Matthew has gathered together in
what we call 'the Sermon on the Mount,' immediately after the
Beatitudes, goes on to speak of the office of His people under the two
metaphors of 'the salt of the earth' and 'the light of the world,' and
immediately connects with the latter of the two a reference to a lamp
lit and set upon its stand; and clinches the whole by the exhortation,
'Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.'

A remarkable and beautiful variation of that exhortation is found in
one of the Apostolic writings when Paul, instead of saying, 'Ye are the
light of the world,' says, 'Shine as lights in the world,' and so gives
us the individual, as well as the collective and ecclesiastical, aspect
of these great functions. That is a hint that is very much needed.
Christian people are quite willing to admit that the Church, the
abstraction, the generalisation, is 'the light of the world.' But they
are wofully apt to slip their own necks out from under the yoke of the
obligation, and to forget that the collective light is only the product
of the millions of individual lights rushing together--just as in some
gas-lights you have a whole series of minute punctures, each of which
gives out its own little jet of radiance, and all run together into one
brilliant circle. So do not let us escape the personal pressure of this
office, or lay it all on the broad shoulders of that generalised
abstraction 'the Church.' But, since the collective light is but the
product of the individual small shinings, let us take the two lessons:
first, contribute our part to the general lustre; second, be content
with having our part lost in the general light.

But now let me turn for a little while to the more specific meaning of
this symbol. The life which, by the central position of the Altar of
Incense, was symbolised as being centrally, essentially in its depths
and primarily, a life of habitual devotion and communion with God, in
its manward aspect is a life that shines 'to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.' That is the
solemn obligation, the ideal function, of the Christian Church and of
each individual who professes to belong to it. Now, if you recur to our
Lord's own application of this metaphor, to which I have already
referred, you will see that the first and foremost way by which
Christian communities and individuals discharge this function is by
conduct. 'Let your light so shine before men'--that they may hear your
eloquent proclamation of the Gospel? No! 'Let your light so shine
before men'--that you may convince the gainsayers by argument, or move
the hard-hearted by appeals and exhortations; that you may preach and
talk? No! 'That _they may see your good works_, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven.' We may say of the Christian community, and of the
Christian individual, with all reverence, what the Scripture in an
infinitely deeper and more sacred sense says of Jesus Christ Himself,
'the life was the light.' It is conduct, whereby most effectually, most
universally, and with the least risk of rousing antagonism and hostile
feelings, Christian people may 'shine as lights in the world.' For we
all know how the inconsistencies of a Christian man block the path of
the Gospel far more than a hundred sermons or talks further it. We all
know how there are people, plenty of them, who, however illogically yet
most naturally, compare our lives in their daily action with oar
professed beliefs, and, saying to themselves, 'I do not see that there
is much difference between them and me,' draw the conclusion that it
matters very little whether a man is a Christian or not, seeing that
the conduct of the men who profess to be so is little more radiant,
bright with purity and knowledge and joy, than is the conduct of
others. Dear brethren, you can do far more to help or hinder the spread
of Christ's Kingdom by the way in which you do common things, side by
side with men who are not partakers of the 'like precious faith' with
yourselves, than I or my fellow-preachers can do by all our words. It
is all very well to lecture about the efficiency of a machine; let us
see it at work, and that will convince people. We preach; but you
preach far more eloquently, and far more effectively, by your lives.
'In all labour,' says the Book of Proverbs, 'there is profit'--which we
may divert from its original meaning to signify that in all Christian
living there is force to attract--'but the talk of the lips tendeth
only to poverty.' Oh! if the Christian men and women of England would
live their Christianity, they would do more to convert the unconverted,
and to draw in the outcasts, than all of us preachers can do. 'From
you,' said the Apostle once to a church very young, and just rescued
from the evils of heathenism--'from you sounded out,' as if blown from
a trumpet, 'the Word of the Lord, so that we need not to speak
anything.' Live the life, and thereby you diffuse the light.

Nor need we forget that this most potent of all weapons is one that can
be wielded by all Christian people. Our gifts differ. Some of us cannot
speak for Jesus; some of us who think we can had often better hold our
tongues. But we can all live like and for Him. And this most potent and
universally diffused possibility is also the weapon that can be wielded
with least risk of failure. There is a certain assumption, which it is
often difficult to swallow, in a Christian man's addressing another on
the understanding that he, the speaker, possesses something which the
other lacks. By words we may often repel, and often find that the ears
that we seek to enter with our message close themselves against us and
are unwilling to hear. But there is no chance of offending anybody, or
of repelling anybody, by living Christlike. We can all do that, and it
is the largest contribution that any of us can make to the collective
light which shines out from the Christian Church.

But, brethren, we have to remember that there are dangers attending the
life that reveals its hidden principles as being faith in Christ and
obedience to Him. Did you ever notice how, in the Sermon on the Mount,
there are two sets of precepts which seem diametrically opposite to one
another? There is a whole series of illustrations of the one
commandment, 'Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men,
to be seen of them,' and then there Is the precept, 'Let your light so
shine before men that they may see your good works.' So that whilst, on
the one hand, there is to be the manifestation in daily conduct of the
inner principles that animate us, on the other hand, if there comes in
the least taint or trace of ostentation, everything is spoiled, and the
light is darkness. The light of the sun makes all things visible and
hides itself. We do not see the sunbeams, but we see what the sunbeams
illuminate. It is the coarser kinds of light which are themselves
separately visible, and they are so only because they have not power
enough to make everything around them as brilliant as they themselves
are. So our light is to be silent, our light is--if I might use such a
phrase--to hide itself in 'a glorious privacy,' whilst it enables men
to see, even through our imperfect ministration, the face of our Father
in Heaven.

But let me remind you that the same variation by Paul of our Lord's
words to which I have already referred as bringing out the difference
between the collective and the individual function, also brings out
another difference; for Paul says, 'Ye shine as lights in the world,
holding forth the word of life.' He slightly varies the metaphor. We
are no longer regarded as being ourselves illuminants, but simply as
being the stands on which the light is placed. And that means that
whilst the witness by life is the mightiest, the most universally
possible, and the least likely to offend, there must also be, as
occasion shall serve, without cowardice, without shamefaced reticence,
the proclamation of the great Gospel which has made us 'lights in the
world.' And that is a function which every Christian man can discharge
too, though I have just been saying that they cannot all preach and
speak; for every Christian soul has some other soul to whom its word
comes with a force that none other can have.

So the one office that is set forth here is the old familiar one, the
obligation of which is fully recognised by us all, and pitifully
ill-discharged by any of us, to shine by our daily life, and to shine
by the actual communication by speech of 'the Name that is above every
name.' That is the ideal; alas for the reality! 'Ye are the light of
the world.' What kind of light do we--the Church of Christ that gathers
here--ray out into the darkness of Manchester? Socially,
intellectually, morally, in the civic life, in the national life, are
Christian people in the van? They ought to be. There is a church clock
in our city which has a glass dial that professes to be illuminated at
night, so that the passer-by may tell the hour; but it is generally
burning so dimly that nobody can see on its grimy face what o'clock it
is. That is like a great many of our churches, and I ask you to ask
yourselves whether it is like you or not--a dark lantern, a most
imperfectly illuminated dial, which gives no guidance and no
information to anybody.

This golden lampstand teaches us--

II. How this office is to be discharged.

Remember simply these two points. It stood, as I have already said, on
one side of the Altar of Incense which was central to everything. It
was daily tended by the priests, and fed with fresh oil. Hence we may
derive some important practical lessons.

To begin with, we note that our light is a derived light, and therefore
can only be kept bright when we keep close to the source from whence it
is derived.

'That was the true Light, which coming into the world lighteth every
man'--there is the source of all illumination, in Jesus Christ Himself.
He alone is _the_ Light, and as for all others we must say of them what
was said of His great forerunner, 'Not that light, but sent to bear
witness of that light'; and again, 'he was a light kindled,' and
therefore 'shining,' and so his shining was but 'for a season.' But
Jesus is for ever the light of the world, and all our illumination
comes from Him. As Paul says, 'Now are ye light in the Lord,' therefore
only in the measure in which we are 'in the Lord,' shall we be light.
Keep near to Him and you will shine; break the connection with Him, and
you are darkness, darkness for yourselves, and darkness for the world.
Switch off, and the light is darkness.

Change the metaphor, and instead of saying 'derived light' say
'reflected light.' _There_ is a pane of glass in a cottage, miles away
across the moor. It was invisible a moment ago, and suddenly it gleams
like a diamond. Why? The sun has struck it; and in a moment after it
will be invisible again. As long as Jesus Christ is shining on my
heart, so long, and not a moment longer, shall I give forth the light
that will illumine the world. Astronomers have a contrivance by which
they can keep a photographic film on which they are seeking to get the
image of a star, moving along with the movement of the heavens, so that
on the same spot the star shall always shine. We have to keep ourselves
steady beneath the white beam from Jesus, and then we, too, shall be
'light in the Lord.'

Our light is fed light. Daily came the priest, daily the oil that had
been exhausted by shining was replenished. We all know what that oil
means and is; the Divine Spirit which comes into every heart which is
open by faith in Christ, and which abides in every heart where there
are desire, obedience, and the following of Him; which can be quenched
by my sin, by my negligence, by my ceasing to wish it, by my not using
its gifts when I have them; which can be grieved by my inconsistencies,
and by the spots of darkness that so often take up more of the sphere
of my life than the spots of illumination. But we can have as much of
that oil of the Divine Spirit, the 'unction from the Holy One,' as we
desire, and expect, and use. And unless we have, dear brethren, there
is no shining for us. This generation in its abundant activities tends
to a Christianity which has more spindles than power, which is more
surface than depth, which is so anxious to do service that it forgets
the preliminary of all right service, patient, solitary, silent
communion with God. Suffer the word of exhortation--let shining be
second, let replenishing with the oil be first. First the Altar of
Incense, then the Candlestick.

III. This golden lampstand tells us of the fatal effect of neglecting
the Church's and the individual's duty.

Where is the seven-branched candlestick of the second Temple? No one
knows. Possibly, according to one statement, it lies at the bottom of
the Mediterranean. Certainly we know that it is pictured on that sad
panel in the conqueror's arch at Rome, and that it became a trophy of
the insolent victor. It disappeared, and the Israel whom it vainly
endeavoured through the centuries to stir to a consciousness of its
vocation, has never since had a gleam of light to ray out into the
world. Where are the seven candlesticks, which made a blessed unity
because Christ walked in their midst? Where are the churches of
Ephesus, Smyrna, Philadelphia, Thyatira, and the rest? Where they stood
the mosque is reared, and from its minaret day by day rings out--not
the proclamation of the Name, but--'There is no God but God, and
Mahomet is His Prophet.' The Pharos that ought to have shone out over
stormy seas has been seized by wreckers, and its light is blinded, and
false lights lure the mariner to the shoals and to shipwreck.

'Take heed lest He also spare not thee.' O brethren! is it not a bitter
irony to call _us_ 'lights of the world'? Let us penitently recognise
the inconsistencies of our lives, and the reticence of our speech. Let
us not lose sight of the high ideal, that we may the more penitently
recognise the miserable falling short of our reality. And let us be
thankful that _the_ Priest is tending the lamps. 'He will not quench
the smoking wick,' but will replenish it with oil, and fan the dying
flame. Only let us not resist His ministrations, which are always
gentle, even when He removes the charred blacknesses that hinder our
being what we should be, and may be, if we will--lights of the world.
'Arise! shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee.'




THE NAMES ON AARON'S BREASTPLATE


    Aaron shall bear their names before the Lord, upon his
    two shoulders, for a memorial.... And Aaron shall bear
    the names of the Children of Israel in the breastplate
    of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the
    Holy Place.'--EXODUS xxviii. 12,29.

Every part of the elaborately prescribed dress of the high priest was
significant. But the significance of the whole was concentrated in the
inscription upon his mitre, 'Holiness to the Lord,' and in those others
upon his breastplate and his shoulder.
