and prelibations of that great flood of love that is in God, I can look
unblanched right into the eyes of death and say, 'Thou hast no power at
all over me, I am eternal because the God that loves me is so, and
since He hath loved me with an everlasting love, His loving-kindness
shall not depart from me. Therefore, seeing that all these things shall
be dissolved, I know that I have a building of God, a house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens, and because He lives I shall live
also.' The hope that is built upon the eternal love of God in Christ is
the true guarantee to me of immortal existence, and this hope is ours
if, and only if, we come into the covenant--the covenant of peace. God
says, 'I will love thee, I will bless thee, I will keep thee, I will
pardon thee, I will save thee, I will glorify thee, and there is My
bond on that Cross, the new covenant in His blood.' Close with the
covenant that God is ready to make with you, and then 'life and death,
principalities and powers, things present and things to come, height
and depth, and every other creature shall be impotent to separate you
from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.'

'Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath
no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without
money and without price. 2. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which
is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken
diligently unto Me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul
delight itself in fatness. 3. Incline your ear, and come unto Me, hear,
and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you, even the sure mercies of David. 4. Behold, I have given him for a
witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people. 5. Behold,
thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and nations that knew
not thee shall run unto thee because of the Lord thy God, and for the
Holy One of Israel; for He hath glorified thee. 6. Seek ye the Lord
while He may be found, call ye upon Him while He is near: 7. Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let
him return unto the Lord, and He will have mercy upon him; and to our
God, for He will abundantly pardon. 8. For My thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways My ways, saith the Lord. 9. For as the
heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your
ways, and My thoughts than your thoughts. 10. For as the rain cometh
down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth
the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to
the sower, and bread to the eater: 11. So shall My word be that goeth
forth out of My mouth: it shall not return unto Me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it. 12. For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth
with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you
into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.
13. Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the
brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the Lord for a
name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.'--ISAIAH lv.
1-13.

The call to partake of the blessings of the Messianic salvation
worthily follows the great prophecy of the suffering Servant. No doubt
the immediate application of this chapter is to the exiled nation, who
in it are summoned from their vain attempts to find satisfaction in the
material prosperity realised in exile, and to make the only true
blessedness their own by obedience to God's voice. But if ever the
prophet spoke to the world he does so here. It is no unwarranted
spiritualising of his invitation which hears in it the voice which
invites all mankind to share the blessings of the gospel feast.

The glorious words need little exposition. What we have to do is to see
that they do not fall on our ears in vain. They may be roughly divided
into two sections--the invitation to the feast, with the promises to
the obedient Israel (verses 1-5), and the summons to the necessary
preparation for the feast, namely, repentance, with the reason for its
necessity, and the encouragements to it in the might of God's faithful
promises (verses 6-13).

I. Whose voice sounds so beseechingly and welcoming in this great call,
which rings out to all thirsty souls? If we note the 'Me' and 'I' which
follow, we shall hear God Himself thus taking the office of summoner to
His own feast. By whatever media the gospel call reaches us, it is in
reality God's own voice to our hearts, and that makes the
responsibility of hearing more tremendous, and the folly of refusing
more inexcusable.

Who are invited? There are but two conditions expressed in verse 1, and
these are fulfilled in every soul. All are summoned who are thirsty and
penniless. If we have in our souls desires that all the broken cisterns
of earth can never slake-and we all have these-and if we have nothing
by which we can procure what will still the gnawing hunger and burning
thirst of our souls--and none of us has--then we are included in the
call. Universal as are the craving for blessedness and the
powerlessness to satisfy it, are the adaptation and destination of the
gospel.

What is offered? Water, wine, milk--all the beverages of a simple
civilisation, differing in their operation, but all precious to a
thirsty palate. Water revives, wine gladdens and inspirits, milk
nourishes. All that any man needs or desires is to be found in Christ.
We shall not understand the nature of the feast unless we remember that
He Himself is the 'gift of God.' What these three draughts mean is best
perceived when we listen to Him saying, in a plain quotation of this
call, 'If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.' Nothing
short of Himself can satisfy the thirst of one soul, much less of all
the thirsty. Like the flow from the magic fountain of the legend, Jesus
becomes to each what each most desires.

How does He become ours? The paradox of buying with what is not money
is meant, by its very appearance of contradiction, to put in strongest
fashion that the possession of Him depends on nothing in us but the
sense of need and the willingness to accept. We buy Christ when we part
with self, which is all that we have, in order to win Him. We must be
full of conscious emptiness and desire, if we are to be filled with His
fulness. Jesus interpreted the meaning of 'come to the waters' when He
said, 'He that cometh to Me shall never hunger, and he that believeth
on Me shall never thirst.' Faith is coming, faith is drinking, faith is
buying.

The universal call, with is clear setting forth of blessing and
conditions of possessing, is followed by a pleading remonstrance as to
the folly of lavishing effort and money on what is not bread. It is
strange that men will cheerfully take more pains to continue thirsty
than to accept the satisfaction which God provides. They toil and
continue unsatisfied. Experience does not teach them, and all the while
the one real good is waiting to be theirs for nothing.

  ''Tis heaven alone that is given away;
  'Tis only God may be had for the asking.'

Christ goes a-begging, and we spend our strength in vain toil to
acquire what we turn away from when it is offered us in Him. When the
great Father offers bread for nothing, we will not have it, but we are
ready to give any price for a stone. It is not the wickedness, but the
folly, of unbelief, which is the marvel.

The contrast between the heavy price at which men buy hunger, and the
easy rate at which they may have full satisfaction, is further set
forth by the call to 'incline the ear,' which is all that is needed in
order that life and nourishment which delights the soul may be ours.
'Hearken, and eat' is equivalent to 'Hearken, and ye shall eat.' The
real 'good' for man is only to be found in listening to and obeying the
divine voice, whether it sound in invitation, promise, or command. The
true life of the soul lies in that listening receptiveness which takes
for one's own God's great gift of Christ, and yields glad obedience to
His every word.

The exiled Israel was promised an 'everlasting covenant' as the result
of their acceptance of the invitation; and we know whose blood it is
that has sealed the new covenant, which abides as long as Christ's
fulness and men's need shall last. That covenant, of which we seldom
hear in Isaiah, but which fills a prominent place in Jeremiah and
Ezekiel, is further explained as being 'the sure mercies of David.'
This phrase and its context are difficult, but the general meaning is
clear. The great promises of God's unfailing mercy, made to the
historical founder of the royal house, shall be transferred and
continued, with inviolable faithfulness, to those who drink of the gift
of God.

This parallel between the great King and the whole mass of the true
Israel is further set forth in verses 4 and 5. Each begins with
'Behold,' and the similar form indicates similarity in contents. The
son of Jesse was in some degree God's witness to the heathen nations,
as is expressed in several psalms; and, what he was imperfectly, the
ransomed Israel would be to the world. The office of the Christian
Church is to draw nations that it knew not, to follow in the blessed
path, in which it has found satisfaction and the dawnings of a more
than natural glory transfiguring it. They who have themselves drunk of
the unfailing fountain in Christ are thereby fitted and called to cry
to others, 'Come ye to the waters.' Experience of Christ's
preciousness, and of the rest of soul which comes from partaking of His
salvation, impels and obliges to call others to share the bliss.

II. The second part of the chapter begins with an urgent call to
repentance, based upon the difference between God's ways and man's, and
on the certainty that the divine promises will be fulfilled. The
summons in verses 6 and 7 is first couched in most general terms, which
are then more closely defined. To 'seek the Lord' is to direct conduct
and heart to obtain possession of God as one's own. Of that seeking,
the chief element is calling upon Him; since such is His desire to be
found of us that it only needs our asking in order to receive. As
surely as the mother hears her child's cry, so surely does He catch the
faintest voice addressed to Him. But, men being what they are, a change
of ways and of their root in thoughts is indispensable. Seeking which
is not accompanied by forsaking self and an evil past is no genuine
seeking, and will end in no finding. But this forsaking is only one
side of true repentance; the other is return to God, as is expressed in
the New Testament word for it, which implies a change of mind, purpose,
and conduct. The faces which were turned earthward and averted from God
are to be turned God-ward and diverted from earth. Whosoever thus seeks
may be confident of finding and of abundant pardon. The belief in God's
loving forgivingness is the strongest motive to repentance, and the
most melting argument to listen to the call to seek Him. But there is
another motive of a more awful kind; namely, the consideration that the
period of mercy is limited, and that a time may come, and that soon,
when God no longer 'may be found' nor 'is near.'

The need for such a radical change in conduct and mind is further
enforced, in verses 8 and 9, by the emphatic statement of present
discord between the exiled Israel and God. Mark that the deepest seat
of the discord is first dealt with, and then the manifestation of it in
active life. Mark also that the order of comparison is inverted in the
two successive clauses in verse 8. God's thoughts have not entered into
Israel's mind and become theirs. The 'thinkings' not being regulated
according to God's truth, nor the desires and sentiments brought into
accord with His will and mind, a contrariety of 'ways' must follow, and
the paths which men choose for themselves cannot run parallel with
God's, nor be pleasing to Him. Therefore the stringent urgency of the
call to forsake 'the crooked, wandering ways in which we live,' and to
come back to the path of righteousness which is traced by God for our
feet.

But divergence which necessitates repentance is not the only relation
between our ways and God's. There is elevation, transcendency, like
that of the eternal heavens, high, boundless, the home of light, the
storehouse of beneficent influences which fertilise. If we think of the
dreary, flat plains where the exiles were, and the magnificent sweep of
the sky over them, we shall feel the beauty of the figure. If 'My
thoughts are not your thoughts' was all that was to be said, repentance
would be of little use, and there would be little to encourage to it;
but if God's thoughts of love and ways of blessing arch themselves
above our low lives as the sky bends, pitying and bestowing, above
squalor, barrenness, and darkness, then penitence is not in vain, and
the low earth may be visited with gifts from the highest heaven.

The certainty that such gifts will be bestowed is the last thought of
this magnificent summons. The prophet dilates on that assurance to the
end of the chapter. He seems to catch fire, as it were, from the
introduction of that grand figure of the lofty heavens domed above the
flat earth. In effect, what he says is: They are high and inaccessible,
but think what pours down from them, and how all fertility depends on
their gifts of rain and snow, and how the moisture which they drop is
turned into 'seed to the sower, and bread to the eater.' Thinking of
that continuous benefaction and miracle, we should see in it a symbol
of the better gifts from the higher heavens. So does God's word come
down from His throne. So does it turn barrenness into nodding harvest.
So does it quicken undreamed of powers of fruitfulness in human nature
and among the forces of the world. So does it supply nourishment for
hungry souls, and germs which shall bear fruit in coming years. No
complicated machinery nor the most careful culture can work what the
gentle dropping rain effects. There is mightier force in it than in
many thunder-clouds. The gospel does with ease and in silence what
nothing else can do. It makes barren souls fruitful in all good works,
and in all happiness worthy of men. Therefore the summons to drink of
the springing fountain and to turn from evil ways and thoughts is
recommended by the assurance that God's word is faithful, and all His
promises firm.

The final verses (verses 12, 13) give the glowing picture of the return
from exile amid the jubilation of a transformed world, as the strongest
motive to the obedient hearkening to God's voice, to which the chapter
has summoned, and as the great instance of God's keeping His word.

The flight from Egypt was 'in haste' (Deut. xvi. 3); but this shall be
a triumphal exodus, without conflict or alarms. All nature shall
participate in the joy. Mountains and hills shall raise the shrill note
of rejoicing, and the trees wave their branches, as if clapping hands
in delight. This is more than mere poetic rhetoric. A redeemed humanity
implies a glorified world. Nature has been involved in the consequences
of sin, and will share in the results of redemption, and have some
humble reflected light from 'the liberty of the glory of the sons of
God.'

The fulfilment of this final promise is not yet. All earlier returns of
the exiled Israel from the Babylon of their bondage to God and the city
of God, such as the historical one which the prophet foretold, and the
spiritual one which is repeated age by age in the history of the
Christian Church and of single penitent souls, point on to that last
triumphant day when 'the ransomed of the Lord shall return,' and the
world be transfigured to match the glory that they inherit. That fair
world without poison or offence, and the nations of the saved who
inhabit its peaceful spaces, shall be, in the fullest stretch of the
words, 'to the Lord for a name, and for an everlasting sign that shall
not be cut off.' The redemption of man and his establishing amid the
felicities of a state correspondent to His God-given glory shall be to
all eternity and to all possible creations the highest evidence of what
God is, and His token to all beings.




THE GREAT PROCLAMATION

'Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath
no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without
money and without price.'--ISAIAH lv.1.


The meaning of the word _preach_ is 'proclaim like a herald'; or, what
is perhaps more familiar to most of us, like a town-crier; with a loud
voice, clearly and plainly delivering the message. Now, there are other
notions of a sermon than that; and there is other work which ministers
have to do, of an educational kind. But my business now is to preach.
We have ventured to ask others than the members of our own congregation
to join us in this service; and I should be ashamed of myself, and have
good reason to be so, if I had asked you to come to hear me talk, or to
entertain you with more or less eloquent and thoughtful discourses.
There is a time for everything; and what this is the time for is to
ring out like a bellman the message which I believe God has given me
for you. It cannot but suffer in passing through human lips; but I pray
that my poor words may not be all unworthy of its stringency, and of
the greatness of its blessing. My text is God's proclamation, and all
that the best of us can do is but to reiterate that, more feebly alas,
but still earnestly.

Suppose there was an advertisement in to-morrow morning's papers that
any one that liked to go to a certain place might get a fortune for
going, what a _queue_ of waiting suppliants there would be at the door!
Here is God's greatest gift going a-begging; and there are no doubt
some among you who listen to my text with only the thought, 'Oh, the
old threadbare story is what we have been asked to come and hear!'
Brethren, have you taken the offer? If not, it needs to be pressed upon
you once more. So my purpose in this sermon is a very simple one. I
wish, as a brother to a brother, to put before you these three things:
to whom this offer is made; what it consists of; and how it may be ours.

I. To whom this offer is made.

It is to every one thirsty and penniless. That is a melancholy
combination, to be needing something infinitely, and to have not a
farthing to get it with. But that is the condition in which we all
stand, in regard to the highest and best things. This invitation of my
text is as universal as if it had stopped with its third word. 'Ho,
every one' would have been no broader than is the offer as it stands.
For the characteristics named are those which belong, necessarily and
universally, to human experience. If my text had said, 'Ho, every one
that breathes human breath,' it would not have more completely covered
the whole race, and enfolded thee and me, and all our brethren, in the
amplitude of its promise, than it does when it sets up as the sole
qualifications thirst and penury--that we infinitely need, and that we
are absolutely unable to acquire, the blessings that it offers.

'Every one that thirsteth'--that means desire. Yes; but it means need
also. And what is every man but a great bundle of yearnings and
necessities? None of us carry within ourselves that which suffices for
ourselves. We are all dependent upon external things for being and for
wellbeing.

There are thirsts which infallibly point to their true objects. If a
man is hungry he knows that it is food that he wants. And just as the
necessities of the animal life are incapable of being misunderstood,
and the objects which will satisfy them incapable of being confused or
mistaken, so there are other nobler thirsts, which, in like manner,
work automatically, and point to the thing that they need. We have
social instincts; we need love; we need friendship; we need somebody to
lean upon; we thirst for some heart to rest our heads upon, for hands
to clasp ours; and we know where the creatures and the objects are that
will satisfy these desires. And there are the higher thirsts of the
spirit, that 'follows knowledge, like a sinking star, beyond the
furthest bounds of human thought'; and a man knows where and how to
gratify the impulse that drives him to seek after the many forms of
knowledge and wisdom.

But besides all these, besides sense, besides affection, besides
emotions, besides the intellectual spur of which we are all more or
less conscious, there come in a whole set of other thirsts that do not
in themselves carry the intimation of the place where they can be
slaked. And so you get men restless, as some of you are; always
dissatisfied, as some of you are; feeling that there is something
wanting, yet not knowing what, as some of you are. You remember the old
story in the _Arabian Nights_, of the man who had a grand palace, and
lived in it quite contentedly, until some one told him that it needed a
roc's egg hanging from the roof to make it complete, and he did not
know where to get that, and was miserable accordingly. We build our
houses, we fancy that we are satisfied; and then there comes the
stinging thought that it is not all complete yet, and we go groping,
groping in the dark, to find out where the lacking thing is.
Shipwrecked sailors sometimes, in their desperation, drink salt water,
and that makes them thirstier than ever, and brings on madness and
death. Some publicans drug the vile liquors which they sell, so that
they increase thirst. We may make no mistake about how to satisfy the
desires of sense or of earthly affections; we may be quite certain that
'money answereth all things,' and that it is good to get on in business
in Manchester; or may have found a pure and enduring satisfaction in
study and in books--yet we have thirsts that some of us know not where
to satisfy; and so we have parched lips and swollen tongues, and raging
desire that earth can give nothing to fill.

My brother, do you know what it is that you want?

It is God. Nothing else, nothing less. 'My soul thirsteth for God, for
the living God.' The man that knows what it is of which he is in such
sore need, is blessed. The man who only feels dimly that he needs
something, and does not know that it is God whom he does need, is
condemned to wander in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is, and
where his heart gapes, parched and cracked like the soil upon which he
treads. Understand your thirst. Interpret your desires aright. Open
your eyes to your need; and be sure of this, that mountains of money
and the clearest insight into intellectual problems, and fame, and
love, and wife, and children, and a happy home, and abundance of all
things that you can desire, will leave a central aching emptiness that
nothing and no person but God can ever fill. Oh, that we all knew what
these yearnings of our hearts mean!

Aye! but there are _dormant_ thirsts too. It is no proof of superiority
that a savage has fewer wants than you and I have, for the want is the
open mouth into which supply comes. And it is no proof that you have
not, deep in your nature, desires which, unless they are satisfied,
will prevent your being blessed, that these desires are all unconscious
to yourselves. The business of us preachers is, very largely, to get
the people who will listen to us, to recognise the fact that they do
want things which they do not wish; and that, for the perfection of
their natures, the cherishing of noble longings and thirstings is
needful, and that to be without this sense of need is to be without one
of the loftiest prerogatives of humanity.

Some of you do not wish forgiveness. Many of you would much rather not
have holiness. You do not want to have God. The promises of the Gospel
go clean over your heads, and are as impotent to influence you as the
wind whistling through a keyhole, because you have never been aware of
the wants to which these promises correspond, and do not understand
what it is that you truly require.

And yet there is no desire--that is to say, consciousness of
necessities--so dormant but that its being un-gratified makes a man
restless. You do not wish forgiveness, but you will never be happy till
you get it. You do not wish to be good and true and holy men, but you
will never be blessed till you are. You do not want to have God, some
of you, but you will be restless till you find Him. You fancy you wish
heaven when you are dead; you do not want it while you are living. But
until your earthly life is like the life of Jesus Christ in heaven,
though in an inferior degree, whilst it is on earth, you will never be
at rest. You are thirsty enough after these things to be ill at ease
without them, when you bethink yourselves and pass out of the region of
mere mechanical and habitual existence; but until you get these things
that you do not desire, be sure of this: that you will be tortured with
vain unrest, and will find that the satisfactions which you do seek
turn to ashes in your mouth. 'Bread of deceit,' says the Book, 'is
sweet to a man.' The writer meant by that that there were people to
whom it was pleasant to tell profitable lies. But we might widen the
meaning, and say that all these lower satisfactions, apart from the
loftier ones of forgiveness, acceptance, reconciliation with God, the
conscious possession of Him, a well-grounded hope of immortality, the
power to live a noble life and to look forward to a glorious heaven,
are 'bread of deceit,' which promises nourishment and does not give it,
but breaks the teeth that try to masticate it; 'it turneth to gravel.'

'Ho, every one that thirsteth.' That designation includes us all. 'And
he that hath no money.' Who has any? Notice that the persons
represented in our text as penniless are, in the next verse,
remonstrated with for spending 'money.' So then the penniless man had
some pence away in some corner of his pocket which he could spend. He
had the money that would buy shams, 'that which is not bread' but a
stone though it looks like a loaf, but he had no money for the true
food. Which being translated out of parable into fact, is simply this,
that our efforts may and do win for us the lower satisfactions which
meet our transitory and superficial necessities, but that no effort of
ours can secure for us the loftier blessings which slake the diviner
thirsts of immortal souls. A man lands in a far country with English
shillings in his pocket, but he finds that no coins go there but
thalers, or francs, or dollars, or the like; and his money is only
current in his own land, and he must have it changed before he can make
his purchases. So though he has a pocketful of it he may as well be
penniless.

And, in like fashion, you and I, with all our strenuous efforts, which
we are bound to make, and which there is joy in making, after these
lower good things that correspond to our efforts, find that we have no
coinage that will buy the good things of the kingdom of heaven, without
which we faint and die. For them our efforts are useless. Can a man by
his penitence, by his tears, by his amendment, make it possible for the
consequences of his past to be obliterated, or all changed in their
character into fatherly chastisement? No! A thousand times, no! The
superficial notions of Christianity, which are only too common amongst
both educated and uneducated, may say to a man, 'You need no divine
intervention, if only you will get up from the dust, and do your best
to keep up when you are up.' But those who realise more deeply what the
significance of sin is, and what the eternal operation of its
consequences upon the soul is, and what the awful majesty of a divine
righteousness is, learn that the man who has sinned can, by nothing
that he can do, obliterate that awful fact, or reduce it to
insignificance, in regard to the divine relations to him. It is only
God who can do that. We have no money.

So we stand thirsty and penniless--a desperate condition! Ay! brother,
it _is_ desperate, and it is the condition of every one of us. I wish I
could turn the generalities of my text into the individuality of a
personal address. I wish I could bring its wide-flowing beneficence to
a sharp point that might touch your conscience, heart, and will. I
cannot do that; you must do it for yourself.

'Ho, every one that thirsteth.' Will you pause for a moment, and say to
yourself, 'That is I'? 'And he that hath no money'--that is I. 'Come ye
to the waters'--that is I. The proclamation is for thine ear and for
thy heart; and the gift is for thy hand and thy lips.

II. In what this offer consists.

They tell an old story about the rejoicings at the coronation of some
great king, when there was set up in the market-place a triple
fountain, from each of whose three lips flowed a different kind of rare
liquor which any man who chose to bring a pitcher might fill it with,
at his choice. Notice my text, 'come ye to the _waters_' ... 'buy
_wine_ and _milk_.' The great fountain is set up in the market-place of
the world, and every man may come; and whichever of this glorious triad
of effluents he needs most, there his lip may glue itself and there it
may drink, be it 'water' that refreshes, or 'wine' that gladdens, or
'milk' that nourishes. They are all contained in this one great gift
that flows out from the deep heart of God to the thirsty lips of
parched humanity.

And what is that gift? Well, we may say, salvation; or we may use many
other words to define the nature of the gifts. I venture to take a
shorter one, and say, it means Christ. He, and not merely some truth
about Him and His work; He Himself, in the fulness of His being, in the
all-sufficiency of His love, in the reality of His presence, in the
power of His sacrifice, in the daily derivation, into the heart that
waits upon Him, of His life and His spirit, He is the all-sufficient
supply of every thirst of every human soul. Do we want happiness?
Christ gives us His joy, abiding and full, and not as the world gives.
Do we want love? He gathers us to His heart, in which 'there is no
variableness, neither shadow cast by turning,' and binds us to Himself
by bonds that death, the separator, vainly attempts to untie, and which
no unworthiness, ingratitude or coldness of ours will ever be able to
unloose. Do we want wisdom? He will dwell with us as our light. Do our
hearts yearn for companionship? With Him we shall never be solitary. Do
we long for a bright hope which shall light up the dark future, and
spread a rainbow span over the great gorge and gulf of death? Jesus
Christ spans the void, and gives us unfailing and undeceiving hope. For
everything that you and I need here or yonder, in heart, in will, in
practical life, Jesus Christ Himself is the all-sufficient supply.

'My life in death, my all in all.' What is offered in Him may be
described by all the glorious and blessed names which men have invented
to designate the various aspects of the Good. These are the goodly
pearls that men seek, but there is one of great price which is worth
them all, and gathers into itself all their clouded and fragmentary
splendours. Christ is all, and the soul that has Him shall never thirst.

  'Thou of life the fountain art,
  Freely let me take of Thee.'

III. Lastly, how do we obtain the offered gifts?

The paradox of my text needs little explanation, 'Buy without money and
without price.' The contradiction on the surface is but intended to
make emphatic this blessed truth, which I pray may reach your memories
and hearts, that the only conditions are a sense of need, and a
willingness to take--nothing less and nothing more. We must recognise
our penury and must abandon self, and put away all ideas of having a
finger in our own salvation, and be willing--which, strangely and sadly
enough, many of us are not-to be under obligations to God's unhelped
and undeserved love for all.

Cheap things are seldom valued. Ask a high price and people think that
the commodity is precious. A man goes into a fair, for a wager, and he
carries with him a try full of gold watches and offers to sell them for
a farthing apiece, and nobody will buy them. It does not, I hope,
degrade the subject, if I say Jesus Christ comes into the market-place
of the world with His hands full of the gifts which His pierced hands
have bought, that He may give them away. He says, 'Will you take them?'
And you, and you, and you, pass by on the other side, and go away to
another merchant, and buy dearly things that are not worth the having.

'My father, my father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
wouldst thou not have done it?' Would you not? Swing at the end of a
pole, with hooks in your back; measure all the way from Cape Comorin to
the Himalayas, lying down on your face and rising at each length; do a
hundred things which heathens and Roman Catholics and unspiritual
Protestants think to be the way to get salvation; deny yourselves
things that you would like to do; do things that you do not want to do;
give money that you would like to keep; avoid habits that are very
sweet, go to church or chapel when you have no heart for worship; and
so try to balance the account. If the prophet had bid thee do some
great thing, thou wouldst have done it. How much rather when he says,
'Wash, and be clean.' 'Nothing in my heart I bring.' You do _not_ bring
anything. 'Simply to Thy Cross I cling.' Do you? Do you? Jesus Christ
catches up the 'comes' of my text, and He says, 'Come unto Me, all ye
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.' 'If any man
thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.' Brethren, I lay it on your
hearts and consciences to answer Him--never mind about me--to answer
_Him_: 'Sir, give me this water that I thirst not.'




GOD'S WAYS AND MAN'S

'For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways,
saith the Lord. 9. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are
My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts than your
thoughts.'--ISAIAH lv. 8, 9.


Scripture gives us no revelations concerning God merely in order that
we may know about Him. These words are grand poetry and noble theology,
but they are meant practically and in fiery earnestness. The 'for' at
the beginning of each clause points us back to the previous statement,
and both of the verses of our text are in different ways its
foundation. And what has preceded is this: 'Let the wicked forsake his
way and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the
Lord, for He will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for He will
abundantly pardon.' That is why the prophet dilates upon the difference
between the 'thoughts' and the 'ways' of God and of men.

If we look at these two verses a little more closely we shall perceive
that they by no means cover the same ground nor suggest the same idea
as to the relationship between God's 'ways' and 'thoughts' and ours.
The former of them speaks of unlikeness and opposition, the latter of
elevation and superiority; the former of them is the basis of an
indictment and an exhortation, the latter is the basis of an
encouragement and a promise. The former of them is the reason why 'the
wicked' and 'unrighteous man' ought to and must 'turn' from 'his ways'
and 'thoughts,' the latter of them is the reason why, 'turning,' he may
be sure that the Lord 'will abundantly pardon.'

And so we have here two things to consider in reference to the relation
between the divine purposes and acts and man's purposes and acts.
First, the antagonism, and the indictment and exhortation that are
based upon that; second, the analogy but superiority, and the
exhortation and hope that are built upon that. Let me deal, then, with
these separately.

I. We have here an unlikeness declared, and upon that is rested an
appeal.

Notice the remarkable order and alternation of pronouns in the first
verse. '_My_ thoughts are not _your_ thoughts,' saith the Lord. The
things that God thinks and purposes are not the things that man thinks
and purposes, and therefore, because the thoughts are different, the
outcomes of them in deeds are divergent. God's 'ways' are His acts, the
manner and course of His working considered as a path on which He
moves, and on which, in some sense, we can also journey. Our
'ways'--our manner of life--are not parallel with His, as they should
be.

But that opposition is expressed with a remarkable variation. Observe
the change of pronouns in the two clauses. First, '_My_ thoughts are
not your thoughts'--you have not taken My truth into your minds, nor My
purposes into your wills; you do riot think God's thoughts.
Therefore--'_your_ ways (instead of 'My,' as we should have expected,
to keep the regularity of the parallelism) are not My ways'--I
repudiate and abjure your conduct and condemn it utterly.

Now, of course, in this charge of man's unlikeness to God, there is no
contradiction of, nor reference to, man's natural constitution, in
which there are, at one and the same time, the likeness of the child
with the parent and the unlikeness between the creature and the
Creator. If our thoughts were not in a measure like God's thoughts, we
should know nothing about Him. If our thoughts were not like God's
thoughts, we should have no standard for life or thinking.
Righteousness and beauty and truth and goodness are the same things in
heaven and earth, and alike in God and man. We are made after His
image, poor creatures though we be; and though there must ever be a
gulf of unlikeness, which we cannot bridge, between the thoughts of Him
whose knowledge has no growth nor uncertainty, whose wisdom is infinite
and all whose nature is boundless light, and our knowledge, and must
ever be a gulf between the workings and ways of Him who works without
effort, and knows neither weariness nor limitation, and our work, so
often foiled, so always toilsome, yet in all the unlikeness there is
(and no man can denude himself of it) a likeness to the Father. For the
image in which God made man at the beginning is not an image that it is
in the power of men to cast away, and in the worst of his corruptions
and the widest of his departures he still bears upon him the signs of
likeness 'to Him that created him.' The coin is rusty, battered,
defaced; but still legible are the head and the writing. 'Whose image
and superscription hath it?' Render unto God the things that are
declared to be God's, because they bear His likeness and are stamped
with His signature.

But that very necessary and natural likeness between God and man makes
more solemnly sinful the voluntary unlikeness which we have brought
upon ourselves. If there were no analogy, there could be no contrast.
If God and man were utterly unlike, then there would be no evil in our
unlikeness and no need for our repentance.

The true state for each of us is that we should, as the great
astronomer said he had done in regard to his own science, 'think God's
thoughts after Him,' and have our minds filled with His truth and our
wills all harmonised with His purposes, and that we should thus make
our ways to run parallel with the ways of God. The blessedness, the
peace, the true manhood of a man, are that his ways and thoughts should
be like God's. And so my text comes with its indictment--You who by
nature were formed in His image, you to whom it is open to sympathise
with His designs, to harmonise your wills with His will, and to bring
all the dark and crooked ways in which you walk into full parallelism
with His way--you have departed into darkness of unlikeness, and in
thought and in ways are the opposites of God.

Mark how wonderfully, in the simple language of my text, deep truths
about this sin of ours are conveyed. Notice its growth and order. It
begins with a heart and mind that do not take in God's thoughts,
truths, purposes, desires, and then the alienated will and the darkened
understanding and the conscience which has closed itself against His
imperative voice issue afterwards in conduct which He cannot accept as
in any way corresponding with His. First comes the thought unreceptive
of God's thought, and then follow ways contrary to God's ways.

Notice the profound truth here in regard to the essential and deepest
evil of all our evil. '_Your_ thoughts'; '_your_
ways,'--self-dependence and self-confidence are the master-evils of
humanity. And every sin is at bottom the result of saying--'I will not
conform myself to God, but I am going to please myself, and take my own
way.' My own way is never God's way; my own way is always the devil's
way. And the root of all sin lies in these two strong, simple words,
'_Your_ thoughts not Mine; _your_ ways not Mine.'

Notice, too, how there are suggested the misery and retribution of this
unlikeness. 'If you will not make My thoughts your thoughts, I shall
not take your ways as My ways. I will leave you to them.' 'You will be
filled with the fruit of your own devices. I shall not incorporate your
actions into My great scheme and purpose.' Men

                     'Would not know His ways,
                      And He has left them to their own.'

So here we have the solemn indictment brought by God's own voice
against us all. The criminality of our unlikeness to Him rests upon our
original likeness.

The unlikeness roots itself in thought, and blossoms in the poisonous
flower of God-displeasing acts. It brings down upon our heads the
solemn retribution of separation from Him, and being filled with the
fruit of our own devices. Such is the indictment brought against every
soul of man upon the earth, and there is built upon it the call to
repentance and change,' let the wicked forsake his _way_, and the
unrighteous man his _thoughts_.' The question rises in many a heart,
'How am I to forsake these paths on which my feet have so longed
walked?' And if I do, what about all the years behind me, full of wild
wanderings and thoughts in all of which God was not?

II. The second verse of our text meets that despairing question. It
proclaims the elevation of God's ways and thoughts above ours, and
thereon bases the assurance of pardon.

The relation is not only one of unlikeness and opposition, but it is
also one of analogy and superiority. The former clause began with
thoughts which are the parents of ways, and, as befits the all-seeing
Judge, laid bare first the hidden discord of man's heart and will, ere
it pointed to the manifest antagonism of his doings. This clause begins
with God's ways, from which alone men can reach the knowledge of His
thoughts. The first follows the order of God's knowledge of man; the
second, that of man's knowledge of God.

It is a wonderful and beautiful turn which the prophet here gives to
the thought of the transcendent elevation of God. The heavens are the
very type of the unattainable; and to say that they are 'higher than
the earth' seems, at first sight, to be but to say, 'No man hath
ascended into the heavens,' and you sinful men must grovel here down
upon your plain, whilst they are far above, out of your reach. But the
heavens bend. They are an arch, and not a straight line. They touch the
horizon; and there come from them the sweet influences of sunshine and
of rain, of dew and of blessing, which bring fertility. So they are not
only far and unattainable, but friendly and beneficent, and
communicative of good. Like them, in true analogy but yet infinite
superiority to the best and noblest in man, is the boundless mercy of
our pardoning God:

                'The glorious sky, embracing all,
                   Is like its Maker's love,
                 Wherewith encompassed, great and small
                   In peace and order move.'

'As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than
your ways.' _The_ special 'thought' and 'way' which is meant here is
God's thought and way about sin. There are three points here on which I
would touch for a moment. First, God's way of dealing with sin is
lifted up above all human example. There is such a thing as pardoning
mercy amongst men. It is a faint analogy of, as it is an offshoot from,
the divine pardon, but all the forgivingness of the most placable and
long-suffering and gladly pardoning of men is but as earth to heaven
compared with the greatness of His. Our forgiveness has its
limitations. We sometimes cannot pardon as freely as we thought,
because there blends with our indignation against evil a passionate
personal sense of wrong done to us which we cannot get rid of, and that
disturbs the freeness and the joyfulness of many a human pardon. But
God's pardon is undisturbed and hindered by any sense of personal
resentment, though sin is an offense against Him, and in its freeness,
its fulness, its frequency, and its sovereign power to melt away that
which it forgives, it towers above the loftiest of earth's beauties of
forgiveness, as the starry heavens do above the flat plain.

God's pardon is above all human example, even though, having once been
received by us, it ought to become for us the pattern by which we shape
and regulate our own lives. Nothing of which we have any experience in
ourselves or in others is more than as a drop to the ocean compared
with the absolute fulness and perfect freeness and unwearied frequency
of His forgiveness. 'He will abundantly pardon.' He will multiply
pardon. 'With Him there is plenteous redemption.' We think we have
stretched the elasticity of long suffering and forgiveness further than
we might have been reasonably expected to do if seven times we forgive
the erring brother, but God's measure of pardon is seventy times seven,
