confused in the devious valleys that run off from the roots of the
hills everywhere, and we cannot make out which way the streams are
going, and what there is behind that low shoulder of hill yonder:
but when we get to the summit peak, and look down, it will all shape
itself into one consistent whole, and we shall see it all at once.
The memory shall be perfect--perfect in the range of its grasp, and
perfect in the rapidity with which it brings up all its objects
before us at every instant.

Once more: it seems as if, in another world, memory would not only
contain the whole life, and the whole life simultaneously; but would
perpetually attend or haunt us. A constant remembrance! It does not
lie in our power even in this world, to decide very much whether we
shall remember or forget. It does not come within a man's will to
forget or to remember. He cannot say, 'I will remember'; for if he
could, he would have remembered already. He cannot say, 'I will
forget'; for the very effort fixes his attention on the obnoxious
thing. All that we can do, when we seek to remember, is to wander
back to somewhere about that point in our life where the shy thing
lurks, and hope to catch some sight of it in the leafy coverts: and
all we can do, when we want to forget, is to try and fill our mind
with other subjects, and in the distractions of them to lose the
oppressive and burdensome thoughts. But we know that that is but a
partial remedy, that we cannot succeed in doing it. There are
presences that will not be put by. There are memories that
_will_ start up before us, whether we are willing or not. Like
the leprosy in the Israelite's house, the foul spot works its way
out through all the plaster and the paint; and the house is foul
because it is there. Oh, my friend! you are a happy and a singular
man if there is nothing in your life that you have tried to bury,
and the obstinate thing _will_ not be buried, but meets you
again when you come away from its fancied grave. I remember an old
castle where they tell us of a foul murder committed in a vaulted
chamber with a narrow window, by torchlight one night; and there,
they say, there are the streaks and stains of blood on the black
oak floor; and they have planed, and scrubbed, and planed again, and
thought they were gone--but there they always are, and continually
up comes the dull reddish-black stain, as if oozing itself out
through the boards to witness to the bloody crime again! The
superstitious fable is a type of the way in which a foul thing, a
sinful and bitter memory--gets ingrained into a man's heart. He
tries to banish it, and gets rid of it for a while. He goes back
again, and the spots are there, and will be there for ever; and the
only way to get rid of them is to destroy the soul in which they
are.

Memory is not all within the power of the will on earth: and
probably, memory in another world is still more involuntary and
still more constant. Why? Because I read in the Bible that there is
work in another world for God's servants to do; but I do not read
that there is work for anybody else but God's servants to do. The
work of an unforgiven sinner is done when he dies, and that not only
because he is going into the state of retribution, but because no
rebel's work is going to be suffered in that world. The time for
that is past. And so, if you will look, all the teachings of the
Bible about the future state of those who are not in blessedness,
give us this idea--a monotonous continuance of idleness, shutting
them up to their own contemplations, the memories of the past and
the agonies of the future. There are no distractions for such a man
in another world. He has thought, he has conscience, he has
remembrance. He has a sense of pain, of sin, of wrong, of loss. He
has one 'passive fixed endurance, all eternal and the same'; but I
do not read that his pain is anodyned and his sorrow soothed by any
activity that his hand finds to do. And, in a most tragic sense, we
may say, 'there is neither work, nor labour, nor device,' in that
dark world where the fruits of sin are reaped in monotonous
suffering and ever-present pain. A memory, brethren, that
i>will_ have its own way--what a field for sorrow and lamentation
that is, when God says at last, 'Now go--go apart; take thy life
with thee; read it over; see what thou hast done with it!' One old
Roman tyrant had a punishment in which he bound the dead body of the
murdered to the living body of the murderer, and left them there
scaffolded. And when that voice comes, 'Son, remember!' to the
living soul of the godless, unbelieving, impenitent man, there is
bound to him the murdered past, the dead past, his own life; and, in
Milton's awful and profound words,

  'Which way I fly is hell--myself am hell!'

There is only one other modification of this awful faculty that I
would remind you of; and that is, that in a future life memory will
be associated with a perfectly accurate knowledge of the consequences
and a perfectly sensitive conscience as to the criminality of the
past. You will have cause and consequence put down before you, meeting
each other at last. There will be no room then to say, 'I wonder how
such and such a thing will work out,' 'I wonder how such a thing can
have come upon me'; but every one will have his whole life to look
back upon, and will see the childish sin that was the parent of the
full-grown vice, and the everlasting sorrow that came out of that
little and apparently transitory root. The conscience, which here
becomes hardened by contact with sin, and enfeebled because unheeded,
will then be restored to its early sensitiveness and power, as if the
labourer's horny palm were to be endowed again with the softness of
the infant's little hand. If you will take and think about that,
brother, _there_ is enough--without any more talk, without any
more ghastly, sensual external figures--_there_ is enough to make
the boldest tremble; a memory embracing all the past, a memory rapidly
grasping and constantly bringing its burden, a judgment which admits
of no mistakes, and a conscience which has done with palliations and
excuses!

It is not difficult to see how that is an instrument of torture. It
is more difficult to see how such a memory can be a source of
gladness; and yet it can. The old Greeks were pressed with that
difficulty: they said to themselves, If a man remembers, there can
be no Elysium for him. And so they put the river of forgetfulness,
the waters of Lethe, betwixt life and the happy plains. Ah,
_we_ do not want any river of oblivion betwixt us and everlasting
blessedness. Calvary is on this side, and that is enough! Certainly
it is one of the most blessed things about 'the faith that is in Christ
Jesus,' that it makes a man remember his own sinfulness with penitence,
not with pain--that it makes the memory of past transgressions full
of solemn joy, because the memory of _past_ transgressions but brings
to mind the depth and rushing fullness of that river of love which has
swept them all away as far as the east is from the west. Oh, brother,
brother! you cannot forget your sins; but it lies within your own
decision whether the remembrance shall be thankfulness and blessedness,
or whether it shall be pain and loss for ever. Like some black rock that
heaves itself above the surface of a sunlit sea, and the wave runs
dashing over it, and the spray, as it falls down its sides, is all
rainbowed and lightened, and there comes beauty into the mighty
grimness of the black thing;--so a man's transgressions rear themselves
up, and God's great love, coming sweeping itself against them and over
them, makes out of the sin an occasion for the flashing more brightly
of the beauty of His mercy, and turns the life of the pardoned penitent
into a life of which even the sin is not pain to remember. So, then,
lay your hand upon Christ Jesus. Put your heart into His keeping. Go
to Him with your transgressions, He will forget them, and make it
possible for you to remember them in such a way that the memory will
become to you the very foundation of all your joy, and will make
heaven's anthem deeper and more harmonious when you say, 'Now unto
Him that hath washed us from our sins in His own blood, and hath
made us kings and priests unto God, unto Him be glory for ever and
ever!' And, on the other hand, _if not_, then, 'Son, remember!'
will be the word that begins the future retribution, and shuts you
up with a wasted past, with a gnawing conscience, and an upbraiding
heart: to say,

  'I backward cast my ee
  On prospects drear!
  And forward, though I canna see,
  I guess and fear!'




GOD'S SLAVES


    'Doth He thank that servant because he did the things
    that were commanded him! I trow not. 10. So likewise
    ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are
    commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we
    have done that which was our duty to do.'
    --LUKE xvii. 9-10.

There are two difficulties about these words. One is their apparent
entire want of connection with what precedes--viz., the disciples'
prayer, 'Lord, increase our faith,' and the other is the harshness
and severity of tone which marks them, and the view of the less
attractive side of man's relation to God which is thrown into
prominence in them. He must be a very churlish master who never says
'Thank you,' however faithful his servant's obedience may be. And he
must be a very inconsiderate master, who has only another kind of
duty to lay upon the shoulders of the servant that has come in after
a long day's ploughing and feeding of cattle. Perhaps, however, the
one difficulty clears away the other, and if we keep firm hold of
the thought that the words of my text, and those which are
associated with them, are an answer to the prayer, 'Lord, increase
our faith,' the stern and somewhat repelling characteristics of the
words may somewhat change.

I. So I look, first, at the husk of apparent harshness and severity.
The relation between master and hired servant is not the one that is
in view, but the relation between a master and the slave who is his
property, who has no rights, who has no possessions, whose life and
death and everything connected with him are at the absolute disposal
of his master. It is a foul and wicked relation when existing
between men, and it has been full of cruelty and atrocities. But
Jesus Christ lays His hand upon it, and says, 'That is the relation
between men and God; that is the relation between men and Me.'

And what is involved therein? Absolute authority; so that the slave
is but, as it were, an animated instrument in the hand of the
master, with no will of his own, and no rights and no possessions.
That is not all of our relation to God, blessed be His Name! But
that is _in_ our relation to Him, and the highest title that a
man can have is the title which the Apostles in after days bound
upon their foreheads as a crown of honour--'A slave of Jesus
Christ.'

Then, if that relation is laid as being the basis of all our
connection with God, whatever else there may be also involved, these
two things which in the human relation are ugly and inconsiderate,
and argue a very churlish and selfish nature on the part of the
human master, belong essentially to our relation to God. 'Which of
you, having a servant, ploughing or feeding cattle, will say unto
him ... when he has come from the field, Go (immediately) and sit
down to meat, and will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith
I may sup, and gird thyself and serve me, till I have eaten and
drunken: and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?' You will get your
supper by-and-by, but you are here to work, says the master, and
when you have finished one task, that does not involve that you are
to rest; it involves only that you are to take up another. And
however wearisome has been the ploughing amongst the heavy clods all
day long, and tramping up and down the furrows, when you come in you
are to clean yourself up, and get my supper ready, 'and afterward
thou shalt eat and drink.'

As I have said, such a speech would argue a harsh human master, but is
there not a truth which is not harsh in it in reference to us and God?
Duty never ends. The eternal persistence through life of the obligation
to service is what is taught us here, as being inherent in the very
relation between the Lord and Owner of us all and us His slaves.
Moralists and irreligious teachers say grand things about the eternal
sweep of the great law of duty. The Christian thought is the higher
one, 'Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid Thine hand upon
me,' and wherever I am I am under obligation to serve Thee, and no past
record of work absolves me from the work of the present. From the
cradle to the grave I walk beneath an all-encompassing, overarching
firmament of duty. As long as we draw breath we are bound to the
service of Him whose slaves we are, and whose service is perfect freedom.

Such is the bearing of this apparently repulsive representation of
our text, which is not so repulsive if you come to think about it.
It does not in the least set aside the natural craving for
recreation and relaxation and repose. It does not overlook God's
obligation to keep His slave alive, and in good condition for doing
His work, by bestowing upon him the things that are needful for him,
but it does meet that temptation which comes to us all to take that
rest which circumstances may make manifestly not God's will, and it
says to us, 'Forget the things that are behind, and reach forth unto
the things that are before.' You have done a long day's work with
plough or sheep-crook. The reward for work is more work. Come away
indoors now, and nearer the Master, prepare His table. 'Which of
you, having a servant, will not do so with him?' And that is how He
does with us.

Then, the next thought here, which, as I say, has a harsh exterior,
and a bitter rind, is that one of the slave doing his work, and
never getting so much as 'thank you' for it. But if you lift this
interpretation too, into the higher region of the relation between
God and His slaves down here, a great deal of the harshness drops
away. For what does it come to? Just to this, that no man among us,
by any amount or completeness of obedience to the will of God
establishes claims on God for a reward. You have done your duty--so
much the better for you, but is that any reason why you should be
decorated and honoured for doing it? You have done no more than your
duty. 'So, likewise, ye, when ye have done all things that are
commanded you'--even if that impossible condition were to be
realised--'say we are unprofitable servants'; not in the bad sense
in which the word is sometimes used, but in the accurate sense of
not having brought any profit or advantage, more than was His
before, to the Master whom we have thus served. It is a blessed
thing for a man to call _himself_ an unprofitable servant; it
is an awful thing for the Master to call him one. If _we_ say
'we are unprofitable servants,' we shall be likely to escape the
solemn words from the Lord's lips: 'Take ye away the unprofitable
servant, and cast him into outer darkness.' There are two that may
use the word, Christ the Judge, and man the judged, and if the man
will use it, Christ will not. 'If we judge ourselves we shall not be
judged.'

Now, although, as I have said about the other part of this text,
it is not meant to exhaust our relations to God, or to say the
all-comprehensive word about the relation of obedience to blessedness;
it is meant to say

  'Merit lives from man to man,
  And not from man, O Lord! to Thee.'

No one can reasonably build upon his own obedience, or his own work,
nor claim as by right, for reward, heaven or other good. So my text
is the anticipation of Paul's teaching about the impossibility of a
man's being saved by his works, and it cuts up by the root, not only
the teaching as to a treasure of 'merits of the saints,' and 'works
of supererogation,' and the like; but it tells us, too, that we must
beware of the germs of that self-complacent way of looking at
ourselves and our own obedience, as if they had anything at all to
do with our buying either the favour of God, or the rewards of the
faithful servant.

II. Now, all that I have been saying may sound very harsh. Let us
take a second step, and try if we can find out the kernel of grace
in the harsh husk.

I hold fast by the one clue that Jesus Christ is here replying to
the Apostle's prayer, 'Lord, increase our faith.' He had been laying
down some very hard regulations for their conduct, and, naturally,
when they felt how difficult it would be to come within a thousand
miles of what He had been bidding them, they turned to Him with that
prayer. It suggests that faith is there, in living operation, or
they would not have prayed to Him for its increase. And how does He
go about the work of increasing it? In two ways, one of which does
not enter into my present subject. First, by showing the disciples
the power of faith, in order to stimulate them to greater effort for
its possession. He promised that they might say to the fig tree, 'Be
thou plucked up and planted in the sea,' and it should obey them.
The second way was by this context of which I am speaking now. How
does it bear upon the Apostles' prayer? What is there in this
teaching about the slave and his master, and the slave's work, and
the incompatibility of the notion of reward with the slave's
service, to help to strengthen faith? There is this that this
teaching beats down every trace of self-confidence, and if we take
it in and live by it, makes us all feel that we stand before God,
whatever have been our deeds of service, with no claims arising
from any virtue or righteousness of our own. We come empty-handed.
If the servant who has done all that is commanded has yet to say, 'I
can ask nothing from Thee, because I have done it, for it was all in
the line of my duty,' what are we to say, who have done so little
that was commanded, and so much that was forbidden?

So, you see, the way to increased faith is not by any magical
communication from Christ, as the Apostles thought, but by taking
into our hearts, and making operative in our lives, the great truth
that in us there is nothing that can make a claim upon God, and that
we must cast ourselves, as deserving nothing, wholly into His
merciful hands, and find ourselves held up by His great unmerited
love. Get the bitter poison root of self-trust out of you, and then
there is some chance of getting the wholesome emotion of absolute
reliance on Him into you. Jesus Christ, if I might use a homely
metaphor, in these words pricks the bladder of self-confidence which
we are apt to use to keep our heads above water. And it is only when
it is pricked, and we, like the Apostle, feel ourselves beginning to
sink, that we fling out a hand to Him, and clutch at His
outstretched hand, and cry, 'Lord, save me, I perish!' One way to
increase our faith is to be rooted and grounded in the assurance
that duty is perennial, and that our own righteousness establishes
no claim whatever upon God.

III. Finally, we note the higher view into which, by faith, we come.

I have been saying, with perhaps vain repetition, that the words of
our text and context do not exhaust the whole truth of man's
relation to God. They do exhaust the truth of the relation of God to
any man that has not faith in his heart, because such a man is a
slave in the worst sense, and any obedience that he renders to God's
will externally is the obedience of a reluctant will, and is hard
and harsh, and there is no end _to_ it, and no good _from_
it. But if we accept the position, and recognise our own impotence,
and non-desert, and humbly say, 'Not by works of righteousness which
we have done, but by His mercy He saves us,' then we come into a
large place. The relation of master and slave does not cover all the
ground _then_. 'Henceforth, I call you not slaves, but  friends,' And
when the wearied slave comes into the house, the new task is not
a new burden, for he is a son as well as a slave; but  the work is
a delight, and it is a joy to have something more to do for his Father.
If our service is the service of sons, sweetened by love, then there
will be abundant thanks from the Father, who is not only our owner,
but our lover.

For Christian service--that is to say, service based upon faith and
rendered in love--_does_ minister delight to our Father in
heaven, and He Himself has called it an 'odour of a sweet smell,
acceptable unto God.' And if our service on earth has been thus
elevated and transformed from the compulsory obedience of a slave
to the joyful service of a son, then our reception when at sundown
the plough is left in the furrow and we come into the house will be
all changed too. 'Which of you, having a servant, will say to him,
Go and sit down to meat, and will not rather say to him, Make ready
whilst I eat and drink?' That is the law for earth, but for heaven
it is this, 'Blessed are those servants whom the Lord, when He
cometh, shall find watching. Verily, I say unto you, that He shall
gird Himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth
and serve them.' The husk is gone now, I think, and the kernel is
left. Loving service is beloved by God, and rewarded by the
ministering, as a servant of servants, to us by Him who is King of
kings and Lord of lords.

'Lord, increase our faith,' that we may so serve Thee on earth, and
so be served by Thee in heaven.




WHERE ARE THE NINE?


    'And it came to pass, as He went to Jerusalem, that He
    passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
    12. And as He entered into a certain village, there met
    Him ten men that were lepers, which stood afar off:
    13. And they lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus,
    Master, have mercy on us. 14. And when He saw them, He
    said unto them, Go show yourselves unto the priests.
    And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were
    cleansed. 15. And one of them, when he saw that he was
    healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified
    God. 16. And fell down on his face at His feet, giving
    Him thanks: and he was a Samaritan. 17. And Jesus
    answering said, Were there not ten cleansed? but where
    are the nine? 18. There are not found that returned to
    give glory to God, save this stranger. 19. And He said
    unto him, Arise, go thy way, thy faith hath made thee
    whole.'--LUKE xvii. 11-19.

The melancholy group of lepers, met with in one of the villages on
the borders of Samaria and Galilee, was made up of Samaritans and
Jews, in what proportion we do not know. The common misery drove
them together, in spite of racial hatred, as, in a flood, wolves
and sheep will huddle close on a bit of high ground. Perhaps they
had met in order to appeal to Jesus, thinking to move Him by their
aggregated wretchedness; or possibly they were permanently
segregated from others, and united in a hideous fellowship.

I. We note the lepers' cry and the Lord's strange reply. Of course
they had to stand afar off, and the distance prescribed by law
obliged them to cry aloud, though it must have been an effort, for
one symptom of leprosy is a hoarse whisper. Sore need can
momentarily give strange physical power. Their cry indicates some
knowledge. They knew the Lord's name, and had dim notions of His
authority, for He is addressed as Jesus and as Master. They knew
that He had power to heal, and they hoped that He had 'mercy,' which
they might win for themselves by entreaty. There was the germ of
trust in the cry forced from them by desperate need. But their
conceptions of Him, and their consciousness of their own
necessities, did not rise above the purely physical region, and He
was nothing to them but a healer.

Still, low and rude as their notions were, they did present a point
of contact for Christ's 'mercy,' which is ever ready to flow into
every heart that is lowly, as water will into all low levels. Jesus
seems to have gone near to the lepers, for it was 'when He saw,' not
when He heard, them that He spoke. It did not become Him to 'cry,
nor cause His voice to be heard in the street,' nor would He cure as
from afar, but He approaches those whom He heals, that they may see
His face, and learn by it His compassion and love. His command
recognised and honoured the law, but its main purpose, no doubt, was
to test, and thereby to strengthen, the leper's trust. To set out to
the priest while they felt themselves full of leprosy would seem
absurd, unless they believed that Jesus could and would heal them.
He gives no promise to heal, but asks for reliance on an implied
promise. He has not a syllable of sympathy; His tender compassion is
carefully covered up. He shuts down, as it were, the lantern-slide,
and not a ray gets through. But the light was behind the screen all
the while. We, too, have sometimes to act on the assumption that
Jesus has granted our desires, even while we are not conscious that
it is so. We, too, have sometimes to set out, as it were, for the
priests, while we still feel the leprosy.

II. We note the healing granted to obedient faith. The whole ten set
off at once. They had got all they wanted from the Lord, and had no
more thought about Him. So they turned their backs on Him. How
strange it must have been to feel, as they went along, the gradual
creeping of soundness into their bones! How much more confidently
they must have stepped out, as the glow of returning health asserted
itself more and more! The cure is a transcendent, though veiled,
manifestation of Christ's power; for it is wrought at a distance,
without even a word, and with no vehicle. It is simply the silent
forth-putting of His power. 'He spake, and it was done' is much, for
only a word which is divine can affect matter. But 'He willed, and
it was done,' is even more.

III. We note the solitary instance of thankfulness. The nine might
have said, 'We are doing what the Healer bade us do; to go back to
Him would be disobedience.' But a grateful heart knows that to
express its gratitude is the highest duty, and is necessary for its
own relief. How like us all it is to hurry away clutching our
blessings, and never cast back a thought to the giver! This leper's
voice had returned to Him, and his 'loud' acknowledgments were very
different from the strained croak of his petition for healing. He
knew that he had two to thank--God and Jesus; he did not know that
these two were one. His healing has brought him much nearer Jesus
than before, and now he can fall at His feet. Thankfulness knits us
to Jesus with a blessed bond. Nothing is so sweet to a loving heart
as to pour itself out in thanks to Him.

'And he was a Samaritan.' That may be Luke's main reason for telling
the story, for it corresponds to the universalistic tendency of his
Gospel. But may we not learn the lesson that the common human
virtues are often found abundantly in nations and individuals
against whom we are apt to be deeply prejudiced? And may we not
learn another lesson--that heretics and heathen may often teach
orthodox believers lessons, not only of courtesy and gratitude, but
of higher things? A heathen is not seldom more sensitive to the
beauty of Christ, and more touched by the story of His sacrifice,
than we who have heard of Him all our days.

IV. We note Christ's sad wonder at man's ingratitude and joyful
recognition of 'this stranger's' thankfulness. A tone of surprise as
well as of sadness can be detected in the pathetic double questions.
'Were not _the_ ten'--all of them, the ten who stood there but
a minute since--'cleansed? but where are the nine?' Gone off with
their gift, and with no spark of thankfulness in their selfish
hearts. 'Were there none found that returned to give glory to God,
save this stranger?' The numbers of the thankless far surpass those
of the thankful. The fewness of the latter surprises and saddens
Jesus still. Even a dog knows and will lick the hand that feeds it,
but 'Israel doth not know, My people doth not consider.' We increase
the sweetness of our gifts by thankfulness for them. We taste them
twice when we ruminate on them in gratitude. They live after their
death when we bless God and thank Jesus for them all. We impoverish
ourselves still more than we dishonour Him by the ingratitude which
is so crying a fault. One sorrow hides many joys. A single crumpled
rose-leaf made the fairy princess's bed uncomfortable. Some of us
can see no blue in our sky if one small cloud is there. Both in
regard to earthly and spiritual blessings we are all sinners by
unthankfulness, and we all lose much thereby.

Jesus rejoiced over 'this stranger,' and gave him a greater gift at
last than he had received when the leprosy was cleared from his
flesh. Christ's raising of him up, and sending him on his way to
resume his interrupted journey to the priest, was but a prelude to
'Thy faith hath made thee whole,' or, as the Revised Version margin
reads, 'saved thee.' Surely we may take that word in its deepest
meaning, and believe that a more fatal leprosy melted out of this
man's spirit, and that the faith which had begun in a confidence
that Jesus could heal, and had been increased by obedience to the
command which tried it, and had become more awed and enlightened
by experience of bodily healing, and been deepened by finding a
tongue to express itself in thankfulness, rose at last to such
apprehension of Jesus, and such clinging to Him in grateful love,
as availed to save 'this stranger' with a salvation that healed
his spirit, and was perfected when the once leprous body was left
behind, to crumble into dust.




THREE KINDS OP PRAYING


    'And He spake a parable unto them to this end, that
    men ought always to pray, and not to faint; 2. Saying,
    There was in a city a judge, which feared not God,
    neither regarded man: 3. And there was a widow in that
    city; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine
    adversary. 4. And he would not for a while: but
    afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not
    God, nor regard man; 5. Yet because this widow
    troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual
    coming she weary me. 6. And the Lord said, Hear what
    the unjust judge saith. 7. And shall not God avenge
    His own elect, which cry day and night unto Him,
    though He bear long with them! 8. I tell you that He
    will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless when the Son
    of man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?
    9. And He spake this parable unto certain which
    trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and
    despised others: 10. Two men went up into the temple
    to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican.
    11. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself,
    God, I thank thee, that I am not as Other men are,
    extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
    publican. 11. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes
    of all that I possess. 13. And the publican, standing
    afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto
    heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be
    merciful to me a sinner. 14. I tell you, this man went
    down to his house justified rather than the other: for
    every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and
    he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.'
    --LUKE xviii. 1-14.

The two parables in this passage are each prefaced by Luke's
explanation of their purpose. They are also connected by being both
concerned with aspects of prayer. But the second was apparently not
spoken at the same time as the first, but is put here by Luke as in
an appropriate place.

I. The wearisome widow and the unrighteous judge. The similarities
and dissimilarities between this parable and that in chapter xi. 5-8
are equally instructive. Both take a very unlovely character as open
to the influence of persistent entreaty; both strongly underscore
the unworthiness and selfishness of the motive for yielding. Both
expect the hearers to use common-sense enough to take the sleepy
friend and the worried judge as contrasts to, not parables, of Him
to whom Christians pray. But the judge is a much worse man than the
owner of the loaves, and his denial of the justice which it was his
office to dispense is a crime; the widow's need is greater than the
man's, and the judge's cynical soliloquy, in its unabashed avowal of
caring for neither God nor man, and being guided only by regard to
comfort, touches a deep depth of selfishness. The worse he was, the
more emphatic is the exhortation to persistence. If the continual
dropping of the widow's plea could wear away such a stone as that,
its like could wear away anything. Yes, and suppose that the judge
were as righteous and as full of love and wish to help as this judge
was of their opposites; suppose that instead of the cry being a
weariness it was a delight; suppose, in short, that, to go back to
chapter xi., we 'call on Him as Father who, without respect of
persons, judgeth': then our 'continual coming' will surely not be
less effectual than hers was.

But we must note the spiritual experience supposed by the parable to
belong to the Christian life. That forlorn figure of the widow, with
all its suggestions of helplessness and oppression, is Christ's
picture of His Church left on earth without Him. And though of
course it is a very incomplete representation, it is a true
presentation of one side and aspect of the devout life on earth. 'In
the world ye shall have tribulation,' and the truer His servants are
to Him, and the more their hearts are with Christ in God, the more
they will feel out of touch with the world, and the more it will
instinctively be their 'adversary.' If the widow does not feel the
world's enmity, it will generally be because she is not a 'widow
indeed.'

And another notable fact of Christian experience underlies the
parable; namely that the Church's cry for protection from the
adversary is often apparently unheard. In chapter xi. the prayer was
for supply of necessities, here it is for the specific blessing of
protection from the adversary. Whether that is referred to the needs
of the Church or of the individual, it is true that usually the help
sought is long delayed. It is not only 'souls under the altar' that
have to cry 'How long, O Lord, dost Thou not avenge?' One thinks of
years of persecution for whole communities, or of long, weary days
of harassment and suffering for individuals, of multitudes of
prayers and groans sent up into a heaven that, for all the answers
sent down, might as well be empty, and one feels it hard to hold by
the faith that 'verily, there is a God that' heareth.

We have all had times when our faith has staggered, and we have
found no answer to our heart's question: 'Why tarry the wheels of
His chariot?' Many of us have felt what Mary and Martha felt when
'Jesus abode still two days in the place where He was' after He had
received their message, in which they had been so sure of His coming
at once when He heard that 'he whom Thou lovest is sick,' that they
did not ask Him to come. The delays of God's help are a constant
feature in His providence, and, as Jesus says here, they are but too
likely to take the life out of faith.

But over against these we have to place Jesus' triumphant assurance
here: 'He will avenge them speedily.' Yes, the longest delay may yet
be 'right early,' for heaven's clock does not beat at the same rate
as our little chronometers. God is 'the God of patience,' and He has
waited for millenniums for the establishment of His kingdom on
earth; His 'own elect' may learn long-suffering from Him, and need
to take to heart the old exhortation, 'If the vision tarry, wait for
it, for it will surely come, and will not tarry.' Yes, God's delays
are not delays, but are for our profit that we may always pray and
not faint, and may keep alight the flame of the sure hope that the
Son of man cometh, and that in His coming all adversaries shall be
destroyed, and the widow, no longer a widow, but the bride, go in to
the feast and forget her foes, and 'the days of her mourning be
ended.'

II. The Pharisee and the publican.

Luke's label on this parable tells us that it was spoken to a group
of the very people who were personated in it by the Pharisee. One
can fancy their faces as they listened, and how they would love the
speaker! Their two characteristics are self-righteousness and
depreciation of every one else, which is the natural result of such
trust in self. The self-adulation was absolute, the contempt was
all-embracing, for the Revised Version rightly renders 'set
_all_ others at nought.' That may sound exaggerated, but the
way to judge of moral characteristics is to take them in their
fullest development and to see what they lead to then. The two
pictures heighten each other. The one needs many strokes to bring
out the features, the other needs but one. Self-righteousness takes
many shapes, penitence has but one emotion to express, one cry to
utter.

Every word in the Pharisee's prayer is reeking with self-complacency.
Even the expression 'prayed with himself' is significant, for it
suggests that the prayer was less addressed to God than to himself,
and also that his words could scarcely be spoken in the hearing of
others, both because of their arrogant self-praise and of their
insolent calumnies of 'all the rest.' It was not prayer to God, but
soliloquy in his own praise, and it was in equal parts adulation of
himself and slander of other men. So it never went higher than the
inner roof of the temple court, and was, in a very fatal sense, 'to
himself.'

God is complimented with being named formally at first, and in the
first two words, 'I thank thee,' but that is only formal
introduction, and in all the rest of his prayer there is not a trace
of praying. Such a self-satisfied gentleman had no need to ask for
anything, so he brought no petitions. He uses the conventional
language of thanksgiving, but his real meaning is to praise himself
to God, not to thank God for himself. God is named once. All the
rest is I, I, I. He had no longing for communion, no aspiration, no
emotion.

His conception of righteousness was mean and shallow. And as St.
Bernard notes, he was not so much thankful for being righteous as
for being alone in his goodness. No doubt he was warranted in
disclaiming gross sins, but he was glad to be free from them, not
because they were sins, but because they were vulgar. He had no
right to fling mud either on 'all the rest' or on 'this publican,'
and if he had been really praying or giving thanks he would have had
enough to think of in God and himself without casting sidelong and
depreciatory glances at his neighbours. He who truly prays 'sees no
man any more,' or if he does, sees men only as subjects for
intercession, not for contempt. The Pharisee's notion of
righteousness was primarily negative, as consisting in abstinence
from flagrant sins, and, in so far as it was positive, it dealt
entirely with ceremonial acts. Such a starved and surface conception
of righteousness is essential to self-righteousness, for no man who
sees the law of duty in its depth and inwardness can flatter himself
that he has kept it. To fast twice a week and to give tithes of all
that one acquired were acts of supererogation, and are proudly
recounted as if God should feel much indebted to the doer for paying
Him more than was required. The Pharisee makes no petitions. He
states his claims, and tacitly expects that God will meet them.

Few words are needed to paint the publican; for his estimate of
himself is simple and one, and what he wants from God is one thing,
and one only. His attitude expresses his emotions, for he does not
venture to go near the shining example of all respectability and
righteousness, nor to lift his eyes to heaven. Like the penitent
psalmist, his iniquities have taken hold on him, so that he is 'not
able to look up.' Keen consciousness of sin, true sorrow for sin,
earnest desire to shake off the burden of sin, lowly trust in God's
pardoning mercy, are all crowded into his brief petition. The arrow
thus feathered goes straight up to the throne; the Pharisee's prayer
cannot rise above his own lips.

Jesus does not leave His hearers to apply the 'parable,' but drives
its application home to them, since He knew how keen a thrust was
needed to pierce the triple breastplate of self-righteousness. The
publican was 'justified'; that is, accounted as righteous. In the
judgment of heaven, which is the judgment of truth, sin forsaken is
sin passed away. The Pharisee condensed his contempt into
'_this_ publican'; Jesus takes up the 'this' and turns it into
a distinction, when He says, '_this man_ went down to his house
justified.' God's condemnation of the Pharisee and acceptance of the
publican are no anomalous aberration of divine justice, for it is a
universal law, which has abundant exemplifications, that he that
exalteth himself is likely to be humbled, and he that humbles
himself to be exalted. Daily life does not always yield examples
thereof, but in the inner life and as concerns our relations to God,
that law is absolutely and always true.




ENTERING THE KINGDOM


    'And they brought unto Him also infants, that He would
    touch them: but when His disciples saw it, they rebuked
    them. 16. But Jesus called them unto Him, and said,
    Suffer little children to come unto Me, and forbid
    them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.
    17. Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive
    the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise
    enter therein. 18. And a certain ruler asked Him,
    saying, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit
    eternal life? 19. And Jesus said unto him, Why callest
    thou Me good? none is good, save one, that is, God.
    20. Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit
    adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false
    witness, Honour thy father and thy mother. 21. And he
    said, All these have I kept from my youth up. 22. Now
    when Jesus heard these things, He said unto him, Yet
    lackest thou one thing: sell all that thou hast, and
    distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure
    in heaven: and come, follow Me. 23. And when he heard
    this, he was very sorrowful: for he was very rich.
    24. And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful He
    said, How hardly shall they that have riches enter
    into the kingdom of God? 25. For it is easier for a
    camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich
    man to enter into the kingdom of God. 26. And they
    that heard it said, Who then can be saved? 27. And He
    said, The things which are impossible with men are
    possible with God. 28. Then Peter said, Lo, we have
    left all, and followed Thee. 29. And He said unto
    them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath
    left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or
    children, for the kingdom of God's sake, 30. Who shall
    not receive manifold more in this present time, and in
    world to come life everlasting.'--LUKE xviii. 15-30.

In this section Luke rejoins the other two Evangelists, from whom
his narrative has diverged since Luke ix. 51. All three bring
together these two incidents of the children in Christ's arms and
the young ruler. Probably they were connected in time as well as in
subject. Both set forth the conditions of entering the kingdom,
which the one declares to be lowliness and trust, and the other to
be self-renunciation.

I. We have the child-likeness of the subjects of the kingdom. No
doubt there was a dash of superstition in the impulse that moved the
parents to bring their children to Jesus, but it was an eminently
natural desire to win a good man's blessing, and one to which every
parent's heart will respond. It was not the superstition, but the
intrusive familiarity, that provoked the disciples' rebuke. A great
man's hangers-on are always more careful of his dignity than he is,
for it increases their own importance.

The tender age of the children is to be noted. They were 'babes,'
and had to be brought, being too young to walk, and so having
scarcely yet arrived at conscious, voluntary life. It is 'of such'
that the subjects of the kingdom are composed. What, then, are the
qualities which, by this comparison, Jesus requires? Certainly not
innocence, which would be to contradict all his teaching and to shut
out the prodigals and publicans, and clean contrary to the whole
spirit of Luke's Gospel. Besides, these scarcely conscious infants
were not 'innocent,' for they had not come to the age of which
either innocence or guilt can be predicated. What, then, had they
which the children of the kingdom must have?

Perhaps the sweet and meek little 131st Psalm puts us best on the
track of the answer. It may have been in our Lord's mind; it
certainly corresponds to His thought. 'My heart is not haughty, nor
mine eyes lofty.... I have stilled and quieted my soul; like a
weaned child with his mother.' The infant's lowliness is not yet
humility; for it is instinct rather than virtue. It makes no claims,
thinks no lofty thoughts of self; in fact, has scarcely begun to
know that there is a self at all. On the other hand, clinging trust
is the infant's life. It, too, is rudimentary and instinctive, but
the impulse which makes the babe nestle in its mother's bosom may
well stand for a picture of the conscious trust which the children
of the kingdom must have. The child's instinct is the man's virtue.
We have

  'To travel back
  And tread again that ancient track,'

regaining as the conscious temper of our spirits those excellences
of humility and trust of which the first faint types may be seen in
the infant in arms. The entrance gate is very low, and, if we hold
our heads high, we shall not get through it. It must be on our hands
and knees that we go in. There is no place in the kingdom for those
who trust in themselves. We must rely wholly on God manifest in His
Son.

So intent is Luke in pointing the lesson that he passes by in
silence the infinitely beautiful and touching incident which the
world perhaps knows better than any other in our Lord's life--that
of His taking the infants in His arms and blessing them. In many
ways that incident would have been peculiarly suitable for this
Gospel, which delights to bring out the manhood and universal
beneficence of Jesus. But if Luke knew of it, he did not care to
bring in anything which would weaken the lesson of the conditions of
entering the kingdom.

II. We have self-renunciation as the condition of entering the
kingdom. The conversation with the ruler (vs. 18-23) sets forth its
necessity; the sad exclamation to the bystanders (vs. 24-27) teaches
its difficulty; and the dialogue with Peter as representing the
twelve (vs. 28-30), its reward.

(1) The necessity of self-renunciation. The ruler's question has
